BOOK I: DISCOURSES OF RAPHAEL HYTHLODAY, OF THE BEST STATE OF A COMMONWEALTH
(PART 2 OF 3)

“While I was talking thus, the Counsellor, who was present, had
prepared an answer, and had resolved to resume all I had said,
according to the formality of a debate, in which things are generally
repeated more faithfully than they are answered, as if the chief trial
to be made were of men’s memories. ‘You have talked prettily, for a
stranger,’ said he, ‘having heard of many things among us which you
have not been able to consider well; but I will make the whole matter
plain to you, and will first repeat in order all that you have said;
then I will show how much your ignorance of our affairs has misled you;
and will, in the last place, answer all your arguments. And, that I may
begin where I promised, there were four things—’ ‘Hold your peace!’
said the Cardinal; ‘this will take up too much time; therefore we will,
at present, ease you of the trouble of answering, and reserve it to our
next meeting, which shall be to-morrow, if Raphael’s affairs and yours
can admit of it. But, Raphael,’ said he to me, ‘I would gladly know
upon what reason it is that you think theft ought not to be punished by
death: would you give way to it? or do you propose any other punishment
that will be more useful to the public? for, since death does not
restrain theft, if men thought their lives would be safe, what fear or
force could restrain ill men? On the contrary, they would look on the
mitigation of the punishment as an invitation to commit more crimes.’ I
answered, ‘It seems to me a very unjust thing to take away a man’s life
for a little money, for nothing in the world can be of equal value with
a man’s life: and if it be said, “that it is not for the money that one
suffers, but for his breaking the law,” I must say, extreme justice is
an extreme injury: for we ought not to approve of those terrible laws
that make the smallest offences capital, nor of that opinion of the
Stoics that makes all crimes equal; as if there were no difference to
be made between the killing a man and the taking his purse, between
which, if we examine things impartially, there is no likeness nor
proportion. God has commanded us not to kill, and shall we kill so
easily for a little money? But if one shall say, that by that law we
are only forbid to kill any except when the laws of the land allow of
it, upon the same grounds, laws may be made, in some cases, to allow of
adultery and perjury: for God having taken from us the right of
disposing either of our own or of other people’s lives, if it is
pretended that the mutual consent of men in making laws can authorise
man-slaughter in cases in which God has given us no example, that it
frees people from the obligation of the divine law, and so makes murder
a lawful action, what is this, but to give a preference to human laws
before the divine? and, if this is once admitted, by the same rule men
may, in all other things, put what restrictions they please upon the
laws of God. If, by the Mosaical law, though it was rough and severe,
as being a yoke laid on an obstinate and servile nation, men were only
fined, and not put to death for theft, we cannot imagine, that in this
new law of mercy, in which God treats us with the tenderness of a
father, He has given us a greater licence to cruelty than He did to the
Jews. Upon these reasons it is, that I think putting thieves to death
is not lawful; and it is plain and obvious that it is absurd and of ill
consequence to the commonwealth that a thief and a murderer should be
equally punished; for if a robber sees that his danger is the same if
he is convicted of theft as if he were guilty of murder, this will
naturally incite him to kill the person whom otherwise he would only
have robbed; since, if the punishment is the same, there is more
security, and less danger of discovery, when he that can best make it
is put out of the way; so that terrifying thieves too much provokes
them to cruelty.

“But as to the question, ‘What more convenient way of punishment can be
found?’ I think it much easier to find out that than to invent anything
that is worse; why should we doubt but the way that was so long in use
among the old Romans, who understood so well the arts of government,
was very proper for their punishment? They condemned such as they found
guilty of great crimes to work their whole lives in quarries, or to dig
in mines with chains about them. But the method that I liked best was
that which I observed in my travels in Persia, among the Polylerits,
who are a considerable and well-governed people: they pay a yearly
tribute to the King of Persia, but in all other respects they are a
free nation, and governed by their own laws: they lie far from the sea,
and are environed with hills; and, being contented with the productions
of their own country, which is very fruitful, they have little commerce
with any other nation; and as they, according to the genius of their
country, have no inclination to enlarge their borders, so their
mountains and the pension they pay to the Persian, secure them from all
invasions. Thus they have no wars among them; they live rather
conveniently than with splendour, and may be rather called a happy
nation than either eminent or famous; for I do not think that they are
known, so much as by name, to any but their next neighbours. Those that
are found guilty of theft among them are bound to make restitution to
the owner, and not, as it is in other places, to the prince, for they
reckon that the prince has no more right to the stolen goods than the
thief; but if that which was stolen is no more in being, then the goods
of the thieves are estimated, and restitution being made out of them,
the remainder is given to their wives and children; and they themselves
are condemned to serve in the public works, but are neither imprisoned
nor chained, unless there happens to be some extraordinary circumstance
in their crimes. They go about loose and free, working for the public:
if they are idle or backward to work they are whipped, but if they work
hard they are well used and treated without any mark of reproach; only
the lists of them are called always at night, and then they are shut
up. They suffer no other uneasiness but this of constant labour; for,
as they work for the public, so they are well entertained out of the
public stock, which is done differently in different places: in some
places whatever is bestowed on them is raised by a charitable
contribution; and, though this way may seem uncertain, yet so merciful
are the inclinations of that people, that they are plentifully supplied
by it; but in other places public revenues are set aside for them, or
there is a constant tax or poll-money raised for their maintenance. In
some places they are set to no public work, but every private man that
has occasion to hire workmen goes to the market-places and hires them
of the public, a little lower than he would do a freeman. If they go
lazily about their task he may quicken them with the whip. By this
means there is always some piece of work or other to be done by them;
and, besides their livelihood, they earn somewhat still to the public.
They all wear a peculiar habit, of one certain colour, and their hair
is cropped a little above their ears, and a piece of one of their ears
is cut off. Their friends are allowed to give them either meat, drink,
or clothes, so they are of their proper colour; but it is death, both
to the giver and taker, if they give them money; nor is it less penal
for any freeman to take money from them upon any account whatsoever:
and it is also death for any of these slaves (so they are called) to
handle arms. Those of every division of the country are distinguished
by a peculiar mark, which it is capital for them to lay aside, to go
out of their bounds, or to talk with a slave of another jurisdiction,
and the very attempt of an escape is no less penal than an escape
itself. It is death for any other slave to be accessory to it; and if a
freeman engages in it he is condemned to slavery. Those that discover
it are rewarded—if freemen, in money; and if slaves, with liberty,
together with a pardon for being accessory to it; that so they might
find their account rather in repenting of their engaging in such a
design than in persisting in it.

“These are their laws and rules in relation to robbery, and it is
obvious that they are as advantageous as they are mild and gentle;
since vice is not only destroyed and men preserved, but they are
treated in such a manner as to make them see the necessity of being
honest and of employing the rest of their lives in repairing the
injuries they had formerly done to society. Nor is there any hazard of
their falling back to their old customs; and so little do travellers
apprehend mischief from them that they generally make use of them for
guides from one jurisdiction to another; for there is nothing left them
by which they can rob or be the better for it, since, as they are
disarmed, so the very having of money is a sufficient conviction: and
as they are certainly punished if discovered, so they cannot hope to
escape; for their habit being in all the parts of it different from
what is commonly worn, they cannot fly away, unless they would go
naked, and even then their cropped ear would betray them. The only
danger to be feared from them is their conspiring against the
government; but those of one division and neighbourhood can do nothing
to any purpose unless a general conspiracy were laid amongst all the
slaves of the several jurisdictions, which cannot be done, since they
cannot meet or talk together; nor will any venture on a design where
the concealment would be so dangerous and the discovery so profitable.
None are quite hopeless of recovering their freedom, since by their
obedience and patience, and by giving good grounds to believe that they
will change their manner of life for the future, they may expect at
last to obtain their liberty, and some are every year restored to it
upon the good character that is given of them. When I had related all
this, I added that I did not see why such a method might not be
followed with more advantage than could ever be expected from that
severe justice which the Counsellor magnified so much. To this he
answered, ‘That it could never take place in England without
endangering the whole nation.’ As he said this he shook his head, made
some grimaces, and held his peace, while all the company seemed of his
opinion, except the Cardinal, who said, ‘That it was not easy to form a
judgment of its success, since it was a method that never yet had been
tried; but if,’ said he, ‘when sentence of death were passed upon a
thief, the prince would reprieve him for a while, and make the
experiment upon him, denying him the privilege of a sanctuary; and
then, if it had a good effect upon him, it might take place; and, if it
did not succeed, the worst would be to execute the sentence on the
condemned persons at last; and I do not see,’ added he, ‘why it would
be either unjust, inconvenient, or at all dangerous to admit of such a
delay; in my opinion the vagabonds ought to be treated in the same
manner, against whom, though we have made many laws, yet we have not
been able to gain our end.’ When the Cardinal had done, they all
commended the motion, though they had despised it when it came from me,
but more particularly commended what related to the vagabonds, because
it was his own observation.

“I do not know whether it be worth while to tell what followed, for it
was very ridiculous; but I shall venture at it, for as it is not
foreign to this matter, so some good use may be made of it. There was a
Jester standing by, that counterfeited the fool so naturally that he
seemed to be really one; the jests which he offered were so cold and
dull that we laughed more at him than at them, yet sometimes he said,
as it were by chance, things that were not unpleasant, so as to justify
the old proverb, ‘That he who throws the dice often, will sometimes
have a lucky hit.’ When one of the company had said that I had taken
care of the thieves, and the Cardinal had taken care of the vagabonds,
so that there remained nothing but that some public provision might be
made for the poor whom sickness or old age had disabled from labour,
‘Leave that to me,’ said the Fool, ‘and I shall take care of them, for
there is no sort of people whose sight I abhor more, having been so
often vexed with them and with their sad complaints; but as dolefully
soever as they have told their tale, they could never prevail so far as
to draw one penny from me; for either I had no mind to give them
anything, or, when I had a mind to do it, I had nothing to give them;
and they now know me so well that they will not lose their labour, but
let me pass without giving me any trouble, because they hope for
nothing—no more, in faith, than if I were a priest; but I would have a
law made for sending all these beggars to monasteries, the men to the
Benedictines, to be made lay-brothers, and the women to be nuns.’ The
Cardinal smiled, and approved of it in jest, but the rest liked it in
earnest. There was a divine present, who, though he was a grave morose
man, yet he was so pleased with this reflection that was made on the
priests and the monks that he began to play with the Fool, and said to
him, ‘This will not deliver you from all beggars, except you take care
of us Friars.’ ‘That is done already,’ answered the Fool, ‘for the
Cardinal has provided for you by what he proposed for restraining
vagabonds and setting them to work, for I know no vagabonds like you.’
This was well entertained by the whole company, who, looking at the
Cardinal, perceived that he was not ill-pleased at it; only the Friar
himself was vexed, as may be easily imagined, and fell into such a
passion that he could not forbear railing at the Fool, and calling him
knave, slanderer, backbiter, and son of perdition, and then cited some
dreadful threatenings out of the Scriptures against him. Now the Jester
thought he was in his element, and laid about him freely. ‘Good Friar,’
said he, ‘be not angry, for it is written, “In patience possess your
soul.”’ The Friar answered (for I shall give you his own words), ‘I am
not angry, you hangman; at least, I do not sin in it, for the Psalmist
says, “Be ye angry and sin not.”’ Upon this the Cardinal admonished him
gently, and wished him to govern his passions. ‘No, my lord,’ said he,
‘I speak not but from a good zeal, which I ought to have, for holy men
have had a good zeal, as it is said, “The zeal of thy house hath eaten
me up;” and we sing in our church that those who mocked Elisha as he
went up to the house of God felt the effects of his zeal, which that
mocker, that rogue, that scoundrel, will perhaps feel.’ ‘You do this,
perhaps, with a good intention,’ said the Cardinal, ‘but, in my
opinion, it were wiser in you, and perhaps better for you, not to
engage in so ridiculous a contest with a Fool.’ ‘No, my lord,’ answered
he, ‘that were not wisely done, for Solomon, the wisest of men, said,
“Answer a Fool according to his folly,” which I now do, and show him
the ditch into which he will fall, if he is not aware of it; for if the
many mockers of Elisha, who was but one bald man, felt the effect of
his zeal, what will become of the mocker of so many Friars, among whom
there are so many bald men? We have, likewise, a bull, by which all
that jeer us are excommunicated.’ When the Cardinal saw that there was
no end of this matter he made a sign to the Fool to withdraw, turned
the discourse another way, and soon after rose from the table, and,
dismissing us, went to hear causes.

“Thus, Mr. More, I have run out into a tedious story, of the length of
which I had been ashamed, if (as you earnestly begged it of me) I had
not observed you to hearken to it as if you had no mind to lose any
part of it. I might have contracted it, but I resolved to give it you
at large, that you might observe how those that despised what I had
proposed, no sooner perceived that the Cardinal did not dislike it but
presently approved of it, fawned so on him and flattered him to such a
degree, that they in good earnest applauded those things that he only
liked in jest; and from hence you may gather how little courtiers would
value either me or my counsels.”

To this I answered, “You have done me a great kindness in this
relation; for as everything has been related by you both wisely and
pleasantly, so you have made me imagine that I was in my own country
and grown young again, by recalling that good Cardinal to my thoughts,
in whose family I was bred from my childhood; and though you are, upon
other accounts, very dear to me, yet you are the dearer because you
honour his memory so much; but, after all this, I cannot change my
opinion, for I still think that if you could overcome that aversion
which you have to the courts of princes, you might, by the advice which
it is in your power to give, do a great deal of good to mankind, and
this is the chief design that every good man ought to propose to
himself in living; for your friend Plato thinks that nations will be
happy when either philosophers become kings or kings become
philosophers. It is no wonder if we are so far from that happiness
while philosophers will not think it their duty to assist kings with
their counsels.” “They are not so base-minded,” said he, “but that they
would willingly do it; many of them have already done it by their
books, if those that are in power would but hearken to their good
advice. But Plato judged right, that except kings themselves became
philosophers, they who from their childhood are corrupted with false
notions would never fall in entirely with the counsels of philosophers,
and this he himself found to be true in the person of Dionysius.

“Do not you think that if I were about any king, proposing good laws to
him, and endeavouring to root out all the cursed seeds of evil that I
found in him, I should either be turned out of his court, or, at least,
be laughed at for my pains? For instance, what could I signify if I
were about the King of France, and were called into his cabinet
council, where several wise men, in his hearing, were proposing many
expedients; as, by what arts and practices Milan may be kept, and
Naples, that has so often slipped out of their hands, recovered; how
the Venetians, and after them the rest of Italy, may be subdued; and
then how Flanders, Brabant, and all Burgundy, and some other kingdoms
which he has swallowed already in his designs, may be added to his
empire? One proposes a league with the Venetians, to be kept as long as
he finds his account in it, and that he ought to communicate counsels
with them, and give them some share of the spoil till his success makes
him need or fear them less, and then it will be easily taken out of
their hands; another proposes the hiring the Germans and the securing
the Switzers by pensions; another proposes the gaining the Emperor by
money, which is omnipotent with him; another proposes a peace with the
King of Arragon, and, in order to cement it, the yielding up the King
of Navarre’s pretensions; another thinks that the Prince of Castile is
to be wrought on by the hope of an alliance, and that some of his
courtiers are to be gained to the French faction by pensions. The
hardest point of all is, what to do with England; a treaty of peace is
to be set on foot, and, if their alliance is not to be depended on, yet
it is to be made as firm as possible, and they are to be called
friends, but suspected as enemies: therefore the Scots are to be kept
in readiness to be let loose upon England on every occasion; and some
banished nobleman is to be supported underhand (for by the League it
cannot be done avowedly) who has a pretension to the crown, by which
means that suspected prince may be kept in awe. Now when things are in
so great a fermentation, and so many gallant men are joining counsels
how to carry on the war, if so mean a man as I should stand up and wish
them to change all their counsels—to let Italy alone and stay at home,
since the kingdom of France was indeed greater than could be well
governed by one man; that therefore he ought not to think of adding
others to it; and if, after this, I should propose to them the
resolutions of the Achorians, a people that lie on the south-east of
Utopia, who long ago engaged in war in order to add to the dominions of
their prince another kingdom, to which he had some pretensions by an
ancient alliance: this they conquered, but found that the trouble of
keeping it was equal to that by which it was gained; that the conquered
people were always either in rebellion or exposed to foreign invasions,
while they were obliged to be incessantly at war, either for or against
them, and consequently could never disband their army; that in the
meantime they were oppressed with taxes, their money went out of the
kingdom, their blood was spilt for the glory of their king without
procuring the least advantage to the people, who received not the
smallest benefit from it even in time of peace; and that, their manners
being corrupted by a long war, robbery and murders everywhere abounded,
and their laws fell into contempt; while their king, distracted with
the care of two kingdoms, was the less able to apply his mind to the
interest of either. When they saw this, and that there would be no end
to these evils, they by joint counsels made an humble address to their
king, desiring him to choose which of the two kingdoms he had the
greatest mind to keep, since he could not hold both; for they were too
great a people to be governed by a divided king, since no man would
willingly have a groom that should be in common between him and
another. Upon which the good prince was forced to quit his new kingdom
to one of his friends (who was not long after dethroned), and to be
contented with his old one. To this I would add that after all those
warlike attempts, the vast confusions, and the consumption both of
treasure and of people that must follow them, perhaps upon some
misfortune they might be forced to throw up all at last; therefore it
seemed much more eligible that the king should improve his ancient
kingdom all he could, and make it flourish as much as possible; that he
should love his people, and be beloved of them; that he should live
among them, govern them gently and let other kingdoms alone, since that
which had fallen to his share was big enough, if not too big, for
him:—pray, how do you think would such a speech as this be heard?”

“I confess,” said I, “I think not very well.”

“But what,” said he, “if I should sort with another kind of ministers,
whose chief contrivances and consultations were by what art the
prince’s treasures might be increased? where one proposes raising the
value of specie when the king’s debts are large, and lowering it when
his revenues were to come in, that so he might both pay much with a
little, and in a little receive a great deal. Another proposes a
pretence of a war, that money might be raised in order to carry it on,
and that a peace be concluded as soon as that was done; and this with
such appearances of religion as might work on the people, and make them
impute it to the piety of their prince, and to his tenderness for the
lives of his subjects. A third offers some old musty laws that have
been antiquated by a long disuse (and which, as they had been forgotten
by all the subjects, so they had also been broken by them), and
proposes the levying the penalties of these laws, that, as it would
bring in a vast treasure, so there might be a very good pretence for
it, since it would look like the executing a law and the doing of
justice. A fourth proposes the prohibiting of many things under severe
penalties, especially such as were against the interest of the people,
and then the dispensing with these prohibitions, upon great
compositions, to those who might find their advantage in breaking them.
This would serve two ends, both of them acceptable to many; for as
those whose avarice led them to transgress would be severely fined, so
the selling licences dear would look as if a prince were tender of his
people, and would not easily, or at low rates, dispense with anything
that might be against the public good. Another proposes that the judges
must be made sure, that they may declare always in favour of the
prerogative; that they must be often sent for to court, that the king
may hear them argue those points in which he is concerned; since, how
unjust soever any of his pretensions may be, yet still some one or
other of them, either out of contradiction to others, or the pride of
singularity, or to make their court, would find out some pretence or
other to give the king a fair colour to carry the point. For if the
judges but differ in opinion, the clearest thing in the world is made
by that means disputable, and truth being once brought in question, the
king may then take advantage to expound the law for his own profit;
while the judges that stand out will be brought over, either through
fear or modesty; and they being thus gained, all of them may be sent to
the Bench to give sentence boldly as the king would have it; for fair
pretences will never be wanting when sentence is to be given in the
prince’s favour. It will either be said that equity lies of his side,
or some words in the law will be found sounding that way, or some
forced sense will be put on them; and, when all other things fail, the
king’s undoubted prerogative will be pretended, as that which is above
all law, and to which a religious judge ought to have a special regard.
Thus all consent to that maxim of Crassus, that a prince cannot have
treasure enough, since he must maintain his armies out of it; that a
king, even though he would, can do nothing unjustly; that all property
is in him, not excepting the very persons of his subjects; and that no
man has any other property but that which the king, out of his
goodness, thinks fit to leave him. And they think it is the prince’s
interest that there be as little of this left as may be, as if it were
his advantage that his people should have neither riches nor liberty,
since these things make them less easy and willing to submit to a cruel
and unjust government. Whereas necessity and poverty blunts them, makes
them patient, beats them down, and breaks that height of spirit that
might otherwise dispose them to rebel. Now what if, after all these
propositions were made, I should rise up and assert that such counsels
were both unbecoming a king and mischievous to him; and that not only
his honour, but his safety, consisted more in his people’s wealth than
in his own; if I should show that they choose a king for their own
sake, and not for his; that, by his care and endeavours, they may be
both easy and safe; and that, therefore, a prince ought to take more
care of his people’s happiness than of his own, as a shepherd is to
take more care of his flock than of himself? It is also certain that
they are much mistaken that think the poverty of a nation is a means of
the public safety. Who quarrel more than beggars? who does more
earnestly long for a change than he that is uneasy in his present
circumstances? and who run to create confusions with so desperate a
boldness as those who, having nothing to lose, hope to gain by them? If
a king should fall under such contempt or envy that he could not keep
his subjects in their duty but by oppression and ill usage, and by
rendering them poor and miserable, it were certainly better for him to
quit his kingdom than to retain it by such methods as make him, while
he keeps the name of authority, lose the majesty due to it. Nor is it
so becoming the dignity of a king to reign over beggars as over rich
and happy subjects. And therefore Fabricius, a man of a noble and
exalted temper, said ‘he would rather govern rich men than be rich
himself; since for one man to abound in wealth and pleasure when all
about him are mourning and groaning, is to be a gaoler and not a king.’
He is an unskilful physician that cannot cure one disease without
casting his patient into another. So he that can find no other way for
correcting the errors of his people but by taking from them the
conveniences of life, shows that he knows not what it is to govern a
free nation. He himself ought rather to shake off his sloth, or to lay
down his pride, for the contempt or hatred that his people have for him
takes its rise from the vices in himself. Let him live upon what
belongs to him without wronging others, and accommodate his expense to
his revenue. Let him punish crimes, and, by his wise conduct, let him
endeavour to prevent them, rather than be severe when he has suffered
them to be too common. Let him not rashly revive laws that are
abrogated by disuse, especially if they have been long forgotten and
never wanted. And let him never take any penalty for the breach of them
to which a judge would not give way in a private man, but would look on
him as a crafty and unjust person for pretending to it. To these things
I would add that law among the Macarians—a people that live not far
from Utopia—by which their king, on the day on which he began to reign,
is tied by an oath, confirmed by solemn sacrifices, never to have at
once above a thousand pounds of gold in his treasures, or so much
silver as is equal to that in value. This law, they tell us, was made
by an excellent king who had more regard to the riches of his country
than to his own wealth, and therefore provided against the heaping up
of so much treasure as might impoverish the people. He thought that
moderate sum might be sufficient for any accident, if either the king
had occasion for it against the rebels, or the kingdom against the
invasion of an enemy; but that it was not enough to encourage a prince
to invade other men’s rights—a circumstance that was the chief cause of
his making that law. He also thought that it was a good provision for
that free circulation of money so necessary for the course of commerce
and exchange. And when a king must distribute all those extraordinary
accessions that increase treasure beyond the due pitch, it makes him
less disposed to oppress his subjects. Such a king as this will be the
terror of ill men, and will be beloved by all the good.
