OF THE TRAVELLING OF THE UTOPIANS
(PART 2 OF 2)

“Thus, upon an inquiry into the whole matter, they reckon that all our
actions, and even all our virtues, terminate in pleasure, as in our
chief end and greatest happiness; and they call every motion or state,
either of body or mind, in which Nature teaches us to delight, a
pleasure. Thus they cautiously limit pleasure only to those appetites
to which Nature leads us; for they say that Nature leads us only to
those delights to which reason, as well as sense, carries us, and by
which we neither injure any other person nor lose the possession of
greater pleasures, and of such as draw no troubles after them. But they
look upon those delights which men by a foolish, though common, mistake
call pleasure, as if they could change as easily the nature of things
as the use of words, as things that greatly obstruct their real
happiness, instead of advancing it, because they so entirely possess
the minds of those that are once captivated by them with a false notion
of pleasure that there is no room left for pleasures of a truer or
purer kind.

“There are many things that in themselves have nothing that is truly
delightful; on the contrary, they have a good deal of bitterness in
them; and yet, from our perverse appetites after forbidden objects, are
not only ranked among the pleasures, but are made even the greatest
designs, of life. Among those who pursue these sophisticated pleasures
they reckon such as I mentioned before, who think themselves really the
better for having fine clothes; in which they think they are doubly
mistaken, both in the opinion they have of their clothes, and in that
they have of themselves. For if you consider the use of clothes, why
should a fine thread be thought better than a coarse one? And yet these
men, as if they had some real advantages beyond others, and did not owe
them wholly to their mistakes, look big, seem to fancy themselves to be
more valuable, and imagine that a respect is due to them for the sake
of a rich garment, to which they would not have pretended if they had
been more meanly clothed, and even resent it as an affront if that
respect is not paid them. It is also a great folly to be taken with
outward marks of respect, which signify nothing; for what true or real
pleasure can one man find in another’s standing bare or making legs to
him? Will the bending another man’s knees give ease to yours? and will
the head’s being bare cure the madness of yours? And yet it is
wonderful to see how this false notion of pleasure bewitches many who
delight themselves with the fancy of their nobility, and are pleased
with this conceit—that they are descended from ancestors who have been
held for some successions rich, and who have had great possessions; for
this is all that makes nobility at present. Yet they do not think
themselves a whit the less noble, though their immediate parents have
left none of this wealth to them, or though they themselves have
squandered it away. The Utopians have no better opinion of those who
are much taken with gems and precious stones, and who account it a
degree of happiness next to a divine one if they can purchase one that
is very extraordinary, especially if it be of that sort of stones that
is then in greatest request, for the same sort is not at all times
universally of the same value, nor will men buy it unless it be
dismounted and taken out of the gold. The jeweller is then made to give
good security, and required solemnly to swear that the stone is true,
that, by such an exact caution, a false one might not be bought instead
of a true; though, if you were to examine it, your eye could find no
difference between the counterfeit and that which is true; so that they
are all one to you, as much as if you were blind. Or can it be thought
that they who heap up a useless mass of wealth, not for any use that it
is to bring them, but merely to please themselves with the
contemplation of it, enjoy any true pleasure in it? The delight they
find is only a false shadow of joy. Those are no better whose error is
somewhat different from the former, and who hide it out of their fear
of losing it; for what other name can fit the hiding it in the earth,
or, rather, the restoring it to it again, it being thus cut off from
being useful either to its owner or to the rest of mankind? And yet the
owner, having hid it carefully, is glad, because he thinks he is now
sure of it. If it should be stole, the owner, though he might live
perhaps ten years after the theft, of which he knew nothing, would find
no difference between his having or losing it, for both ways it was
equally useless to him.

“Among those foolish pursuers of pleasure they reckon all that delight
in hunting, in fowling, or gaming, of whose madness they have only
heard, for they have no such things among them. But they have asked us,
‘What sort of pleasure is it that men can find in throwing the dice?’
(for if there were any pleasure in it, they think the doing it so often
should give one a surfeit of it); ‘and what pleasure can one find in
hearing the barking and howling of dogs, which seem rather odious than
pleasant sounds?’ Nor can they comprehend the pleasure of seeing dogs
run after a hare, more than of seeing one dog run after another; for if
the seeing them run is that which gives the pleasure, you have the same
entertainment to the eye on both these occasions, since that is the
same in both cases. But if the pleasure lies in seeing the hare killed
and torn by the dogs, this ought rather to stir pity, that a weak,
harmless, and fearful hare should be devoured by strong, fierce, and
cruel dogs. Therefore all this business of hunting is, among the
Utopians, turned over to their butchers, and those, as has been already
said, are all slaves, and they look on hunting as one of the basest
parts of a butcher’s work, for they account it both more profitable and
more decent to kill those beasts that are more necessary and useful to
mankind, whereas the killing and tearing of so small and miserable an
animal can only attract the huntsman with a false show of pleasure,
from which he can reap but small advantage. They look on the desire of
the bloodshed, even of beasts, as a mark of a mind that is already
corrupted with cruelty, or that at least, by too frequent returns of so
brutal a pleasure, must degenerate into it.

“Thus though the rabble of mankind look upon these, and on innumerable
other things of the same nature, as pleasures, the Utopians, on the
contrary, observing that there is nothing in them truly pleasant,
conclude that they are not to be reckoned among pleasures; for though
these things may create some tickling in the senses (which seems to be
a true notion of pleasure), yet they imagine that this does not arise
from the thing itself, but from a depraved custom, which may so vitiate
a man’s taste that bitter things may pass for sweet, as women with
child think pitch or tallow taste sweeter than honey; but as a man’s
sense, when corrupted either by a disease or some ill habit, does not
change the nature of other things, so neither can it change the nature
of pleasure.

“They reckon up several sorts of pleasures, which they call true ones;
some belong to the body, and others to the mind. The pleasures of the
mind lie in knowledge, and in that delight which the contemplation of
truth carries with it; to which they add the joyful reflections on a
well-spent life, and the assured hopes of a future happiness. They
divide the pleasures of the body into two sorts—the one is that which
gives our senses some real delight, and is performed either by
recruiting Nature and supplying those parts which feed the internal
heat of life by eating and drinking, or when Nature is eased of any
surcharge that oppresses it, when we are relieved from sudden pain, or
that which arises from satisfying the appetite which Nature has wisely
given to lead us to the propagation of the species. There is another
kind of pleasure that arises neither from our receiving what the body
requires, nor its being relieved when overcharged, and yet, by a secret
unseen virtue, affects the senses, raises the passions, and strikes the
mind with generous impressions—this is, the pleasure that arises from
music. Another kind of bodily pleasure is that which results from an
undisturbed and vigorous constitution of body, when life and active
spirits seem to actuate every part. This lively health, when entirely
free from all mixture of pain, of itself gives an inward pleasure,
independent of all external objects of delight; and though this
pleasure does not so powerfully affect us, nor act so strongly on the
senses as some of the others, yet it may be esteemed as the greatest of
all pleasures; and almost all the Utopians reckon it the foundation and
basis of all the other joys of life, since this alone makes the state
of life easy and desirable, and when this is wanting, a man is really
capable of no other pleasure. They look upon freedom from pain, if it
does not rise from perfect health, to be a state of stupidity rather
than of pleasure. This subject has been very narrowly canvassed among
them, and it has been debated whether a firm and entire health could be
called a pleasure or not. Some have thought that there was no pleasure
but what was ‘excited’ by some sensible motion in the body. But this
opinion has been long ago excluded from among them; so that now they
almost universally agree that health is the greatest of all bodily
pleasures; and that as there is a pain in sickness which is as opposite
in its nature to pleasure as sickness itself is to health, so they hold
that health is accompanied with pleasure. And if any should say that
sickness is not really pain, but that it only carries pain along with
it, they look upon that as a fetch of subtlety that does not much alter
the matter. It is all one, in their opinion, whether it be said that
health is in itself a pleasure, or that it begets a pleasure, as fire
gives heat, so it be granted that all those whose health is entire have
a true pleasure in the enjoyment of it. And they reason thus:—‘What is
the pleasure of eating, but that a man’s health, which had been
weakened, does, with the assistance of food, drive away hunger, and so
recruiting itself, recovers its former vigour? And being thus refreshed
it finds a pleasure in that conflict; and if the conflict is pleasure,
the victory must yet breed a greater pleasure, except we fancy that it
becomes stupid as soon as it has obtained that which it pursued, and so
neither knows nor rejoices in its own welfare.’ If it is said that
health cannot be felt, they absolutely deny it; for what man is in
health, that does not perceive it when he is awake? Is there any man
that is so dull and stupid as not to acknowledge that he feels a
delight in health? And what is delight but another name for pleasure?

“But, of all pleasures, they esteem those to be most valuable that lie
in the mind, the chief of which arise out of true virtue and the
witness of a good conscience. They account health the chief pleasure
that belongs to the body; for they think that the pleasure of eating
and drinking, and all the other delights of sense, are only so far
desirable as they give or maintain health; but they are not pleasant in
themselves otherwise than as they resist those impressions that our
natural infirmities are still making upon us. For as a wise man desires
rather to avoid diseases than to take physic, and to be freed from pain
rather than to find ease by remedies, so it is more desirable not to
need this sort of pleasure than to be obliged to indulge it. If any man
imagines that there is a real happiness in these enjoyments, he must
then confess that he would be the happiest of all men if he were to
lead his life in perpetual hunger, thirst, and itching, and, by
consequence, in perpetual eating, drinking, and scratching himself;
which any one may easily see would be not only a base, but a miserable,
state of a life. These are, indeed, the lowest of pleasures, and the
least pure, for we can never relish them but when they are mixed with
the contrary pains. The pain of hunger must give us the pleasure of
eating, and here the pain out-balances the pleasure. And as the pain is
more vehement, so it lasts much longer; for as it begins before the
pleasure, so it does not cease but with the pleasure that extinguishes
it, and both expire together. They think, therefore, none of those
pleasures are to be valued any further than as they are necessary; yet
they rejoice in them, and with due gratitude acknowledge the tenderness
of the great Author of Nature, who has planted in us appetites, by
which those things that are necessary for our preservation are likewise
made pleasant to us. For how miserable a thing would life be if those
daily diseases of hunger and thirst were to be carried off by such
bitter drugs as we must use for those diseases that return seldomer
upon us! And thus these pleasant, as well as proper, gifts of Nature
maintain the strength and the sprightliness of our bodies.

“They also entertain themselves with the other delights let in at their
eyes, their ears, and their nostrils as the pleasant relishes and
seasoning of life, which Nature seems to have marked out peculiarly for
man, since no other sort of animals contemplates the figure and beauty
of the universe, nor is delighted with smells any further than as they
distinguish meats by them; nor do they apprehend the concords or
discords of sound. Yet, in all pleasures whatsoever, they take care
that a lesser joy does not hinder a greater, and that pleasure may
never breed pain, which they think always follows dishonest pleasures.
But they think it madness for a man to wear out the beauty of his face
or the force of his natural strength, to corrupt the sprightliness of
his body by sloth and laziness, or to waste it by fasting; that it is
madness to weaken the strength of his constitution and reject the other
delights of life, unless by renouncing his own satisfaction he can
either serve the public or promote the happiness of others, for which
he expects a greater recompense from God. So that they look on such a
course of life as the mark of a mind that is both cruel to itself and
ungrateful to the Author of Nature, as if we would not be beholden to
Him for His favours, and therefore rejects all His blessings; as one
who should afflict himself for the empty shadow of virtue, or for no
better end than to render himself capable of bearing those misfortunes
which possibly will never happen.

“This is their notion of virtue and of pleasure: they think that no
man’s reason can carry him to a truer idea of them unless some
discovery from heaven should inspire him with sublimer notions. I have
not now the leisure to examine whether they think right or wrong in
this matter; nor do I judge it necessary, for I have only undertaken to
give you an account of their constitution, but not to defend all their
principles. I am sure that whatever may be said of their notions, there
is not in the whole world either a better people or a happier
government. Their bodies are vigorous and lively; and though they are
but of a middle stature, and have neither the fruitfullest soil nor the
purest air in the world; yet they fortify themselves so well, by their
temperate course of life, against the unhealthiness of their air, and
by their industry they so cultivate their soil, that there is nowhere
to be seen a greater increase, both of corn and cattle, nor are there
anywhere healthier men and freer from diseases; for one may there see
reduced to practice not only all the art that the husbandman employs in
manuring and improving an ill soil, but whole woods plucked up by the
roots, and in other places new ones planted, where there were none
before. Their principal motive for this is the convenience of carriage,
that their timber may be either near their towns or growing on the
banks of the sea, or of some rivers, so as to be floated to them; for
it is a harder work to carry wood at any distance over land than corn.
The people are industrious, apt to learn, as well as cheerful and
pleasant, and none can endure more labour when it is necessary; but,
except in that case, they love their ease. They are unwearied pursuers
of knowledge; for when we had given them some hints of the learning and
discipline of the Greeks, concerning whom we only instructed them (for
we know that there was nothing among the Romans, except their
historians and their poets, that they would value much), it was strange
to see how eagerly they were set on learning that language: we began to
read a little of it to them, rather in compliance with their
importunity than out of any hopes of their reaping from it any great
advantage: but, after a very short trial, we found they made such
progress, that we saw our labour was like to be more successful than we
could have expected: they learned to write their characters and to
pronounce their language so exactly, had so quick an apprehension, they
remembered it so faithfully, and became so ready and correct in the use
of it, that it would have looked like a miracle if the greater part of
those whom we taught had not been men both of extraordinary capacity
and of a fit age for instruction: they were, for the greatest part,
chosen from among their learned men by their chief council, though some
studied it of their own accord. In three years’ time they became
masters of the whole language, so that they read the best of the Greek
authors very exactly. I am, indeed, apt to think that they learned that
language the more easily from its having some relation to their own. I
believe that they were a colony of the Greeks; for though their
language comes nearer the Persian, yet they retain many names, both for
their towns and magistrates, that are of Greek derivation. I happened
to carry a great many books with me, instead of merchandise, when I
sailed my fourth voyage; for I was so far from thinking of soon coming
back, that I rather thought never to have returned at all, and I gave
them all my books, among which were many of Plato’s and some of
Aristotle’s works: I had also Theophrastus on Plants, which, to my
great regret, was imperfect; for having laid it carelessly by, while we
were at sea, a monkey had seized upon it, and in many places torn out
the leaves. They have no books of grammar but Lascares, for I did not
carry Theodorus with me; nor have they any dictionaries but Hesichius
and Dioscerides. They esteem Plutarch highly, and were much taken with
Lucian’s wit and with his pleasant way of writing. As for the poets,
they have Aristophanes, Homer, Euripides, and Sophocles of Aldus’s
edition; and for historians, Thucydides, Herodotus, and Herodian. One
of my companions, Thricius Apinatus, happened to carry with him some of
Hippocrates’s works and Galen’s Microtechne, which they hold in great
estimation; for though there is no nation in the world that needs
physic so little as they do, yet there is not any that honours it so
much; they reckon the knowledge of it one of the pleasantest and most
profitable parts of philosophy, by which, as they search into the
secrets of nature, so they not only find this study highly agreeable,
but think that such inquiries are very acceptable to the Author of
nature; and imagine, that as He, like the inventors of curious engines
amongst mankind, has exposed this great machine of the universe to the
view of the only creatures capable of contemplating it, so an exact and
curious observer, who admires His workmanship, is much more acceptable
to Him than one of the herd, who, like a beast incapable of reason,
looks on this glorious scene with the eyes of a dull and unconcerned
spectator.

“The minds of the Utopians, when fenced with a love for learning, are
very ingenious in discovering all such arts as are necessary to carry
it to perfection. Two things they owe to us, the manufacture of paper
and the art of printing; yet they are not so entirely indebted to us
for these discoveries but that a great part of the invention was their
own. We showed them some books printed by Aldus, we explained to them
the way of making paper and the mystery of printing; but, as we had
never practised these arts, we described them in a crude and
superficial manner. They seized the hints we gave them; and though at
first they could not arrive at perfection, yet by making many essays
they at last found out and corrected all their errors and conquered
every difficulty. Before this they only wrote on parchment, on reeds,
or on the barks of trees; but now they have established the
manufactures of paper and set up printing presses, so that, if they had
but a good number of Greek authors, they would be quickly supplied with
many copies of them: at present, though they have no more than those I
have mentioned, yet, by several impressions, they have multiplied them
into many thousands. If any man was to go among them that had some
extraordinary talent, or that by much travelling had observed the
customs of many nations (which made us to be so well received), he
would receive a hearty welcome, for they are very desirous to know the
state of the whole world. Very few go among them on the account of
traffic; for what can a man carry to them but iron, or gold, or silver?
which merchants desire rather to export than import to a strange
country: and as for their exportation, they think it better to manage
that themselves than to leave it to foreigners, for by this means, as
they understand the state of the neighbouring countries better, so they
keep up the art of navigation which cannot be maintained but by much
practice.
