# leaf 0018

Course, but we also give you those basic, standard effects that are vital to your education as a magician. Those fundamental principles form an important part of your training and will be reflected in your work as you advance from year to year.

And always remember that some of the greatest tricks in the world are the most aged. We utilize the old ideas and principles but give them a modern touch in presentation, or patter, and thus create “new”’ tricks. Often when asked to “Show us something new,” I have deliberately done an old one with a new twist to it, and have fooled the boys who were not up on the fundamentals.

Quite a number of mystery workers have asked me from time to time just how to make certain “Double Paper Cones” that I used in my act. Then I began to ask magicians what they knew about such cones and discovered that the subject was little understood by magicians generally. Very few realized that such a simple device formed an important part of the programs of such professionals as Blackstone and Dante.

So I came to the conclusion that I would write a lesson about double paper effects and add this fundamental information to your store of knowledge. You will find it in this volume.

And thus the new Tarbell Course in Magic is undergoing many : changes and additions in tune with today. Much of the old original Course will be retained, but rearranged. If you own an old Course, hold on to it, as you will enjoy going over the old arrangement, as an early student.

This Course is written for you, to help you. I try to figure out the knowledge you should have, to make you more successful—to give you an efficient workable background. Even though we do not do a great many of the tricks as yet, we need from an educational standpoint to knew the methods employed, for they add to our basic knowledge and greatly aid our progress.

I want to thank all those who have contributed their own material to this Course, for they, like myself, are learning that “To give is to receive,” and that “To teach is to learn.”

_ XIV
