# leaf 0021

Lesson 20 | HOW TO PLEASE YOUR AUDIENCE

A Bm NT ae

er

ss

eu:

ve

ves MODERN magician is fundamentally an entertainer, and to be a successful entertainer he must please his audience.

The magician is somewhat like a mirror on the stage reflecting back to his audience the things they want to see and hear.

The style and method of presentation are as important as the magic and mysteries. Imagination, originality, human nature, timing, humor, sincerity, good taste, showmanship, personality, proper speech, proper dress and timeliness all play their part.

IMAGINATION

When Aladdin rubbed his lamp—things happened! It is the business of the magician to make things happen, and to happen in an unexpected, interesting way.

Weare all children from five to one hundred and five years of age. Like children, we seek an escape in the land of fairy tales and illusion. People want phenomena and miracles. Instinctively one wishes for a magic wand to bring forth one’s fondest desires.

People rush to the movies and to the theatre, because they want to be entertained in an unreal world, a world of fancy. They want to live in their imaginations for a while and forget their own individual lives with their problems and hardships. They find the theatre a retreat where they can withdraw from their own everyday lives.

Artists, writers, producers and actors strive to take people out of themselves. On the screen, on the stage, on the radio, they bring a new world to us. In the theatrical world much is illusion. Behind the curtain line is much different than in front of it. We laugh and cry at situations that take on the power of reality. We feel happy all over when the lovers fall into each other’s arms and apparently live happily ever after. Painted scenery becomes a King’s castle, a living room, a bed room, a garden or a

street. We Want to Believe.

All this is a great factor in the explanation of the magician’s power. He deals with the unreal. His art is so far removed from everyday life that the spell he casts over his audience is tremendous. His is a world of fancy. His illusion looks like reality. And that is what the public wants. 7
