# leaf 0022

The public is interested in mystery and the supernatural. This accounts for the great interest in mystery detective stories in books and on the radio as well as the screen. People pay for mystery. The magician will be popular if he will bring mystery—mystery that appeals to the imagination.

Imagination has built cities where rolling prairies and farm lands were before. Imagination has brought forth a modern civilization with its electric power, lights, radio, automobiles, railroads and aeroplanes. The imagination of man changed an ox cart into a buggy, into an automobile and into an aeroplane.

The ordinary, plus imagination, makes the extraordimary. A man with imagination takes two or three common ingredients selling at fifteen cents per pound and combines them into a product selling for two dollars per pound.

Note the simple articles out of which magic is made—a coin, a handkerchief, a ball, a piece of paper or a piece of rope. Each in themselves is just a common article to the general public. But the magician adds imagination to them and they in return perform the unexpected.

Ten cents worth of clothesline plus imagination may be turned into a hundred dollar program or even a five hundred dollar program. Audiences have been held spellbound by my own series of rope mysteries. With a simple piece of clothesline three feet long I have entertained an audience for over fifteen minutes.

Frakson takes a few cigarettes and builds a beautiful act. Cardini adds imagination to cards, billiard balls and cigarettes and becomes a headliner.

On the dealers’ shelves lie dozens of articles waiting for the man with imagination to make headline features. The simple thumb tip, originally ? designed to switch a torn strip of tissue paper for a whole strip, had very limited sales, but began to sell into the thousands when it was used to vanish cigarettes, salt, water, etc. Even mind readers applied it to their mental effects.

. Imagination is limited to no one. We all have it.

ORIGINALITY

Be yourself—do not be an echo. Be a person and not a parrot. Don’t be an imitator, a borrower, a beggar or a plagiarist.

In all the world there is no one exactly like you. No one can see from your eyes or hear with your ears. No one has had your exact experiences.

The tendency is for the average person to imitate. He sees a performer feature something and then wants to go out and duplicate it. He gets out his notebook and tries to copy the patter word by word. He imitates the
