# leaf 0024

HUMAN NATURE

When Robert-Houdin came under the guidance of Torrini, during Houdin’s early years, Torrini told him that the first thing to learn in becoming a magician was human nature. Success comes from our ability to please and handle people. Our success is greatly measured by the reactions of the audience and of those with whom we deal.

People are busy with many things, so why should they give up their time to come and see you? + What can you offer that is more important than the things they are doing and even pay a substantial fee to see you?

People are primarily interested in themselves and in their individual wants. A man is interested in what he wants, not what you want. He is interested in you as long as you can help supply, his wants. As Elbert Hubbard once said, ‘‘Love the things that I love and I will love you, but hate the things that I love and you are crazy.”

Man’s selfishness arose in an effort to survive. But a man’s selfishness is unpopular with other people. You might say “I want so-and-so. I demand so-and-so.”’ And others would say “So what! Who cares?” People shy away from our self-centered desires and yet want us to cater to their own self-centered cravings.

And yet people will favor your desires if they see benefit, profit and a gain for themselves. So we have to take partly at least, our self-centered desires and interpret them into an expression of what others want and want so badly they are willing to pay for it. So instead of saying ““Here’s what I want,” you say ‘“‘Here’s what you want.” You talk you instead of I. Andrew Carnegie once said that he made his money by making money for

others. ;

My father’s cousin, Gage Tarbell, was one of the greatest insurance men that ever lived. At one time his office sold more insurance per year than seven insurance companies put together. He changed death insurance into life insurance. He showed men how their weekly or monthly earnings could still continue after their deaths. He showed men how to take care of their families in advance; to take care of a wife and each of the children. He looked after college educations, saw that money was distributed in proper amounts, showed people how to protect families against financial sharks. He made it possible for a man to put aside small amounts each month to accomplish his desires. People with whom he did business became his friends, because he himself was a friend and because he fathered and assumed the responsibility of the things they were trying to straighten out, and perhaps didn’t know how to straighten out.

Today program chairmen, managers, theatre owners, club presidents, etc., have their problems and they are seeking the a that will help best to meet their needs in the easiest way possible.
