# leaf 0026

half a pound on the scales at first. Then she turns to the customer and says ‘Have you ever tried one of our butter creams?’”’ And she hands hima butter cream.

Then little by little she adds candy to the scale and finally she throws an extra one in for good. measure. She puts the candy into a good looking box, well wrapped, and hands it to the customer. ‘‘You will love these candies—they are so fresh.”” She put an extra chocolate nougat on the box as she delivered it.

She gave the customer one pound of candy and two extra pieces. But the customer was as happy as though she had given him two pounds. The two extra pieces were the best kind of advertising and cheaper than newspaper space.

Yes, the man went away happy and would come back again for that store gave him something. You must give in order to get. Today the Marchand system is popular with the better candy stores over the country.

Here are a few fundamental things I want you to remember about people: 90% are interested in physical improvement. 8% are interested in mental improvement. 2% are interested in spiritual improvement.

People want:

Health

Wealth

Love

Adventure $ Entertainment

People want miracles. People judge their gods by the miracles that they perform.

_ As modern day magical entertainers we help to supply the craving for miracles in a harmless, inspiring and entertaining way.

Elbert Hubbard used to tell me, “I love magicians because they are honest men. They tell you they are going to fool you and then proceed to do it. In fact their pay is governed by their ability to puzzle. But no matter what happens at the magic show—when you get home you still have your watch, your pocketbook and your appendix. And that is more than I can say for some of my non-magician acquaintances.”

So let grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, children and relations come to see us, enjoy our seeming miracles and go away entertained and pleased. We have transported them to a new world for a while. Human nature craves the magical.
