# leaf 0027

TIMING

The whole universe runs on law and order. There is a proper place and time for everything. In order to get contrasts, life gives us the law of opposites—positive and negative, light and dark, heat and cold, up and down, in and out, big and little, expansion and limitation, hard and soft, heavy and light, bright and dull, male and female, laughter and sorrow and the kinetic and the static.

There is a time for planting and a time for harvesting. Spring, summer, fall and winter have their timing. The earth goes around the sun on an exact schedule and astronomers worry if their calculations are a minute off.

Nature gives great variety and is constantly adding new touches to keep us from fatiguing. Even the most brilliant sunset would become tiresome if held too long. The human nervous system will stand about so much. It is hard to hold human interest for any great length of time.

Timing is superimportant to the magician and his control of the audience. He is there to please the audience and to fit in with the rhythm of their desires.

I have seen big expensive shows flop because of poor timing and I have seen one single entertainer a greater success than a $150,000 production, because of his timing.

Amateur magicians are usually so anxious to entertain themselves with their own stuff, that many do not hesitate to want to do an hour, or a full evening, show on a bill which has five to nine other acts.

In vaudeville, acts are given a certain time and they are supposed to run that exact time. If the act is given eight minutes, it is supposed to go on and get off in eight minutes and not ten minutes or fifteen minutes. Every bill is set to run just so many minutes as a whole and each act is a definite part in making the complete program.

So always remember, ‘‘How do I fit into the whole scheme of things? Who wants a full meal on top of a Christmas dinner)” There is a proper time for humor, a proper time for mystery, a proper time for tears and a proper time for everything that enters into the making of a great show.

On the stage a second seems like a minute and a minute like an hour,

sometimes. Music is often necessary to keep you in proper timing, or properly timed patter and action to take the place of music.

Blessed are the dependable people who do things right, have respect for an 8:30 P.M. curtain and respect for the feelings of the audience who paid to come in to have a good time.

Not too much—not too little. As a great French chef said “It must have that definite touch.”
