# leaf 0028

HUMOR

Humor is the saving grace of the gods. Philosophy without humor would be tragic. Humor is a part of happiness. It is the balance wheel to sanity. It is one of the highest faculties in the human brain. Pity the world without humor, comedy and laughter. And God bless those who have taught the world to laugh and have changed tragedy to comedy by the proper perspective of thought.

Hannen Swaffer, noted English columnist, said when the Egyptian (Magic) Hall, of London, was torn down, ‘We not only miss the passing of the magician at Egyptian Hall with his mysteries, but we miss his humor, for humor is as much a part of the successful magician’s show as are his magical mysteries.” Yes, a magician without humor would be like a Christmas without Santa Claus.

Humor with the magician is not telling a joke about Pat and Mike, but is greatly dependent upon situations, proper timing and interesting slants. The heart must be right and ready to enter into the fun. Humor leaves everyone feeling fine and happier. To play a joke on someone, to embarrass someone, is not humor, in fact it is apt to result in resentment.

Sometimes the puzzling climax or surprise in a mystery produces humor because it was so unexpected and was presented in such a wholesome interesting manner.

When I brought out ‘“‘Eyeless Vision”’ as a stage program, I little realized its entertainment value. My original idea was to show the amazing things a man could do with his eyes sealed and bandaged. I would perform something startling and awe inspiring and expect the audience to nod their heads in educational appreciativeness, but instead they would break out into uproarious laughter. The most serious moments sometimes produced the greatest laughter. And I wondered what was the matter.

So I asked questions of members of my audiences. “Why did you laugh when I told a lady that her husband’s middle name was Melvin?” I asked.

“Yes,” he would say, “but you should have seen the look on the woman’s face when you told her that. Man, that was a sight to look upon.”

So I found people were laughing at the others’ reactions (the result of proper timing), and the amazing things I would do which seemed so impossible.

Once a lady came up with a postage stamp pasted on her forehead to test me. Instead of saying “This is a lady with a postage stamp on her forehead,” I said, “Well, here is a lady who is not afraid of the mail (male). ue believes in going places. Stamps on a lady should be cancelled with

isses.
