# leaf 0030

resentment in the audience, and Mr. Kellogg, disappointed, got up and left the auditorium.

Here is something I said in Volume I, but I repeat it because I want every magician to remember it as long as he lives. A magician is supposed to be a person who is on a plane higher than the average person and is supposed to have a bit of supernatural power to do things ordinary folks cannot do. In days gone by people came to the magician for health, wealth, love and to find a way out of difficulties. In the field of entertainment, people will come to see the magician who would never think of going to the theatre or other places of entertainment. But they feel the magician presents ‘“‘clean”’ entertainment and everyone can attend from the youngster to grandpa and grandma. We must never disappoint an audience, and never must the magician come down from his pedestal of respect.

Our work does not end with the stage. Sometimes our greatest effort is off the stage. When we are entertained by others we must learn to fit into that degree of society and be respected. People should be glad to have us with them. Table manners, the things we talk about, our intelligent reactions, our desire to be of service, are very important.

How you live offstage is especially important when you are dealing with committees. It is so easy to be considerate, to be kindly, to be courteous and to be appreciative.

We are living in a fast-changing world so let us keep our programs upto-date and not be out-moded. As styles change we must change. Let us use good taste in tune with the times.

KEEPING UP WITH THE TIMES ? The character of magic, like that of everything else in life, has altered with the changing world. At one time a great deal of cumbersome apparatus was used—many trick cases, trunks, automata and long table drapes. The magician, too, was encumbered with voluminous robes.

Robert-Houdin, founder of the modern school of legerdemain, did away with the gaudy, clumsy paraphernalia of his predecessors. Smaller effects and sleight of hand came into its own. Houdin wore a dress suit and adapted his program to the society of his day.

So great was the impression of Houdin’s life on young Eric Weiss, who worshipped Houdin and wanted to be like him, that he called himself Houdini, which means “‘like Houdin.”’

I have said so many times that the greatest magic consists in making the common, uncommon, and the ordinary, extraordinary, for we start with something people already know and then step it up into a magical surprise or seeming impossibility.
