# leaf 0033

Costumes are appropriate where one plays a character. Here is a chance for art and a good costumer. Winston Freer, who dresses in Hindu style, has a well designed snappy outfit that shows youth, adventure, spirit, action, and as though he might be an Aladdin from the Arabian Nights. His turban is small and not ill fitting and cumbersome such as some magicians have worn.

MAGICIANS SHOULD BE ARTISTS

Dress, stage appearance—all are important. Composition, arrangement, color, quantity should be carefully studied. This is an age of modern arrangement and color.

See how the modern city show window has changed from the window of years ago. Windows are pictures in themselves. Note the difference between the beautifully styled windows of Marshall Field or Lord and Taylor, and the ten cent stores. One is a study in beauty, the other a mass of articles.

Dress your act. Do not clutter up the stage. Have a place for everything and study proper values.

At one time colors were just red, yellow, green, blue, purple, black and white. But today we have lovely tones of color, harmony of arrangement. Instead of red we speak also of geranium, vermilion, carmine, maroon, rose, etc.

Munsell gave us many ideas in proper color harmony and use of proper tones. Art stores can supply you with books and charts on colors.

Be careful of your blacks and reds. These should only be used in small amounts. Black, unless polished, is a dead color, while red is very powerful and very stimulating.

When I studied oil painting, I was not allowed red or black on my palette. My red was rose madder. To gain an impression of black on the picture I mixed rose madder with dark blue. It gave a darkness, a certain depth of brilliance that black itself could not give. Black gave a “‘dead”’ effect.

If a bright red, such as vermilion, was used, it was only in a small amount to accent something—a spot or two. This was also true of black. I am speaking of colored paintings and not of black and white pictures such as washes, pen and inks, silhouettes, etc.

Some colors, appropriate in themselves, are inharmonious when placed beside certain other colors, yet can be made more beautiful and effective when combined with certain others.

Red, because of its vitality, warmth and stimulation, can be seen a
