# leaf 0034

long way. That is why red lights are used for danger signals on street crossings, etc.

Yellow gives light, mentality and clearness of vision. Blue gives spirituality, coolness and quiet.

Green is a combination between yellow and blue. It is a protective color. It has strength and will power.

Violet is a dual color. It suggests birth and royalty, depending on how used. Ultra violet is a powerful healing agent. The violet tones are healing. A dark shade of violet combined with black has to be used with care as it looks too depressing. Violet is pleasing when used with the yellow tones.

White is a combination of all colors, while black is an absence of color. All life expresses itself in color. Anything that lives, vibrates, and anything that vibrates has color.

Use color to accent the particular part of the trick that you are selling. Let us say you are performing the trick where a square block drops through two tubes. A piece of plate glass is between the two tubes. Apparently the wooden block penetrates the glass. The important thing to see is the block of wood. So we can paint this some shade of red for brightness.

Now suppose we also painted the tubesred. The tubes would show up but the block would only be secondary. But if the tubes are painted in a subdued color in light grey blues and greens the red block would stand out in powerful contrast.

Too often have magical dealers elaborately painted up tubes and the non-essentials. For years in the egg bag trick, red egg bags have been supplied—brilliant red egg bags. It is the egg that must be accented, not the bag. Some day the dealers will get wise and make the egg bag in a pleasing subdued color to contrast with the whiteness of the egg.

When the amateur buys a piece of magical apparatus he wants to see plenty of gaudy color as a rule, or have it highly nickel plated. As Al Baker used to say “Nickel plated thumb tips will sell better than flesh colored ones, for the beginner wants something to look at and to show his friends.” But the thumb tip is supposed to be a hidden piece of apparatus. It is the cb-ject to be seen that must have the greatest visibility.

There are times when brilliant silver and gold cloths heighten an effect. This is particularly true in the production of brightly colored flowers or variegated colored plumes, etc.

Levante heightened the effect of plumes that changed color through a tube, by making the tube of a brilliant silver cloth—a cloth with the metallic brilliance of nickel plate.
