# leaf 0035

In using flash—just be careful that the color heightens the effect with which it is used and does not lessen. If you are not artistically inclined, have an artist help you.

Always remember—you are not selling boxes, curtains, gaudy tables and apparatus, but you are selling mystery! Design artistically to increase the mystery.

There is a great difference between something artistically beautiful and in good taste, and something gaudy and artificial looking.

Make things pleasing to the eye for the eye is trained to register 22 times more speedily than the other senses. But at the same time do not neglect hearing, feeling, taste and smell.

PERSONALITY AND MAGNETISM

People love those who are alive and magnetic and stand out from the crowd. The truly great artist has to radiate and hold audiences by his magnetic attraction.

To stand on our own, poised and controlled, without fear or favor, is a powerful asset. We do our work efficiently without worrying about what someone is going to think, say or do. We love our work and we are happy in it.

Let us stand out as individuals guided by our own faith in ourselves. As our success becomes greater our faith increases. Let us be of good cheer. Let us have strength of purpose. Magnetism, health and wholeness of body and mind go hand in hand.

Gloomy thoughts, irritability, complaining, gossiping, indigestion, fears and criticism are not conducive to magnetism. Such things are non-magnetic. Anything that lowers vitality lowers magnetism.

Few people realize the energy that a magician uses up on the stage. That is why it is necessary to restore the energy with sufficient sleep, exercise, good food, fresh air, sunshine and a poised mind.

MAKE-UP

This is a study in itself for each individual. On the stage or under the bright lights of a cabaret floor show, proper make-up removes natural paleness under the lights and enhances a performer’s appearance.

Where red, white and blue border and foot lights are used there is not as much need for make-up as there is under white lights. The red in the lights helps to color the skin.

For straight make-up you should get a basic make-up color adapted to blonde, red hair or brunette. This also applies to powder and rouge.
