# leaf 0036

Leaning toward the brunette side I use Max Factor’s 7-A grease paint which comes in tubes. I dab a bit here and there upon my face and then, slightly wetting my hands in water, smooth the paint over my skin.

Then I apply Warnesson’s Electric Rouge on cheeks and lips. I use barely enough to give a warmth in color. The eyebrows are darkened a bit with a black or brown eyebrow pencil. Also around eye lashes. Then I powder with Stein’s Face Powder No. 5 (Brunette Powder).

The thing to get in make-up is an ideality in healthy naturalness. Do not over make-up as it looks too artificial. It is well to study your particular make-up under a make-up artist—someone who understands make-up for the stage and cabaret floor.

Make-up is used simply to improve your appearance, and the more natural, the more becoming to your personality, the better.

For character parts special make-up should be used to fit the character.

SHOWMANSHIP

Showmanship is that thing which makes a common thing uncommon, an ordinary thing extraordinary and gives an ant hill a mountain of interest. It means the ability to put romance, mystery, surprise, suspense, interest and emotional feeling into your performance.

Showmanship puts breath into a lump of clay and makes it a living _ thing.

To become a Master of Showmanship you must be inspired with the spirit of being a magician and to love the thing you are doing. Your interest will help to awaken an audience’s interest. Your enthusiasm and

interest awaken magnetism within you, and attract people to you.

About the deadest looking place is a theatre stage when there is no show going on. Yet see what happens when lights come on, the scene is set and the actors perform. Audiences sit inspired under the radiation of the theatrical showmanship.

Take your example from the playwright and producer. They put into plays the same principle of showmanship which you must use. They create interest in the audience, arouse their emotions, and build up each lesser effect to a greater one until they reach a climax.

The showman makes a masterpiece of a commonplace trick. He clothes it properly, he studies its presentation, he makes it timely, he learns to sell it to an audience so as to stir up interest and suspense.

The showman is one who is not satisfied with a few simple pieces of wood, metal, glass and paper, but puts them together and gives us a radio.

In everyday life we find many, many instances of showmanship. The
