# leaf 0043

extreme southern point of South America. The commandant was anxious to impress the natives with the power of the civilized white man. He induced Kellar to bring his wonders to the half-naked savages.

Kellar told them he could burn the earth, if he so desired, and to prove it he would set the ground on fire. While Kellar had been entertaining with other tricks, his assistant had mixed some sugar and chlorate of potash in equal parts and filled a hole in the sand with it without attracting attention, At the proper time Kellar brought out a small bottle containing sulphuric acid. Into this he dipped the end of his wand. Then waving it above his head he shouted, “Burn, O Earth!’ He thrust the wet end of the wand into the sugar-potash mixture in the sand, which resulted instantly in a column of flame, white and dazzling, which shot into the air. The amazed natives went screaming into the hills.

On a steamer going from Panama to Callao, in South America, Kellar took advantage of an odd situation. People are interested in how a magician can foretell events. In Kellar’s book ‘‘Magician’s Tour” the following story is told:

“A magician should always and everlastingly be wide awake in order to amount to anything, and Kellar is very much so. He soon learned that the steamer would stop at midnight in order that the officers might take soundings. There was a large number of well-to-do Peruvians and Chilanos on board, but they were ignorant of how a magician foretells events, and on this ignorance my master decided to play. He spoke Spanish like a native, and he soon appeared among the passengers and in words of portentous weight declared that at midnight, sharp, the vessel would stop! Some of the Spaniards laughed at him, while others appeared impressed by his earnest manner. All remained on watch, however, as though they were seeing an old year out, and when, on the stroke of twelve the engines stopped, consternation was pictured on many a face, and every passenger on the steamship believed they had a veritable wonder worker and prophet

whose marvelous acts had made him a sulphurous hero in Mexico. During

when they landed at Callao, his fame was at once spread throughout the city. It was arare stroke of business on the conjurer’s part. The people of Callao and surrounding country were soon talking about him with as much interest as though he had been made a new President.”

Famous in the Kellar show in its latter days was the “Levitation of Princess Karnac.”’ Kellar brought this illusion to heights it had never previously attained. In Kellar’s hands the mystery seemed like a miracle. A

The couch was removed leaving a bare stage. Kellar passed a hoop over the girl to show no connection. She was suspended in the center of the stage away from everything. It was a grand piece of showmanship. Something that stage magicians in their fondest dreams never thought possible.
