# leaf 0045

through a Chinese interpreter (his acrobat). His lodgings were fitted up in Chinese fashion with silken draperies, and dimly lighted Chinese lanterns. Under the smell of incense he drank tea and gave his opinion on oriental troubles to newspaper reporters. His wife’s make-up was equally clever.

Chung Ling Soo had a flare for the elaborate and the magnificent. A parlor trick would be turned into an elaborate stage presentation. The old broken plate ordinarily restored in a simple frame, became restored in a radiant sun whose golden rays extended many feet outward. The Miser’s Dream of catching money in a hat became a shower of coins on the stage with great bills six feet long dropping from the flies, with a curtain of giant coins for a background. The smoke trick usually performed with a saucer and a glass tumbler, was performed with a great magnificent glass vase about three feet high. Smoke blown from a cigarette several feet away mysteriously appeared in the vase. He shot an arrow with a ribbon attached through his girl assistant. He allowed assistants from the audience to load marked bullets in guns and fire at him. He caught the bullets in his teeth or on a plate. He believed in spectacular magic and he amassed a fortune in the music halls and theatres of Great Britain.

Howard Thurston, a student of the Evangelist, Dwight L. Moody, was trained for the ministry. This training as a minister gave power over his audiences. Even when he performed his famous rising cards he struck the pose of Evangelist Moody and one could hear the tone of Moody in his voice as he said “Up, up, up!”

Thurston first came into real prominence by his novel card act. He featured front and back hand palming with cards, interesting vanishes and productions. There was soon a furor in magic to imitate Thurston’s card act. After a trip around the world he finally took over the Kellar show.

Audiences loved Thurston as they looked upon him as a “National Institution.”” Thurston took advantage of his ministerial training in his ~ magical showmanship. He also incorporated his world experiences.

Dante (Herr Jansen) brings to his audiences the travelled magician who successfully visited the countries of the world. Dante is an excellent _ illusion builder with original ideas. His natural touches in the back stage sketches he has written himself are truly unusual mysteries. People like _ Dante when he is just himself, when he relaxes, kidding about this and that and making his audience feel perfectly at home with him.

Levante, has the appearance, the youth, the vitality, the dignity, the grace of a successful movie star. He also has a delightful stage personality. To these personal qualifications, however, he adds distinctive dress in his immaculate white dress suit, and remarkable showmanship in the original effects he presents. His work is clean cut and he adds those niceties that you would expect from a gentleman magician. You expect the extraordinary from Levante and he does not disappoint.
