# leaf 0046

Blackstone, is Blackstone. He enjoys his work and others enjoy it with him. He presents elaborate illusions from flower and silk productions that cover a stage, to a vanishing horse. He can make a borrowed handkerchief dance on the stage with the interest of a great illusion. He has an interesting way of telling stories to children who come upon his stage. When he sets a little girl on his lap and tells her about Santa Claus, his eyes fairly sparkle and the youngster expects anything to happen.

Nicola became world famous through his travels in the Orient. He had a grand illusion show, that was presented in masterly style—probably the greatest number of large spectacular effects ever combined in one show.

Al Baker is a natural born humorist and belongs to a school that Mark Twain, Strickland Gillilan and Bill Bye made famous. Al’s quick sense of humor makes him equal to almost any occasion. His magic is natural. Things happen in a natural way. He believes in simplicity, yet carefully worked details. Al creates his own methods and mysteries. He is never satisfied with the ordinary presentations. He employs natural effective methods that he can sell to an audience in a friendly way. His cake in the hat is a masterpiece. The world owes much to Al’s original methods.

Joe Dunninger knows the value of showmanship and usesit. He leans to mental effects and psychic “phenomena.” He believes in the type of material that leading magazines and newspapers over the country will write about. He keeps himself before the public eye. He has a very original mind that can take a simple effect and build it up to dramatic proportions. He sells his effects convincingly.

David Bamberg is of the seventh generation of Bambergs, all magicians. He is the son of Theo Bamberg, whose Chinese act under the stage name of Okito, was something to remember. Okito had a very origina mind.

David loved the Chinese style and the possibilities of Chinese magic _ and so built one of the most beautiful magic shows in the world. He took the name Fu Manchu and has been a great success artistically and financially. It is said that there are over 300 Oriental costumes in the Fu Manchu show.

David’s showmanship brings to the world original Chinese magic presented in an elaborate manner. Excepting a two-month tour including New York City and a half-dozen eastern cities a few years ago, he plays chiefly throughout South America and Mexico with great success.

“Think-a-Drink” Hoffman, is an interesting study in individual showmanship. He was a big hit with Shubert’s Broadway success “The

Streets of Paris.”” He has played the finest theatres and night clubs in America at high fees.

Hoffman’s rise to fame is inspiring. Hoffman was going along in an
