# leaf 0047

ordinary manner doing cards, billiard balls, ropes and a “drink act.” He was fairly successful but not in keeping with his true ability. I suggested that he specialize on his feature act which was the “drink act”— pouring any drink called for from a pitcher of water. By specializing I saw a chance to make him a big time Shubert act.

I began to study Hoffman, his individuality, and his interests. Where did he differ from anyone else and what were his strong saleable points? He had studied drink making in the Hawaiian Islands and was an expert in concocting unusual drinks. He had an unusual knack of drink mixing and a keen sense of flavors. To simply pour water containing grain alcohol into glasses containing various liquor essences, as is common in magic, was not good enough for Hoffman. He had better ideas so as to get natural flavors, even to fine wines.

I saw in Hoffman a natural set-up for the Shuberts so worked on the act with that idea in view. As the appeal of the old act was along lines that were passé, I wanted to step up the act into a new mental and physical plane. By raising the plane I hoped to develop a type of act that would not be easy for imitators to follow. Anything to be truly successful must have a spiritual, mental and physical background. It is the law of life. It must be in tune with the times.

The psychology of Hoffman’s act is thus analyzed: Everything has speeded up except the art of drink making, and why not speed that up by merely pouring water into a glass and if you want wine—merely think wine—and you have wine, for the water in the glass has changed to wine. Or if you think an ice cream soda—it becomes an ice cream soda. In other words you think a drink!

So the name “Think-a-Drink”’ was the logical answer.

The psychology of instant drink making through apparent mental action is in keeping with the times. Besides people want miracle action.

So important was the think a drink idea that “Think-a-Drink” became a part of his stage name and was registered in the patent office.

In watching audience reactions, it was discovered that while hard liquors were mystifying yet it was the soft drinks that got the laughs. This was because of the contrasts. Every drink is timed, every drink has been studied in its presentation, from the psychological reactions of audiences. After a year of testing in a theatrical unit, it was offered to the Shuberts for their Broadway presentation. It became a hit of Broadway. “Think-a-Drink” Hoffman is one of the headliners of the theatre and club. His is one act that people discuss for a long time afterward.

Cardini (Richard Pitchford) rose to fame through individual showmanship. His act has been copied and recopied. He introduced a new era in a manipulative act. There is an interesting psychology back of
