# leaf 0048

Cardini’s act. While his manipulation is faultless yet its big effect lies in the fact that things happen when he is looking in the opposite direction and he is as much surprised as the audience at the mysterious things that are happening. Instead of saying to an audience “let me show you some clever manipulations in magic’ the magic happens seemingly unknown to him. That is what makes the act so funny and gets so many laughs.

We must never forget that Cardini is English and can perform in a way that is natural to his English personality. The Continental artist trains himself in pantomime. He can wear English style clothes, top hat and dress suit tailored in English fashion. He was born for it. Cardini is Cardini and far above his imitators.

Frakson comes from a family of magicians of Spain. His father and mother were travelling magicians, and all of his ten brothers and sisters were successful magicians. Frakson has a Continental style that is dashing and typically Frakson. His quick movements, his marvelous misdirection and finished manipulation—his “‘Si-si-si—come little one” as he produces a lighted cigarette from nowhere is ideally adapted to his temperament. He is very original.

Ade Duval, at one time, was doing a magic show with a partner in Chautauqua and Lyceum. I finally convinced Ade, by practically making him lose his job with the Redpath Bureau, that his big time forte was to specialize in Silks and Colors. A rhapsody in colored silk, set to music, was the thing he should work for. So he put an act together basing it around an elaborate phantom tube production and toured vaudeville. But I said, “Ade, you will never be a real success until you go to Europe and absorb the Continental style and technique which comes from playing European audiences.” Duval went to Europe and again I was right.

Jack Gwynne said that too many people call themselves “‘the greatest magician in the world” so he bills himself as ‘“‘the second greatest magician”’—with no competitors. Jack must have an act that shines. Highly polished chromium, nickel plate, glass, silk and color play a great part in his act. Even in paper tearing, enameled paper is more effective than the dullness of newspaper.

I could write several volumes on the showmanship of individual magicians, dozens of them who have made their mark because of their ability to be “‘different.”

YOUR INTEREST IN MAGIC

Regardless of what others do, each of us has himself to consider. Some of us want to be professionals, others semi-professionals, while © others want to perform just as amateurs for the love of the work and the entertainment that they can give their friends. Some are salesmen and want to please their customers. Some study magic for the educational
