# leaf 0051

Lesson 2] MAGIC WITH WANDS

0 tt te ot i tt it tt tt tt te

9 Pgs MAGIC WAND has played an important part in magical mysteries throughout the ages. Used as a solid stick it has acted as a means of misdirection for vanishing, appearing and exchanging articles when lifted from or placed upon the table or place of concealment. Held in the hand, it helped to conceal a palmed object.

Magicians throughout the world have brought forth many interesting types of wands. I have a wand made of the vertebrae from an Antarctic whale. Discs of bone are fastened together with an iron rod running through them. I have a Chinese wand made of bamboo.

The commonest type of wand for practical purposes is about 14 inches long and one-half inch in diameter. Usually the body of the wand is black in color with nickeled or chromium tips about one and three-quarters inches in length. Sometimes the tips are painted white or other colors and Catalin wands in various color combinations have found favor with some performers. Wands can be modernized by painting the body between the tips dark blue, brown, white, ivory, or other colors.

Unless otherwise specified, the wand 14 inches long by one-half inch diameter, the tips one and three-quarters inches long, will be used in the various effects described in this lesson.

From time to time, various mechanical and specially prepared wands have come into the field of magic and excellent effects have been made possible by their use.

Some of the wand effects described in this lesson are not at all difficult to construct but others are best purchased from the various magic dealers.

THE “P-L” VANISHING WAND

This is a good effect with which to open a program. It is fast, easy to do and effective. This type of wand gets its name from the maker, the Petrie-Lewis Co. and is sold by all dealers.

EFFECT:

The performer, after tapping his wand on the table to show that it is solid, wraps it in a piece of paper and gives it to a spectator to hold. Magician then takes the wrapped wand and tears the paper to pieces. The wand has vanished . . . magician reaches into his inside coat pocket and produces the wand therefrom.
