# leaf 0068

while left hand grips wand. This forces the disc at end A out a bit as in Fig. 3. Grip wand tightly with first finger and thumb of right hand so as to keep spring in place. Remove left hand. With right hand reach over with wand and nip the silk. When open disc is placed on silk and allowed to close a bit of silk is easily nipped. Move silk over to the desired spot or bring up to left hand. Silk is easily released by pushing slightly on end B again.

Practice will show how easily and how speedily a silk handkerchief

can be mysteriously lifted from the table. Handkerchief is taken in left hand from wand. You can pick up silk after silk, one at a time.

In performing tricks with sponge balls it is interesting to see you reach over for a ball with tip of wand and have it adhere. Just simply press end A against the ball, opening disc and nipping ball. This can be done quite nonchalantly.

Maenetic Ristine Carns (Tarbell Routine)

This is an effective use of the Edwards’ Magnetic Wand. Three cards freely elected by audience are returned to the deck, well shuffled, and brought out of the deck again by touching the tip of wand to the top edge of the deck.

PARAPHERNALIA: 1—A magnetic wand.

2—A deck of cards.

3—A duplicate deck of cards which is cut about a thirty-second of an inch shorter than a regular deck. These are called short cards. A short card deck can be supplied by your magic dealer. 4—A piece of cardboard 234 X 414 inches. To PREPARE: From the short card deck remove the following cards in order:

Ace of Hearts Eight of Clubs Two of Spades ‘Nine of Hearts Three of Diamonds Ten of Spades Four of Clubs Jack of Diamonds Five of Hearts Queen of Clubs Six of Spades King of Hearts

Seven of Diamonds

Place these cards on ‘‘top” of the deck, the Ace of Hearts being at the “top.”

On the “bottom” of the deck place the piece of cardboard.

Place deck with cardboard in left trousers pocket, the cardboard against the body. The Ace of Hearts is on the side away from your body.

Have the regular deck and magnetic wand on table.
