# leaf 0069

To Perrorm:

Have three cards freely selected from the regular deck of cards. Give remaining cards to a spectator to shuffle thoroughly. Take back the deck and place in the left trousers pocket, back of cards towards audience. The “top” card of this packet is against the cardboard in pocket. The cardboard acts as a wall between the two decks so they can be easily separated.

“Three cards have been freely selected from a deck of cards and the remaining cards thoroughly shuffled. These shuffled cards I have placed in my pocket. Much has been said during the past few years about eztrasensory perception. Let me try an experiment.”

To one of spectators who has a selected card, you say,

“You have selected a card. For instance, if you selected the Eight of Spades I could not reach into my pocket and take out another Hight of Spades. I could take out a Spade card to represent the suit, and an Eight spot of another suit. Let me try something on that order. Name the suit of your card. A Diamond?”

Reach into your pocket and count down from the top to the third card, the Three of Diamonds.

“‘Here is the Three of Diamonds.”

Remove the Three of Diamonds from the pocket and show to audience. To name the card before removing it from the pocket adds to the mystery.

“T have produced the suit of your card, now tell the number. Five?”

Reach into your pocket and count down to the Five of Hearts. Remember in counting that you have removed the Three of Diamonds.

“*Here is the Five of Hearts.”’ Remove it and show.

“Pardon me. I know what the lady over there is thinking. What would have happened if an Ace had been selected. Then I would have produced an Ace. Perhaps the Ace of Hearts.

Remove Ace of Hearts and show.

‘“‘Name any number. A Queen? The Queen is quite a number.”

Reach into pocket and count down to the Jack, Queen and King and lift all three out of the deck.

“All right, how about the Queen of Clubs.” Remove all three cards from the pocket and show.

“Not only a Queen but the Jack of Diamonds and the King of Hearts to escort her.”
