# leaf 0130

To PERFORM:

Have a spectator come up to help you. Ask him to be seated a moment and take charge of the stage while you go down into the audience and borrow a half dollar. Take coin from some gentleman in the audience, then return it and ask that he mark it so that he can easily identify it.

“Mark it well so that you can readily identify it in case ‘you see it again— or rather in case you do not see it again.”

While he is marking it, get coin from under vest or from pocket and Finger Palm it. Have second, third, and fourth fingers curled around coin so that it cannot be seen by audience. You may grasp your coat lapel with right hand also to dispel any suspicion that you have something in right hand. Take marked coin between thumb and first two fingers of right hand, keeping back of hand uppermost.

Pretend to transfer coin to left hand, but as you toss coin, Front Thumb Palm the marked coin in right hand and let your own coin fall into left hand. Just before doing this bring the marked coin to Finger Tip Clip position so that movement will be easy. When you have disposed of your coin into left hand, let marked coin fall into regular Finger Palm position.

Go back to stage. Have assistant stand at your right as you face audience. Give him your coin from your left hand. The audience thinks, of course, that you have given him the borrowed marked coin. Tell assistant to close his hand over the coin. Now you stand away from him for a moment, your left side toward audience.

“Now, sir, if in three minutes’ time you were to open your hand and find the half dollar had vanished, you would be surprised, wouldn’t youd”

Assistant says, “Yes,”’ or laughs. “And so should I.”

‘As you talk to assistant, slip right hand into right trousers pocket and let marked half dollar fall through the slit in the envelopes into the smallest one. When you do this, insert your first and second fingers into the slit to make it easy for coin to slide in. Close hole and roll envelopes into a ball. You will have no difficult in doing this without being detected as the audience is laughing at your last remark and there is a slight pause in your performing. Remove hand from pocket.

The important part of the trick is now done. The trick is really over before the audience thinks it has begun.

“Well, I am not going to do this trick that way. Money disappears easily enough without adding magical influence to it.”
