# leaf 0152

off the numbers from borrowed bill while in reality you are giving the numbers on the bill in the prepared cigarette.

Keep the dollar bill in plain sight. Bring out package of cigarettes from your pocket. Hold box so that cigarettes slide over to right side of box and hand to spectator so that prepared cigarette is nearest him. Asa rule, spectator takes this cigarette when you offer the box to him.

“That's fine. You have selected a cigarette for me, sir.”

Take cigarette from him and place it in your mouth. Ask spectator to take another for himself. If he did not take the prepared cigarette from you the first time, merely let him keep the first one, and you select the prepared one for yourself.

“‘Have one yourself, sir, and we'll have just a little smoke between friends.”

Replace cigarette box in pocket. Go back to stage. While your back is turned, get Pull in left hand, closing your fingers over it. Hold dollar bill up in right hand all the time.

Now turn and face audience. Spread out dollar bill, holding it between hands.

“Tt is said that if a person folds a dollar bill and then puts it in his pocket, when he takes it out again, he finds his money in creases.”

Fold bill over and crease it down. Continue folding and rolling it a little so that it can be easily tucked into Cigarette Pull. Place bill in Pull under cover of hands and release Pull.

“However, in folding money so many times, it certainty makes it look small—in fact, so small. ...”

Open left hand and show bill has vanished.

“That it is quite invisible. This, of course, isn’t difficult to do because almost anyone can get rid of money. Now, the production of money is more difficult.”

Take box of matches from pocket and light the cigarette which has been in your mouth ever since the spectator selected it from the box you offered him. Replace matches.

“T guess that’s why many fellows light up a cigarette and try to imagine they are rich. But not so good with this cigarette. It doesn’t seem to smoke so well.”

Take cigarette from mouth and look at it. ...

“As we say jokingly, one to another, ‘It would make a poor artist as it doesn’t draw so well.’”
