# leaf 0211

Norte:

This can also be done as a mental effect by having spectator bring deck out in front and open to the spot where cards face each other. You can turn your back for a moment while this is being done. Then spectator should hold a packet in each hand and concentrate on the two cards facing him. You begin to visualize cards and finally name them.

‘One is a red card—one is a black card. I see a diamond, three diamonds. Yes, it is the Three of Diamonds. I see a club, six clubs. The other card is the Six of Clubs.”

ANOTHER SUGGESTION:

By using two decks of cards you can use this principle for a “You Do as I Do” type of experiment.

After you have “‘fixed” one deck and have given it to spectator to hold behind his back, you pick up the other deck and in pretending to look for Joker, get the Six of Clubs and Three of Diamonds to the “bottom’’ of your deck, facing you. You can also remove Joker and place on table. Riffle shuffle your cards but do not disturb position of the two cards at “bottom.” Be sure no one sees these ‘‘bottom”’ cards.

Place deck behind your back and reverse the “bottom” card. Say to spectator. ...

“Each of us holds a shuffled deck of cards behind our backs. I am going to cut my deck. I want you also to cut your deck. I am going to reverse the bottom packet. Also reverse yours. Now let the two packets come together face to face. Square the cards and we will each bring our deck out and place on the table before us.”

Decks are placed on table.

““Spread your cards and note the two cards that are facing each other in the center of the deck. Remember you had free choice in cutting the deck behind your back.”

Spectator opens up deck showing two cards facing each other.

“The Three of Diamonds and the Six of Clubs. Now, sir, I want you to pick up my deck of cards and open them up and see what two cards face each other.”

~ Spectator open up deck revealing the Three of Diamonds and the Six of Clubs.

“The Three of Diamonds and the Si of Clubs. That shows the sympathy between us. For the thing that I have done, you have duplicated.”

Say to audience, ‘Congratulate the man.”
