# leaf 0212

208 THE TARBELL COURSE IN MAGIC A CLEVER CARD DISCOVERY

This is a mathematical system in card magic that has been popular with George Kaplan. It is a variation of the Al Baker-Audley Walsh Telephone Mystery.

EFFECT:

A deck of cards is thoroughly shuffled by a spectator. He is asked to look at the ‘‘top”’ card and remember it, then to remove from the “bottom”’ and place on top of his card the same number of cards as the number of his card. For instance, if the card was a nine spot, he is to move nine cards from the ‘“‘bottom”’ to the “‘top.”’ The cards are cut by a spectator. The performer spreads cards on the table and picks out the selected card, or is able to find the selected card and produce it as he sees fit.

PARAPHERNALIA: A deck of cards.

To PERFORM:

Give a deck of cards to a spectator, requesting him to “‘Give the cards an overhand shuffle. . . .then secretly look at the ‘top’ card, but do not show it to me.”

Spectator shuffles, looks at the “‘top”’ card and replaces it on the deck.

“Secretly count off the ‘bottom’ of the deck the same number of cards as the number on the card that you looked at. For instance, if you looked at a five spot count off five cards. If you looked at a Queen, count off twelve cards. Place these cards on ‘top’ of your card, on ‘top’ of the deck.”

Spectator counts cards from the bottom to the “‘top.’’ Let us say that his card was the Nine of Hearts and that he counted nine cards.

You can turn your back a bit towards spectator as he makes his count. Turn back again and see if you can glimpse the “‘bottom’”’ card of the deck. If not, take cards from him and, in a careless gesture, secure a quick secret glimpse so you will know the “bottom” card. Let us say it is the Seven of Clubs. This will be the key card. Let deck rest horizontally, backs up, on the outstretched palm of the left hand.

“No one knows the location of your card except yourself, and so that not even you will know the location—cut the cards.”

Cards are given a single cut. Square the cards. Spread the cards out
