# leaf 0219

Lesson 26 — SELECTED CARD MYSTERIES 215 match with the numbers. Ahead of these must be the selected card. You can determine the correct one by the process of elimination, already taught you in this lesson.

Once in a while you will run across a somewhat stubborn person, who, when you try to feel your way in elimination, will say, “‘ You tell me.” They will give no hint. Let us say one card that checks is the Seven of Diamonds and the other is the Three of Clubs. “‘Yours was a red card.’ He says, “You tell me what it is.” Just come out and say, “Your card is the Seven of Diamonds.” If he says, “Correct,” you have been successful but if he says, “Wrong,” you just continue—“‘Of course I gave you the wrong card but I had to give you some card to take away your mental tension for a moment. But it relaxed your conscious mind long enough to let me know that your card was the Three of Clubs!”’

Study how to handle various types of emergencies.

Bill McCaffrey has devised an excellent excuse for asking the assistant to count a small heap of cards equal in number to the denomination of the “bottom” card. By using the “‘bottom”’ card only as a counting indicator, it throws off those skeptics who might suspect some mathematical principle. McCaffrey, like Al Baker, watches details closely in order to super-bewilder an audience.

PROPHETIC CARD DISCOVERY

An old principle is employed in this effective variation which E. J. Moore likes to do.

EFFECT:

Performer states that he will write a prophecy on a piece of paper, fold up the paper, and place it in plain view of all. He picks up a deck of cards and, removing a few cards from the “top,” asks a spectator to freely select one and place it on the table face down. A few more cards are lifted off, fanned, and spectator selects another card. This is repeated with a third card.

Spectator is told to take the deck, and, after looking at a card on table to note the number of spots it has and to count enough cards off the deck onto it in order to raise the count to ten. For instance, if a four spot is on table, to add six cards; if a nine spot, to add one; if a ten spot, to add none. This is done with all three cards on table.

Spectator is asked to turn cards on table over which brings the bottom cards face up. Now add the spots together on all three cards now uppermost. Let us say they add to seventeen. Spectator is then told to count
