# leaf 0223

-To Prerrorm:

Hold deck with backs of cards upward. Fan it enough so that little finger of left hand can be easily slipped under the four arranged cards.

Palm the four cards in right hand and reach into right trousers pocket. Push cards up into upper corner of pocket where they are concealed, as taught in Volume 1. Remove handkerchief from pocket and then pull pocket out to show it empty. Replace pocket.

“Will you please give the deck a thorough shuffle?” Give deck to spectator who shuffles it.

“That's what they call the (some small town) shuffle. Now remove any card—yust any card you would like—but do not show it to me yet. Now give me the deck of cards. I shall place it here in my pocket.”

Take deck. Place it in pocket with backs of cards towards audience and in back of cards already there. These four cards are now on “‘top”’ of deck which makes them easy to get at.

“In magic, one develops a very keen sense of touch—so keen that playing cards can be distinguished by a touch of the fingers. To illustrate: The gentleman here thoroughly shuffled a deck of cards and then selected a card from it. I placed the shuffled deck in my pocket. (To spectator holding card) Will you, please tell me the suit of your card—whether it is a Club, Heart, Spade or Diamond? A Spade?”

Reach into pocket and produce the third card down, which is the Two of Spades. Show it to the audience so that all can see it.

“A Spade? And what is the value of the card? An Ace?” Reach into pocket and bring forth the Ace of Diamonds, calling out its name as you exhibit it. Remove deck from pocket and take card from spectator.

Where speed in performance is necessary, as in stage work, performer does not even bother to take up selected card. It is better to step quickly into the next effect.

SUGGESTIONS:

Let us assume that the King of Clubs was the selected card. Reach into pocket and remove the Eight of Clubs—this gives the suit. Then say, “The King? That's the thirteenth card.”

Nod your head and show the Eight in your hand, quickly withdrawing the Four and then the Ace from your pocket, as you say,

“Hight and... .four are twelve and.... one are thirteen.”

Sometimes it is necessary to count the card in the hand and sometimes
