# leaf 0227

Take gentleman’s hand again and hover over the cards, finally pressing it down on the other key card. Lift up the card. Let us assume that it is the Jack of Hearts .... “The Jack of Hearts. That is the card you selected and remembered. Is that right? Correct!”

“MARVELLO”

I am indebted to the late T. Nelson Downs, world-famous coin and card mystifier, for this excellent effect with cards.

EFFECT:

Performer shuffles a deck of cards and asks a spectator to think of any number between 5 and 15 and another spectator to think of any number between 20 and 30. Magician deals the cards faces up on the table, telling each spectator to remember the card as it appears at the number each selected. Performer then asks each spectator what his number is. He counts off the cards one at a time on the table, placing the selected cards aside—for instance, the thirteenth and twenty-eighth.

Two cards are then taken from the pack at random and shown and placed in an empty envelope. Performer now takes more cards from the pack and puts with them the two selected cards—these he gives to a spectator to hold. He says that he will cause the cards in the envelope to change places with the selected cards in spectator’s hand. These cards are examined and it is found that the selected cards have vanished and the indifferent cards are there. The selected cards are then taken from the envelope.

PARAPHERNALIA: 1—A deck of cards.

2—An ordinary envelope. 3—A small table.

To PERForm:

You will need two people to help you. For convenience we will call them Smith and Jones. Smith should be at left side and Jones at right. Table should be in front of you. Thoroughly shuffle the deck, preferably giving it a riffle shuffle in your hands.

“You have perhaps noticed, at one time or other, that when you wished to remember a certain thing, if you associated it with some object, you were able to remember it perfectly. Therefore, I am going to ask you two gentlemen to select a card each; and in order to remember the card exactly, I want you to associate the card with a number.”

To Smith,
