# leaf 0245

NOTE:

Another way of utilizing this principle is to use two decks. Prepare one by cutting a hole as described above through all the cards except the “top” and “bottom” ones. Place this deck in your lower right vest pocket.

Come forward with the regular unprepared deck in the prepared case. Remove deck from case and have three or four cards selected by spectators, giving the whole deck to each spectator to make his selection.

Then take the deck. Request that spectators hold up their cards so that the rest of the audience can see them, but not the magician. So saying, turn your back to audience fora moment. This gives you a chance to drop the deck into the inner right coat pocket and to remove the prepared deck from the vest pocket.

Have the selected cards placed back into this prepared deck. Transfer ‘‘top” card to “bottom” of deck. Place the cards in the case and proceed with experiment as described above.

RISING CARD FROM THE POCKET

This is Keith Clark’s routine for the rising card out of the pocket and one that has been popular in his act.

EFFECT:

Performer has a card freely selected from a deck of cards. Card is returned to deck. Performer makes a motion of palming a card and puts his hand as though containing card in his right trousers pocket. Audience notes this and comments on the fact that the performer has put a card in his pocket. “Jn my pocket. Of course.’ He looks at upper left breast pocket of coat and the Ace of Diamonds rises out of the pocket. The gentleman who selected the card says it is not his card but upon looking at it again it turns out to be the selected card.

PARAPHERNALIA: 1—A deck of cards.

2—A special card case that fits into the outer left breast pocket. It is easily constructed from a piece of medium weight card or card-board, size 5 X 10 inches. Fold this in half and cut a slot out of each side 114 inches, Fig. 1. Fold over the two sides of the lower portion so as to make an en-

velope into which a playing card can be

FIG. 1 FIG.2 inserted, Fig. 2. Fold the envelope up-
