# leaf 0249

under center of it. It answers the same purpose as a staple. Determine the length of your thread by holding the cards about 18 inches above the table and about a foot in front of you. With cards in this position, the thread should be taut. Place prepared cards at front of table, faces up. In front of cards place a handkerchief to screen them from audience. Arrange thread carefully on table so that it will not get tangled or caught in anything. Place glass tumbler near cards at front of table and wooden hoop on opposite side and farther back.

On the other deck of cards place the Queen of Hearts, the Ten of Hearts, and the Seven of Spades. Arrange these in reverse order with the Seven of Spades on “top” in preparation for forcing.

To PERFORM:

Force the Seven of Spades, the Ten of Hearts, and the Queen of Spades on three different spectators, respectively. Give the pack to each spectator and ask him to return his card to it. Finally have some member of audience thoroughly shuffle the deck.

Come back to table and secretly place the pack on the threaded cards with left hand, faces of cards up. At same moment pick up handkerchief with right hand and then the glass tumbler also with right hand.

“There is an old saying that people who live in glass houses should dress in the dark. It might not hurt this glass to give it a polish and make it still more transparent.” Show glass freely and wipe it out with handkerchief.

“This glass is of pure crystal, made especially for this magical experiment so thal you can see through it—that is, the glass and not the experiment.”

Drop the handkerchief onto table and pick up the cards. Place them in tumbler, faces towards audience. The thread hangs down behind the glass, Fig. 26.

FIG.27

“‘You can see the cards in the glass, can you not? That is why I wanted the glass to be transparent. There is nothing left for you to magine. Fifty-two cards isolated in a glass house.”

Fig. 27 shows the arrangement of cards—the unprepared deck facing the audience, behind it the threaded packet with thread hanging down
