# leaf 0252

“Papa will have to spank. Now you go back with the rest of the little ‘cardses’ and stay there.” Return card to front portion of deck so that it will not interfere with remaining threaded portion of prepared deck. Pick up glass from table again and hold in left hand as before.

“Perhaps you would have more influence with your card, sir. Will you just say, ‘Ten of Hearts, arise?’ ”” When spectator says this, permit the Ten of Hearts to rise. This is the next threaded card and it will come up readily if your thread is taut. “I think the Ten of Hearts likes you better than it does me.” Remove Ten of Hearts and place on front of deck.

“Now, for the third and last card. Up—up—up.” No card comes up. Look at the deck a moment, perplexed.

“Did you see any card come up? If any did, I can’t see it. (To spectator who selected third card.) What was the name of your card, may I ask? The Queen of Hearts? Oh, no wonder. We cannot expect a Queen to rise under ordinary circumstances.”

Make a low graceful bow, and as you do so, say, ‘“Could we have the delightful pleasure of having your gracious majesty arise so that we might gaze on your gorgeous beauty?”

Let the Queen rise. “All hail the Queen!’ Stand up straight again. Remove the Queen and place it on the front of the deck.

Push glass forward a little. This causes the thread to pull out of the slit in the King card from which you started your threading. This frees the glass and deck entirely. Take deck from glass and fan it wide with right hand. Also show glass freely. Replace deck and glass on table.

Ep. Reno MertsHop:

There are numerous ways of applying this principle in the working of - the rising cards. One method is to arrange your table as shown in Fig. 39.

Everything is set in the same way as described in preceding effect, except that thread is not tied to staple or pin at back of table, but is pulled through it and tied to an iron washer or nut or small weight. Enough thread is allowed to enable the performer to stand several feet away from the table with weight in his left trousers pocket. The glass with the cards is not held in the hand but remains at the front of the table.
