# leaf 0269

The rising card glass sets on table. Also the regular deck with cards to be forced at “top” of deck. Or, if desired, a forcing deck containing three different cards, may be used.

To PERForM:

Force the three cards on three spectators, have cards returned and shuffled. Place deck on table behind handkerchief and pick up the glass with one hand while the other pushes handkerchief over the regular deck, exposing the threaded pack. If desired you can rap the glass with the wand to accent the ring of the glass.

Place cards in glass—flaps up—face of cards towards audience. Place glass and cards on the table.

Upon command, assistant pulls thread which releases it from flap on rear card and card rises out of glass. The second card follows this, and finally the third.

Then by pulling the thread faster the cards spurt out of the glass leaving only the three selected cards remaining in the glass. They are removed, shown separately, and tossed out.

Another effect is to have four cards selected and first to have three of them rise singly, after which all the other cards fly out of the glass in a fountain leaving the fourth selected card in the glass at the finish.

TOMMY DOWD’S RISING CARDS

Tommy Dowd’s ingenuity is evident in this, his own conception of the Rising Cards which is here released for the first time.

EFFECT:

Two or three cards are selected, shuffled back into the pack which is placed in a clear glass tumbler, and another empty tumbler placed mouth to mouth over the first one. While performer holds the tumblers in his hands, a selected card is seen to rise from the enclosed pack and ascend into the upper tumbler from which the spectator may remove it. Likewise with the other chosen cards.

PARAPHERNALIA:

I—A bottomless glass tumbler, Fig. 1, sufficiently wide to take a half if not a whole pack of poker width cards.

2—An unprepared glass tumbler to match the bottomless one.

3—A regular pack of poker width (broad) cards.

With the above articles on your table, all is ready.
