# leaf 0312

RAINBOW BILLIARD BALLS

This effect is performed with balls of various colors. It is taught to you in pantomime style and is best presented with music. There is no reason, however, why this effect cannot be “Pattered’’ and used without music, or pantomimed without music.

The effect of the different colored balls is very pretty and will make a good number for your programs. Before you attempt this routine, however, be sure that you have mastered the moves in the preceding pages.

EFFECT:

Four balls mysteriously appear, one at a time, between the fingers of the magician’s right hand. These balls apparently change color at will. At the finish, a red, a white, a green, and a yellow ball are held between the fingers and are then dropped onto a plate one at a time to prove them solid.

PARAPHERNALIA: A set of Rainbow Billiard Balls, which consists of:

1 white ball—1 white shell. 1 yellow ball.

1 green ball.

1 red ball.

These balls are usually 134 inches in diameter; however, larger or smaller balls may also be obtained.

~ To PREPARE:

Place white shell over yellow ball in rear right trousers pocket. Place green ball in left coat pocket and red ball up under left side of vest, about two inches up from bottom edge. Place white ball in right coat pocket.

If this routine is to be performed after “Adam and Eve,” you can arrange the balls a little differently so as not to interfere with the first effect you perform. The white shell and yellow ball can be in the right coat pocket instead of the trousers pocket, or in the right vest pocket. In arranging a program, the placing of the balls in preparation for this effect will have to be done in accordance with your requirements. You will have no difficulty, however, in varying your arrangements.

To PERFORM:

Get white ball into palm of right hand. Do the Change Over Palm and get ball into left palm. See Figs. 6 and 7, using opposite hands. Now produce ball on closed left fist. (See Figs. 8, 9 and 10.)

Throw ball into air twice, then pretend to throw it-a third time but keep it palmed in left hand. (See Figs. 15 and 16.)
