# leaf 0388

Faint flashes of light appeared in a distant corner of the room, then vanished . . . successive flashes occurred in other parts of the room, some high in the air, some down low . . . the lights flitted about, gradually growing brighter, sometimes lingering a bit longer, sometimes a series of momentary flashes! Spectators felt definite “spirit touches” from the fingers of unseen hands.

Ejaculations of the spectators were ample proof that they had been “seeing things,” a fact which was freely acknowledged, and reaffirmed when the lights were turned on—and there sat Mr. Saint, calm and nonchalant under the weight of A and B, with his arms and hands still firmly held by C and D. He could not move under such restraint, and it is a fact that the four challengers did not once release their control for even a moment from start to finish.

PARAPHERNALIA:

1—One “Luminous Locator” button, such as sold for attachment to electric light pull cords, etc.

2—Five or six lead pellets or “BB” shot.

To PERFORM:

The mechanical part of the secret is apparent from the paraphernalia mentioned, but the showmanship and patter are responsible for the seeming room-wide travels of the lights, and a certain amazement on the part of the challengers who never saw any of the lights at any time, despite the fact that everybody else saw them!

Just before the time set for the seance, Mr. Saint exposed his luminous * button to brilliant light and placed it in his mouth, concealed from view when he talked. The “BB” shot were also concealed in the mouth. He saw to it that A and B faced the audience as they sat upon his knees; and that C and D were a little back of him, as they held his arms, “so as not to obstruct the view of the audience any more than absolutely necessary.”

Thus A, B, C, and D at no time could see into Saint’s mouth, and since the luminous button remained in Saint’s mouth all the time, it explains the inability of the challengers to see the manifestations. They would have discovered the secret had they been able to get a glimpse when the light was “made to appear’ by the mere opening of the mouth. Mr. Saint’s patter during the seance was designed to create the impression that the ae were in all parts of the room, especially at points far distant from

m.

Such was his showmanship that the spectators afterward swore that they saw lights “all over the room,” whereas the only light ever visible was the tiny luminous bulb in Mr. Saint’s mouth, and it, of course, appeared in only that one spot. His patter ran something like the following, and each
