# leaf 0398

“The crown was placed i in a separate compartment outside of the mummy case, if I remember correctly.” Girl shakes head from side to side for No.

“T do not know where you saw mummies or where you studied their getup. I still doubt whether you are even wrapped right.” Girl shakes head for Yes.

“You are a fine looking mummy. If King Tut looked like that, he must have had an ignorant mummy wrapper and crown placer.” Girl sways from side to side.

“Do any of you people know anything about how a mummy was wrapped?”

Assistant dressed as old man hobbles up the aisle and talks in squeaky voice, Fig. 17.

Ae A “Hold on, young feller. I know how mummies is wrapped. I’ve wrapped and unwrapped many of ’em in my day. He ain’t right and you ain't right. Neither one of you has the right idea. Egyptian mummies is peculiar things.”

ie

\o He comes down to the stage and points cane at performer as he talks:

“Gol ding! The mummy clothes is crooked. Let me show ye how to fiz ’em.”

You say: “Come up on the stage, dad.”

You assist him up and this is another chance for comedy. Assistant (old man) says: “Gol ding! Take off that there crown. Unwrap the young feller and let’s commence right. I'll show ye how Cleopatra herself was .wrapped up.”

Remove crown and unwind blanket by holding outer corners while girl revolves to the right. When she is free of blanket, it drops to floor and is held only at one end by performer. When girl appears, old man says: “Gol ding! He’s a girl.”

Then he quickly removes spectacles, beard, and wig and shows that he is the man assistant who is supposed to have been wrapped in blanket.

You should have no trouble with this excellent illusion if you study the details of it and use care in performing. Notice the effect when assistant wraps himself in blanket and have girl imitate the movements to produce the same effect. Try to cover the feet as much as possible, but to avoid detection in case they are exposed, have the girl’s and man’s shoes similar. The costume of the girl may vary. It may be Turkish, Chinese, or any straight costume desired. If it is Chinese, the trousers and shoes of girl and man can be very much alike.
