<modernized_text>
The Third Story

[Day the Fifth]

Pietro Boccamazza Flees with Agnolella, Falls Among Thieves; The Girl Escapes Through a Forest and Is Led to a Castle, While Pietro Is Captured by the Thieves, but Later Escapes and Finds His Mistress, Marrying Her and Returning with Her to Rome

The entire company praised Emilia's story, and the queen, seeing it was finished, turned to Elisa and instructed her to continue. Eager to obey, Elisa began: "A distressing night that a pair of indiscreet young lovers faced comes to my mind, dear ladies, but since many happy days followed, I am pleased to tell the story, as it fits our theme.

Not long ago, in Rome - once the head, and now the tail of the world - there was a youth named Pietro Boccamazza, from a highly respected family in the city, who fell in love with a very beautiful and charming young woman named Agnolella, the daughter of a commoner named Gigliuozzo Saullo, who was much beloved by the Romans. Pietro managed to make Agnolella love him as well, and, consumed by their ardent love and unable to bear the cruel pain of his desire for her any longer, he asked for her hand in marriage. When his family learned of this, they scolded him harshly and made it clear to Gigliuozzo that he should disregard Pietro's words, for they would never accept him as a friend or relative if he did. Seeing his only path to achieving his desires blocked, Pietro was deeply distressed, and if Gigliuozzo had consented, he would have taken his daughter as his wife, despite his family's objections. However, he determined that, if the girl was willing, they would contrive to fulfill their wishes, and after confirming through an intermediary that this was agreeable to her, he agreed with Agnolella that she would flee with him from Rome.

So, having made the necessary arrangements, Pietro rose very early one morning, took the girl with him, and set out for Anagni, where he had certain trusted friends. They did not have time to hold a proper wedding, as they feared being pursued, and rode on, speaking of their love and occasionally kissing. It happened that when they were perhaps eight miles from Rome, Pietro, not knowing the way well, took a path to the left instead of continuing straight, and after riding just a bit farther, they found themselves near a small castle. As soon as they were spotted, a dozen footmen suddenly emerged. Seeing them, the girl cried, "Pietro, let us get away, for we are being attacked!" Then, turning her horse's head towards a nearby large forest, she dug her spurs into its flanks and clung to the saddle, and the horse, feeling the goading, galloped her into the woods.

Pietro, gazing more at the girl's face than the road, did not become aware of the newcomers as quickly as she, and was overtaken and seized by them. They made him dismount from his horse and asked who he was, and when he told them, they deliberated and said, "This man is a friend of our enemies; what else should we do but take his clothes and this horse and hang him from one of those oaks, to spite the Orsini?" They all agreed with this plan and told Pietro to remove his clothes, which as he was about to do, sensing the ill fate that awaited him, it happened that an ambush of about twenty-five footmen suddenly sprang out upon the others, shouting "Kill! Kill!" The ruffians, taken by surprise, let Pietro be and turned to defend themselves, but, seeing themselves greatly outnumbered, they fled, while the others pursued them.

Pietro, seeing this, quickly gathered up his things and mounted his horse, intending to flee the way he had seen his mistress take, but not finding her and seeing neither road nor path in the forest, nor any horse tracks, he was the most wretched man alive. As soon as he felt safe and out of reach of those who had captured him, as well as the others who had attacked them, he began to wander about the woods, weeping and calling, but no one answered him, and he dared not go back, nor did he know where he might end up if he went forward, all the more so because he feared the wild beasts that inhabit the forests, both for himself and for his mistress, whom he expected to see strangled by a bear or a wolf at any moment. In this manner, the unfortunate Pietro roamed the entire day through the woods, crying and calling, sometimes going backwards when he thought he was going forward, until, from shouting, weeping, fear, and long fasting, he was so exhausted that he could no longer continue. Seeing night fall and not knowing what else to do, he dismounted from his horse and tied it to a large oak, then climbed into the tree, so as not to be devoured by the wild animals during the night. The moon rose shortly after, and in the clear, bright night, he remained awake, sighing, weeping, and cursing his ill fortune, for he dared not sleep, lest he fall from the tree, although, had he been more comfortable, his grief and concern for his mistress would not have allowed him to sleep anyway.

Meanwhile, the girl, fleeing as we have said, and not knowing where to go other than where her horse seemed to be taking her, traveled so far into the woods that she could no longer see where she had entered, and wandered all day through that desolate place, no differently than Pietro had done, sometimes pausing to listen and sometimes continuing on, weeping and calling and lamenting her misfortune. Finally, seeing that Pietro did not come and it was now evening, she happened upon a small path, which her horse turned onto, and following it for perhaps two miles or more, she saw a small house in the distance. She made her way there as quickly as she could and found an elderly man and his equally old wife, who, seeing her alone, said to her, "Daughter, what are you doing here alone at this hour in these parts?" The girl, weeping, replied that she had lost her companions in the woods and asked how near she was to Anagni. "My dear," the old man answered, "this is not the way to Anagni; it is more than twelve miles from here." The girl then asked, "And how far is it from here to any inhabited place where I can find lodging for the night?" The old man replied, "There is none anywhere so close that you could reach it by daylight." The girl said, "Since I cannot go elsewhere, will you please shelter me here for the night, for the love of God?" "Young lady," the old man replied, "you are most welcome to stay with us tonight; however, we must warn you that there are many dangerous groups, both friends and foes, who come and go through these parts, both day and night, and who often greatly trouble and harm us; and if, by ill fortune, any of them were to come here and, seeing you, young and fair as you are, were to attempt to affront or shame you, we would not be able to protect you from that. We think it best to warn you of this, so that, if it should happen, you cannot complain of us."

The girl, seeing that it was late, although the old man's words frightened her, said, "If it pleases God, He will protect both you and me from that harm; and even if it should befall me, it would be a much lesser evil to be mistreated by men than to be torn apart by the wild beasts in the woods." With that, she dismounted from the horse and entered the poor man's house, where she dined with him on the meager fare they had, and then, fully clothed, lay down with them on their small bed. She continued sighing and lamenting her own misfortune and that of Pietro all night, not knowing whether to hope for good or ill of him; and as morning approached, she heard a great trampling of people coming, at which she arose and, going to a large courtyard behind the little house, saw a large pile of hay in a corner, in which she hid herself, so as not to be found so quickly, if those people should come there. Scarcely had she finished hiding when they, a large company of wicked ruffians, came to the door of the little house and, having it opened, entered and found Agnolella's horse still saddled and bridled; whereupon they asked who was there, and the good man, not seeing the girl, replied, "There is no one here but ourselves; but this horse, from whomever it may have escaped, came here yesterday evening, and we brought it into the house, lest the wolves should eat it." "Then," said the captain of the troop, "since it has no other master, it is fair prey for us."

Thereupon they all dispersed about the little house, and some went into the courtyard, where, laying down their lances and shields, it happened that one of them, not knowing what else to do, threw his lance into the hay, and came very close to killing the hidden girl, for the steel tore a part of her dress, so that she almost cried out, fearing she had been wounded; but, remembering where she was, she remained still, completely terrified. Presently, the ruffians, having prepared the kids and other meat they had with them and eaten and drunk, went off, some here and some there, about their business, and took the girl's horse with them. When they had gone some distance, the good man asked his wife, "What became of the young woman who came here yesterday evening? I have seen nothing of her since we arose." The good wife replied that she did not know, and went to look for her, whereupon the girl, hearing that the ruffians had gone, came out of the hay, to the great relief of her hosts, who, glad to see that she had not fallen into their hands, said to her, as day was now breaking, "Now that day is coming, we will, if it pleases you, accompany you to a castle five miles from here, where you will be safe; but you must go on foot, for those wicked men who just departed have taken your horse."

The girl cared little about the horse, but begged them, for God's sake, to bring her to that castle, and they set out and arrived there around mid-morning. Now, this castle belonged to one of the Orsini family, named Lionello di Campodifiore, and by chance his wife, a very pious and good lady, was there, who, seeing the girl, recognized her immediately and received her with joy, and was eager to hear in detail how she came to be there. Agnolella told her everything, and the lady, who also knew Pietro, as he was a friend of her husband's, was grieved by the misfortune that had befallen him, and, hearing where he had been taken, had no doubt that he was dead; so she said to Agnolella, "Since you do not know what has become of Pietro, you shall stay here until I have an opportunity to send you safely back to Rome."

Meanwhile, the unfortunate Pietro remained in the oak tree, as wretched as could be, and towards the first watch of the night, he saw a good twenty wolves appear, which immediately came all around his horse, as soon as they saw it. The horse, sensing them, strained at its bridle until it broke free, and would have fled, but being surrounded and unable to escape, it defended itself for a long time with its teeth and hoofs. However, it was finally brought down and strangled by the wolves, which then devoured it, leaving nothing but the bones, at which Pietro, who had considered the horse a companion and support in his troubles, was greatly dismayed and feared he would never be able to get out of the woods. But towards daybreak, being frozen from the cold in the oak and still looking all around, he caught sight of a large fire perhaps a mile away, and as soon as it was day, he came down from the oak, not without fear, and making his way towards the fire, came upon some shepherds eating and making merry around it, who received him out of compassion.

After he had eaten and warmed himself, he told them of his misadventure and asked if there was a village or castle nearby where he could go. The shepherds told him that about three miles away was a castle belonging to Lionello di Campodifiore, whose lady was currently there, at which Pietro was greatly pleased, and begged one of them to accompany him to the castle, which two of them readily did. There he found some who knew him, and was about to inquire about having the forest searched for the girl, when he was summoned to the lady's presence and immediately went to her. Never was joy like his when he saw Agnolella with her, and he was consumed with the desire to embrace her, but refrained out of respect for the lady, and if he was happy, the girl's joy was no less. The gentle lady, having welcomed him and treated him kindly and heard from him what had befallen him, chided him severely for what he had attempted against the will of his family; but seeing that he was resolved upon it and that it was also agreeable to the girl, she said to herself, "Why do I trouble myself in vain? These two love and know each other, and both are friends of my husband. Their desire is an honorable one, and it seems pleasing to God, since the one of them has escaped the gallows and the other the lance-thrust and both the wild beasts of the woods; therefore, let it be as they wish." Then, turning to the lovers, she said to them, "If you still have the desire to become husband and wife, it is my wish as well; let it be so, and the wedding shall be celebrated here at Lionello's expense. I will then make peace between you and your families." Accordingly, they were married right then and there, to the great delight of Pietro and the even greater satisfaction of Agnolella, and the gentle lady arranged an honorable wedding for them, as much as could be done in the mountains. There, with the utmost joy, they enjoyed the first fruits of their love, and a few days later, they mounted horses with the lady and returned, under good escort, to Rome, where she was able to reconcile Pietro's family, who were greatly incensed by what he had done, and he lived with his Agnolella in complete peace and happiness to a good old age.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
The key changes made in this modernized version include:

- Replacing archaic words and phrases with their modern equivalents (e.g., "quoth" becomes "said", "methinks" becomes "I think", "certes" becomes "certainly")
- Simplifying complex sentence structures by breaking them down into shorter, more straightforward constructions
- Providing brief explanations or contextual details for historical/cultural references that may be unfamiliar to modern readers (e.g., the removal of the Papal See to Avignon)
- Maintaining the overall tone and narrative voice of the original, while using language that is more accessible to a high school reading level
- Preserving idiomatic expressions where possible and providing brief footnotes to explain them when necessary
</explanation>