<modernized_text>
THE SIXTH STORY

[Day the Fifth]

GIANNI DI PROCIDA FOUND WITH A YOUNG LADY, WHOM HE LOVED AND WHO HAD BEEN GIVEN TO KING FREDERICK OF SICILY, IS BOUND WITH HER TO BE BURNED; BUT, BEING RECOGNIZED BY RUGGIERI DELL' ORIA, HE ESCAPES AND BECOMES HER HUSBAND

Neifile's story, which had greatly pleased the ladies, having ended, the queen instructed Pampinea to tell another. Accordingly, raising her bright face, Pampinea began: "Greatly powerful, charming ladies, is the might of Love and exposes lovers to severe hardships and extraordinary, unexpected perils, as can be seen from many things that have been recounted both today and at other times. Nevertheless, it pleases me once more to demonstrate it to you with a story of a young man in love.

Ischia is an island very near Naples, and therein, among others, was once a very beautiful and lively young woman, named Restituta, who was the daughter of a gentleman of the island called Marino Bolgaro. A young man named Gianni, a native of a small island near Ischia called Procida, loved her more than his own life, and she likewise loved him. Not only did he come by day from Procida to see her, but often at night, when he could not find a boat, he had swum from Procida to Ischia, at the very least to look upon the walls of her house, if he could do no more.

During the continuation of this ardent love, it happened that the girl, being all alone one summer day on the seashore, as she went from rock to rock loosening shellfish from the stones with a knife, came upon a hidden place among the cliffs, where, for shade and the convenience of a very cool spring of water that was there, certain young men of Sicily, coming from Naples, had taken up their quarters with a small boat they had. Seeing that she was alone and very beautiful, and unaware of their presence, they took counsel together to seize her and carry her off, and put their resolve into execution. Accordingly, they took her, despite her great outcry, and carrying her aboard the boat, made their way to Calabria, where they began to dispute over whose she should be. In the end, unable to agree among themselves and fearing to come to worse and ruin their plans on her account, they took counsel together to present her as a gift to Frederick, the King of Sicily, who was then a young man and delighted in such acquisitions. Accordingly, coming to Palermo, they made a gift of the young woman to the king, who, finding her fair, held her dear; but, as he was then somewhat infirm in body, he commanded that, until he should be stronger, she should be lodged in a very fine pavilion, belonging to a garden of his called La Cuba, and there attended; and so it was done.

Great was the outcry in Ischia over the abduction of the young woman, and what grieved them most was that they could not learn who were those who had carried her off; but Gianni, whom the matter concerned more than any other, not expecting to get any news of this in Ischia and learning the direction the abductors had taken, equipped another boat and embarking therein, as quickly as he might, scoured all the coast from La Minerva to La Scalea in Calabria, enquiring everywhere for news of the girl. Being told at La Scalea that she had been carried off to Palermo by some Sicilian sailors, he hastened thither as quickly as he could, and there, after much searching, finding that she had been presented to the king and was by him kept under guard at La Cuba, he was greatly distressed and lost almost all hope, not only of ever having her again, but even of seeing her. Nevertheless, detained by love, having sent away his boat and seeing that he was known to no one there, he remained behind and, passing often by La Cuba, he chanced one day to catch sight of her at a window, and she saw him, to their great delight.

Gianni, seeing the place was lonely, approached as best he could and, speaking with her, was instructed by her as to how he must act if he would afterward have further speech with her. He then took leave of her, having first carefully examined the layout of the place in every part, and waited until a good part of the night was past, when he returned thither and, climbing up in places where a woodpecker would scarce have found a foothold, made his way into the garden. There he found a long pole and, setting it against the window which his mistress had shown him, climbed up thereby lightly enough. The young woman, thinking she had already lost her honor, for the preservation of which she had in times past been somewhat coy with him, now believing she could give herself to none more worthily than to him and doubting not to be able to persuade him to carry her off, had resolved in herself to comply with his every desire; wherefore she had left the window open, so he might enter forthright. Accordingly, Gianni, finding it open, softly made his way into the chamber and lay down beside the girl, who was not sleeping and who, before they came to other matters, disclosed to him all her intent, instantly beseeching him to take her away from there and carry her off. Gianni answered that nothing could be so pleasing to him as this, and promised that he would without fail, as soon as he had taken leave of her, put the matter in train in such a way that he might carry her away with him, the first time he returned thither. Then, embracing each other with exceeding pleasure, they took that delight beyond which Love can afford no greater, and after repeating it again and again, they fell asleep, without realizing it, in each other's arms.

Meanwhile, the king, who had at first sight been greatly taken with the young woman, calling her to mind and feeling himself well in body, determined, although it was near dawn, to go and stay with her for a while. Accordingly, he betook himself privately to La Cuba with certain of his servants and, entering the pavilion, caused the chamber wherein he knew the girl slept to be softly opened. Then, with a great lighted torch before him, he entered therein and, looking upon the bed, saw her and Gianni lying asleep and naked in each other's arms; whereat he was suddenly furiously incensed and inflamed with such a passion of wrath that it lacked little but he had, without saying a word, slain them both then and there with a dagger he had by his side. However, considering it a very base thing for any man, much more for a king, to slay two naked folk in their sleep, he restrained himself and determined to put them to death in public and by fire; wherefore, turning to the only companion he had with him, he said to him, 'What thinkest thou of this vile woman, on whom I had set my hope?' And afterward he asked him if he knew the young man who had dared enter his house to do him such an affront and such an outrage; but he answered that he remembered not ever to have seen him. The king then departed the chamber, full of rage, and commanded that the two lovers should be taken and bound, naked as they were, and that, as soon as it was broad day, they should be carried to Palermo and there bound to a stake, back to back, in the public place, where they should be kept till the hour of tierce, so they might be seen by all, and after burnt, even as they had deserved; and this said, he returned to his palace at Palermo, exceedingly angry.

The king gone, there fell upon the two lovers and not only awakened them, but forthright without any pity took them and bound them; which when they saw, it may easily be imagined if they were distressed and feared for their lives and wept and lamented. According to the king's command, they were carried to Palermo and bound to a stake in the public place, while the faggots and the fire were made ready before their eyes, to burn them at the appointed hour. Thither straightway flocked all the townspeople, both men and women, to see the two lovers; the men all pressed to look upon the young woman and, just as they praised her for fair and well-made in every part of her body, even so the women, who all ran to gaze upon the young man, highly commended him for handsome and well-shaped. But the wretched lovers, both deeply ashamed, stood with bowed heads and bewailed their sorry fate, hourly expecting the cruel death by fire.

While they were thus kept against the appointed hour, the offense they had committed, being noised abroad everywhere, came to the ears of Ruggieri dell'Oria, a man of inestimable worth and then the king's admiral, whereupon he repaired to the place where they were bound and, considering first the young woman, commended her greatly for her beauty, then, turning to look upon the young man, knew him without much difficulty and, drawing nearer to him, asked him if he were not Gianni di Procida. The youth, raising his eyes and recognizing the admiral, answered, 'My lord, I was indeed he of whom you ask; but I am about to be no more.' The admiral then asked him what had brought him to that pass, and he answered, 'Love and the king's anger.' The admiral caused him tell his story more at large and, having heard everything from him as it had happened, was about to depart, when Gianni called him back and said to him, 'For God's sake, my lord, if it may be, get me one favor of him who makes me to abide thus.' 'What is that?' asked Ruggieri; and Gianni said, 'I see I must die, and that soon, and I ask, therefore, by way of favor,--as I am bound with my back to this young woman, whom I have loved more than my life, even as she has loved me, and she with her back to me,--that we may be turned about with our faces one to the other, so that, dying, I may look upon her face and depart, comforted.' 'With all my heart,' answered Ruggieri, laughing; 'I will do in such wise that you shall yet see her till you grow weary of her sight.'

Then, taking leave of him, he charged those who were appointed to carry the sentence into execution that they should proceed no farther therein, without other commandment of the king, and straightway betook himself to the latter, to whom, although he saw him greatly incensed, he spared not to speak his mind, saying, 'King, in what have the two young folk offended against you, whom you have commanded to be burned yonder in the public place?' The king told him and Ruggieri went on, 'The offense committed by them deserves it indeed, but not from you; for, even as defaults merit punishment, even so do good offices merit recompense, let alone grace and clemency. Do you know who these are you would have burned?' The king answered no, and Ruggieri continued, 'Then I will have you know them, so you may see how unwisely you suffer yourself to be carried away by the transports of passion. The young man is the son of Landolfo di Procida, own brother to Messer Gian di Procida, by whose means you are king and lord of this island, and the young woman is the daughter of Marino Bolgaro, to whose influence you owe it that your officers have not been driven forth of Ischia. Moreover, they are lovers who have long loved one another and, constrained by love, rather than with any will to do despite to your authority, have done this sin, if that can be called sin which young folk do for love. Wherefore, then, will you put them to death, when you should rather honor them with the greatest favors and rewards at your command?'

The king, hearing this and certifying himself that Ruggieri spoke truth, not only forbore from proceeding to do worse, but repented him of that which he had done, wherefore he commanded incontinent that the two lovers should be loosed from the stake and brought before him; which was forthwith done. Thereupon, having fully acquainted himself with their case, he concluded that it behooved him requite them the injury he had done them with gifts and honor; wherefore he had them newly clad in sumptuous fashion and, finding them of one accord, caused Gianni to take the young woman as his wife. Then, making them magnificent presents, he sent them back, rejoicing, to their own country, where they were received with the utmost joy and delight.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
In modernizing this chapter, I focused on the following key changes:

1. Replacing archaic words and phrases with their modern equivalents, such as "methinks" becoming "I think", "certes" becoming "certainly", and "an it like you" becoming "if it pleases you".

2. Simplifying complex sentence structures by breaking down lengthy, convoluted sentences into shorter, more straightforward constructions. For example, the original sentence "Neifile's story, which had much pleased the ladies, being ended, the queen bade Pampinea address herself to tell another, and she accordingly, raising her bright face, began" was simplified to "Neifile's story, which had greatly pleased the ladies, having ended, the queen instructed Pampinea to tell another. Accordingly, raising her bright face, Pampinea began".

3. Updating outdated references and cultural concepts, such as replacing "La Cuba" with a description of it as "a very fine pavilion, belonging to a garden of his called La Cuba" and explaining the significance of the characters Landolfo di Procida and Gian di Procida.

4. Maintaining the author's distinct narrative voice and tone, including the use of descriptive language, humor, and emotional responses, while modernizing the vocabulary and sentence structure.

5. Ensuring consistency in modernized vocabulary choices, such as using "young woman/young man" instead of "damsel/youth" throughout the chapter.
</explanation>