<modernized_text>
The Third Story

[Day the Tenth]

Mithridanes Envies Nathan's Hospitality and Generosity, Then Decides to Kill Him, But Nathan Guides Him Instead to Becoming His Friend

The guests seemed amazed by what they had heard, that a clergyman could have acted so generously. But as soon as the ladies had finished discussing it, the king instructed Filostrato to continue, who promptly began:

"Noble ladies, the magnificence of the King of Spain and the Abbot of Cluny was truly extraordinary, perhaps like nothing ever heard before. But perhaps it will seem no less remarkable to you to hear how a man, in order to show generosity to another who thirsted for his very life, secretly devised a way to give it to him, and would have done so had the other wished to take it, as I intend to show you in a short story.

It is a well-established fact, according to the reports of various Genoese and others who have traveled in those regions, that there once lived in the land of Cattajo a man of noble lineage and immense wealth named Nathan. He had an estate next to a busy highway where all who traveled from the West to the East or from the East to the West had to pass. Being a man of great and generous spirit, who wished his actions to be known, he assembled a large group of skilled workers and had them build one of the grandest and most magnificent palaces ever seen in a short time. He then maintained a large and impressive household, and joyfully and warmly welcomed and entertained all who came and went. This praiseworthy practice made him known not only throughout the East, but nearly all of the West.

Nathan was already quite elderly, but no less dedicated to his hospitality, when his fame reached the ears of a young man from a nearby country named Mithridanes. Knowing himself to be no less wealthy than Nathan, Mithridanes grew envious of Nathan's renown and virtues, and determined to eclipse or overshadow them with even greater generosity. So he had a palace built just like Nathan's and proceeded to offer the most extraordinary hospitality to all who came and went in that region, quickly becoming equally famous.

One day, as Mithridanes was alone in the central courtyard of his palace, a poor woman entered through one of the gates and asked him for alms, which he gave her. She came in again through the second gate and received another alms, and this continued for twelve times in succession. But when she returned a thirteenth time, he said to her, 'Good woman, you are very persistent in your begging.' Nevertheless, he still gave her an alms. The old woman then exclaimed, 'Oh, the wondrous generosity of Nathan! For entering through each of the thirty-two gates of his palace and asking him for alms, I was never recognized by him, and yet I always received it. But here, having only come through thirteen gates, I have been recognized and rebuked.' With that, she left and did not return.

Hearing the old woman's words, Mithridanes was consumed with furious rage, as he felt that what he had heard of Nathan's fame diminished his own. He said to himself, 'Alas, woe is me! When will I ever equal Nathan's generosity in great things, let alone surpass it as I try to do, if I cannot even match him in the smallest? Truly, I weary myself in vain if I do not remove him from the earth. Since old age does not carry him off, I must do it with my own hands without delay.'

Driven by this impulse, Mithridanes took horse with a small company, without telling anyone his plan, and came to where Nathan was living after three days' journey. Arriving in the evening, he instructed his followers to find lodging, as if they were not with him, and waited alone at a short distance from Nathan's magnificent palace. There he found Nathan walking for pleasure, unattended and simply dressed, and not recognizing him, asked if he could direct him to where Nathan lived. 'My son,' the latter replied cheerfully, 'there is no one in these parts better able than I to show you where he dwells. So whenever you wish, I will take you there.' Mithridanes said this would be most welcome, but asked if he could go unseen and unknown by Nathan. Nathan agreed, 'That too I will arrange, since it pleases you.'

Mithridanes dismounted and went with Nathan to the grand palace. There Nathan had one of his servants take the young man's horse, then quietly instructed all in the household not to reveal to the youth that he was Nathan. He then lodged Mithridanes in a fine chamber where no one saw him except those Nathan had appointed to attend him, and kept him company himself, honoring him greatly.

After Mithridanes had stayed there for some time in this manner, he asked the man, whom he revered as a father, who he was. Nathan replied, 'I am an unworthy servant of Nathan's who has grown old with him since childhood, though he has never advanced me beyond what you see. So while everyone else is highly pleased with him, I have little cause to be thankful.' These words gave Mithridanes greater hope of being able to carry out his wicked plan more safely and certainly. When Nathan courteously asked him who he was and what had brought him to those parts, offering his advice and assistance, Mithridanes hesitated at first, but then decided to confide in him. After much preamble, he revealed his identity and the reason and impulse that had brought him there. 

Hearing Mithridanes' words and his cruel intent, Nathan was deeply troubled inwardly. But without hesitation, he answered him with a steadfast mind and resolute countenance, saying, 'Mithridanes, your father was a noble man, and you show yourself not to have degenerated from him in undertaking so high an enterprise as this you have, to be generous to all. I greatly commend the jealousy you bear toward Nathan's virtues, for if there were many such, the wretched world would soon become good. The design you have disclosed to me I will assuredly keep secret, but for its accomplishment I can give you more useful counsel than great aid. You can see from here a thicket, perhaps half a mile away, where Nathan almost every morning walks alone for his pleasure, staying there for a good while. It will be an easy matter for you to find him there and do with him as you will. If you kill him, you must, so you may return home unhindered, depart not by the way you came, but by the one you will see issuing from the thicket on the left, for though somewhat wilder, it is nearer to your country and safer for you.'

After receiving this information, and Nathan having taken his leave, Mithridanes secretly told his companions, who had lodged with him in the palace, where they should look for him the next day. When the new day came, Nathan, whose intent was in no way at odds with the counsel he had given Mithridanes nor had it changed in any way, went alone to the thicket, there to die. Meanwhile, Mithridanes arose, taking his bow and sword, for he had no other weapons, mounted his horse, and made his way to the thicket, where he saw Nathan walking alone in the distance. Resolved to try to see and hear him before attacking, he ran toward him and seizing him by the headband he wore, said, 'Old man, you are a dead man.' To which Nathan simply replied, 'Then I have deserved it.'

Hearing his voice and looking at his face, Mithridanes immediately recognized him as the one who had so lovingly received and familiarly accompanied him, and faithfully advised him. Instantly, his fury subsided, and his rage turned to shame. Casting away the sword he had already drawn to strike him, and dismounting from his horse, he ran weeping to throw himself at Nathan's feet, saying, 'Now, dearest father, I clearly recognize your generosity, considering with what secrecy you have come here to give me your life, which, without any reason, I showed myself desirous of taking from you. But God, more careful of my honor than I myself, has in the extremity of my need opened the eyes of my understanding, which base envy had closed. Therefore, the more readily you were prepared to comply with me, so much the more do I confess myself beholden to make amends for my wrongdoing. Take, then, from me the vengeance that you deem fitting for my sin.'

Nathan raised Mithridanes to his feet, tenderly embracing and kissing him, saying, 'My son, there is no need for you to ask nor for me to grant forgiveness for your undertaking, whatever you choose to call it, wicked or otherwise. For you pursued it not out of hatred, but to win a greater renown. Live, then, assured of my forgiveness, and be certain that there is no man alive who loves you as I do, considering the nobility of your spirit, which has turned not to the amassing of wealth like the avaricious, but to the spending of what has been amassed. Nor be ashamed of having sought to slay me, that you might become famous, nor think that I marvel at it. The greatest emperors and most illustrious kings have, with scarcely any other art than that of killing, not just one man as you would have done, but an infinite multitude of men, and burning countries and razing cities, enlarged their kingdoms and consequently their fame. So if you would, to make yourself more famous, have slain me alone, you did nothing new or extraordinary, but only what has been commonly done.'

Mithridanes, without excusing his perverse design, commended the honorable excuse found by Nathan, and in the course of their conversation, said he marveled greatly how Nathan could have brought himself to meet his death and even given him the means and counsel to that end. To which Nathan replied, 'Mithridanes, I would not have you marvel at my resolve nor at the counsel I gave you, for since I have been my own master and have set myself to do the very thing you have undertaken to do, there has never come to my house anyone whom I have not, so far as lay in my power, contented of that which he required of me. You came here desiring my life, so, learning that you sought it, I straightway determined to give it to you, that you might not be the only one to depart hence without his wish. And in order that you might have your desire, I gave you such counsel as I thought apt to enable you to have my life and not lose your own. And therefore I tell you once more and pray you, if it pleases you, take it and satisfy yourself thereof. I know not how I may better bestow it. These fourscore years have I occupied it and used it about my pleasures and my diversions, and I know that in the course of nature, as it happens with other men and things in general, but little of it can now be left me. Wherefore I hold it far better to bestow it by way of gift, like as I have always given and expended my other treasures, than to seek to keep it until such time as it shall be taken from me by nature against my will. To give a hundred years is no great boon; how much less, then, is it to give the six or eight I have yet to abide here? Take it, then, if it please you. Pray, take it, if you have a mind thereto; for never yet, while I have lived here, have I found any who has desired it, nor know I when I may find any such, if you, who demand it, take it not. And even should I chance to find any, I know that the longer I keep it, the less worth will it be; therefore, before it waxes worse, take it, I beseech you.'

Mithridanes was deeply ashamed and replied, 'God forbid that I should not only take, but even desire to take, a thing of such value as your life, the years of which, far from seeking to diminish, I would gladly add to my own!' To which Nathan immediately replied, 'And are you indeed willing, since it is in your power to do so, to add some of your years to mine, and in so doing, cause me to do for you that which I have never yet done for any man - take of your good, I who have never yet taken aught from others?' 'Yes, indeed I am,' Mithridanes hastily answered. 'Then,' said Nathan, 'you must do as I shall bid you. You shall take up your abode, young as you are, here in my house and bear the name of Nathan, while I will betake myself to your house and let myself still be called Mithridanes.' Mithridanes said, 'If I knew how to do as well as you have done and do, I would without hesitation accept what you offer me. But since it seems to me very certain that my actions would diminish Nathan's fame, and as I have no intention of marring in another what I know not how to order in myself, I will not take it.'

After many other courteous discourses between them, they returned, at Nathan's insistence, to the latter's palace, where he entertained Mithridanes with the utmost honor for several days, heartening him in his great and noble purpose with all manner of wisdom and wit. Then, when Mithridanes desired to return to his own home with his company, Nathan sent him away, having thoroughly conveyed to him that he could never surpass him in generosity.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
The key changes made in this modernized version of "The Decameron" chapter include:

- Replacing archaic words and phrases with more contemporary language (e.g., "methinks" to "I think", "certes" to "certainly")
- Simplifying complex sentence structures by breaking them down into shorter, clearer statements
- Updating references to outdated cultural or historical concepts (e.g., explaining "Cattajo" as the Dalmatian province of Cattaro)
- Maintaining Boccaccio's distinct narrative voice and tone, while making the language more accessible for a high school reading level
- Ensuring consistency in vocabulary choices and modernized phrasing across the chapter
</explanation>