After ages and ages had passed by, the bed of the sea ceased to sink, and began slowly to rise. The water over the newly made layers of stone became shallower, and at last the floor was raised until it emerged from the sea. But, of course, it would not be the original ground which formed the surface of the newly uncovered land. The sheets of consolidated clay lay on the top; over the fresh surface life gradually spread, until man himself came to dwell there, while far beneath his feet the remains of the ancient vegetation were buried.

When we now dig down through the rocks we come upon the portions of trees and other plants which the lapse of time, and the influence of pressure, have turned from leaves and wood into our familiar coal.

That ancient forest grew because sunbeams abounded in those early times, and nourished a luxuriant vegetation. The heat and the light then expended so liberally by the sun were seized by the leaves of flourishing plants, and were stored away in their stems and foliage. Thus it is that the ancient sunbeams have been preserved in our coal-beds for uncounted thousands of years. When we put a lump of coal on our fire this evening, and when it sends forth a grateful warmth and cheerful light, it but reproduces for our benefit some of that store of preserved sunbeams of which our earth holds so large a treasure. Thus, the sun has contributed very materially to our comfort, for it has provided the fire to keep us warm.

The orb of day has, however, ministered further to our tea party, for has it not produced the tea itself? The tea grew a long way off, most likely in China, where the plant was matured by the warmth of the sunbeams. From China the tea-chests were brought by a sailing vessel to London; the ship performed this long voyage by the use of sails, blown by what we call wind, which is merely the passage of great volumes of air as they hurry from one part of the earth to another.

We may ask what makes the air move, for it will not rush about in this way unless there be considerable force to drive it. Here again we perceive the influence of the sun. Tracts of land are warmed by the genial sunbeams. The air receives the heat from the land, and the warm air is buoyant and ascends, while cooler air continually flows in to supply its place. To do this it has, of course, to rush across the country, and thus wind is caused. All the air currents on our earth are consequently due to the sun. You see, therefore, how greatly we are indebted to our brilliant luminary for the enjoyment of our tea-table. Not only has the sun given us the coal and the tea, but it has actually provided the means by which the tea was carried all the way from China to our own shores.

We can also trace the connection between the hot water and the sun. Of course, the water has come immediately from the kettle, and that has been taken from the fire, and the fire was produced by sunbeams. Thus we learn that it is the warmth of the sun that has made the water boil. If you visit the water-works you will see great reservoirs. In some cases they have been filled by a river, sometimes the water is pumped from a deep well in the ground, sometimes it is the surface-water caught on a mountain side. Whatever be the immediate source of our water supply, the real origin is to be sought, not in the earth beneath, but in the heavens above. All the water we use day by day has come from the clouds. It is the clouds which sent down the rain, or sometimes the snow, or the hail, and it is this water from the clouds which fills our rivers. It is this water also which sinks deep into the earth and supplies our wells, so that from whatever apparent source the water seems to have come, it is indeed the clouds which have been the real benefactors. The water in your teacup to-night was, a little while ago, in a cloud, floating far overhead in the sky.

We may look a little further and find whence the clouds have come. It is certain that clouds are merely a form of steam or vapor of water, and as they are so continually sending down rain on the earth, there must be some means by which their supply will be replenished. Here again our excellent friend the sun is to be found ever helping us secretly, if not helping us openly. He pours down his rich and warm beams on the great oceans, and the heat turns some of the water into vapor, which, being lighter than the air, ascends upwards for miles. There the vapor often passes into the form of clouds, and the winds waft these clouds to refresh the thirsty lands of the earth. Thus, you see, it is the sun which procures for us water from the great oceans which cover so much of our globe, and sends it on by the winds to supply our water-works, and fill our teapots. Notice another little kindliness of our great benefactor. The water of the oceans is quite salt. But we could not make tea with salt water, so the sun, when lifting the vapor from the sea, most thoughtfully leaves all the salt behind, and thus provides us with the purest of sweet water.

That nice muffin was baked by the sun, toasted by the sun, and made from wheat grown by the sun. If the wheat was ground in a wind-mill, then the sun raised the wind which turned the mill. Perhaps the flour-mill was driven by steam, in which case the sun, long ago, provided the coal for the boiler. The miller might have lived on a river and used a water-mill, but if he did, then here again the sun actually did the work. The sun raised the water to the clouds, and after it had fallen in rain, and was on its way back to the sea, its descent was utilized to turn the water-wheel. The water derives its power to turn the mill from the fact that it is running downhill, but it could not run down unless it had first been raised up; and thus it is indeed the sun which drives the water-wheel. Nor can the baker dispense with the sun’s aid even if he rejected wind-mills, or steam-mills, or water-mills, and determined to grind the corn himself with a pestle and mortar. Here, at least, it might be thought that it is a man’s sinews and muscles that are doing the work, and so no doubt they are. But you are mistaken if you think the sun has not rendered indispensable aid. The sun has just as surely provided the power which moves the baker’s arms as it has raised the wind which turned the wind-mill. The force exerted in grinding with the pestle has been derived from the food that the man has eaten; that food was grown by the sun, and the man received from the food the energy it had derived from the sun’s heat. So that, look at it any way you please, even for the grinding of the wheat to make the muffin for your tea party, you are wholly indebted to the sun.

It is the sun which has bleached the tablecloth to that snowy whiteness. The sun has given those bright colors which look so pretty in the girls’ dresses. With how much significance can we say and feel that light is pleasant to the eye, and what prettier name than Little Sunbeam can we have for the darling child who makes our home so bright?

THE DISTANCE OF THE SUN.

The sun is a very long way off. It is not easy for you to imagine a distance so great, but if you want to learn astronomy you must make the attempt. This is the first measurement that we shall have to make on our way to that far-off country called Star-Land; but long as we shall find it to be, we shall afterwards have to consider distances very much longer. When you are out in the street, or taking a walk in the country, you can see at once that this man is near, or that house is far, or that mountain is many miles away. This is because you have other objects between to help you to judge of the distances of these different objects. You will see, for example, that there are many houses or farmyards, and you will notice hedges dividing different fields between you and the mountain. You also see that there are woods and parks, and perhaps stretches of moorland extending up the slopes. You have an impression that the farmyards and fields are of considerable size, and that the woods or moors are wide and extensive; and putting these things together, you realize that the mountain must be miles away.

But when we look at the sun we have no aids conveniently placed to help us in judging his distance. There are no intervening objects, and merely gazing at the sun helps us but little in obtaining any accurate knowledge. We must go to the astronomer and ask him to tell us how far he has found the sun to be, and then we must also beg from him some explanation of the method he has used in making his measurements.

It has been found that the sun is, on the average, about ninety-three millions of miles from the earth; but sometimes it is a little further and sometimes it is a little nearer. Let us first try to count 93,000,000. The easiest way will be to get the clock to do this for us; and here is a sum that I would suggest for you to work out. How long will the clock have to tick before it has made as many ticks as there are miles between the earth and the sun? Every minute the clock, of course, makes 60 ticks, and in 24 hours the total number will reach 86,400. By dividing this into 93,000,000 you will find that more than 1076 days, or nearly three years, will be required for the clock to perform the task.

We may consider the subject in another way, and find how long an express train would take to go all the way from the earth to the sun. We shall suppose the speed of the train to be 40 miles an hour; and if the train ran for a whole day and a whole night without stopping, it would then accomplish 960 miles. In a year the distance travelled would reach 350,400 miles, and by dividing this into 93,000,000 we arrive at the conclusion that a train would have to travel at a pace of 40 miles an hour, not alone for days and for weeks and for years, but even for centuries. Indeed, not until 265 years had elapsed would the mighty journey have been ended. Even though King Charles I. had been present when the train began to move, the destination would not yet have been reached. No one who started in the train could expect to reach the end of the trip. That would not occur till the time of his great-great-grandchildren.

HOW ASTRONOMERS MEASURE THE DISTANCES OF THE HEAVENLY BODIES.

I shall so often have to speak of the distances of the celestial bodies that I may once for all explain how it is that we have been able to discover what these distances are. This would be a very puzzling matter if we were to try and describe it fully, but the principle of the method is not at all difficult. Do you know why you have been provided with two eyes? It is undoubted that one of the reasons is to aid you in estimating distances. You see this boy (Fig. 4) judges of the distance of his finger by the inclination of his two eyes when directed at it. In a similar way we judge of the distance of a heavenly body by making observations on it from two different stations.

[Figure 4: Two Eyes are better than One]

[Figure 5: How we measured the Height of the Ball]

I shall illustrate our method of measuring the actual distance of a body in the heavens by showing you how we can find the height of that large india-rubber ball which is hanging from the ceiling. Of course, I do not intend to have a measuring tape from the ball itself, because I want to solve the problem on the same principle as that by which we measure the distance of the sun or of any other celestial body which we cannot reach. I will ask the aid of a boy and a girl, who will please stand one at each end of the lecture table. The apparatus we shall want is very simple; it consists of two cards and a pair of scissors. The boy will kindly shape his card to such an angle that when he holds it to his eye one side of the angle shall point straight at the little girl, and the other side shall point straight at the ball, just as you see in the picture (Fig. 5). The girl will also please do the same with her card, so that along one side she just sees the little boy’s face, while the other side points up to the ball. It will be necessary to cut these angles properly. If the angle be too big, then when one side points to the boy’s face, the other will be directed above the ball. If the angle on the card be too small, then one side will be directed below the ball, while the other is pointed to the boy. The whole accuracy of our little observations depends upon cutting the card angles properly. When they have been truly shaped it will be easy to find the distance of the ball. We first take a foot rule and measure the length of our table from one of our young friends to the other. That length is twelve feet, and to discover the distance of the ball we must make a drawing. We get a sheet of paper, and first rule a line twelve inches long. That will represent the length of the table, it being understood that each inch of the drawing is to correspond to a foot of the actual table. Let the end where the girl stood be marked B, and that of the boy, A, and now bring the cards and place them on the line just as shown in the figure. The card the girl has shaped is to be put so that the corner of it lies at B, and one edge along B A. Then the boy’s card is to be so put that its corner is at A and one edge along A B. Next with a pencil we rule lines on the other edges of the cards, taking care that they are kept all the time in their proper positions. These two lines carried on will meet at C; and this must be the position of the ball on the scale of our little sketch. It only now remains to take the foot rule and measure on the drawing the length from A to C. I find it to be twenty inches, and I have so arranged it that the distance from B to C is the same.

[Figure 6: This is what we wanted the Cards for]

I do not intend to trouble you much with Euclid in these lectures, but as many of my young friends have learned the sixth book, I will just refer to the well-known proposition, which tells us that the lengths of the corresponding sides of two similar triangles are proportional. We have here two similar triangles. There is the big one with the boy at one corner, the girl at the other, and the ball overhead. Here is the small triangle which we have just drawn. These triangles are similar because they have got the same angles, and it was to insure that they should have the same angles that we were so careful in shaping the cards. As these two triangles are similar, their sides must be proportional. We have agreed that the line A B, which is twelve inches long, is to represent the length of the table between the little boy and girl. Hence the distance, A C, must, on the same scale, be the interval between the ball and the boy at the end. This is twenty inches on the drawing, and therefore the actual distance from the end of the table to the ball is twenty feet.
