Hence you see that without going up to the ball or having a string from it, or in any other way making direct communication with it, we have been able to ascertain how far up in the air the ball is actually hung. This simple illustration explains the principle of the method by which astronomers are able to learn the distances of the different celestial bodies from the earth. You must think of the sun, the moon, and the stars as globes supported in some manner over our heads, and we seek to discover their distances from measurements of angles made at the ends of a base-line.

[Figure 7: This would be our Base-line when finding the Sun’s Distance]

Of course, astronomers must choose two stations which are far more widely separated than are those in our little experiment. In fact, the greater the interval between the two stations, the better. Astronomers require a much longer distance than from one side of this room to the other, or from one side of London to the other side. If it were merely a balloon at which we were looking, then, when one observer at one side of London and another at the opposite side shaped their cards carefully, we should be able to tell the height of the balloon very easily. But as the sun is so much further off than any balloon could ever be, we must separate the observers much more widely. Even the breadth of England would not be enough, so we have to make them separate more and more until they are as widely divided as it is possible for any two people on this earth to be. One astronomer takes up his position at A (Fig. 7), and the other at the opposite side at B, so that they can both see the sun. They are obliged to use a much more accurate way of measuring the angles than by cutting out cards with pairs of scissors; and as the astronomer at A is not able to see his friend at B, it becomes no easy matter to measure the angles accurately. However, we shall not now trouble ourselves about such difficulties. It may suffice for the present to know that the angles are measured by delicate and very accurate instruments used by astronomers. They will not, indeed, make a little sketch such as sufficed for our purpose. They make a calculation which is a much more accurate way of effecting true measurement. The astronomers know the size of the earth, and thus they know how many thousands of miles lie between the two stations where the observations are made. This distance means in their calculation just what the length of the table did in our sketch. From each end of the line they set off an angle just as we did, and the astronomer must use the principle of similar triangles which he finds in Euclid, just we had to do. At last, when they have calculated the sides of their triangle, they obtain the distance of the sun.

THE APPARENT SMALLNESS OF DISTANT OBJECTS.

[Figure 8: The nearer you are, the bigger the Globe looks]

[Figure 9: The Globe is so far off that it lies beyond the Picture. The dotted lines show how small it seems]

I ought here to explain a principle which those who are learning about the stars must always bear in mind. The principle asserts that the further a body is, the smaller it looks. Perhaps this will be understood from the adjoining little sketch (Fig. 8). It represents a great globe, on which oceans and continents are shown, and you see a little boy and a little girl are looking at the globe. The girl stands quite close to it, and I have drawn two dotted lines from her eye, one to the top of the globe, and the other to the under surface. If she wants to examine the entire side of the globe which is visible to her, she must first look along the upper dotted line, and then she must turn her glance downwards until she comes to the lower line, and having to turn her eyes thus up and down she will think the globe is very big, and she will be quite right. The boy is, as you see, on the other side of the globe, but I have put him much further off than the girl. I have also drawn two dotted lines from his eye to the globe, and it is plain that he will not have to turn his head much up and down to see the whole globe. He can take it all in at a glance, and to him, therefore, the globe will appear to be comparatively small, because he is sufficiently far from it. The more distant he is, the smaller it will appear. You can easily imagine that, if the globe were far enough, the two lines that would include the whole would be like those shown (Fig. 9), in which the globe is so distant that it cannot be seen in the picture. The apparent size of the globe, which is really measured by the angle between these two lines, would always be smaller and smaller according as the distance was greater. Now you can understand why an object seems smaller the further away it is; indeed, when sufficiently far, the object ceases to be visible at all.

I could give many illustrations of the diminution of size by distance, and so, doubtless, could you. Every boy knows that his kite looks smaller and smaller the greater the length of string that he lets out. I have seen in the West of Ireland a bird that seemed like a little speck high up near the clouds, but from its flight and other circumstances I knew that the speck was not a little bird. It was, indeed, a great eagle, which was dwarfed by the elevation to which it had soared.

It is in astronomy that we have the best illustrations of this principle. Enormous objects seem to be small because they are so very far off. You must therefore always remember that although an object may appear to be small, this appearance may be only a delusion. It may be that the object is very big, but very distant. In astronomy, this is almost always the case, there is so much room above us, around us, on all sides in space. Look up at the ceiling. It certainly does not bound space, for there is another side to it; and then there is the roof of the house. But the roof is not a boundary, for, of course, there is the air above it, and then, higher up still, there are the clouds, and so we can carry our imagination on and on through and beyond the air up to where the stars are, and still on and on. And as there is unlimited room, the celestial bodies take advantage of it, and are, generally speaking, at distances so gigantic that, no matter how small they may appear, their smallness is merely deceptive.

Let us try to illustrate in another way the exceeding remoteness of the sun. So please imagine that you were on the sun, and that you took a view of our earth from that distance. To find out what we must expect to see, let us think of a balloon voyage. If you were to go up in a balloon, you would at first see only the houses, or objects immediately about you, but as you rose the view would become wider and wider. You would see that London was surrounded by the country, and then, as you still soared up and up, the sea would become visible, and you would be able to trace out the coasts, east and west and south. If, in some way, you could soar higher than any balloon could carry you, the whole of the British Islands would presently lie spread like a map beneath. Still on and on, and then the continent of Europe would be gradually opened out, until the great oceans, and even other continents, would at last be caught sight of, and then you would perceive that our whole earth was indeed a globe. The higher you went, the less distinctly would you be able to see the details on the surface. At last the outlines of the continents and oceans would fade, and you would begin to lose any perception of the shape of the earth itself. Long ere you had reached the distance of the sun, the earth would look merely as the planet Venus now does to us. It is instructive to consider how small our earth would seem if it were possible to view it from the sun. Think of that very familiar little globe, a lawn-tennis ball, which is two and three-quarter inches in diameter. But suppose a tennis ball were at the opposite side of the street, or still further away; suppose, for example, that it were half a mile away, what could you expect to see of it? And yet the earth, as seen from the sun, would appear to be no larger than a tennis ball would look when viewed from a distance of half a mile.

THE SHAPE AND SIZE OF THE SUN.

We have spoken of the heat of the sun, how hot he is; of the distance of the sun, how far he is; and now we must say a little about the size of the sun; and also about his shape. It is plain that the sun is round, that it has the shape of a ball. We are sure of this because, though a plate is circular, yet, if it were placed so that we only saw it edgeways from a distance, it would not appear to be round. The sun is always rotating, and as it always seems to be a circle, we are therefore certain that the true shape of the sun must be globular, and not merely circular like a flat plate.

In the middle of the day, when the sun is high in the heavens, it is impossible for us to form a notion of the size of the sun. People will form very different estimates as to his apparent bigness. Some will say he looks as large as a dinner plate, but such statements are meaningless, unless we say where the plate is to be held. If it be near the eye, of course the plate may hide the sun, and, for that matter, everything else also. If the plate were about a hundred feet away, then it would often hide the sun. If the plate were more than a hundred feet distant, then it could not hide the sun entirely, and the further the plate, the smaller it would seem.

No means of estimating the sun’s size are available when his orb stands high in the heavens. But when he is rising or setting, we see that he passes behind trees or mountains, so that there are intervening objects with which we can compare him; then we have actual proof that the sun must be a very large body indeed.

[Figure 10: A Sunset viewed from Marseilles (Marcus Codde)]

I give here a picture, by Marcus Codde, taken from a French journal, l’Astronomie, which gives a charming illustration of a sunset at Marseilles (Fig. 10). If you wish to see that the sun is bigger than a mountain, you may go to the top of Notre Dame de la Garde, but you must choose either the 10th of February or the 31st of October for your visit, because it is only on the evenings of those days that the sun sets in the right position.

On both these evenings the sun sinks directly behind Mount Carigou in the Pyrenees; this mountain is a long way from Marseilles--no less, indeed, than one hundred and fifty-eight miles. But the mountain is so lofty, that when the sky is clear, the summit can be distinctly seen upon the sun as a background, in the way shown in the picture. This must be a very pretty sight, and it teaches us an important lesson. The sun is further away than the mountain, and yet you see the sun on both sides of the mountain, and above it. Here, then, we learn without any calculations, that the sun must be bigger than the upper part of a great mountain in the Pyrenees.

When we calculate the size of the sun from the measurements made by astronomers, we discover that it is much bigger than Mount Carigou; we see that even the entire range of the Pyrenees, the whole of Europe, and even our whole globe, are insignificant by comparison.

[Figure 11: How we compare the Earth and the Sun]

There is a football on the table, shown in Fig. 11. We shall suppose it to represent the sun; we shall now choose something else to represent the earth. We must, however, exhibit the proportions accurately. A tennis ball will not do; it is far too large. The fact is, the width of the earth is less than the one-hundredth part of the width of the sun. The tennis ball is, however, only a quarter the width of the football, so we must choose something a good deal smaller. I try with a marble, even with the smallest marble I can find, but when I measure it, I find that one hundred such marbles, placed side by side, would be far longer than the width of the football; I must therefore look for something still smaller. A grain of small-sized shot will give the right size for the model of our earth. About one hundred of these grains placed side by side will extend to a length equal to the width of the football. Now you will be able to form some conception of how enormous the sun really is. Think of this earth, how big we find it when we begin to travel. What a tremendous voyage we have to take to get to New Zealand, and even then we have only got halfway round the globe. Then think that the sun is in the same proportion bigger than the earth as that football is bigger than that grain of shot. If a million of such grains of shot were melted and cast into one globe, it would not be so large as that football. If a million globes, as large as our earth, could be united together, no doubt a vast globe would be produced, but it would not be so large as the sun. Think of a single house, with three or four people living in it, and then think of this mighty London, with its millions of inhabitants. The house will represent our earth, while great London represents the sun!

THE SPOTS ON THE SUN.

I have shown you that the sun is intensely hot, and a very long way off, and enormously big. And now we have to describe the appearance of the surface of the sun when we examine it closely.

[Figure 12: Looking at the Sun]

If you get a piece of very dark glass, or if you smoke a piece of glass over a candle, then you can look directly at the sun with comfort. A nicer plan is to prick a pinhole in a card, through which you can look at the sun without any inconvenience. Generally speaking, a view of the sun in this way will show you only a uniformly bright surface. To study the face of our great luminary carefully, you must use the aid which the telescope gives to the astronomer. A very good way of doing this is shown in Fig. 12. A small telescope, fixed on a stand, is pointed to the sun, and, the eyepiece being drawn out somewhat further than when direct observations are being made, the sun draws its own picture on a screen. This may be examined without any inconvenience, or without the necessity for any protection to the eye, and a number of young astronomers can all view the sun at the same moment. On such a picture you will generally see the brilliant surface marked with dark spots, which are sometimes as numerous as in the case represented in Fig. 13. These spots present very different appearances according to circumstances. One such spot when seen with a very powerful telescope showed the wonderful structure which is represented in Fig. 14.
