[Figure 21: How we illustrate the Changes between Day and Night]

A little reflection will show that a very much simpler explanation was available. It was shown that the sun need not revolve round the earth once every day, but that everything would be explained if the earth itself turned round in such a way as to produce the changes from day to night. We may illustrate the case by this figure (Fig. 21). The small globe is the earth, which I can turn by the handle. The lamp will represent the sun, and, as at present shown, the side of the earth, on which England lies, is towards the lamp and in full day. On the opposite side of the globe are other countries such as New Zealand, and there it is dark. You see that by simply turning the handle I can move England gradually round so that it passes into the dark side, and then night falls over the country. At the same time New Zealand is turned round to enjoy the smiles of day. This is a very simple method of accounting for the succession of day and night, and it is also the true method. We have already seen that the sun turns round, and now we find that the earth also turns, but the little body, the earth, goes much the faster, for it makes twenty-five turns while the sun goes round once.

Our earth is at this moment spinning round at a speed so great that London moves many hundreds of miles every hour. A town near the equator would gallop round at a pace of more than a thousand miles an hour--quicker, in fact, than a rifle-bullet. Don’t you think that we ought to perceive that we are being whirled about in this terrific fashion? We know that when we are flying along in a railway train, we feel the jolting and we hear the noise, and we feel the blast of air if we put our heads out of window, and we see the trees as they appear to rush past. All these things tell us that we are in rapid motion. But suppose these sensations were absent. Imagine a line so perfectly laid that no jolts are perceptible, and that no racket is heard; draw down the blinds so that nothing can be seen, how then are we to know that we are moving? Indeed, your grandfathers used to be able to enjoy such a tranquil locomotion. I remember seeing in my childhood the fly-boats, as they were called, on the Royal Canal, wherein passengers were conveyed from Dublin to the West of Ireland, before the railway was made. The fly-boat was a sort of Noah’s ark in appearance, drawn by a horse cantering along the towing-path. In the cabin of such a vessel, where there was not the slightest motion of rolling or pitching--nothing but noiseless gliding along the canal--no one would be conscious of motion, so long as he did not look through the cabin windows. No one was ever seasick in a fly-boat; it was the perfection of travelling for those who loved ease and quiet.

The motion of the earth round its axis is, so far, like that of the fly-boat. It is so absolutely smooth that we do not feel anything, and we only become conscious of it by looking at outside objects. These are the sun, or the moon, or the stars. We see these bodies apparently going through their unvarying rising and setting, just as, in looking out from the fly-boat, the passengers in that quaint old conveyance could see the houses and trees as they passed.

Seeing is believing; and I should like here, in this very theatre, to show you that we are actually turning round; and this I am enabled to do by the kindness of my distinguished friend, Professor Dewar.

[Figure 22: A Pendulum]

I am tempted to wish that I had Aladdin’s lamp for the moment, for I would rub it, and when the great genie appeared, I would bid him take the Royal Institution, and all of us here, to a place which everybody has heard of, and nobody has seen--I mean the North Pole. It would be so easy to describe the experiment I am about to show you, there. It is not so easy here. But it will be sufficiently accurate for our purpose to suppose that we actually have made the voyage, and that this is the Pole at the centre of the lecture-table. The direction of the axis round which the earth is turning is a line pointing up straight to the ceiling. This lecture-table and all the rest of the theatre is going round. In about six hours it will have moved a quarter of the way, and in twenty-four hours it will have gone completely round. That is, at least, what would happen if we were actually at the Pole. As we are not there, for the Pole is many miles away from the Royal Institution, I must slightly modify this statement, and say that the table here takes more than twenty-four hours to go round. And now I want some way of proving that such is actually the case. There is no use in our merely looking at it, because we ourselves, and this whole building, and the whole of London, are all turning together. What we want is something which does not partake of the motion. Here is a heavy leaden ball (Fig. 22). It is fastened to the roof by a fine steel wire, and you see it swings to and fro with a deliberate and graceful motion. I want it to oscillate very steadily, so I draw it to one side and tie it by a piece of thread to a support, and then I burn the thread, and the great ball begins to swing to and fro. It would continue to do so for an hour, or indeed for several hours, and it is a peculiarity of this motion that the vibration always remains in the same direction in space. Even the rotation of the earth will not affect the plane of this great pendulum, so far at least as our experiment is concerned. Here, then, we have a method of testing my assertion about the turning round of this theatre. I mark a line on the table, directly underneath the motion of the ball to and fro. If we could wait for an hour or so, we should see that the motion of the ball seemed to have altered to a direction inclined to its original position, but it is really the table that has moved, for the direction of the motion of the ball is unaltered. We cannot, however, wait so long, therefore I show you the ingenious method which Professor Dewar has devised. By a beam from the electric light, he has succeeded in so magnifying the effect that even in a single minute it is quite obvious that the whole of this room is distinctly turning round, with respect to the oscillations of the pendulum. This celebrated experiment proves by actual inspection that the earth must be rotating. By measuring the motion we might even calculate the length of the day, though I do not say it would be an accurate method of doing so.

The proper way of finding how long the earth takes to turn round is by observing the stars. Fix on any star you please, and note it in a certain position to-night; if you then observe the moment when the star is in the same place to-morrow, the interval of time that has elapsed is the true duration of one complete rotation. When accurately measured its length is found to be 23 hours 56 minutes 4 seconds, or about four minutes shorter than the ordinary day, measured from one noon to the next.

ANNUAL MOTION OF THE EARTH ROUND THE SUN.

[Figure 23: The Changes of the Sun with the Seasons]

I have as yet only been speaking of the daily movements by which the sun appears to go across the heavens between morning and evening. We next consider the annual movements which give rise to the changes of the seasons. It is now Christmastide, when the days are short and dark, while six months ago the days were long and glorious in the warmth and brightness of summer. A similar recurrence of the seasons takes place every year, and thus we learn that some great changes alter the relation between the earth and the sun year after year. We must try and explain this. Why is it that we enjoy warmth at one season, and suffer from frost and snow at another?

Note first a great difference between the sun in summer and the sun in winter. I will ask you to look out at noon any day when the clouds are absent, and you will then find the sun at the highest point it reaches during the day. All the morning the sun has been gradually climbing from the east; all the afternoon it will be gradually sinking down to the west. Let us make the same observation at different parts of the year. Suppose we take the shortest day in December. You will look out about twelve o’clock from some situation which affords a view towards the south, and there, as shown in the adjoining sketch (Fig. 23), is the midwinter sun.

But now the spring approaches, and the days begin to lengthen. If you watch the sun you will see it pass higher and higher every noon until Midsummer Day is reached, and then the sun at noon is found quite high up in the sky. As autumn draws near, the sun at noon creeps downwards again until, when the next shortest day has come round, we find that it passes just where it did at the previous midwinter. With unceasing regularity year after year the sun goes through these changes. When he is high at noon we have days both long and warm; when he is low at noon we have days both short and cold.

Vulcan with his golden boat was naturally expected to give an explanation of this. As the summer drew on, each day Vulcan shot out the sun with a stronger impulse, so that it should ascend higher and higher. His greatest effort was made on Midsummer Day, when, after rowing but a little way round from the north towards the east, he drove off the sun with a terrific effort. The sun soared aloft to the utmost height it could reach, and in the meantime Vulcan returned to the west to be ready to catch the sun as it descended. On the other hand, in midwinter, he came round much further through the east to the south, and then shot up the sun with his feeblest effort, and had to paddle as hard as ever he could so as to complete his long return voyage during the brief day.

[Figure 24: How the Stars are to be seen in broad Daylight]

It is evident that there are two quite distinct kinds of motion of the sun. There is first the daily rising and setting, for which we have accounted by showing that it is merely an appearance produced by the fact that the earth is turning round. But now we have been considering quite a different motion by which the sun seems to creep up and down in the heavens, and this takes a whole year to go through its changes.

There is still another point which we must consider before we can understand all these puzzling movements of the sun. We shall ask the stars to help us by their familiar constellations. You know, perhaps, the Great Bear, or the Plough as it is often called, and Orion. There are also Aries the Ram, Taurus the Bull, and other fancifully named systems. These constellations have been known for countless ages, and for our present purposes we may think of them as permanent groups in the heavens, which do not alter either their own shapes or their positions relatively to each other. These groups of stars extend all around the sky. They are not only over our heads and on all sides down to the horizon, but if we could dig a deep hole through the earth, coming out somewhere near New Zealand, and if we then looked through, we should see that there was another vault of stars beneath us. We stand on our comparatively little earth in what seems the centre of this great universe of stars all around. It is true we do not often see the stars in broad daylight, but they are there nevertheless. The blaze of sunlight makes them invisible. A good telescope will always show the stars, and even without a telescope they can sometimes be seen in daylight in rather an odd way. If you can obtain a glimpse of the blue sky on a fine day from the bottom of a coal pit, stars are often visible. The top of the shaft is, however, generally obstructed by the machinery for hoisting up the coal, but the stars may be seen occasionally through the tall chimney attached to a manufactory when an opportune disuse of the chimney permits of the observation being made (Fig. 24). The fact is that the long tube has the effect of completely screening from the eye the direct light of the sun. The eye thus becomes more sensitive, and the feeble light from the stars can make its impression, and produce vision. From all these various lines of reasoning we see that there can be no doubt of the continuous presence of stars above and around us, and below us, on every side, and at all times.

[Figure 25: The Sun seems to revolve around the Earth]

If you look out at Christmas time, towards the south, you will see the Belt of Orion and the Dog Star in a splendid portion of the heavens. These stars you will see every winter in the same place. But you may look in vain for them in summer. No doubt you can see stars in the summer evenings, but they will be totally different from those that adorned the skies in winter. Each season has its own constellations. This simple fact was known to the ancients, and we shall find its explanation full of meaning. Let us select four well-known constellations which will best answer our purpose. They lie in a circle round the heavens. They are Orion, Virgo, Scorpio, and Pisces. I am supposing that you are looking out at midnight towards the south. In December you will see Orion; in March, Virgo; in June, Scorpio; and in September, Pisces; and then next December you will be looking at Orion again. See what this proves. At midnight, of course, the sun is at the other side of the earth, so that if I am looking at Orion in midwinter the sun must be behind my back. Look at our little picture (Fig. 25). The earth is in the middle, and the sun must be on the opposite side to Orion. That is, the sun must be somewhere about the position I have marked at A. In March we see Virgo in the south at midnight, when, of course, the sun is at the other side of the earth; so that the sun must be somewhere at B. In June Scorpio is seen, so that the sun must be at the other side, at C. That is to say, in midsummer the sun is in that part of the sky where Orion is situated. If, therefore, on a bright June day we could see the stars, we should find Orion in the south. But, of course, the light of the sun makes Orion invisible. We can, however, see the stars by our telescopes, and on rare occasions an eclipse of the sun will occur, by which he is temporarily extinguished, and then we can see the stars without the help of a telescope, even though it is daytime.
