[Figure 26: The Earth, however, really revolves around the Sun]

Thus it would seem as if the sun were first at A and then at B, C, and D, and then began to go round again. I say it would seem as if the sun had these movements, and the ancients thought there was no doubt about the matter. Even after it was plain that the earth turned round on its axis so as to give the changes of day and night, it was still thought necessary to suppose that the sun went round the earth once in the year, in order to explain how the changes in the stars during the different seasons were produced.

Here is another case in which we must be careful to distinguish between what appears to be true and what is actually the case. Everything that we undoubtedly see would be just as well explained by supposing that the sun remained at rest, and that the earth revolved around it, as in Fig. 26. If, for instance, the earth were at A in midwinter, then the sun is on the opposite side to Orion, and of course at midnight we shall be able to see Orion. So in spring the earth is at B, and we see Virgo, and similarly in summer we have Scorpio, and in autumn Pisces. Thus all that is actually visible could be fully accounted for by regarding the sun as fixed in the centre, and the earth as travelling round it from A to B, to C and to D respectively, and completing the journey in a twelvemonth. Which idea are we to adopt? Shall we say that the earth goes round the sun, or the sun goes round the earth?

I remember an old college story, which I cannot help giving you at this place. It may serve to lighten what I fear you must otherwise have thought rather a tedious part of our subject. There were three students brought up for examination in astronomy, and they showed a lamentable ignorance of the subject, but the examiner, being a kind-hearted man, wished, if possible, to pass them; and so he proposed to the three youths the very simplest question that he could think of. Accordingly, addressing the first student, he said: “Now tell me, does the earth go round the sun, or the sun go round the earth?” “It is--the earth--goes round the sun.” “What do you say?” he inquired, turning rather suddenly on the next, who gasped out: “Oh, sir--of course--it is the sun goes round the earth.” “What do you say?” he shouted at the third unhappy victim. “Oh, sir, it is--sometimes one way, sir, and sometimes the other!”

But which is it? Well, we must remember that the earth is comparatively a very little body and the sun a very big one, so it is not at all surprising to learn that the earth goes round the sun, which remains, practically speaking, at rest in the centre. Thus our great earth and all it contains are continually bound in what is very nearly a circular course round the great luminary. You will find it instructive to work out this little sum. How fast is the earth moving, or how far do we go in a second? We are about 93,000,000 miles from the sun, and the great circle that we go round has a diameter twice as great as this--that is, about 186,000,000 miles. The circumference of a circle is nearly three and one-seventh times its diameter, and accordingly the whole length of the voyage in the year is about 585,000,000 miles. This has to be accomplished in 365 days, so that the daily run must be about 1,600,000 miles. We divide this by 24, to find the distance journeyed each hour, which we find to be about 67,000 miles; and we must divide this again by 60 to find the length covered in a minute, and by 60 again for the progress made each second. It is truly startling to find that, night and day, this great earth has to travel more than eighteen miles every second in order to get round its mighty path in the allotted time.

I began this lecture about forty minutes ago, and I think from what I have said you will be able to calculate a result that will, I dare say, astonish you. In these forty minutes we have moved about 45,000 miles. No doubt my lecture commenced in this hall, and in your presence; but can I truly say I began it here? Well, no; I began it not here, but at a place 45,000 miles away; but we have all been travelling together, and the journey has been so very smooth and free from all jolts, that we never thought anything about the motion.

I am sure many of those to whom I am now speaking have read accounts of voyages in the Arctic regions. You have been told of the sufferings of the crews during the long winters, amid the ice and snow; and you have heard how, during that dismal period, there is total darkness, for the sun never rises for weeks and months together. On the other hand, these northern regions often present a more cheerful picture. During midsummer, the long darkness of winter is atoned for by perpetual sunshine. At midnight there is still the full brilliance of day, and the sun, though low, no doubt, has not passed below the horizon. Even in the northerly parts of Europe we can see the midnight sun. Lord Dufferin, in his delightful narrative of a cruise, entitled “Letters from High Latitudes,” gives an interesting illustration of the perplexities arising from endless daylight. It appears that everything went on happily until the fatal moment when the yacht crossed the Arctic circle. Then it was that dire tribulation arose among the poultry. A fine cock was the cause of the trouble. Knowing his duty, he always liked to be particular about performing the important task of crowing at sunrise. This he could do regularly, so long as the yacht remained in reasonable latitudes, where the sun behaved properly. But when they crossed the Arctic circle, the cock was confronted with a wholly new experience. The sun never set in the evening, and consequently never had to rise in the morning. What was the distracted bird to do? He did everything. He burst into occasional fits of terrific crowing at all sorts of hours, then he gave up crowing altogether, but finding that did not mend matters, he took to crowing incessantly. Exhaustion was succeeded by delirium, and rather than live any longer in a universe where the sun was capable of pranks so heartless, the indignant fowl flung himself from the vessel and perished in the Arctic Ocean.

THE CHANGES OF THE SEASONS.

[Figure 27: The Changes of the Seasons]

In the adjoining figure, I show a little sketch (Fig. 27), by which I try to explain the changes of the seasons. It exhibits four positions of the earth, one on each side of the sun. The left. A, represents the earth when summer gladdens the northern hemisphere; while the right, C, shows winter in the same region. You will see the two central lines which represent the axis about which the earth rotates. Of course, the earth has no visible axis. The line which runs through the globe from the North to the South Pole is imaginary. It remains fixed in the earth, for we can prove in our observatories that the Pole does not shift its position to any considerable extent in the earth itself. In fact, if we could reach the North Pole and drive a peg into the ground year after year to mark the exact spot, we should find that the position of the Pole was sensibly the same. Does it not seem strange that we should be able to know so much about the Pole, though we have never been able to get there; have never, in fact, been able to get within less than 400 miles of it? I think you will be able to understand the point quite easily. The latitude of a place, as you know from your geography, is the number of degrees, and parts of a degree, between that place and the equator. In our observatories, we can determine this so accurately that the difference between the latitude of one side of a room and of the other side of the same room is quite perceptible. As we find that the latitudes of our observatories remain sensibly unchanged from year to year, we are certain that the Pole must remain in the same place. Indeed, if the Pole were to alter its position by the distance of a stone’s throw, the careful watchers in many observatories would speedily detect the occurrence.

And now I must direct your attention to something apparently quite different. When the battle of Waterloo was fought, the great victory was won with the aid of the old-fashioned musket, a smooth-bore gun which was loaded at the muzzle with a good charge of powder, and then a round bullet was rammed down. “Brown Bess,” as the musket was called, was a most efficient weapon at close quarters, and indeed at any distance when the bullet hit; but there was the difficulty. The round bullets, rushing up the tube and out into the air in a somewhat vague manner, had a habit of roaming about, which was quite incompatible with the accurate shooting of our modern rifles.

One great improvement in small arms consisted in giving to the bullet a rapid rotation about an axis which is in the line of fire. This is what the rifle accomplishes. The grooves in the barrel of the rifle twist round, and though they only give half a complete turn in the length of the barrel, yet the speed of the bullet is so great that when it flies off it is actually spinning with the tremendous velocity of about one hundred and fifty revolutions a second. Even with the old-fashioned round bullet, the rifling of the barrel effected great improvement in the accuracy of the shooting. The introduction of the elongated bullets was another great improvement, while the adaptation of breech-loading enabled a bullet to be used rather larger than that which could have been forced down the barrel, and thus it was insured that the grooves should bite into the bullet as it hurries past and impart the necessary spin.

A body rapidly rotating about an axis has a tendency to preserve the direction of that axis, and powerfully resists any attempt to change it. Our earth is spinning in this fashion. It is true that the rotation is, in one sense, a slow one, for it requires almost an entire day for each rotation. But when we remember the dimensions of our earth, we shall modify this notion. We have already stated that any place on the equator has to travel more than one thousand miles each hour in order to accomplish the journey within the required time. So far, therefore, the earth moves like a rifle-bullet, and the direction of its axis remains constant.

In the course of the great voyage between summer and winter, the earth travels from one side of the sun to the opposite side, and in doing so it still continues to spin about an axis parallel to the original direction. See the consequences which follow. The sun illuminates half the earth, and in the left position in Fig. 27, representing summer, the North Pole is turned over towards the sun, and lies in the bright half of the earth. There is continual day at the North Pole, and night is unknown there at this time of year, because the turning of the earth about its axis will not bring the Pole nor the regions near the Pole into the dark hemisphere. Thus it is that the Arctic regions enjoy perpetual day at this season. Look now at the position of England when the northern hemisphere is tilted towards the sun, and is consequently enjoying the full splendor of midsummer. As the earth turns round, England will gradually cross the boundary between light and shade, and will enter upon the darkened hemisphere. Then there will be night in England, but you will see from the figure that the day is much longer than the night, and hence it is that we enjoy the fine long days in summer.

We next look at a different scene six months later. The earth has reached the other side of the sun, but the axis has remained parallel to itself, consequently the North Pole is now inclined entirely away from the sun. The earth continues to turn round as before, but its movements do not bring the North Pole or the surrounding Arctic regions out of the dark hemisphere, and consequently the night must be unbroken in these dismal circumstances. The long continuous day which forms the Polar midsummer is dearly purchased by the gloom and cold of a winter in which there is no sun for many weeks in succession. Observe also the changed circumstances of England. In the course of each twenty-four hours it lies much longer in the dark half of the earth than in the bright, and consequently there is only a short day succeeded by a long night.

SUNSHINE AT THE NORTH POLE.

It is a privilege of astronomers to be able to predict events that will happen in thousands of years to come, and to describe things accurately though they never saw them, and though nobody else has ever seen them either. No one has ever yet got to the North Pole, but whenever they do, we are able to tell them much of what they will see there. We may leave it to Jules Verne to describe how the journey is to be made, and how the party are to be kept alive at the North Pole. I shall give a picture of the changes of the seasons, and of the appearance in the stars, as seen from thence.

We shall, therefore, prepare to make observations from that very particular spot on this earth--the North Pole. I suppose that eternal ice and snow abide there. I don’t think it would be a pleasant residence. However, we shall arrange to arrive on Midsummer Day, prepared to make a year’s sojourn. The first question to be settled is the erection of the hut. In a cold country it is important to give the right aspect, and we are in the habit of saying that a southerly aspect is the best and warmest, while the north and the east are suggestive only of chills and discomfort. But what is a southerly aspect at the North Pole, or, rather, what is not a southerly aspect? Whatever way we look from the North Pole we are facing due south. There is no such thing as east or west; every way is the southward way. This is truly an odd part of the earth. The only other locality at all resembling it would be the South Pole, from which all directions would be north.

The sun would be moving all through the day in a fashion utterly unlike its behavior in our latitudes. There would, of course, be no such thing as rising and setting. The sun would, indeed, at first seem neither to go any nearer to the horizon nor to rise any higher above it, but would simply go round and round the sky. Then it would gradually get lower and lower, moving round day after day in a sort of spiral, until at last it would get down so low that it would just graze the horizon, right round which it would circulate till half the sun was below, and then until the whole disk had disappeared. Even though the sun had now vanished, a twilight glow would for some time be continuous. It would seem to come from a source moving round and round below the horizon, then gradually the light would become fainter and fainter until at last the winter of utter and continuous blackness had set in. The first indications of the return of spring would be detected by a feeble glow near the horizon, which would seem to move round and round day after day. Then this glow would pass into a continuous dawn, gradually increasing until the sun’s edge crept into visibility, and the great globe would at last begin to climb the heavens by its continual spiral until midsummer was reached, when the change would go on again as before.

Our first excursion to the country of Star-land has now been taken, and we have naturally commenced by studying that sun to which we owe so much. But we shall have to learn that though our sun is of such vital importance to us, yet, in magnificence and size, he has many rivals among the host of stars.
