The first day of the week is related to the greatest body in the heavens--the sun--and accordingly we call that day Sun-day. The second day of the week is similarly called after the next most important celestial body--the moon--and though we do not actually say Moon-day, we do say Monday, which is very nearly the same. In French, too, we have lune for moon, and Lundi signifies our Monday. The other days of the week also have names derived from the heavens, but of these we shall speak hereafter. We are now going to talk about the moon.

We can divide the objects in this room into two classes. There are the bright faces in front of me, and there are the bright electric lights above. The electric lights give light, and the faces receive it. I can see both lights and faces; but I see the electric lamps by the light which they themselves give. I see the faces by the illumination which they have received from the electric lights. This is a very simple distinction, but it is a very important one in Star-land. Among all these bodies which glitter in the heavens there are some which shine by their own light, like the lamps. There are others only brilliant by reflected light, like the faces. It seems impossible for us to confuse the brightness of a pleasant face with the beam from a pretty lamp, but it is often not very easy to distinguish in the heavens between a body which shines by its own light and a body which merely shines by some other light reflected from it. I think many people would make great mistakes if asked to point out which objects on the sky were really self-luminous and which objects were merely lighted up by other bodies. Astronomers themselves have been sometimes deceived in this way.

The easiest example we can give of bodies so contrasted is found in the case of the sun and the moon. Of course, as we have already seen, the sun is the splendid source of light which it scatters all around. Some of that light falls on our earth to give us the glories of the day; some of the sunbeams fall on the moon, and though the moon has itself no more light than earth or stones, yet when exposed to a torrent of sunbeams, she enjoys a day as we do. One side of her is brilliantly lighted; and this it is which renders our satellite visible.

Hence we explain the marked contrast between the sun and the moon. The whole of the sun is always bright; while half of the moon is always in darkness. When the bright side of the moon is turned directly towards us, then, no doubt, we see a complete circle, and we say the moon is full. On other occasions a portion only of the bright surface is directed to us, and thus are produced the beautiful crescents and semicircles and other phases of the moon.

[Figure 28: To show that the Moon is lighted by Sunbeams]

A simple apparatus (illustrated in Fig. 28) will explain their various appearances. The large india-rubber ball there shown represents the moon, which I shall illuminate by a beam from the electric light. The side of the ball turned towards the light is glowing brilliantly, and from the right side of the room you see nearly the whole of the bright side. To you the moon is nearly full. From the centre of the room you see the moon like a semicircle, and from the left it appears a thin crescent of light. I alter the position of the ball with respect to the lamp, and now you see the phases are quite changed. To those on my left our mimic moon is now full; to those on my right the moon is almost new, or is visible with only a slender crescent. From the centre of the room the quarter is visible as before. We can also show the same series of changes by a little contrivance of Figs. 29 and 30.

Thus every phase of the moon (Fig. 31), from the thinnest beautiful crescent of light that you can just see low in the west after sunset up to the splendor of the full moon, can be completely accounted for by the different aspects of a globe, of which one-half is brilliantly illuminated.

[Figure 29-30: The Phases of the Moon]

We can now explain a beautiful phenomenon that you will see when the moon is still quite young. We fancifully describe the old moon as lying in the new moon’s arms when we observe the faintly illuminated portion of the rest of that circle, of which a part is the brilliant crescent. This can only be explained by showing how some light has fallen on the shadowed side; for nothing which is not itself a source of light can ever become visible unless illuminated by light from some other body.

[Figure 31: The Changes in the Moon]

Let us suppose that there is a man on the moon who is looking at the earth. To him the earth will appear in the same way as the moon appears to us, only very much larger. At the time of new moon the bright side of the earth will be turned directly towards him, so that the man in the moon will see an earth nearly full, and consequently pouring forth a large flood of light. Think of the brightest of all the bright moonlight nights you have ever seen on earth, and then think of a light which would be produced if you had thirteen moons, all as big and as bright as our full moon, shining together. How splendid the night would then be! You would be able to read a book quite easily! Well, that is the sort of illumination which the lunar man will enjoy under these circumstances; all the features of his country will be brightly lighted up by the full earth. Of course, this earth-lighted side of the moon cannot be compared in brilliancy with the sun-lighted side, but the brightness will still be perceptible, so that when from the earth we look at the moon, we see this glow distributed all over the dark portion; that is, we observe the feebly lighted globe clasped in the brilliant arms of the crescent. At a later phase the dark part of the moon entirely ceases to be visible, and this for a double reason: firstly, the bright side of the earth is then not so fully turned to the moon, and therefore the illumination it receives from earth-shine is not so great; and, secondly, the increasing size of the sun-lighted part of the moon has such an augmented glow that the fainter light is overpowered by contrast. You must remember that more light does not always increase the number of things that can be seen. It has sometimes the opposite effect. Have we not already mentioned how the brightness of day makes the stars invisible? The moon herself, seen in full daylight, seems no brighter than a small particle of white cloud.

THE SIZE OF THE MOON.

It is not easy to answer the question which I am sometimes asked, “Is the moon very big?” I would meet that question by another, “Is a cat a big animal?” The fact is, there is no such thing as absolute bigness or smallness. The cat is no doubt a small animal when compared with the tiger, but I think a mouse would probably tell you that the cat was quite a big animal--rather too big, indeed, in the mouse’s opinion. And the tiger himself is small compared with an elephant, while the mouse is large as compared with a fly.

When we talk of the bigness or the smallness of a body, we must always consider what we are going to compare it with. It is natural in speaking of the moon to compare it with our own globe, and then we can say that the moon is a small body.

The relative sizes of the earth and the moon may be illustrated by objects of very much smaller dimensions. Both a tennis ball and a football are no doubt familiar objects to everybody. If the earth be represented by the football, then the moon would be about as large as the lawn-tennis ball. But this proportion is not quite accurate, so I will suggest to you an instructive way of making a better pair of models of the earth and the moon. In fact, experiments somewhat similar to those I describe have been actually going on in every kitchen in the land during this festive season. For have not globes and balls of all sorts and sizes been made of plum-pudding, and it will only require a little care on the part of the cook to make a pair of luscious spheres that shall fairly set forth the sizes of the earth and the moon. There is first to be a nice little round plum-pudding, three inches in diameter. It is just a little bigger than a cricket ball. It should, however, only make its appearance at a bachelor’s table. Were it set down before a hearty circle on Christmas Day, dire disappointment would result. One boy of sound constitution could eat it all. Perhaps it would weigh about three-quarters of a pound. This little globe is to represent the moon.

[Figure 32: Relative Sizes of the Earth and Moon]

Another plum-pudding is to be constructed which shall represent the earth (Fig. 32). We must, however, beg the cook to observe the proportions. The width of the earth, or the diameter, to use the proper word, is about four times the diameter of the moon. Hence, as the small plum-pudding was three inches across, the large one must have a diameter of twelve inches. This will be a family pudding of truly satisfactory dimensions; perhaps the cook will be a little surprised to find the alarming quantity of materials that will be required to complete a sphere of plum-pudding a foot in diameter.

These models having been duly made, and boiled, and placed on the table, we are now to propose the following problem:--

“If one schoolboy could eat the small plum-pudding, how many boys would be required to dispose of the large one?”

The hasty person, who does not reflect, will at once dash out the answer, “Four!” He will say, “It is quite plain that, since one of the puddings has four times the diameter of the other, it must be four times as big; and therefore, as one boy is able to eat the small pudding, four boys will be adequate for the large one.” But the hasty person will, as usual, be quite wrong. His argument would be sound if it were merely two pieces of sugar-stick that he was comparing; no doubt there is only four times as much material in a piece twelve inches long as there is in a piece three inches long. But the plum-puddings have breadth and depth, which are in the same proportions as the length, and the consequence is that the large plum-pudding is far more than four times as big as the small one. No four boys, however admirable their capacities, would be equal to the task of consuming it. Nor even if four more boys were called in to help would the dish be cleared. Twenty boys, forty boys, fifty boys would not be enough. It would take sixty-four boys to demolish the magnificent plum-pudding one foot in diameter.

If the cook will try the experiment, she will find that by taking the materials sufficient for sixty-four small plum-puddings all of the same size, and mixing them together, she will, no doubt, make a large plum-pudding, but its diameter will only be four times that of the small puddings.

As a matter of fact, the moon is 2160 miles in diameter, and the earth is 7918 miles. These numbers are so nearly 2000 and 8000 respectively, that for simplicity I have spoken of the earth as having a diameter four times as great as the moon. If we want to be very accurate, we ought to determine the ratio of the two quantities from the figures just given. Our illustration of the plum-puddings must, therefore, be a little modified. The earth is not quite so much as sixty-four times as big as the moon; but this figure is sufficiently accurate for our present purpose.

Another interesting question may be proposed, namely: How much land is there on the moon? We might state the answer in acres or in square miles; but it will, perhaps, be more instructive to make a comparison between the moon and the earth.

Here also I shall use an illustration; and we shall again consider two globes which are respectively three inches and twelve inches in diameter. The globes I use this time are hollow balls of india-rubber. These will represent the earth and the moon with sufficient accuracy, and the relative surfaces of these two globes is what I want to find. There are different ways in which the comparison might be made. I might, for instance, paint the two globes and see the quantity of paint that each requires. If I did this, I should find that the great globe took just sixteen times as much paint as the small one. We can adopt a simpler plan. The india-rubber in one of these balls has the same thickness as in the other, as they are each hollow, so that the quantity which is required for each ball may be taken to represent its surface. By simply weighing the two balls, I perceive that the large one is sixteen times as heavy as the small one. You notice here the difference between the comparative weights of two hollow balls and two solid ones of the same material. Had these globes been of solid india-rubber, the large one would have weighed sixty-four times as much as the small one, just as in the case of the plum-puddings; but being hollow, the ratio of their weights is only the square of the ratio of their diameters--that is to say, four times four, or sixteen.

We are thus taught that if the moon were exactly one-fourth of the diameter of the earth, its surface would be one-sixteenth part of that of the earth. It would, no doubt, have made our subject a little easier and simpler if the moon had been created somewhat smaller than it is. As, however, the universe has not been solely constructed for the purpose of these talks about Star-land, we must take things as we find them. This proportion is not four; it is more nearly 3⅔, and the relative surfaces of the two bodies is the square of 11/3, or about 13½. In other words, the entire extent of the surface of our globe is about thirteen and a half times that of the moon.

The face of the full moon, being half the entire extent of the surface, is, therefore, about one-twenty-seventh part of the earth’s surface--continents, oceans, seas, and islands all taken together. The British Empire and the Russian Empire are each of them as large as the face of the full moon.

HOW ECLIPSES ARE PRODUCED.

The moon is the attendant, or the satellite of the earth, ministering to the wants of the earth by mitigating the darkness of our nights. The earth goes around the sun in its annual journey of 365 days. The moon revolves around the earth once every twenty-seven days. The motion of the moon is thus a very complicated one, for it is, in fact, moving round a body which is itself in constant motion (Fig. 33).

You will see by your almanacs every year that certain eclipses are to take place; and after what we have said about the sun and the moon, it will be easy to understand how eclipses arise. There are two different kinds. You will sometimes see an eclipse of the moon, and sometimes those eclipses of the sun of which we have spoken in the last Lecture. You may be surprised to find with what accuracy the eclipses can be predicted. We can tell not only those that will occur this year and next year, but we could also foretell the eclipses that will appear in a hundred or a thousand years to come; or we can, with equal ease, calculate backwards, so as to find the circumstances of eclipses that happened thousands of years ago. This shows how well we have learned the way the moon moves.
