[Figure 33: To show how the Earth goes round the Sun and the Moon round the Earth]

[Figure 34: A Total Eclipse to the Girl and a Partial Eclipse to the Boy]

[Figure 35: Partial. Annular. Different Kinds of Solar Eclipse]

An eclipse of the sun is the simpler occurrence, so we shall describe it first. It happens when the moon comes between the earth and the sun. Look at our little astronomers shown in Fig. 34. A boy and a girl are both gazing at the sun, when the moon comes between. To the boy the moon appears to take a great bite out of the sun, so that it looks like the left-hand picture in Fig. 35. (I have drawn a line from the end of the telescope in Fig. 34, which shows how much of the sun is cut off.) This would be called a partial eclipse of the sun. The almanac will sometimes describe the eclipses as visible in London, or visible at Greenwich; but that need not be taken so literally as was supposed by a Kensington gentleman, who, on noticing that the almanac said an eclipse was to be visible in London, called a cab and drove into the city to look for it. His almanac had not mentioned that it would be visible from his own house. You may usually take for granted that when an eclipse is said to be visible from London or Greenwich, it will be more or less visible all over England. Most of these eclipses are only partial, and though they are interesting to watch they do not teach us much. By far the most wonderful kind of eclipse is that in which the whole of the bright part of the sun is blotted out. Then, indeed, we do see wonders. But such eclipses are rare, and even when they do occur they only last a very few minutes. The sights that are displayed are so interesting that astronomers often travel thousands of miles to reach a suitable locality for making observations.

The girl in Fig. 34 is placed in the best possible position for seeing the eclipse. There you find her right in the line of the sun and moon; and I think you will agree that she cannot see any part of the sun, for the moon is altogether in the way. I have drawn two dotted lines, one at each side. All that she can see beyond the moon must lie outside these dotted lines, and she will be in the dark as long as the moon stays in the way. When the eclipse is complete, comparative darkness steals over the land. The birds are deceived, and fly home to the trees to roost. The owls and the bats, thinking their time has arrived, venture forth on their nocturnal business. Even flowers close their petals, only to open a few minutes later when the sun again bursts forth. Other flowers that give forth their fragrance at night are also sweetly perceptible so long as the sun remains obscured. An unruly cow, accustomed to break into a meadow at night, was found there after an eclipse was over; while I learn from the same authority that a man rushed over in great excitement to see what his chickens were doing, but came back much disappointed on finding them pecking away as if nothing had happened.

It will sometimes happen that the moon is so placed that the edge of the sun can be seen all round it. A case of the kind is shown in the right-hand picture of Fig. 35. It is called an annular, or ring-shaped eclipse.

The eclipses of which we have been speaking are, of course, only to be seen during the day when the sun must be up. The lunar eclipses, which are visible at night, are due to the interposition of the earth between the sun and the moon. The sun is at night-time under our feet at the other side of the earth, and the earth throws a long shadow upwards. If the moon enter into this shadow, it is plain that the sunlight is partly or wholly cut off, and since the moon shines by no light of her own, but only by light borrowed from the sun, it follows that when she is buried in the shadow all the direct light is intercepted, and she must lose her brilliancy. Thus we obtain what is called a lunar eclipse. It is total if the moon be entirely in the shadow. The eclipse is partial if the moon be only partly in the shadow. The lunar eclipse is visible to everybody on the dark hemisphere of the earth if the clouds will keep out of the way, so that usually a great many more people can see a lunar eclipse than a solar eclipse, which is only visible from a limited part of the earth. It thus happens that the lunar eclipse is the more familiar spectacle of the two.

When the moon is entirely in the shadow, one might naturally think that it would become totally invisible. This is not always the case. It is a curious fact that in the depth of a total eclipse the moon is often still visible, for she glows with a copper-colored light, which is bright enough to render some of the chief marks on her surface distinctly discernible.

EFFECT OF THE MOON’S DISTANCE ON ITS APPEARANCE.

We are now about to take a good look at the moon and examine the different objects which are marked upon it. There is a peculiar interest attached to this particular orb, because it is much the nearest of all the heavenly bodies to our globe, and therefore the one that we can see the best. Every other object--sun, star, or planet--is hundreds, or perhaps thousands, of times as far off as the moon. It is right that we should desire to learn all we can about the bodies in space. We know that the earth is a great ball, and we see that there are many other such bodies. Some of them are much larger, and some of them are smaller than the globe on which we dwell; some of them are dark bodies like the earth, and among them the moon is one. Is it not reasonable that we should make special efforts to find out all we can about this interesting neighbor?

Though the moon is so close to us relatively to other objects in space, yet when we express its distance in the ordinary methods of measurement it is a very long way off--about 240,000 miles--a length nearly as great as that of all the railways in the world put together. An express train which runs forty miles an hour would travel 240 miles in six hours, and the whole distance to the moon would be accomplished in 6000 hours, so that travelling by night and day incessantly you would accomplish the journey in 250 days. To take another illustration, if you wrapped a thread ten times round the equator of the earth, it would be long enough to stretch from the earth to the moon. Or suppose a cannon could be made sufficiently strong to be fired with a report loud enough to be audible 240,000 miles away. The sound would only be heard at that distance a fortnight after the discharge had taken place.

The moon is too far for us to examine the particular features on its surface by the unaided eye. Suppose that there was a mighty city like London on the moon, with great buildings and teeming millions of people, and you went out on a fine night to take a look at our neighbor. What do you think you would be able to see of the great lunar metropolis? Would you be able to see its streets full of omnibuses, or even its great buildings? Would you see St. Paul’s and Westminster--the great parks and the river? Of all these things your unaided eye would show you almost nothing. I can give you a little illustration. Suppose that you made a tiny model of London; imagine this little structure all complete, so that the streets, the buildings, the bridges, the railways, the parks, and the Thames were placed in their true proportions; suppose that the miniature city was so small that it could stand on a penny postage stamp, surely everything would look very insignificant, even if you had the model in your hand and looked at it with the aid of a magnifying glass. But suppose it were put on the other side of the table or on the other side of the room, or the other side of the street. Even St. Paul’s Cathedral itself would have ceased to be distinguishable; but yet the distance is not nearly great enough. You would have to put the little model a quarter of a mile away before it would be in the right position to illustrate the appearance of a lunar London to the unaided eye.

A TALK ABOUT TELESCOPES.

The astronomer will not be contented with a mere naked-eye inspection of a world so interesting as the moon. He will get a telescope to help his vision. The word “telescope” means a contrivance for looking at objects which are a long way off. We have explained that the further an object is, the smaller it appears to be. The telescope enables us to largely overcome this inconvenience. It has the effect of making a distant object look larger.

There are great differences in the forms of telescopes; and some instruments are large and some small, according to the purposes for which they are required. Perhaps the most useful practical application of the telescope is by the officer on duty on board a ship. He is generally provided with a pair of these instruments bound together to form the “binocular.”

You are all acquainted with this useful contrivance, or at all events with the opera-glass, that is used for purposes with which landsmen are more familiar. The ship’s telescope, or the binocular, or the opera-glass, is feeble in power when compared with the great instruments of the Observatory. The officer on the ship will generally be satisfied with a telescope which shall show the objects with which he is concerned at about one-third of their actual distance. Thus, suppose his attention is directed to a great steamer three miles away, he wishes to see her more clearly, and accordingly he takes a view through his binocular. Immediately the vessel is so transformed that it seems to be only one mile away. The apparent dimensions of the object are increased threefold. The hull is three times as long, the masts and the funnel are three times as high, the sailors are three times as tall; various objects on the ship too small to be seen at three miles would be visible from one mile, and to that apparent distance the ship has now been brought.

If the sailor desires to reduce the apparent distance of objects, how much more keenly does the astronomer feel the same want? At best, the sailor only has to scan a range of a few miles with his glass, but what are a few miles to the astronomer? It is true that he can count the distance of the moon by thousands of miles, a good many thousands, no doubt, but for all other objects he must use millions, while for most bodies in space, millions of millions of miles are the figures we are constrained to employ. Need it be said that the astronomer must resort to every device he can to make the body appear closer. He does not despise the modest binocular. It is often a useful instrument in the Observatory. It gives most beautiful pictures of the celestial scenery, and you would be amazed to find how many thousands of stars you can see with its help which your unaided eye would not show you at all. The binocular will also greatly improve the appearance of the moon, but still its powers fall far short of what we require for the study of lunar landscapes. Even though we can reduce the moon’s apparent distance to one-third its actual amount, yet still that third is a very considerable distance. One-third of 240,000 is 80,000, so that we can see the moon no better with a binocular than we should see it were it 80,000 miles away, and were we viewing it with the unaided eye.

[Figure 36: The Dome at Dunsink Observatory]

[Figure 37: The Equatorial at Dunsink Observatory]

I am not going to enter here upon any detailed account of the telescope, because I shall say a little more on the subject in a later lecture; at present I only describe that form of instrument which is most convenient for studying the moon. I take as an illustration the South Equatorial at Dunsink Observatory, which belongs to Trinity College, Dublin.

This telescope has a building to itself, which stands on the lawn in front of the house. The site is open and elevated, so as to command an extensive prospect of the heavens. You will see in Fig. 36 a picture of the structure. It is circular in form and is entered by the little porch. The most peculiar feature of an edifice intended to contain this kind of telescope is its roof, or Dome, as we call it. It is of a hemispherical shape with a projecting rim at the bottom. But no one would go to the trouble and expense of making a round dome like that over the Observatory if it were not necessary for a particular purpose. The dome is very unlike ordinary roofs, not only in appearance, but also because it can turn round. In the next figure you will see a section through the building, and the wheels are exposed by which the dome is carried. These wheels run easily on rails, so that when the attendant pulls the rope which you see in his hands, he turns round a large pulley, and that operates a little cogwheel which works into a rack, and thus makes the dome revolve. The roof is built of timber, covered with copper; it weighs more than six tons, but the machinery is so nicely adjusted, that a child four years old can easily set the whole in motion. The object of all this machinery is seen when we learn that there is only one opening in the dome. It is covered by the shutter shown over the doorway in Fig. 36. When opened to the top, it gives a long and wide aperture, through which the astronomer can look out at the heavens. Of course the dome has to be turned until the opening has been brought to face the required aspect. The big telescope can thus be directed to any object above the horizon. You see a gentleman using the telescope (Fig. 37), and this shows that the great instrument is nearly three times as long as the astronomer himself! No doubt the telescope seems to be composed of a good many different parts, but the essential portions of the instrument are comparatively few and simple. At the upper end is the object glass, which consists of two lenses, one of flint glass and the other of crown glass. Both of these must be of exceptional purity, and the shape to be given to the lenses is a matter of the utmost importance. It is in the making of this pair of glasses that the skill of the optician has to be specially put forth. So valuable indeed is an object glass which fulfils all the requirements, that it is by far the most costly part of the instrument. There are no glasses in the interior of the tube until you come to the end where the observer is looking in. This is closed by an eyepiece consisting of a lens, or a pair of lenses. There are usually many different eyepieces for a telescope, and they contain lenses of varied powers, to be used according to the state of the atmosphere, or to the particular kinds of observation in progress.

If you point a big telescope to the sky, and see therein the sun or the moon or any of the stars, you will speedily find that the objects pass away out of view. Remember our earth is constantly turning round, and bears, of course, the Observatory with it, so that though the telescope be rightly pointed to the heavens at one moment, by the next it will have been turned aside. To you who are using the telescope, the appearance produced is as if the heavenly bodies were themselves moving. We can counteract this inconvenience. The telescope is supported on a pedestal, which is built on masonry, that goes down through the floor to its foundation on the solid rock beneath. In the iron casing at the top of the pedestal you will see a little window, and inside is clockwork driven by a heavy weight. This clockwork turns the whole telescope round in the opposite direction to that in which the earth is moving. The consequence is that the telescope remains constantly pointed to the same part of the heavens.

[Figure 38: The Yerkes Telescope, University of Chicago]

This instrument is no doubt a large one, but of late years many much greater have been built. The most powerful telescope that has ever been erected is the great Yerkes instrument belonging to the University of Chicago, of which a picture is shown in Fig. 38. The object glass is 40 inches across.

HOW THE TELESCOPE AIDS US IN VIEWING THE MOON.
