Those who are in charge of an observatory are often visited by persons who, coming to see the wonders of the heavens, and finding instruments of such great proportions, not unnaturally expect the views they are to obtain of the celestial bodies shall be of corresponding magnificence. So they are, no doubt, but then it frequently happens that the pictures which even the greatest telescope can display will fall far short of the ideal pictures which the visitors have conjured up in their own imaginations, so that they are often sadly disappointed. Especially is this true with regard to the moon. I have seen people who, when they had a view of the moon through a great telescope, were surprised not to find vast ranges of mountains which looked to them as big as the Alps, or mighty deserts, over which the eye could roam for thousands of miles. They have sometimes expected to behold stupendous volcanoes that not only were, but that looked to be as big as Vesuvius. Others seem to have thought they ought to see the moon with such clearness that the fields were to be quite visible, and some would not have been much astonished if they had observed houses and farmyards, and, perhaps, even cocks and hens.

There are different ways of estimating the apparent dimensions of an object, but the size the moon appears to me to have in a great telescope may be illustrated by taking an orange in your hand and looking at the innumerable little marks and spots on its surface. The amount of detail that the eye will show on the orange is about equal to the amount of detail that a good telescope will show on the moon. A desert on the moon, which really is a hundred miles across, will then correspond to a mark about an eighth of an inch in diameter on the orange. Some of you may ask what is gained by the use of a telescope, for the moon looks to us as large as a plate with the unaided eye, and now we hear it only looks as big as an orange in the telescope. But where is the plate with which you compare your moon supposed to be held? It is surely not in your hand. It is imagined to be up in the sky, a very long way off. Though an orange is much smaller than a plate, yet you will be able to see many more details in the orange by taking it in your hand than you could see on a plate which was at the other side of the street.

[Figure 39: The Advantage of using a Telescope]

I sometimes find that people will not believe how much the telescope that they are using is magnifying the moon until they use both eyes together, of which one is applied to the telescope, while the other is directed to the moon. It will then be seen, even with a very small instrument, that the telescopic moon is as big as the larger of the two crescents in the adjoining figure (Fig. 39), while the naked-eye moon is like the smaller.

The greatest telescopes are capable of reducing the apparent distance of an object to about one-thousandth part of its actual amount. If, therefore, a body were a thousand miles away, it would, when viewed by one of these mighty instruments, be seen as large as our unaided vision would show it, were the body only a single mile distant. No doubt this is a large accession to our power, but it often falls far short of what the astronomer would desire. The distances of the stars are all so great that even when divided by one thousand, they are still enormous. If you have a number expressed by 100,000,000,000,000, then dividing it by a thousand merely means taking off three of the ciphers, and there is still a large number left. We are, however, at present concerned with the moon, and, as its distance is about 240,000 miles, the effect of the best telescope is to reduce this distance apparently to 240 miles. Here, then, we find a limit to what the best of all telescopes can do. It can never show us the moon better than, hardly indeed so well as, we could see it with our unaided eye were it only 240 miles over our heads. We cannot expect the most powerful instruments to reveal any object on the moon unless that object were big enough to be seen by the unaided eye when 240 miles away. What could we expect to see at a distance of 240 miles?

Here is a little experiment which I made to study this point. I marked a round black dot on a sheet of white paper. The dot was a quarter of an inch in diameter, and then I fastened this on a door in the garden, and walked backwards until the dot ceased to be visible. I found this distance to be about thirty-six yards. I tried a little boy of eight years old, and it appeared that the dot became invisible to him about the same time as it did to me. “What has this to do with the moon?” you will say. Well, we shall soon see. In thirty-six yards there are 5184 quarters of an inch, and as it is unnecessary to be very particular about the figures, we may say, in round numbers, that the distance when we ceased to be able to distinguish the dot was about five thousand times as great as the width of the dot itself. You need not, therefore, expect to see anything on the moon or on anything else which is not at least as wide as the five-thousandth part of the distance from which we are viewing it. The great telescope practically places the moon at a distance of 240 miles, and the five-thousandth part of that is about eighty yards; consequently a round object on the moon about eighty yards in diameter would be just glimpsed as the merest dot in the most powerful telescope. To attract attention, a lunar object should be much larger than this. If St. Paul’s Cathedral stood on a lunar plain, it would be visible in our great telescopes. It is true that we could not see any details. We should not be able to distinguish between a Cathedral and a Town-hall. There would just be something visible, so that the artist who was making a sketch of that part would put down a mark with his pencil to show that something was there. This will show us that we need not expect to see objects on the moon, even with the mightiest of telescopes, unless they are of great size.

TELESCOPIC VIEWS OF LUNAR SCENERY.

I have already warned you not to expect too much, even with the biggest of telescopes; and just as a caution, I may, perhaps, tell you a story I once heard of an astronomer who had a great telescope. It was a very famous instrument, and people often came to the Observatory at night to enjoy a look at the heavens. Sometimes these visitors were grave philosophers, but frequently they were not very accomplished men of science. One evening such a visitor came to the Observatory, and sent in his name and an introduction to the astronomer, with a request that he might enter the temple of mystery. The astronomer courteously welcomed the stranger, and asked him what he specially desired to see.

“Oh!” said the visitor, “I have specially come to see the moon--that is the object I am particularly interested about.”

“But,” said the astronomer, “my dear sir, I would show you the moon with pleasure, if you were here at the proper time; but what brings you here now? Look up; the evening is fine. There are the stars shining brightly, but where is the moon? You see it is not up at present. In fact, it won’t rise till about half-past two to-morrow morning, and it is only nine o’clock now. Come back again in five or six hours, and you shall observe the moon with the great telescope.”

But the visitor evidently thought the astronomer was merely trying to get rid of him by a pretext. And he was equal to the occasion--he was not going to be put off in that way.

“Of course, the moon is not up,” he replied; “any one can see that, and that is the reason why I have come, for if the moon had been up, I could have seen it without your telescope at all!”

Although no explorer can ever reach our satellite, yet it is hardly an exaggeration to say that in some respects we know the geography of the moon a good deal better than we know the geography of the earth. Think of the continent of Africa. In that great country there are mighty tracts, there are vast lakes and ranges of mountains, of which we know but little. We could make a better map of Africa, so far at least as its broad outlines are concerned, if it were fastened up on our side of the moon than we actually possess at this moment. There is no spot on the nearer side of the moon as large as an ordinary parish in this country which has not been surveyed. There are maps and charts of the moon showing every part of it, which is as big as a good-sized field. Indeed, as there are no lunar clouds, the features of its surface are never obscured whenever our own atmosphere will permit us to make our observation. Artists have frequently sketched the lunar features, and there is plenty of material for them to work on. We have also had photographs taken of the moon, but there is a special difficulty to be encountered in taking photographs of celestial bodies which photographers of familiar objects on this earth do not experience. For a photograph to be successful, everybody knows that the first requisite is for the sitter to stay quiet while the plate is being exposed. This is, unhappily, just what the moon cannot do. We endeavor to obviate the difficulty by moving the telescope round so as to follow the moon in its progress. This can be done with considerable accuracy, but, unfortunately, there is another difficulty which lies entirely beyond our control. As the rays of light from the moon perform their journey through hundreds of miles of unsteady air, the rays are bent hither and thither, so that the picture is more affected by the atmosphere than in the case of a photographer’s portrait taken in the studio. If we are merely viewing the moon through the telescope, the quivering effect on the rays of this long atmospheric voyage, though rather inconvenient, does not prevent us from seeing the object, and we can readily detect the true shape of each feature in spite of incessant fluctuations. When, however, these rays fall not on the eye, but on the photographic plate, they produce by their motion a picture which cannot be much magnified without becoming very confused and wanting in sharpness. Nevertheless, for the general outlines of our satellite’s appearance and for the portraiture of its splendid features we have derived the greatest assistance from photography.

[Figure 40: The Full Moon]

The adjoining picture (Fig. 40) gives a fair idea of what the full moon looks like when viewed through a small telescope. I do not, however, say that the lunar objects can then be observed under favorable conditions; for when the moon is full is the very worst time for making observations of our satellite. In fact, at this phase you can hardly see anything except slight differences between the colors of different parts. The best time for observing the moon is at the first quarter; but even then you can only observe satisfactorily those objects which happen to lie along the border between light and shade. To study the moon properly you must, therefore, watch it during several different phases, from the time when it presents a thin and delicate crescent (just after new moon) until it has again waned to a thin and delicate crescent (just before the next new moon). We want the relief given by shadows to bring out the full beauty of lunar scenery.

On the map you will first notice the large dark-colored patches which are so conspicuous on the moon’s face. They are, apparently, the empty basins which great seas once filled. But if water was ever there it has at all events now quite disappeared. These dark parts are, no doubt, a good deal smoother than the rest of the surface; but we can see many little irregularities which tell us that we are not looking at oceans. The chief features I want you to observe are the curious rings which you see in the figure; there is a very well-marked one a little below the centre, and in the upper part many rings--large and small--are crowded together. We call them lunar craters. You will see what they are like from the model, of which a picture is shown in Fig. 42. But to realize from this picture the proper scale of the object, you should imagine it to be some miles in width. The cliffs which rise all round to form the wall, as well as the mountain which adorns the centre, are quite as high as any of the mountains in Great Britain.

[Figure 41: View on the Moon. (By Lœwy and Puiseux, Paris Observatory.) The large central crater is Hipparchus and above it is Albategnius]

[Figure 42: Our Model of a Lunar Crater]

You may desire to know how we are able to measure the heights of mountains on the moon. That is what I am now going to show you; and for this purpose we shall look at our imitation lunar crater. Here is the great ring, or circular enclosure, surrounded by cliffs, and here is a sharp mountain peak rising in the centre. I shall ask to have the beam from the electric lamp turned on our model. You see how prettily it is lighted up. I have placed the lamp so that the beams are sloping; and I have done this with the express object of making the shadows long. In fact, as we look at a lunar crater, which lies on the border between light and shade, the sun illuminates the object under the same conditions as those shown in the figure. I dare say you have often noticed what long shadows are cast at sunset. Similar shadows are made to teach the astronomer the altitudes of the lunar mountains; for he measures the length of the shadow, and then by a little calculation he can find the height of the object by which that shadow has been cast. I shall suppose that we want to measure the height of a flagstaff (Fig. 43). It is quite possible to do this by merely measuring the length of the shadow which that flagstaff casts at noon. It would not be correct to say that the height of the flagstaff is the length of its shadow. This will, indeed, be the case if you are fortunate enough to make your measurement at or near London on either the 6th of April or the 5th of September. On all other days in the year a little calculation must be made, which I need not now mention, but which the astronomer, with the aid of his Nautical Almanac, can do in a very few minutes. In a similar manner, by measuring the lengths of the shadows on the moon, and by finding the number of miles in the shadow, we are able to calculate the altitudes of the lunar mountains and of the ranges of cliffs by which the walled plains are surrounded.

[Figure 43: How we found the Height of the Flagstaff]

ON THE ORIGIN OF THE LUNAR CRATERS.

We have now to offer an explanation of the curious rings which are the most characteristic features on the moon. To account for them we must look for a moment at some objects on the earth. You have all heard of volcanoes or burning mountains, such as Vesuvius or Etna, which occasionally break out into violent eruptions, and send forth great showers of ashes and torrents of molten lava. In the Sandwich Islands there is a celebrated volcano called Kilauea. It is like a vast lake of lava, so hot that it is actually molten, and glows with heat like red-hot iron. The adventurous tourist who visits this crater can climb to the brink of a lofty range of cliffs which surround it, and gaze down upon the fervid sea beneath. Suppose that by some great change the internal heat which keeps this mighty basin glowing were to decline and go out, the sea of lava would cease to be liquid, and would ultimately grow hard and cold, and we should then have an immense flat plain, surrounded by a range of cliffs. Elsewhere in the Sandwich Islands examples of extinct craters may be found at the present day. Those who have studied these interesting localities point out how such terrestrial craters explain the ringed plains in the moon. It seems certain that in ancient days great volcanoes abounded on our satellite, and the rings were often much larger than those on the Sandwich Islands, some of them being one hundred miles or more in diameter. The volcanoes must long ago have been raging on the moon with a fury altogether unknown in any active volcanoes which this earth can now show. We can also surmise how the lofty mountain peak, which so often rises in the centre of a lunar ring, has been upheaved. When the fires had almost subsided, and the floor had grown nearly cold, one last and expiring effort is made by which the congealing surface is burst through at the centre, and materials are shot forth which remain as the central mountain to the present day.
