STAR-LAND — running consistency ledger
(orchestrator updates this between files; every file reads it first)

VOICE LOCKS
- "Star-land" always, capital S, hyphen. It is his coinage and the title.
- Second person throughout, present tense for every demonstration.
- The jokes stay. His figure captions are frequently the punchline and
  must survive as jokes, not as descriptions of jokes.
- First person singular for Ball; he says "I" constantly and means it.

NAMES AND TERMS
- Keep his forms: "the sun", "the moon" lower case as he has them;
  Jupiter/Saturn/Uranus/Neptune capitalised.
- "shooting stars" (not "meteors") where he uses it; he introduces
  "meteor" deliberately and the distinction is his.
- Telescope parts, object-glass, speculum: keep, they are the right
  words and he explains them.

NUMERIC FIDELITY CHECK — run after every file
  A measured quantity keeps its DIGITS exactly as printed. Words are
  acceptable only for a structural enumeration. This check is the only
  guard against a value being silently spelled away; it caught six on
  fleming/ that every other check passed.

    python3 - <<'PY'
    import re
    from pathlib import Path
    FIG=re.compile(r"^\[Figure[^\]]*\]$",re.M)
    def nums(t):
        t=t.replace(',','').replace('·','.')
        return set(re.findall(r'\d+(?:\.\d+)?', t))
    for f in sorted(Path('ball/modern_chapters').glob('*.txt')):
        s=FIG.sub('',(Path('ball/chapters')/f.name).read_text())
        miss=sorted(nums(s)-nums(FIG.sub('',f.read_text())), key=float)
        if miss: print(f.name, miss)
    PY

DECISIONS LOG
(filled in as they are made)

SECTION HEADINGS (68 of them, from file 001 on)
  Ball breaks each lecture with an ALL-CAPS heading ending in a period
  ("FURTHER BENEFITS THAT WE RECEIVE FROM THE SUN."). Render as TITLE
  CASE WITH NO TERMINAL PERIOD ("Further Benefits We Receive from the
  Sun"). assemble.is_subheading() rejects anything ending in ".;:,—",
  so the period alone is the difference between an <h4> and a
  paragraph shouted in capitals. These headings are the book's real
  internal structure — they match the contents synopsis — so getting
  them right is worth the care.

FIGURE CAPTIONS
  Ball's own captions arrive in chapters/ and are frequently the joke.
  Keep his phrasing as the FIRST clause, then extend with a short
  clause saying what the plate actually shows — the caption is also
  the epub's alt text, and "The Noonday Gun" alone tells a listener
  nothing. Never trade the wit for the description; keep both.

VOICE CALIBRATION (file 001)
  Ratio 0.97. Ball needs LIGHT work — his sentences are already short
  by Victorian standards. Resist rebuilding. What actually needs doing:
  split his few long compound sentences, drop "indeed"/"of course"
  where they are filler, modernise "revelling"/"genial"/"utilize", and
  keep every single second-person address. His comic set-pieces (the
  voyage to the sun with a candle, a bullet, a penny, a poker and a
  flint; the Christmas tea-table) are the reason the book survives —
  translate them at full length, never summarise.

EDITION (found while translating file 004)
  This is the NEW AND REVISED EDITION of 1899, not the 1889 first
  edition — the title page says so and the text is updated throughout:
  the great sunspot of September 1898, Saturn's ninth satellite found
  in August 1898, the 1899 Leonid prediction, "(1899)" as the present
  year. env DATE is therefore 1889/1899. The only preface is the one
  from the first edition, dated 22 October 1889, and it is kept as
  such. Ball's dated predictions (notably the 1899 meteor shower he
  forecasts with some confidence) stay exactly as he made them — the
  Verne rule; do not note that the 1899 shower disappointed.

DEDICATION restored to the front matter: "To those young friends who
  have attended my Christmas lectures." prep.py had dropped it with the
  copyright page. A dedication belongs in the book; a contents does not.

VERNE-RULE CASES SO FAR (keep as Ball's claim, no correction)
  - file 009: the lunar craters are explained as VOLCANIC, by analogy
    with Kilauea. This is the book's most conspicuous dated conclusion.
    Rendered exactly as his, with no hint that impacts are the modern
    answer. He is careful to say "it seems certain" and "we can also
    surmise" — keep that grading of confidence precisely where he puts
    it; it is the best feature of his method.
  - file 005: the sun makes one turn while the earth makes twenty-five.
  - file 004: prominence heights and speeds (300,000 miles, 200,000
    miles an hour), the 1898 sunspot.
  - file 008: the Yerkes 40-inch as "the most powerful ever erected".
