Canto Seven

	After the dignified and joyful greetings
	had been repeated three and four times,
	Sordello drew back and said: "Who are you?"

	"Before the souls worthy of climbing to God
	were turned towards this mountain,
	my bones were buried by the emperor Augustus.

	I am Virgil; and for no other fault
	did I lose heaven than for not having faith."
	So my guide answered him then.

	As a man who suddenly sees something
	in front of him that astonishes him,
	and believes and does not, saying "It is — it is not —",

	so that one looked; and then he lowered his eyes
	and came back to him humbly
	and embraced him low, round the knees, as a lesser man embraces a greater.

	"Oh glory of the Latins," he said, "through whom
	our language showed what it could do,
	oh eternal honour of the place I came from,

	what merit or what grace shows you to me?
	If I am worthy to hear your words,
	tell me if you come from Hell, and out of what cloister."

	"Through all the circles of the sorrowful kingdom,"
	he answered him, "I have come here.
	Power from heaven moved me, and I come with it.

	Not for doing, but for not doing, I have lost
	the sight of the high Sun that you long for
	and that I came to know too late.

	There is a place down there not sad with torments
	but only with darkness, where the lamenting
	does not sound like howling but is sighs.

	There I am with the innocent children
	who were bitten by the teeth of death
	before baptism freed them of the human fault;

	there I am with those who did not put on
	the three holy virtues, faith, hope and love, and without vice
	knew all the other virtues and followed them.

	But if you know and can, give us some sign
	so that we may come the sooner
	to where Purgatory truly begins."

	He answered: "No fixed place is set for us;
	I am allowed to go up and around;
	as far as I can go, I will come as your guide.

	But see how the day is already going down,
	and one cannot climb by night;
	so it is well to think about a good resting place.

	There are souls here on the right, off by themselves.
	If you consent, I will take you to them,
	and you will not be sorry to know them."

	"How is this?" was the answer. "If a man wanted
	to climb by night, would he be prevented
	by someone else, or would he not because he could not?"

	And good Sordello drew his finger along the ground,
	saying: "Look — you would not get across
	even this line once the sun has gone,

	not that anything else would hinder
	your going up, except the darkness of the night;
	that tangles the will with the lack of power.

	One could well go back downwards with it,
	and wander about the slope,
	while the horizon keeps the day shut in."

	Then my lord, as though wondering, said:
	"Take us, then, to that place where you say
	we can have some pleasure in waiting."

	We had gone only a little way from there
	when I saw that the mountain was hollowed,
	the way valleys hollow the mountains here.

	"Over there," said that shade, "we shall go,
	where the slope makes a lap of itself;
	and there we shall wait for the new day."

	Between steep and level there was a slanting path
	which led us to the side of the hollow,
	where the rim dies away by more than half.

	Gold and fine silver, scarlet and white lead,
	indigo, bright clear wood,
	fresh emerald at the moment it is split —

	set inside that fold of ground, each would be
	beaten in colour by the grass and the flowers there
	as the less is beaten by the greater.

	Nature had not only painted there,
	but out of the sweetness of a thousand scents
	made one there, unknown and past telling.

	"Salve, Regina", sitting on the green
	and on the flowers, I saw souls singing
	who could not be seen from outside the valley.

	"Before the little sun that is left goes to its nest,"
	began the Mantuan who had led us there,
	"do not ask me to take you down among them.

	From this bank you will make out the gestures
	and the faces of all of them better
	than you would gathered among them in the hollow.

	That one who sits highest, and who has the look
	of having neglected what he should have done,
	and does not move his mouth to the others' singing,

	was the Emperor Rudolph, who could have healed
	the wounds that have killed Italy,
	so that another must revive her, and too late.

	The other, who comforts him by his look,
	ruled Bohemia, the country where the water rises
	that the Moldau carries into the Elbe, and the Elbe to the sea:

	Ottokar was his name, and in swaddling clothes
	he was worth far more than his bearded son
	Wenceslaus, whom lust and idleness feed.

	And that little-nosed one, Philip of France, who seems to be
	deep in talk with Henry of Navarre, the man with the kindly face,
	died running from a battle, and shamed the lilies of France:

	look there how he beats his breast!
	And see the other, who has made a bed
	of his palm for his cheek, sighing.

	Those two are the father and the father-in-law of the plague of France, Philip the Fair:
	they know his corrupt and filthy life,
	and from that comes the grief that pierces them so.

	That one who looks so heavily built, Peter of Aragon, and who sings
	in time with Charles of Anjou, the man of the manly nose,
	wore the cord of every virtue girded on him;

	and if the young man sitting behind him, his son Alfonso,
	had stayed king after him instead of dying young,
	the virtue would have passed properly from vessel to vessel,

	which cannot be said of the other heirs.
	James and Frederick have his kingdoms;
	neither of them has the better inheritance, his worth.

	Human goodness rarely rises again
	through the branches; and he who gives it wills it so,
	that it may be asked of him.

	My words go to Charles, the big-nosed one, as much
	as to the other, Peter, who sings with him,
	and Apulia and Provence already grieve for his heir.

	The son is as much less than the father
	as Constance, Peter's widow, can boast more of her husband
	than Beatrice and Margaret can of theirs, Charles.

	See the king of the simple life
	sitting there alone, Henry the Third of England:
	he has better fruit on his branches, his son Edward.

	The one who sits lower than these on the ground,
	looking upwards, is William, marquis of Monferrato,
	whose capture by the town of Alessandria, and the war that followed,

	set Monferrato and the Canavese weeping."
