Canto Nine

	The concubine of old Tithonus
	was already whitening at the eastern balcony,
	out of the arms of her sweet lover;

	her forehead was bright with gems,
	set in the shape of the cold animal
	that strikes people with its tail;

	and night, of the steps by which she climbs,
	had taken two where we were,
	and the third was already lowering its wings,

	when I, who had some of Adam's stuff with me,
	overcome by sleep, lay down on the grass
	where all five of us were sitting.

	At the hour when the little swallow
	begins her sad songs near the morning,
	perhaps in memory of her first sufferings,

	and when our mind, more of a pilgrim
	away from the flesh and less held by its thoughts,
	is almost a prophet in its visions,

	in a dream I seemed to see an eagle
	hanging in the sky with feathers of gold,
	his wings open and set to come down;

	and I seemed to be in the place where
	Ganymede's people were left behind
	when he was carried up to the highest council.

	I thought to myself: "Perhaps he only strikes
	here, out of habit, and perhaps he scorns
	to carry anyone up in his claws from anywhere else."

	Then it seemed to me that, after wheeling a while,
	he came down terrible as lightning
	and snatched me up as far as the fire.

	There it seemed that he and I were burning,
	and the imagined blaze so scorched me
	that my sleep had to break.

	Achilles started up no otherwise,
	turning his wakened eyes about him
	and not knowing where he was,

	when his mother carried him off, asleep
	in her arms, from Chiron to Skyros,
	the place the Greeks later took him from,

	than I started, when sleep fled from my face
	and I went pale
	as a man does who freezes with fright.

	At my side was my comfort, and no one else,
	and the sun was already more than two hours up,
	and my face was turned towards the sea.

	"Do not be afraid," said my lord.
	"Be sure of yourself, for we are at a good point.
	Do not draw in, but let all your strength out.

	You have come now to Purgatory:
	see there the bank that closes it round;
	see the entrance there, where it seems split.

	A while ago, in the dawn that comes before day,
	when your soul was asleep inside you,
	over the flowers that make the place beautiful

	a lady came, and said: 'I am Lucia.
	Let me take this man who is sleeping;
	I will make his way easier for him.'

	Sordello stayed, and the other noble shapes.
	She took you up, and when the day was clear
	she came up here, and I on her tracks.

	She laid you down here; but first her lovely eyes
	showed me that open entrance;
	then she and your sleep went away together."

	Like a man who is reassured out of his doubt
	and whose fear changes into comfort
	once the truth has been uncovered to him,

	so I changed; and as soon as my guide
	saw me free of care he set off up the bank,
	and I behind him, towards the height.

	Reader, you see well how I lift up
	my matter, so do not be surprised
	if I shore it up with more art.

	We came closer, and were at a place
	where, at the point that had seemed to me
	simply broken, like a crack that splits a wall,

	I saw a gate, and three steps below it
	to go up by, of different colours,
	and a doorkeeper who as yet said nothing.

	And as I opened my eyes on him more and more,
	I saw him sitting on the topmost step,
	such in the face that I could not bear it;

	and he had a naked sword in his hand
	which threw the rays back so at us
	that I often turned my face towards it in vain.

	"Say it from there: what do you want?"
	he began to say. "Where is your escort?
	Take care that coming up does not hurt you."

	"A lady of heaven, who knows about these things,"
	my master answered him, "said to us
	only just now: 'Go there: the gate is there.'"

	"And may she advance your steps for your good,"
	the courteous doorkeeper began again.
	"Come forward, then, to our stairs."

	We came there; and the first step
	was white marble, so polished and clear
	that I saw myself in it as I look.

	The second was darker than perse,
	of a rough, burnt-looking stone,
	cracked along its length and across.

	The third, which lies massive on the top of them,
	seemed to me porphyry, as flaming
	as blood that spurts out of a vein.

	On this one God's angel had both his feet,
	sitting on the threshold,
	which seemed to me a stone of diamond.

	Up the three steps my guide drew me
	willingly, saying: "Ask him humbly
	to undo the lock."

	I threw myself devoutly at the holy feet;
	I asked for mercy, and that he would open to me,
	but first I struck myself three times on the breast.

	He wrote seven P's on my forehead
	with the point of his sword, and said: "See that you wash
	these wounds off when you are inside."

	Ashes, or earth dug out dry,
	would be one colour with his clothing;
	and from under it he drew two keys.

	One was of gold and the other of silver;
	first with the white one and then with the yellow
	he did so to the gate that I was satisfied.

	"Whenever one of these keys fails
	and does not turn properly in the lock,"
	he said to us, "this passage does not open.

	One is more precious; but the other needs
	a great deal of art and wit before it unlocks,
	because it is the one that unties the knot.

	I hold them from Peter, and he told me to err
	in opening rather than in keeping it shut,
	so long as the people throw themselves at my feet."

	Then he pushed the door of the sacred gate,
	saying: "Come in; but I warn you
	that whoever looks back goes outside again."

	And when the pivots of that holy gateway,
	which are of metal, loud and strong,
	were turned in their sockets,

	the Tarpeian rock did not roar so,
	nor show itself so harsh, when good Metellus
	was taken from it, and it was left the poorer.

	I turned round, attentive at the first sound,
	and I seemed to hear "Te Deum laudamus"
	in voices mixed with that sweet noise.

	What I was hearing gave me exactly
	the impression one usually gets
	when people are singing to an organ:

	now you can make out the words and now you cannot.
