Canto Ten

	When we were inside the threshold of the gate
	which the bad love of souls leaves unused,
	because it makes the crooked road look straight,

	I heard by its sound that it had closed again;
	and if I had turned my eyes to it,
	what would have been a fit excuse for the fault?

	We were climbing through a split rock
	that shifted one way and the other,
	like a wave that runs off and comes back.

	"Here we must use a little skill,"
	my guide began, "in keeping close,
	now this side, now that, to the wall as it draws away."

	And this made our steps so short
	that the waning moon got back to its bed
	to lie down again before we were

	out of that needle's eye.
	But when we were free and in the open,
	up where the mountain draws back on itself,

	I tired out and both of us uncertain
	of our road, we stopped on a level place
	lonelier than a track through a desert.

	From its edge, where it borders on the void,
	to the foot of the high bank that keeps on rising,
	would measure three times a human body;

	and as far as my eye could take wing,
	now on the left flank and now on the right,
	this terrace looked to me the same.

	Our feet had not yet moved up there
	when I saw that the bank all round —
	which had no room for climbing, being sheer —

	was of white marble, and so adorned
	with carvings that not only Polycletus
	but nature herself would be shamed there.

	The angel who came to earth with the decree
	of the peace wept for so many years,
	which opened heaven after its long ban,

	appeared before us, carved there
	in an attitude so gentle and so true
	that he did not seem an image that keeps silent.

	One would have sworn that he was saying "Ave!";
	for she was pictured there
	who turned the key to open the high love;

	and in her attitude she had these words
	stamped: "Ecce ancilla Dei",
	exactly as a figure is sealed in wax.

	"Do not keep your mind in one place only,"
	said the sweet master, who had me
	on the side where people have their hearts.

	So I moved my face, and saw
	behind Mary, on the side
	where he was who was moving me,

	another story set in the rock;
	so I stepped past Virgil and went close,
	so that it should be laid out for my eyes.

	Carved there in the same marble were
	the cart and the oxen drawing the holy ark,
	because of which men fear an office not given them.

	In front there seemed to be people, all of them
	divided into seven choirs, who made
	one of my two senses say "No", the other "Yes, they sing."

	In the same way, at the smoke of the incense
	pictured there, my eyes and my nose
	disagreed over yes and no.

	There, going in front of the blessed vessel,
	the humble psalmist danced with his robe hitched up,
	and in that act was both more and less than a king.

	Opposite, at the window of a great palace,
	Michal was shown looking on
	like a woman full of scorn and grief.

	I moved my feet from where I stood
	to look closer at another story
	which showed white to me behind Michal.

	There was carved out the great glory
	of the Roman prince, whose worth
	moved Gregory to his great victory:

	I mean the Emperor Trajan;
	and a poor widow was at his bridle,
	with the bearing of tears and of grief.

	Around him it seemed crowded and full
	of horsemen, and the eagles in the gold
	above them seemed to move in the wind.

	The poor woman among all these
	seemed to say: "My lord, get me vengeance
	for my son, who is dead, and my heart breaks";

	and he to answer her: "Wait now
	until I come back"; and she: "My lord,"
	like someone whose grief is in a hurry,

	"and if you do not come back?" And he: "Whoever
	is in my place will do it for you"; and she:
	"What is another's good deed to you, if you forget your own?"

	At which he: "Now take comfort; for I must
	pay my duty before I move.
	Justice wills it, and pity holds me here."

	He who never saw anything new
	made this visible speech,
	new to us because it is not found here.

	While I was taking my pleasure in looking
	at the images of such humilities,
	precious for the sake of the workman who made them,

	"Look, over here, but they take slow steps,"
	the poet murmured, "a great many people:
	these will send us on our way to the high stairs."

	My eyes, which were happy to be gazing,
	being greedy for the new things they love,
	were not slow in turning towards him.

	I do not want you, reader, to be knocked out
	of your good resolve by hearing
	how God wills that the debt be paid.

	Do not attend to the shape of the punishment:
	think what comes after it; think that at worst
	it cannot go past the great sentence.

	I began: "Master, what I see
	moving towards us does not look like people to me,
	and I cannot tell what it is, my sight so wanders."

	And he to me: "The heavy condition
	of their torment bends them to the ground,
	so that my own eyes had a struggle with it at first.

	But look hard over there, and untangle
	with your eyes what is coming under those stones:
	you can make out by now how each one beats himself."

	Oh proud Christians, wretched and weary,
	who, sick in the sight of the mind,
	put your trust in walking backwards,

	do you not see that we are worms
	born to form the angelic butterfly
	that flies to judgment without defences?

	What is your spirit floating so high on,
	since you are as it were insects that have failed,
	like a grub in which the forming goes wrong?

	As sometimes, to hold up a floor or a roof,
	one sees a figure used as a corbel
	bringing its knees up against its chest,

	which, out of unreality, makes a real distress
	be born in whoever looks at it, so I saw
	these, when I paid proper attention.

	It is true that they were more and less bent
	according as they had more and less on their backs;
	and the one who had the most patience in his bearing

	seemed, weeping, to be saying: "I can do no more."
