Canto Thirteen

	We were at the top of the stairway,
	where the mountain that cures whoever climbs it
	is cut back for the second time.

	There a terrace binds the hill round
	in the same way as the first one,
	except that its curve bends more sharply.

	There is no shade there, and no carving to be seen:
	the bank looks bare and the path looks bare,
	with the livid colour of the raw stone.

	"If we wait here for people to ask,"
	the poet reasoned, "I am afraid perhaps
	our choice will be too long delayed."

	Then he fixed his eyes on the sun,
	made his right side the centre of the movement,
	and swung his left side round.

	"Oh sweet light, in whose trust I enter
	on this new road, lead us," he said,
	"as one must be led inside here.

	You warm the world, you shine upon it;
	if no other reason argues against it,
	your rays must always be our guides."

	As far as counts for a mile here,
	so far we had already gone there,
	in a short time, because the will was eager;

	and towards us there were heard flying,
	though not seen, spirits speaking
	courteous invitations to the table of love.

	The first voice that went by in flight
	said aloud "Vinum non habent",
	and went on repeating it behind us.

	And before it had gone quite out of hearing
	by getting further off, another passed
	crying "I am Orestes", and did not stop either.

	"Oh," I said, "father, what voices are these?"
	And as I asked, here was the third,
	saying: "Love those from whom you have had evil."

	And the good master: "This circle whips
	the fault of envy, and so the cords
	of the lash are drawn out of love.

	The bridle wants the opposite sound;
	you will hear it, I believe,
	before you come to the pass of pardon.

	But drive your eyes hard through the air
	and you will see people sitting in front of us,
	each one settled along the cliff."

	Then I opened my eyes wider than before;
	I looked ahead and saw shades with cloaks
	no different in colour from the stone.

	And when we had gone a little further on,
	I heard them cry: "Mary, pray for us",
	cry "Michael" and "Peter" and "All the saints".

	I do not believe there walks the earth today
	a man so hard that he would not have been pierced
	with pity at what I saw then;

	for when I had come so near to them
	that their gestures were clear to me,
	heavy grief was milked out through my eyes.

	They seemed to me covered in coarse haircloth,
	and one propped up another with his shoulder,
	and all of them were propped by the bank.

	So the blind, when they have nothing,
	stand at pardons to beg what they need,
	and one lets his head sink on another,

	so that pity may be quickly stirred in others,
	not only by the sound of the words
	but by the sight, which asks no less.

	And as the sun is no use to the blind,
	so to the shades there, of whom I am speaking now,
	the light of heaven will not give itself;

	for an iron wire pierces the eyelids of them all
	and sews them, as is done to a wild hawk
	because it will not stay quiet.

	It seemed to me that I did them a wrong,
	going along seeing others and not being seen;
	so I turned to my wise counsellor.

	He knew well what the dumb man meant to say;
	and so he did not wait for my question,
	but said: "Speak, and be short and to the point."

	Virgil was walking on the side of the terrace
	where a man can fall off,
	because it is not garlanded with any parapet;

	on the other side of me were the devout
	shades, who through the horrible stitching
	pressed the tears out until they wet their cheeks.

	I turned to them and: "Oh people certain,"
	I began, "of seeing the high light
	which is all that your desire cares for,

	so may grace soon dissolve the scum
	off your conscience, so that the river of the mind
	may come down clear through it,

	tell me — it would be gracious and dear to me —
	if any soul here among you is Italian;
	and perhaps it will be good for that soul if I learn it."

	"Oh my brother, each of us is a citizen
	of one true city; but you mean to say
	one who lived in Italy as a pilgrim."

	This is what I seemed to hear in answer
	from somewhat further on than where I stood,
	so I made myself heard still further along.

	Among the others I saw one shade who looked
	as if she were waiting; and if anyone asks "How?" —
	she was lifting her chin the way a blind man does.

	"Spirit," I said, "who tame yourself in order to climb,
	if you are the one who answered me,
	make yourself known to me by your place or your name."

	"I was Sienese," she answered, "and with these
	others I mend my wicked life here,
	weeping to him to lend himself to us.

	I was not wise, although I was called Sapia,
	and I was far gladder of other people's losses
	than of my own good fortune.

	And so that you may not believe I am deceiving you,
	hear whether I was as mad as I tell you,
	when the arc of my years was already going down.

	My fellow citizens were joined in battle
	with their enemies near Colle,
	and I was praying God for what he had already willed.

	They were broken there and turned into the bitter
	steps of flight; and seeing the chase,
	I took a joy unlike any other,

	so much that I turned my face up, in my daring,
	shouting to God: "Now I fear you no longer!"
	as the blackbird does at a little fair weather.

	I wanted peace with God at the very end
	of my life; and my debt would still not be
	reduced by penitence,

	if it were not that Pier Pettinaio remembered me
	in his holy prayers,
	who out of charity was sorry for me.

	But who are you, who go asking about
	our condition, and carry your eyes unbound,
	as I believe, and speak by breathing?"

	"My eyes," I said, "will be taken from me here too,
	but for a short time, since the offence is small
	of having turned them in envy.

	Far greater is the fear that keeps my soul
	hanging over the torment below,
	for the load down there weighs on me already."

	And she to me: "Who has led you up here
	among us then, if you expect to go back down?"
	And I: "This man who is with me and says nothing.

	And I am alive; so ask of me,
	chosen spirit, if you want me to move
	my mortal feet over there for you."

	"Oh, this is so new a thing to hear,"
	she answered, "that it is a great sign God loves you;
	so help me sometimes with your prayer.

	And I beg you, by what you most long for,
	if ever you tread the soil of Tuscany,
	that you set my name right with my relatives.

	You will see them among that empty people
	who put their hopes in Talamone, and will lose
	more hope there than in looking for the Diana;

	but the admirals will lose most of all."
