Canto Fifteen

	As much as, between the end of the third hour
	and the beginning of the day, there seems to be
	of the sphere that plays about always like a child,

	so much of his course seemed now to be left
	to the sun before evening.
	It was vespers there, and midnight here.

	And the rays struck us full in the face,
	because we had gone so far round the mountain
	that we were now walking straight towards the sunset,

	when I felt my forehead weighed down
	by a brightness far greater than before,
	and the things I could not account for astonished me;

	so I lifted my hands above my eyebrows
	and made myself the little shade
	that files down the excess of what can be seen.

	As, when a ray leaps off water
	or off a mirror to the opposite side,
	rising up at the same angle

	as the one it comes down at, and moves away
	from the fall of a stone by an equal distance,
	as experiment and art both show;

	so it seemed to me that I was struck there
	in front by a reflected light,
	so that my sight was quick to run away.

	"What is that, sweet father, which I cannot
	screen my eyes from well enough to be any use,"
	I said, "and which seems to be coming towards us?"

	"Do not be surprised if the family of heaven
	still dazzles you," he answered me.
	"It is a messenger, come to invite us to climb.

	Soon it will be no burden to you to see
	these things, but as much a delight
	as nature has fitted you to feel."

	When we had come to the blessed angel,
	he said with a glad voice: "Come in here
	to a stairway far less steep than the others."

	We were climbing, already gone up from there,
	and "Beati misericordes!" was sung
	behind us, and "Rejoice, you who overcome!"

	My master and I, the two of us alone,
	were going up; and as I went I thought
	to gain some profit from his words,

	and turned to him, asking:
	"What did the spirit from Romagna mean,
	speaking of 'shut out' and 'sharing'?"

	At which he to me: "He knows the harm
	of his own worst fault, so do not wonder
	if he reproves it, that men may weep less for it.

	Because your desires come to a point
	where a share is lessened by company,
	envy works the bellows for your sighs.

	But if the love of the highest sphere
	twisted your longing upwards,
	that fear would not be in your breast;

	for the more they say 'ours' up there,
	the more of the good each one possesses,
	and the more charity burns in that cloister."

	"I am hungrier for being satisfied,"
	I said, "than if you had said nothing to me first,
	and I gather more doubt in my mind.

	How can it be that one good, shared out
	among more owners, makes them richer of it
	than if it were owned by few?"

	And he to me: "Because you keep driving
	your mind back into earthly things only,
	you pick darkness out of true light.

	That infinite and unspeakable good
	which is up there runs to love
	as a ray comes to a shining body.

	It gives itself according to the ardour it finds,
	so that however far charity reaches,
	the eternal worth grows over it.

	And the more people who understand each other up there,
	the more there is to love well, and the more they love,
	and each gives back to the other as a mirror does.

	And if my reasoning does not feed you,
	you will see Beatrice, and she will take away
	this hunger from you, and every other, completely.

	Only see to it that the five wounds
	are soon rubbed out, as two of them are already,
	which close by being painful."

	As I was about to say "You have satisfied me,"
	I saw that I had come onto the next circle,
	so that my hungry eyes made me keep silent.

	There it seemed to me I was suddenly caught up
	into a vision, out of myself,
	and saw several people in a temple;

	and a woman at the entrance, saying
	with the sweet manner of a mother: "My son,
	why have you done this to us?

	Look, your father and I have been searching
	for you in grief." And as she fell silent here,
	what had appeared at first disappeared.

	Then another appeared to me, with those waters
	down her cheeks that grief distils
	when it is born of great anger at somebody,

	saying: "If you are lord of the city
	over whose name there was such a quarrel among the gods,
	and out of which every science sparkles,

	take your revenge on those bold arms
	that embraced our daughter, Pisistratus."
	And her lord seemed to me, kindly and gentle,

	to answer her with a face under control:
	"What shall we do to a man who wishes us harm,
	if we condemn the man who loves us?"

	Then I saw people, kindled in the fire of anger,
	killing a young man with stones, shouting
	loudly, over and over, to each other: "Kill him! Kill him!"

	And I saw him sinking towards the ground
	because of the death that already weighed him down,
	but always making gates of his eyes to heaven,

	praying to the high Lord, in such a war,
	to forgive his persecutors,
	with that look which unlocks pity.

	When my soul came back outside again
	to the things that are true outside it,
	I recognized my not-false errors.

	My guide, who could see me acting
	like a man loosening himself from sleep,
	said: "What is the matter with you, that you cannot hold yourself up,

	but have come more than half a league
	with your eyes veiled and your legs tangling,
	like a man that wine or sleep bends over?"

	"Oh my sweet father, if you will hear me,
	I will tell you," I said, "what appeared to me
	when my legs were taken from me so."

	And he: "If you had a hundred masks
	over your face, your thoughts, however small,
	would not be shut off from me.

	What you saw was so that you should not refuse
	to open your heart to the waters of peace
	that are poured out from the eternal fountain.

	I did not ask 'What is the matter with you?' as one does
	who looks only with the eye that does not see
	when the body lies with the soul gone out of it;

	but I asked to give strength to your feet.
	The lazy must be goaded like this, who are slow
	to use their waking when it comes back."

	We went on through the evening, straining
	our eyes as far ahead as they could reach
	against the late and shining rays.

	And then, little by little, a smoke came
	towards us, as dark as night,
	and there was nowhere to get out of its way.

	It took our eyes and the clean air from us.
