Canto Twenty-Four

	Neither did the talking make the walking slower,
	nor the walking the talking, but we went on
	fast as we talked, like a ship driven by a good wind;

	and the shades, who looked like things twice dead,
	drew wonder at me through the pits of their eyes,
	having noticed that I was alive.

	And I, going on with what I was saying,
	said: "He goes up perhaps more slowly
	than he would, for somebody else's sake.

	But tell me, if you know, where Piccarda is;
	tell me if I see anyone worth noting
	among these people who stare at me so."

	"My sister — I do not know whether she was more
	beautiful or good — is triumphing gladly
	in her crown already on high Olympus."

	So he said first; and then: "Here it is not forbidden
	to name anybody, since our looks
	have been milked so dry by the diet.

	This," and he pointed with his finger, "is Bonagiunta,
	Bonagiunta of Lucca; and that face
	beyond him, more pricked out than the rest,

	had Holy Church in his arms:
	he was from Tours, and by fasting he purges
	the eels of Bolsena and the sweet wine."

	He named many others to me, one by one,
	and they all seemed pleased to be named,
	so that I saw no dark look for it.

	I saw Ubaldino della Pila use his teeth
	on nothing, out of hunger, and Boniface,
	who pastured many people with his crook.

	I saw Messer Marchese, who once had leisure
	to drink at Forlì with less dryness,
	and even so was such that he never felt full.

	But as a man does who looks and then thinks
	more of one than of another, I did with the man of Lucca,
	who seemed to know most about me.

	He was murmuring; and I heard something
	like "Gentucca" there, where he felt the wound
	of the justice that plucks them so.

	"Oh soul," I said, "who seem so eager
	to talk with me, make yourself plain to me,
	and satisfy both yourself and me by speaking."

	"A woman is born, and does not yet wear the veil,"
	he began, "who will make my city please you,
	however men may blame it.

	You will go away with this foreknowledge.
	If you took my murmuring wrongly,
	the facts themselves will make it clear to you.

	But tell me if I see here the man
	who brought out the new rhymes, beginning
	'Ladies who have understanding of love'."

	And I to him: "I am one who, when
	Love breathes in me, take note, and go setting it down
	in the way he dictates inside."

	"Oh brother, now I see," he said, "the knot
	that kept the Notary and Guittone and me
	short of the sweet new style I hear!

	I see well how your pens
	go close behind the one who dictates,
	which certainly did not happen with ours;

	and whoever sets himself to look further
	sees no more difference between the one style and the other" —
	and, as if satisfied, he fell silent.

	As the birds that winter along the Nile
	sometimes make a flock in the air
	and then fly faster and go in a line,

	so all the people who were there,
	turning their faces, quickened their step,
	made light both by thinness and by will.

	And as a man tired of trotting
	lets his companions go on and walks
	until the heaving of his chest works itself out,

	so Forese let the holy flock pass
	and came along behind with me,
	saying: "When will it be that I see you again?"

	"I do not know," I answered him, "how long I shall live;
	but my coming back will not be so soon
	that I shall not be at the shore first in my will,

	because the place where I was set to live
	strips itself of good more from day to day,
	and seems disposed to a sorry ruin."

	"Now go," he said; "for I see the man who has
	most blame for it dragged at the tail of a beast
	towards the valley where nobody is ever cleared.

	The beast goes faster at every step,
	always faster, until it strikes him
	and leaves the body foully undone.

	Those wheels" — and he raised his eyes to the sky —
	"have not far to turn before that is clear to you
	which my speech cannot make clearer.

	Stay behind now, for time is precious
	in this kingdom, and I am losing too much of it
	coming along level with you like this."

	As a horseman sometimes rides out at a gallop
	from a troop on the march
	to win the honour of the first encounter,

	so he left us with longer strides;
	and I stayed on the road with the two
	who were such great marshals of the world.

	And when he had gone so far ahead of us
	that my eyes followed him
	as my mind followed his words,

	the loaded and living branches of another
	apple tree appeared to me, and not far off,
	since I had only just then turned that way.

	I saw people under it lifting their hands
	and shouting I do not know what towards the leaves,
	like greedy silly children

	who beg, and the one they beg does not answer,
	but to make their wanting keener
	holds what they long for high and does not hide it.

	Then they went away as if undeceived;
	and we came now to the great tree,
	which refuses so many prayers and tears.

	"Pass on beyond without coming close.
	Higher up there is a tree that Eve bit,
	and this plant was raised from it."

	So somebody said among the branches;
	so Virgil and Statius and I, pressing together,
	went on along the side that rises.

	"Remember," it said, "the accursed ones
	formed in the clouds, who, when they were full,
	fought Theseus with their double breasts;

	and the Hebrews who showed themselves soft at the drinking,
	so that Gideon would not have them as companions
	when he came down the hills towards Midian."

	So, keeping close to one of the two edges,
	we passed by, hearing of the sins of the throat
	followed once by miserable gains.

	Then, spreading out along the empty road,
	a good thousand steps and more carried us on,
	each of us thinking without a word.

	"What are you three thinking about, going along alone?"
	a sudden voice said; at which I started
	as frightened, skittish animals do.

	I raised my head to see who it was;
	and never in a furnace were glass or metals
	seen so shining and so red

	as I saw one who was saying: "If it please you
	to go up, you must turn here;
	this is the way for whoever wants to walk to peace."

	His look had taken my sight from me,
	so I turned round behind my teachers,
	like a man who goes by what he hears.

	And as, announcing the dawn,
	the May breeze stirs and gives off scent,
	all impregnated with grass and with flowers,

	so I felt a wind strike the middle of my forehead,
	and felt the feathers move well enough,
	which made the air smell of ambrosia.

	And I heard it said: "Blessed are those whom so much grace
	lights that the love of taste does not smoke up
	too much longing in their breasts,

	but who hunger always for what is just!"
