Canto Twenty-Five

	It was an hour when the climb allowed no dawdling,
	for the sun had left the circle of noon
	to the Bull, and the night to the Scorpion: it was about two in the afternoon;

	so that, as a man does who does not stop
	but goes on his way, whatever appears to him,
	if the goad of need pricks him,

	so we went into the gap,
	one in front of another, taking the stairs
	which by their narrowness unpair the climbers.

	And as the young stork lifts its wing
	for the wish to fly, and does not dare
	to leave the nest, and lowers it again,

	so was I, with the wish to ask
	kindled and put out, coming as far as the act
	of a man who is getting ready to speak.

	My sweet father did not let it pass,
	fast though our walking was, but said: "Loose
	the bow of your speaking, which you have drawn to the iron."

	Then I opened my mouth confidently
	and began: "How can one grow thin
	where the need of nourishment does not touch?"

	"If you called to mind how Meleager
	wasted away as the log burned that his life was tied to,"
	he said, "this would not be so hard for you;

	and if you thought how, at your own flicker,
	your image flickers inside a mirror,
	what seems hard to you would seem soft.

	But so that you may settle into what you want,
	here is Statius; and I call on him and beg him
	to be the healer now of your wounds."

	"If I unfold the eternal view to him,"
	Statius answered, "with you here,
	let it excuse me that I cannot refuse you."

	Then he began: "Son, if your mind takes in
	and keeps my words,
	they will be a light to you on the how you ask about.

	Perfect blood, which is never drunk
	by the thirsty veins and stays behind
	like food you take away from the table,

	takes in the heart a power to inform
	all the human members, like the blood
	that runs through the veins to become them.

	Digested once more, it goes down to the parts it is more decent
	to keep quiet about than to name; and from there it drips
	afterwards on another's blood in the natural vessel, the womb.

	There the one and the other are gathered together,
	the woman's disposed to receive and the man's to act,
	because of the perfect place it is pressed from, the heart;

	and, joined to it, it begins to work,
	first curdling, and then giving life
	to what it has made solid for its own matter.

	The active power, having become a soul
	like a plant's — differing so far
	that this one is on the way and that one is at shore —

	then works so that it moves and feels,
	like a sea sponge; and then it sets about
	organizing the powers whose seed it is.

	Now, my son, the power unfolds and now spreads out
	which comes from the heart of the begetter,
	where nature attends to all the members.

	But how from an animal it becomes a speaking thing
	you do not see yet: this is a point
	that once made a man wiser than you, Averroes, go wrong,

	so that by his teaching he made the mind that understands
	a thing separate from the soul,
	because he saw no bodily organ taken up by it.

	Open your breast to the truth that is coming,
	and know that as soon as the articulation
	of the brain is perfect in the foetus,

	God, the first mover, turns to it, glad
	at so much art of nature, and breathes
	a new spirit into it, full of power,

	which draws whatever it finds active there
	into its own substance, and makes one single soul
	that lives and feels and turns upon itself.

	And so that you may wonder less at my words,
	look at the heat of the sun, which becomes wine
	when it is joined to the sap that runs from the vine.

	When Lachesis, the Fate, has no more thread to spin,
	the soul is loosed from the flesh, and carries away
	with it in power both the human and the divine:

	the other faculties are all of them dumb;
	memory, understanding and will
	far sharper in action than before.

	Without stopping, of itself it falls
	marvellously to one of the two shores, the Acheron's or the Tiber's;
	there it first learns its roads.

	As soon as a place bounds it there,
	the forming power radiates around it,
	as it did, and as much as it did, in the living limbs.

	And as the air, when it is full of rain,
	becomes adorned with different colours
	by another's ray reflected in it,

	so the air nearby sets itself
	into that form which the soul, come to rest,
	seals on it by its power;

	and afterwards, like the little flame
	that follows the fire wherever it moves,
	the spirit is followed by its new form.

	Because from that it has its appearance afterwards,
	it is called a shade; and from that it then organizes
	every sense, right up to sight.

	From that we speak and from that we laugh;
	from that we make the tears and the sighs
	which you may have heard about the mountain.

	As desires and the other feelings afflict us,
	the shade takes shape;
	and this is the cause of what you were wondering at."

	And by now we had come to the last turning,
	and had gone round to the right hand,
	and were attentive to another care.

	There the bank shoots flame outward,
	and the terrace breathes a blast upward
	that bends the flame back and keeps it away;

	so that we had to go along the open side
	one by one; and I was afraid of the fire
	on this hand, and afraid of falling off on that.

	My guide said: "Through this place
	the rein must be held tight on the eyes,
	because one could go wrong at very little."

	"Summae Deus clementiae", God of highest mercy, I heard sung then
	in the heart of that great burning,
	which made me care no less about turning;

	and I saw spirits walking through the flame,
	so that I watched them and watched my steps,
	dividing my sight between them, now one, now the other.

	After the end that is made to that hymn,
	they cried aloud: "Virum non cognosco", Mary's words, I know no man;
	then they began the hymn again, low.

	When it was finished, they cried again: "Diana
	kept to the wood, and drove the nymph Helice out of it,
	who had felt the poison of Venus."

	Then they went back to their singing; then they cried out
	the names of wives and husbands who were chaste
	as virtue and marriage require.

	And this way is enough for them, I believe,
	for all the time the fire burns them:
	with such care and with such food

	the wound must be sewn up at the last.
