Canto Twenty-Six

	While we went along the edge like that,
	one in front of another, and the good master
	kept saying to me: "Take care: let my warning be some use";

	the sun was striking me on the right shoulder,
	and its rays were already changing the whole west
	from blue to a white look;

	and with my shadow I was making the flame
	seem redder; and at only that sign
	I saw many shades, as they went, take notice.

	This was the reason that gave them a beginning
	for talking about me; and they began
	to say: "That one does not look like a body made of air";

	then some of them came towards me
	as far as they could, always taking care
	not to come out where they would not be burned.

	"Oh you who go behind the others, not for being slower
	but perhaps out of reverence,
	answer me, who burn in thirst and in fire.

	And your answer is needed not by me alone;
	for all these have greater thirst for it
	than an Indian or an Ethiopian has for cold water.

	Tell us how it is that you make a wall of yourself
	against the sun, just as though you had not yet
	come inside the net of death."

	So one of them spoke to me; and I would have
	made myself known already, if I had not been intent
	on another new thing that appeared just then;

	for through the middle of the burning road
	came people with their faces towards these,
	which held me in suspense with looking.

	There I see on either side each shade
	make haste and kiss another, one with one,
	without stopping, content with a short greeting;

	so, inside their dark column,
	one ant nuzzles another,
	perhaps to ask their road and their luck.

	As soon as they break off the friendly meeting,
	before the first step there has gone by,
	each one strains to shout louder than the rest:

	the newcomers "Sodom and Gomorrah",
	and the others: "Pasiphaë goes into the cow,
	so that the young bull may run to her lust."

	Then, like cranes that fly, part of them
	to the Riphean mountains and part towards the sands,
	these shy of the frost, those of the sun,

	one lot of people go and the other lot come,
	and they turn back, weeping, to their first songs
	and to the shout that suits each of them best;

	and the very ones who had begged me before
	came close to me again, as they had done,
	attentive in their faces to listen.

	I, who had seen twice over what they wanted,
	began: "Oh souls who are certain
	of having a state of peace, whenever it comes,

	my limbs have not been left over there
	either unripe or ripe, but are here with me,
	with their blood and with their joints.

	I go up this way so as not to be blind any longer.
	There is a lady above who wins me the grace
	by which I carry the mortal part through your world.

	But so that your greatest longing may soon
	be satisfied, and the heaven house you
	which is full of love and stretches widest,

	tell me, so that I may still rule lines on paper and write of it,
	who you are, and who is that crowd
	which is going away behind your backs."

	The mountaineer is not more stupidly confounded,
	and does not go dumb with staring,
	when, rough and wild, he comes into town,

	than each of those shades was in his looks;
	but when they were unloaded of their astonishment,
	which is soon quieted in high hearts,

	"Blessed are you, who to die the better
	take on board experience of our marches,"
	the one who had questioned me first began again.

	"The people who do not come with us offended
	in the way for which Caesar, in his triumph,
	once heard 'Queen' called out against him, for what he did with the king of Bithynia;

	so they go off crying 'Sodom',
	reproaching themselves as you have heard,
	and they help the burning by their shame.

	Our sin was of the two sexes, man with woman;
	but because we did not keep human law,
	following our appetite like beasts,

	when we part we read out, in our own disgrace,
	the name of Pasiphaë, who made a beast of herself
	inside the wooden cow.

	Now you know our acts and what we were guilty of.
	If perhaps you want to know by name who we are,
	there is no time to say, and I would not know how.

	I will make your wish smaller as to me:
	I am Guido Guinizelli, and I am already purging myself
	for having grieved well before the very end."

	As the two sons of Hypsipyle became when they saw their mother again,
	in the story, as Lycurgus was about to kill her,
	so I became, though I did not run to embrace him,

	when I hear naming himself the father
	of me and of the others, my betters, who ever used
	sweet and graceful rhymes of love;

	and without hearing or speaking I went on
	thinking a long while, gazing at him,
	and because of the fire I came no nearer.

	When I had fed myself with looking,
	I offered myself wholly ready to his service,
	with the swearing that makes another believe you.

	And he to me: "You leave such a trace in me,
	by what I hear, and so clear a one,
	that Lethe, the river of forgetting, cannot take it away or make it dim.

	But if your words swore true just now,
	tell me what is the reason that you show,
	in your speech and in your look, that you hold me dear."

	And I to him: "Your sweet lines,
	which, as long as modern use lasts,
	will make even the ink they are written in precious."

	"Oh brother," he said, "this one whom I point out
	to you with my finger" — and he pointed to a spirit ahead —
	"was a better craftsman of the mother tongue.

	In verses of love and in the prose of romances
	he beat them all; and let the fools talk
	who think Giraut, the man of Limoges, is ahead of him.

	They turn their faces to rumour rather than to truth,
	and so they settle their opinion
	before they will listen to art or reason.

	So many of the old did with Guittone,
	giving the prize only to him, cry after cry,
	until the truth beat him with more voices.

	Now if you have so wide a privilege
	that you are allowed to go to the cloister
	where Christ is abbot of the college,

	say an Our Father there for me,
	as much of it as we need in this world
	where the power to sin is no longer ours."

	Then, perhaps to make room for another
	who was near him, he vanished through the fire
	as a fish goes through water to the bottom.

	I moved forward a little towards the one he had shown me,
	and said that my longing was making
	a place of welcome ready for his name.

	He began, freely, in his own tongue, to say:
	"So much does your courteous asking please me
	that I neither can nor want to hide myself from you.

	I am Arnaut, who weep and go singing;
	in sorrow I see the folly that is past,
	and I see with joy the gladness I hope for ahead.

	Now I beg you, by that power
	which guides you to the top of the stairway,
	remember my pain at the right time!"

	Then he hid himself in the fire that refines them.
