Canto Twenty-Seven

	As, when he shoots his first rays out
	there where his maker shed his blood,
	with the Ebro falling under the high Scales,

	and the waves in the Ganges scorched by noon,
	so the sun stood; so the day was going,
	when God's angel appeared to us, glad.

	He stood on the bank, outside the flame,
	and was singing "Beati mundo corde!"
	in a voice far more alive than ours.

	Then: "You go no further, holy souls,
	unless the fire bites you first. Go into it,
	and do not be deaf to the singing beyond,"

	he said to us when we came near him;
	so that when I understood him I became
	like a man who is being put into the grave.

	I stretched forward over my folded hands,
	looking at the fire and imagining hard
	human bodies I had seen burning once.

	The good escorts turned towards me,
	and Virgil said to me: "My son,
	here there may be torment, but not death.

	Remember, remember! And if I brought you safe
	on the back of Geryon,
	what shall I do now, so much nearer God?

	Believe it for certain, that if you stood
	inside the belly of this flame a thousand years,
	it could not make you the balder by one hair.

	And if you think perhaps that I am deceiving you,
	go up to it and make yourself sure
	with your own hands, at the hem of your clothes.

	Put down, put down every fear now.
	Turn this way and come: come in without fear!"
	And I stood still, and against my conscience.

	When he saw me standing still and stubborn,
	a little disturbed he said: "Now look, son:
	between Beatrice and you there is this wall."

	As Pyramus, at the point of death,
	opened his eyes at Thisbe's name and looked at her,
	when the mulberry turned red,

	so, my stubbornness having gone soft,
	I turned to my wise guide when I heard the name
	that always springs up in my mind.

	At which he shook his head and said: "What!
	Do we mean to stay on this side?" Then he smiled
	as one does at a child who is won by an apple.

	Then he went into the fire in front of me,
	begging Statius to come behind,
	who for a long way had walked between us.

	As soon as I was inside, I would have thrown myself
	into boiling glass to cool off,
	the burning there was so beyond measure.

	My sweet father, to comfort me,
	kept talking about Beatrice as he walked,
	saying: "I think I see her eyes already."

	A voice that sang on the other side guided us;
	and we, attending only to it,
	came out where the way up began.

	"Venite, benedicti Patris mei"
	sounded inside a light that was there,
	such that it overcame me and I could not look at it.

	"The sun is going," it added, "and evening comes.
	Do not stop, but press on with your steps,
	while the west is still not dark."

	The road went straight up inside the rock
	towards a quarter where I cut off the rays
	in front of me from a sun that was already low.

	And we had tried only a few steps
	when I and my wise ones knew by my shadow
	going out that the sun had set behind us.

	And before the horizon in all its huge parts
	had been made one colour,
	and night had all its dominions,

	each of us made a bed of one step;
	for the nature of the mountain broke in us
	the power to climb further, and the pleasure.

	As goats stand chewing the cud, quiet,
	who were quick and wild
	over the peaks before they had fed,

	silent in the shade while the sun is hot,
	watched by the herdsman, who leans
	on his staff and looks after them at rest;

	and as the drover who lodges out of doors
	spends the night quietly beside his flock,
	watching that no wild beast scatters it;

	so were the three of us then,
	I like a goat and they like herdsmen,
	walled in on this side and that by the high rock.

	Little could be seen there of what was outside,
	but through that little I saw the stars
	brighter and larger than they usually are.

	So chewing over things and so gazing at them,
	sleep took me: the sleep that often
	knows the news before the fact.

	At the hour, I think, when Cytherea
	first shone on the mountain from the east,
	who always seems to burn with the fire of love,

	I seemed to see, in a dream, a lady,
	young and beautiful, walking over a plain
	gathering flowers; and she said, singing:

	"Let whoever asks my name know
	that I am Leah, and I go moving
	my beautiful hands round to make myself a garland.

	I adorn myself here to please myself at the glass;
	but my sister Rachel never moves away
	from her mirror, and sits all day.

	She longs to see her own lovely eyes
	as I do to adorn myself with my hands;
	looking satisfies her, and working satisfies me."

	And already, by the brightness before the dawn,
	which rises the more welcome to travellers
	the less far from home they lodge as they come back,

	the shadows were fleeing on every side,
	and my sleep with them; so I got up,
	seeing the great masters already up.

	"That sweet apple which the care of mortals
	goes looking for on so many branches
	will set your hungers at peace today."

	These were the words Virgil used
	towards me; and there were never gifts
	that could match those for giving pleasure.

	Such will came on me, on top of will,
	to be up there, that at every step after it
	I felt my feathers growing for flight.

	When the whole stairway had been run under us
	and we were on the topmost step,
	Virgil fixed his eyes on me,

	and said: "You have seen the temporal fire
	and the eternal, my son; and you have come
	to a place where I of myself see no further.

	I have brought you here by wit and by art;
	take your own pleasure now for your guide.
	You are out of the steep ways, out of the narrow.

	See the sun, which shines on your forehead;
	see the young grass, the flowers and the bushes
	which here the ground brings out of itself alone.

	Until the lovely eyes come, glad,
	which weeping made me come to you,
	you can sit down, and you can walk among them.

	Do not wait for my word any more, or my sign.
	Your judgment is free, upright and whole,
	and it would be a fault not to act on its will:

	so I crown and mitre you over yourself."
