Canto Thirty-Two

	My eyes were so fixed and intent
	on slaking their ten years' thirst
	that all my other senses were put out.

	And on this side and on that they had a wall
	of not caring — so did the holy smile
	draw them to itself with the old net! —

	when my face was turned by force
	towards my left by those three goddesses,
	because I heard from them a "Too fixedly!";

	and the state in which eyes are for seeing
	when they have just been struck by the sun
	left me for a while without my sight.

	But when my sight had re-formed itself to the small
	(I say "the small" in comparison with the great
	object of sense I had been forced away from),

	I saw that the glorious army had wheeled
	on its right, and was going back
	with the sun and the seven flames in its face.

	As a troop turns under its shields to save itself,
	and swings round with its standard
	before the whole of it can change front,

	so that soldiery of the heavenly kingdom
	which was in front all passed by us
	before the chariot turned its pole.

	Then the ladies went back to the wheels,
	and the griffin moved the blessed load
	so that not one of his feathers shook.

	The beautiful lady who had drawn me through the ford,
	and Statius and I, were following the wheel
	that made its track on the smaller curve.

	So, walking through the high empty wood —
	empty by the fault of her who believed the serpent —
	an angelic music kept our steps in time.

	Perhaps in three flights of an unleashed arrow
	we had come as far as we had gone
	when Beatrice came down.

	I heard them all murmur "Adam";
	then they circled a tree stripped
	of leaves and of any other foliage on every branch.

	Its crown, which spreads out wider
	the higher it goes, would be marvelled at
	for its height by the Indians in their woods.

	"Blessed are you, griffin, who do not tear
	with your beak at this wood, sweet to the taste,
	since the belly is badly twisted by it afterwards."

	So the others cried around the strong tree;
	and the twice-born animal:
	"So is the seed of all justice kept."

	And turning to the pole he had drawn,
	he pulled it to the foot of the widowed tree
	and left it tied to what belonged to it.

	As our plants swell in spring, when the sun's great light
	comes down mixed with the light of the Ram,
	the sign that shines behind the heavenly Fish,

	and then each is renewed in its own colour
	before the sun harnesses his horses
	under another star;

	so, opening a colour less than the rose
	and more than the violet, the tree was made new
	which before had had its branches so bare.

	I did not understand, and here on earth we do not sing,
	the hymn that those people sang then,
	nor could I bear the whole of the melody.

	If I could draw how the hundred pitiless eyes of Argus were put to sleep
	as they heard Mercury tell the tale of Syrinx,
	the eyes whose watching cost them so dear,

	then, like a painter who paints from a model,
	I would draw how I fell asleep;
	but let whoever will pretend to sleep well.

	So I go on to when I woke,
	and I say that a brightness tore the veil
	of sleep from me, and a calling: "Get up: what are you doing?"

	As, when they were brought up the mountain to see Christ transfigured,
	a blossom of that apple tree whose fruit makes the angels greedy
	and makes a perpetual marriage feast in heaven,

	Peter and John and James, overcome,
	came to themselves again at the word
	by which greater sleeps than theirs were broken,

	and saw their company diminished
	both of Moses and of Elijah,
	and their master's clothing changed;

	so I came to, and saw standing over me
	that merciful lady who had been
	the guide of my steps beside the river before.

	And all in doubt I said: "Where is Beatrice?"
	At which she: "See her sitting under the new leaves
	on the root of the tree.

	See the company that is round her:
	the others are going up behind the griffin
	with a sweeter song and a deeper one."

	Whether her speech went on longer than that
	I do not know, because by then I had before my eyes
	the one who had closed me off from attending to anything else.

	She sat alone on the bare ground,
	as if left there to guard the wagon
	which I had seen the two-formed beast tie up.

	The seven nymphs made a cloister of themselves
	in a circle round her, with the seven candlesticks in their hands,
	lights that are safe from the north wind and the south.

	"Here you will be a forester for a short time,
	and you will be with me for ever a citizen
	of that Rome where Christ is a Roman.

	So, for the good of the world that lives badly,
	keep your eyes on the chariot now, and what you see,
	when you are back over there, see that you write it."

	So Beatrice; and I, who was wholly devoted
	at the feet of her commands,
	gave my mind and my eyes where she wanted.

	Fire never came down with so swift a motion
	from a thick cloud, when it rains
	from that boundary that lies furthest off,

	as I saw the eagle, the bird of Jove, come down
	through the tree, tearing the bark
	as well as the flowers and the new leaves;

	and it struck the chariot with all its strength,
	so that the chariot heeled like a ship in a storm
	beaten by the waves, now to starboard, now to port.

	Then I saw a fox throw itself into the cradle
	of the triumphal vehicle,
	which seemed starved of all good food;

	but, reproving it for its filthy faults,
	my lady turned it into such a flight
	as its bones without any flesh could bear.

	Then, from the place it had first come from,
	I saw the eagle come down into the chariot's body
	and leave it feathered with itself;

	and, like a voice out of a heart that grieves,
	such a voice came out of heaven and said:
	"Oh my little ship, how badly you are loaded!"

	Then it seemed to me that the ground opened
	between the two wheels, and I saw a dragon come out of it
	which drove its tail up through the chariot;

	and like a wasp drawing back its sting,
	pulling its wicked tail back to itself
	it dragged part of the floor away, and went off wandering.

	What was left was covered over with the feathers,
	as good ground is with couch grass,
	offered perhaps with a sound and kindly intention;

	and one wheel and the other and the pole
	were covered by them in less time
	than a sigh keeps the mouth open.

	The holy structure, so transformed,
	put out heads on all its parts,
	three over the pole and one at each corner.

	The first were horned like oxen,
	but the four had a single horn on the forehead:
	such a monster was never seen before.

	Confident, like a fortress on a high mountain,
	I saw a loose whore sitting on it,
	with her eyes quick to look around;

	and, as if so that she should not be taken from him,
	I saw a giant standing upright beside her,
	and now and then they kissed each other.

	But because she turned her greedy, roving eye
	on me, that fierce lover
	whipped her from her head to her feet;

	then, full of suspicion and raw with anger,
	he untied the monster and dragged it off through the wood,
	so far that he made a shield of the trees alone

	between me and the whore and the new beast.
