Front Matter

(Part 1 of 2)

    To the memory
    of
    my friend Richard Dawes
    late Dean of Hereford
    this book is dedicated
    J. T.

[Figure front: The fog-siren — the great trumpet mounted on its carriage at the South Foreland, with the steam machinery that drives it, the instrument on which Chapter Seven turns.]

Preface to the Third Edition

In preparing this new edition of Sound I have gone carefully over the last one, mending its defects of style and matter as far as I could, and paying respectful attention at the same time to the criticisms and suggestions the earlier editions drew.

There are few cases in which I have been content simply to reproduce what I have read in the works of other acousticians. I have tried to make myself experimentally familiar with the ground, and in every case to present the demonstrations in the form and the order best suited to teaching.

The book carries, no doubt, more than its share of the imperfection that clings to all human effort; yet it has already found its way into the literature of several nations of very different intellectual standing. Last year, for instance, a new German edition was published "under the special supervision" of Helmholtz and Wiedemann. That men so eminent, and so overloaded with official duties, should add to them the labour of examining and correcting every proof sheet of a work like this shows that they take it for what it was meant to be — a serious attempt to improve the public knowledge of science. It is especially gratifying to be assured in this way that the book has met a public want not only in England but in that learned land to which I owe my own scientific education.

Before me, on the other hand, lie two volumes of foolscap size, curiously stitched, and printed in characters whose meaning I am wholly incompetent to penetrate. Here and there, though, I recognise the familiar figures of the earlier editions of Sound. I owe these volumes to Mr. John Fryer of Shanghai, who sent them to me a few weeks ago along with a letter, from which this is an extract: "One day," Mr. Fryer writes, "soon after the first copy of your work on Sound reached Shanghai, I was reading it in my study, when an intelligent official, named Hsü-chung-hu, noticed some of the engravings and asked me to explain them to him. He became so deeply interested in the subject of Acoustics that nothing would satisfy him but to make a translation. Since, however, engineering and other works were then considered to be of more practical importance by the higher authorities, we agreed to translate your work during our leisure time every evening, and publish it separately ourselves. Our translation, however, when completed, and shown to the higher officials, so much interested them, and pleased them, that they at once ordered it to be published at the expense of the Government, and sold at cost price. The price is four hundred and eighty copper cash per copy, or about one shilling and eightpence. This will give you an idea of the cheapness of native printing."

Mr. Fryer adds that his Chinese friend had no difficulty in grasping every idea in the book.

The most important new matter in this edition is an account of an investigation which, over the past two years, I have had the honour of conducting with the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House. Under the title "Researches on the Acoustic Transparency of the Atmosphere, in Relation to the Question of Fog-signalling," the subject is treated in Chapter Seven of this volume. Only government resources could have made such an investigation possible; and it gives me pleasure to believe that not only have the practical objects of the inquiry been secured, but that a crowd of scientific errors which have surrounded this subject for more than a century and a half have been swept away, and their place taken by the sure and certain truth of Nature. In drawing up the account of this laborious inquiry I aimed at linking the observations together so that they alone would amount to a substantial demonstration of the principles involved. Further work let me bring the whole inquiry within the firm grasp of experiment, and so give it a certainty it could hardly have had without that final guarantee.

Immediately after the first brief abstract of the investigation was published, it was criticised. I did not think it necessary to reply, believing that the grounds of the criticism would disappear once the full account appeared. The only opinion I thought it right to defer to was, to some extent, a private one, sent to me by Professor Stokes. He considered that in some cases I had given too exclusive an influence to the mixed currents of watery vapour and air, and had neglected differences of temperature. That differences of temperature, where they come into play, are an efficient cause of acoustic opacity, I never doubted. Indeed, aerial reflection arising from that cause is, in this inquiry, made the subject of experimental demonstration for the first time. What the relative strength of the two may be in the cases under consideration — differences of temperature and differences due to watery vapour — I do not venture to say; but as both are active, I have in Chapter Seven referred to them jointly as producing those "acoustic clouds" to which the stopping of sound in the atmosphere is mostly due.

After the full investigation was published, however, another criticism appeared, to which, considering its source, I would gladly pay every respect and attention. In this criticism, which reached me first through the columns of an American newspaper, differences in the amount of watery vapour and differences of temperature are alike denied any power to cause acoustic opacity. At a meeting of the Philosophical Society of Washington the emphatic opinion had, it was said, been expressed that I was wrong to ascribe the opacity of the atmosphere to its flocculence, the really efficient cause being refraction. This view seemed to me so obviously mistaken that for a time I assumed the newspaper account must be wrong.

Recently, however, I have been sent the "Report of the United States Lighthouse Board for 1874," in which the account just referred to is confirmed. A brief reference to the Report will be enough here. Major Elliott, the accomplished officer and gentleman mentioned on page 261, had published a record of his tour of inspection in this country, in which he spoke, with a perfectly enlightened grasp of the facts, of the differences between our system of lighthouse illumination and that of the United States. He also included in his Report some account of the fog-signal investigation, whose beginning he had witnessed and had indeed helped with, at the South Foreland.

On this able Report by their own officer, the Lighthouse Board at Washington make the following remark: "Although this account is interesting in itself and to the public generally, yet, being addressed to the Lighthouse Board of the United States, it would tend to convey the idea that the facts which it states were new to the Board, and that the latter had obtained no results of a similar kind; while a reference to the appendix to this Report will show that the researches of our Lighthouse Board have been much more extensive on this subject than those of the Trinity House, and that the latter has established no facts of practical importance which had not been previously observed and used by the former."

Footnote: It will be borne in mind that the Washington Appendix was published nearly a year after my Report to the Trinity House.

The "appendix" referred to here is from the pen of the venerable Professor Joseph Henry, chairman of the Lighthouse Board at Washington. To his credit be it recorded that at a very early stage in the history of fog-signalling, Professor Henry reported in favour of Daboll's trumpet, though he was opposed by one of his colleagues on the ground that "fog-signals were of little importance, since the mariner should know his place by the character of his soundings." In the appendix he records the various efforts made in the United States towards establishing fog-signals. He describes experiments on bells, and on the use of reflectors to reinforce their sound; these, though effective close at hand, turned out to be useless at a distance. He corrects current errors about steam whistles, which some inventors thought acted like ringing bells. He quotes the opinion of the Reverend Peter Ferguson that sound is better heard in fog than in clear air — an opinion founded on observations of the noise of locomotives, about which it may be said that others have drawn diametrically opposite conclusions from similar experiments. On the authority of Captain Keeney he cites an occurrence "in the first part of which the captain was led to suppose that fog had a marked influence in deadening sound, though in a subsequent part he came to an opposite conclusion." Professor Henry also describes an experiment made during a fog at Washington, in which he used "a small bell rung by clock-work, the apparatus being the part of a moderator lamp, intended to give warning to the keepers when the supply of oil ceased. The result of the experiment was, he affirms, contrary to the supposition of absorption of the sound by the fog." This conclusion rests not on comparative experiments but on observations made in the fog alone; for, Professor Henry adds, "the change in the condition of the atmosphere, as to temperature and the motion of the air, before the experiment could be repeated in clear weather, rendered the result not entirely satisfactory."

This, I may say, is the only experiment on fog I have found recorded in the appendix.

In 1867 the steam siren was mounted at Sandy Hook and examined by Professor Henry. He compared its action with that of a Daboll trumpet, using for the purpose a stretched membrane covered with sand, placed at the small end of a tapering tube that concentrated the sonorous motion on the membrane. The siren proved the more powerful. "At a distance of 50, the trumpet produced a decided motion of the sand, while the siren gave a similar result at a distance of 58." Professor Henry also varied the pitch of the siren, and found that in combination with its trumpet 400 impulses a second gave the loudest sound, while the best result with the unaided siren came at 360 impulses a second. Experiments were also made on the influence of pressure, from which it appeared that when the pressure varied from 100 lbs. to 20 lbs., the distance the sound reached — as judged by the vibrating membrane — varied only in the ratio of 61 to 51. Professor Henry also showed that the sound of the fog-trumpet is independent of the material it is built from; and he observed, further, how the sound decays as the angle away from the axis of the instrument increases. More observations were made by Professor Henry and his colleagues in August 1873, and in August and September 1874. In the brief but interesting account of these there appears a hypothetical element that is absent from the record of the earlier work.

It is quite clear from all this that on the question of fog-signalling the Lighthouse Board at Washington have not been idle. Add to that the fact that their eminent chairman gives his services free, conducting without fee or reward experiments and observations of the kind described here, and I think it will be granted that he not only deserves well of his own country but sets his younger scientific contemporaries, in his country and in ours, an example of high-minded devotion.

I was aware, in a general way, that work of the kind now published for the first time had been going on in the United States, and that knowledge was not without its effect on my own conduct. The first instruments mounted at the South Foreland were of English manufacture, and for various reasons I felt a strong sympathy for their able maker, Mr. Holmes. From the outset, however, I resolved to suppress such feelings, along with every other extraneous consideration, personal or national, and to aim at getting the best instruments, whatever country produced them. Reporting, accordingly, on the observations of 19 and 20 May 1873 — our first two days at the South Foreland — these were my words to the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House:

"In view of the reported performance of horns and whistles in other places, the question arises whether those mounted at the South Foreland, and to which the foregoing remarks refer, are of the best possible description.... I think our first duty is to make ourselves acquainted with the best instruments hitherto made, no matter where made; and then, if home genius can transcend them, to give it all encouragement. Great and unnecessary expense may be incurred, through our not availing ourselves of the results of existing experience.

"I have always sympathized, and I shall always sympathize, with the desire of the Elder Brethren to encourage the inventor who first made the magneto-electric light available for lighthouse purposes. I regard his aid and counsel as, in many respects, invaluable to the corporation. But, however original he may be, our duty is to demand that his genius shall be expended in making advances on that which has been already achieved elsewhere. If the whistles and horns that we heard on the 19th and 20th be the very best hitherto constructed, my views have been already complied with; but if they be not — and I am strongly inclined to think that they are not — then I would submit that it behooves us to have the best, and to aim at making the South Foreland, both as regards light and sound, a station not excelled by any other in the world."

On this score it gives me pleasure to say that I never had any difficulty with the Elder Brethren. They agreed with me; and two powerful steam whistles, one from Canada and one from the United States, together with a steam siren — also an American instrument — were in due course mounted at the South Foreland. It will be seen in Chapter Seven that my strongest recommendation is for an instrument we owe to the United States.

In the face of these facts it will hardly be supposed that I wish to withhold from the Lighthouse Board of Washington any credit they can fairly claim. My desire is to be strictly just; and that desire compels me to say that in my opinion their Report fails to establish the extravagant claim made in its first paragraph. It contains observations — but contradictory observations; and as for establishing any principle that would reconcile the conflicting results, it leaves us no better off than before.

But I turn willingly from the discussion of "claims" to the discussion of science. Inserted into Professor Henry's Report, as a kind of intrusive element, is a second Report by General Duane, founded on an extensive series of observations he made in 1870 and 1871. After stating clearly the points that need to be settled, the General makes the following remarks:

"Before giving the results of these experiments, some facts will be stated which will explain the difficulties of determining the power of a fog-signal.

"There are six steam fog-whistles on the coast of Maine: these have been frequently heard at a distance of twenty miles, and as frequently cannot be heard at the distance of two miles, and this with no perceptible difference in the state of the atmosphere.

"The signal is often heard at a great distance in one direction, while in another it will be scarcely audible at the distance of a mile. This is not the effect of wind, as the signal is frequently heard much further against the wind than with it. For example, the whistle on Cape Elizabeth can always be distinctly heard in Portland, a distance of nine miles, during a heavy northeast snowstorm, the wind blowing a gale directly from Portland toward the whistle.

Footnote: That is to say, homogeneous air with an opposing wind is frequently more favourable to sound than non-homogeneous air with a favouring wind. We had the same experience at the South Foreland. — J. T.

Footnote: Had this observation been published, it could only have given me pleasure to refer to it in my recent writings. It is a striking confirmation of my observations on the Mer de Glace in 1859.
