Chapter Five: Resonance, Organ-Pipes and the Voice

(Part 1 of 6)

The lengthwise vibrations of a wire — The relative velocities of sound in brass and in iron — The lengthwise vibrations of rods fixed at one end — And of rods free at both ends — The divisions and overtones of rods vibrating lengthwise — Examining vibrating bars by polarised light — Finding the velocity of sound in solids — Resonance — The vibrations of stopped pipes: their divisions and overtones — How the tones of stopped pipes stand to those of open pipes — The state of the column of air inside a sounding organ pipe — Reeds and reed pipes — The voice — The overtones of the vocal cords — The vowel sounds — Kundt's experiments — New ways of finding the velocity of sound

Lengthwise Vibrations of Wires and Rods: Turning Lengthwise Vibrations into Crosswise Ones

So far we have busied ourselves entirely with crosswise vibrations — vibrations made at right angles to the length of the strings, rods, plates and bells under examination. A string can also vibrate along its own length; but here the power that makes it vibrate is not a tension applied from outside but the elastic force of its own molecules. Now that molecular elasticity is far greater than anything we can ordinarily produce by stretching the string, and the consequence is that the sounds produced by a string's lengthwise vibrations are as a rule much shriller than those produced by its crosswise ones. These lengthwise vibrations can be excited by drawing a fiddle bow across the string at a slant; but they are more easily produced by running a bit of cloth or leather strewn with powdered resin briskly along the string. Resined fingers do just as well.

When the wire of our monochord is plucked aside you hear the sound of its crosswise vibrations. Rub resined leather along the wire and a note far more piercing than the last is heard. That comes from the lengthwise vibrations of the wire. Behind the table a stout iron wire 23 feet long is stretched. One end of it is firmly fixed to an immovable wooden tray, the other is coiled round a pin driven firmly into one of our benches. The pin can be turned with a key and the wire stretched, to make the rubber travel more easily. Clasping the wire with the resined leather and running my hand to and fro along it, a rich, loud musical sound is heard. Halve the wire at its centre and rub one of the halves, and the note is the octave of the last: the vibrations are twice as fast. Clip the wire at a third of its length and rub the shorter part, and the note is a fifth above the octave. Take a quarter of its length and rub as before, and the note is the double octave of the whole wire's, being produced by four times the number of vibrations. So in lengthwise vibrations, as in crosswise ones, the number of vibrations made in a given time is inversely proportional to the length of the wire.

And notice how surprisingly powerful these sounds are when the wire is rubbed vigorously. With a shorter length the note is so shrill, and at the same time so powerful, as to be hardly bearable. It is not the wire itself that produces this intense sound: it is the wooden tray at its end, to which its vibrations are passed. And since the vibrations of the wire are lengthwise, those of the tray, which lies at right angles to the wire, must be crosswise. Here we have an instructive example of lengthwise vibrations being turned into crosswise ones.

Lengthwise Pulses in Iron and Brass: Finding their Relative Velocities

Let the wire vibrate lengthwise along its whole length again, and let my assistant turn the key at the end at the same time, altering the tension. You notice no change of note. The lengthwise vibrations of the wire, unlike the crosswise ones, do not depend on the tension. Beside the iron wire a second wire, of brass, of the same length and thickness, is stretched. I rub them both. Their tones are not the same: the iron wire's is considerably the higher of the two. Why? Simply because the sound-pulse travels faster in iron than in brass. The pulses in this case run to and fro from one end of the wire to the other. At one moment the wire pushes the tray at its end; at the next it pulls the tray — this pushing and pulling coming from the pulse running to and fro along the whole wire. The time a pulse takes to run from one end to the other and back is the time of a complete vibration. In that time the wire gives the wooden tray at its end one push and one pull; the tray gives the air one complete vibration; and the air bends the tympanic membrane once in and once out. Plainly the rapidity of vibration — in other words the pitch of the note — depends on the speed at which the sound-pulse is carried through the wire.

And now the solution of a beautiful problem drops into our hands of itself. By shortening the brass wire we make it give a note of the same pitch as the other's. You hear both notes sounding in unison now, and the reason is that the sound-pulse travels through these 23 feet of iron wire and through these 15 feet 6 inches of brass wire in the same time. These lengths are in the ratio of 11 to 17, and those two numbers give the relative velocities of sound in brass and in iron. The first velocity is in fact 11,000 feet a second and the second 17,000 feet a second. The same method can of course be applied to many other metals.

[Figure 82: A wire fixed at both ends, vibrating lengthwise. In a and b the pulse (the arrows show which way it runs) sweeps the whole length with no node; in c and d one node splits it into two segments; in e and f two nodes split it into three. The nodes are marked by dotted crosswise lines.]

When a wire or string vibrating lengthwise gives out its lowest note, there is no node on it at all: the pulse, as I have just said, runs to and fro along the whole length. But, like a string vibrating crosswise, it can also subdivide itself into ventral segments separated by nodes. Damp the centre of the wire and we make that point a node. The pulses now run in from both ends, meet at the centre, recoil from each other and return to the ends, where they are reflected as before. The note produced is the octave of the fundamental. The next higher note answers to a division of the wire into three vibrating segments separated by two nodes. The first of these three modes of vibration is shown in Fig. 82 at a and b, the second at c and d, the third at e and f, the nodes being marked by dotted crosswise lines and the arrows in each case showing which way the pulse is moving. The rates of vibration follow the order of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and so on, just as with a wire vibrating crosswise.

A rod or bar of wood or metal with both ends fixed, vibrating lengthwise, divides itself in the same way as the wire. The succession of tones is the same in both cases too.

Lengthwise Vibrations of Rods Fixed at One End: Musical Instruments Built on this Principle

Rods and bars with one end fixed can also vibrate lengthwise. A smooth rod of wood or metal with one end gripped in a vice, for instance, gives a musical note when resined fingers are run along it. When such a rod gives its lowest note it simply lengthens and shortens in quick alternation; there is no node on the rod at all. The pitch of the note is

[Figure 83: A rod fixed in its block, vibrating lengthwise. In a and b it simply lengthens and shortens with no node; in c and d a node stands a third of the way down from the free end; in e and f there are two nodes, the upper one a fifth of the way down. Arrows show which way the pulses run.]

inversely proportional to the length of the rod. This follows necessarily from the fact that the time of a complete vibration is the time the sonorous pulse takes to run twice up and down the rod. The first overtone of a rod fixed at one end answers to its division by a node a third of its length from the free end. Its second overtone answers to a division by two nodes, the upper of which stands a fifth of the rod's length from the free end, the rest of the rod being divided into two equal parts by the second node. Fig. 83 shows at a and b, c and d, e and f the states of the rod belonging to its first three modes of vibration. The nodes,

[Figure 84: The instrument of deal rods. A row of rods of graded length stands in a wooden case, and the player draws resined fingers up them one after another to sound the scale.]

as before, are marked by dotted lines, and the arrows show which way the pulses run.

The order of the tones of a rod fixed at one end and vibrating lengthwise is that of the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7 and so on. It is easy to see why this must be so. The time of vibration in c or d is the time of the segment above the dotted line; and since that segment is only a third of the whole rod, its vibrations must be three times as fast. The time of vibration in e or f is likewise that of its topmost segment; and since that segment is a fifth of the whole rod, its vibrations must be five times as fast. So the order of the tones must be that of the odd numbers.

Before you (Fig. 84) is a musical instrument whose sounds come from the lengthwise vibrations of a number of deal rods of different lengths. Run resined fingers over the rods one after another and you get a series of notes of varying pitch. An expert performer might make the tones of this instrument very pleasant to you.

The Vibrations of Rods Free at Both Ends

[Figure 85: König's apparatus. The brass rod a b is gripped at its centre by the clamp s; an ivory ball hangs by two strings from the points m and n of the wooden frame and rests against the end b. Rub the rod near a and the ball is knocked away.]

Rods with both ends free can also vibrate lengthwise and give out musical tones. Looking into this will lead us to extremely important results. Clasp a long glass tube exactly at its centre and draw a wetted cloth along one of its halves, and a clear musical sound follows. A solid glass rod of the same length would give the same note. Here the centre of the tube is a node, and the two halves lengthen and shorten in quick alternation. M. König of Paris has provided us with an instrument to show this. A brass rod, a b (Fig. 85), is held at its centre by the clamp s, while an ivory ball, hung by two strings from the points m and n of a wooden frame, is set resting against the end b of the rod. Draw a bit of resined leather gently along the rod near a and it is thrown into lengthwise vibration. The centre, s, is a node — but the restlessness of the ivory ball shows you that the end b is trembling. I apply the rubber more briskly. The ball rattles; and now the vibration is so intense that the ball is flung off violently every time it touches the end of the rod.

Breaking a Glass Tube with Sonorous Vibrations

When the wetted cloth is drawn over the surface of a glass tube, the film of liquid it leaves behind is seen forming narrow trembling rings all along the rod. Now this shivering of the liquid comes from the shivering of the glass underneath it, and it is possible to build the vibration up until the glass actually flies to pieces. Savart was the first to show this. Twice in this room I have repeated the experiment, sacrificing each time a fine glass tube 6 feet long and 2 inches in diameter. Seizing the tube at its centre C (Fig. 86), I swept my hand vigorously to and fro along C D, until at last the half furthest from my hand was shivered into ring-shaped fragments. On examining them it was found that, narrow as they were, many were marked by circular cracks showing a still finer subdivision.

Here again the rapidity of vibration is inversely proportional to the length of the rod. A rod of half the length vibrates lengthwise twice as fast, a rod of a third the length three times as fast, and so on. The time of a complete vibration being the time the pulse needs to run up and down the rod, and that time being directly proportional to the length of the rod, the rapidity of vibration must necessarily be in the inverse proportion.

[Figure 86: The tube broken by its own sound. Held at its centre C while the hand sweeps to and fro along the upper half C D, the far half has shivered into the stack of narrow rings shown below.]

[Figure 87: The long glass rod a e held at b, midway between its centre and one end, and rubbed along the short section a b. Nodes form at b and at d, the same distance from the other end, dividing the rod into three vibrating parts.]

This division of a rod by a single node at its centre answers to the deepest tone its lengthwise vibration can give. But, as in every other case we have examined, such rods can subdivide further. Hold the long glass rod a e (Fig. 87) at a point b, midway between its centre and one of its ends, and rub its short section a b with a wet cloth: the point b becomes a node, and a second node, d, forms at the same distance from the opposite end of the rod. So we have the rod divided into three vibrating parts — one whole ventral segment, b d, and two half ones, a b and d e. The sound belonging to this division of the rod is the octave of its fundamental note.

You now have a way of checking me. For if the second mode of division just described gives the octave of the fundamental, and if a rod of half the length gives the same octave, then the whole rod held at a point a quarter of its length from one end ought to give the same note as the half rod held in the middle. Sound both notes together and they are heard to be identical in pitch.

[Figure 88: The three simplest lengthwise modes of a rod free at both ends — one node at the centre in a and b, two nodes in c and d, three in e and f, with the arrows showing the direction of the pulses.]

Fig. 88 shows at a and b, c and d, e and f the first three divisions of a rod free at both ends vibrating lengthwise. The nodes, as before, are marked by crosswise dots and the direction of the pulses by arrows. The order of the tones is that of the numbers 1, 2, 3 and so on.

How Sonorous Vibrations Act on Polarised Light

When a tube or rod vibrating lengthwise gives out its fundamental tone, its two ends are vibrating freely, the glass there suffering neither strain nor pressure. At the centre the case is exactly the reverse: there is no vibration there, but a quick alternation of stretching and squeezing. When the sonorous pulses meet at the centre they squeeze the glass; when they recoil they stretch it. So while at the ends we have the greatest vibration but no change of density, at the centre we have the greatest changes of density but no vibration.

We have now cleared the way for a very beautiful experiment made many years ago by Biot, but never, as far as I know, repeated on the scale offered you here. The beam from our electric lamp, L (Fig. 89), is sent through a prism, B, of double-refracting spar, and a beam of polarised light is obtained. This beam falls on a second prism of spar, n; but though both prisms are perfectly transparent, the light that has passed through the first cannot get through the second. Introduce a piece of glass between the two prisms and subject that glass to either stretching or squeezing, and the light is enabled to pass through the whole system.
