Chapter Five: Resonance, Organ-Pipes and the Voice

(Part 4 of 6)

In Fig. 103, a and b show the division of an open pipe belonging to its fundamental tone; c and d the division belonging to its first overtone, e and f the division belonging to its second, the dots marking the nodes. The distance m n is one-half, o p one-quarter and s t one-sixth of the whole length of the pipe. But the pitch of a is that of a stopped pipe as long as m n; the pitch of c is that of a stopped pipe of the length o p; and the pitch of e is that of a stopped pipe of the length s t. So, since these lengths are in the ratio of ½ : ¼ : ⅙, or 1 : ½ : ⅓, the rates of vibration must be as their reciprocals — that is, as 1 : 2 : 3. Merely by inspecting the several modes of vibration, then, we can draw the conclusion that the succession of tones of an open pipe must follow the series of natural numbers.

The pipe a in Fig. 103 has been drawn on purpose twice the length of a in Fig. 93. It is perfectly plain that to complete a vibration the pulse has to travel the same distance in both pipes, and hence that the pitch of the two must be the same. The open pipe a n is in effect two stopped pipes with the central nodal surface at m for their common base. This shows the relation between a stopped pipe and an open one to be just what experiment establishes.

Finding the Velocity of Sound in Gases, Liquids and Solids from Musical Vibrations

We have already learned that the relative velocities of sound in different solids can be found from the notes they give out when thrown into lengthwise vibration. It was remarked at the time that to draw up a table of absolute velocities we needed only an accurate comparison of the velocity in one of those solids with the velocity in air. We are now in a position to supply that comparison. For we have learned that the vibrations of the air in an organ pipe open at both ends are carried out exactly like those of a rod free at both ends. Any difference of rate between the vibrations of a rod and of an open organ pipe of the same length must therefore be due solely to the different speeds at which the sonorous pulses travel through them. So take an organ pipe of a certain length, giving a note of a certain pitch, and find the length of a pine rod that gives the same note. That length would be ten times the length of the organ pipe, which would prove the velocity of sound in pine to be ten times its velocity in air. But the absolute velocity in air is 1,090 feet a second; so the absolute velocity in pine is 10,900 feet a second, which is the figure given in our first chapter. We owe this beautiful way of finding the velocity of sound in solids to the celebrated Chladni.

In our first lecture we also had a table of the velocities of sound in gases other than air. I am sure you could tell me, after a little thought, how that table was drawn up. All that is needed is to find a series of organ pipes which, filled with the different gases, give the same note; the lengths of those pipes give the relative velocities of sound through the gases. We should find, for instance, that a pipe filled with hydrogen must be four times the length of a pipe filled with oxygen to give the same note, and that would prove the velocity of sound in hydrogen to be four times its velocity in oxygen.

But we also had a table of velocities through various liquids. How was that drawn up? By forcing the liquids through properly built organ pipes and comparing their musical tones. In water it takes a pipe rather better than four feet long to give the note of an air pipe one foot long, and that proves the velocity of sound in water to be somewhat more than four times its velocity in air. My object here is to give you a clear notion of how scientific knowledge lets us grapple with these apparently insurmountable problems. There is no need to go into the niceties of the measurements. You will readily see, though, that all the experiments with gases might be made with the same organ pipe, the velocity of sound in each gas being deduced straight from the pitch of its note. With a pipe of constant length the pitch — in other words the number of vibrations — would be directly proportional to the velocity. So comparing oxygen with hydrogen, we should find the note of the latter to be the double octave of the former's, from which we should infer that the velocity of sound in hydrogen is four times its velocity in oxygen. The same remark applies to experiments with liquids: there too the same pipe may be used throughout, the velocities being inferred from the notes the different liquids give.

In fact, since the length of an open pipe is, as I have explained, half the length of its sonorous wave, we need only find with the siren how many vibrations the pipe makes in a second, and multiply that number by twice the length of the pipe, to get the velocity of sound in the gas or liquid inside it. An open pipe 26 inches long filled with air makes 256 vibrations a second. The length of its sonorous wave is twice 26 inches, or 4⅓ feet; multiplying 256 by 4⅓ we get 1,120 feet a second as the velocity of sound through air at this temperature. If the tube were filled with carbonic acid gas its vibrations would be slower; if with hydrogen, faster; and applying the same principle we should find the velocity of sound in both those gases.

In the same way the length of a solid rod free at both ends and sounding its fundamental note is half the length of the sonorous wave in the substance of the solid. So we have only to find the rate of vibration of such a rod and multiply it by twice the rod's length to get the velocity of sound in the substance of the rod. You can hardly fail to be struck by the power physical science has given us over these problems; nor will you refuse your admiration to that famous old investigator Chladni, who taught us how to master them by experiment.

Reeds and Reed Pipes

Our siren and the experiments we did with it are no doubt still fresh in your memory. Its musical sounds are produced by cutting a series of air currents up into puffs. A vibrating reed does the same thing, as it does in the accordion, the concertina and the harmonica. In those instruments it is not the vibrations of the reed itself, passed to the air and carried through it to our ears, that make the music. The reed's job is constructive, not generative: it moulds into a series of separate puffs what would otherwise be a continuous current of air.

[Figure 104: The metal reed used in organ pipes, seen in perspective at A and in section at B. The long flexible tongue V V lies in a rectangular opening through which the air enters the pipe, and swings to and fro across it, almost but not quite filling it.]

Reeds coupled to organ pipes sometimes command the vibrations of the column of air and are sometimes commanded by them. When they are stiff they rule the column; when they are flexible the column rules them. In the first case, to get any benefit from the column of air, its length ought to be so regulated that either its fundamental tone or one of its overtones matches the rate of vibration of the reed. The metal reed generally used in organ pipes is shown in Fig. 104 at A and B, in perspective and in section. It consists of a long, flexible strip of metal, V V, set in a rectangular opening through which the current of air enters the pipe. How reed and pipe are put together is shown in Fig. 105. The front, b c, of the space holding the flexible tongue is of glass, so that you can see the tongue inside it. A conical pipe, A B, stands over the reed. The wire w i, shown pressing

[Figure 105: The reed and its pipe. The conical pipe A B stands over the reed box, whose front b c is of glass so that the flexible tongue can be seen inside; the wire w i presses against the tongue and can be slid to lengthen or shorten its vibrating part.]

against the reed, is used to lengthen or shorten it, and so to vary its rate of vibration within certain limits. At one time in musical practice the reed closed the opening by simply falling against its sides; every stroke of the reed made a tap, and the taps linked themselves together into an unpleasant, screaming sound which badly damaged the sound of the organ pipe it belonged to. This was lessened, but not cured, by letting the reed strike against soft leather. The reed used now, however, is the free reed, which swings to and fro between the sides of the opening, almost but not quite filling it, and in that way the unpleasantness is avoided. When reed and pipe keep perfect step, the sound is at its purest and most forcible; but a certain latitude is possible on either side of perfect agreement. If the disagreement is pushed too far, though, the pipe stops being any use at all, and we get only the sound of the reed's own vibrations.

Footnote: The clear illustrations of organ pipes and reeds given here, and earlier in this chapter, have been copied in substance from the excellent work of Helmholtz. Pipes opening on hinges, so as to show their inner parts, were shown in the lecture.

Flexible wooden reeds, which can accommodate themselves to the requirements of the pipes above them, are also used in organ pipes. Perhaps the simplest illustration of a reed commanded by its column of air is a common wheat straw. About an inch from a knot, at r, I bury my penknife in this straw, s r′ (Fig. 106), to about a quarter of the straw's thickness, and, turning the blade flat, run it up towards the knot, raising a strip of the straw nearly an inch long. That strip, r r′, is to be our reed, and the straw itself our pipe. It is now eight inches long. Blown into, it gives this decidedly musical sound. Cut down to six inches, the pitch is higher; at four inches, higher still; and at two inches the sound is very shrill indeed. In these experiments the reed was forced to accommodate itself throughout to the requirements of the vibrating column of air.

[Figure 106: The wheat straw s r′ made into a reed pipe: a strip nearly an inch long, r r′, has been raised from the straw near the knot with a penknife, and blowing into the straw sets it vibrating.]

The clarinet is a reed pipe. It has a single broad tongue with a long cylindrical tube attached to it. The reed end of the instrument is gripped by the lips, and their pressure narrows the slit between the reed and its frame as much as is wanted. The overtones of a clarinet differ from those of a flute. A flute is an open pipe, a clarinet a stopped one, the end the reed sits at answering to the closed end of the pipe. The tones of a flute follow the order of the natural numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and so on, or of the even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8; while the tones of a clarinet follow the order of the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7. The notes in between are supplied by opening the holes in the side of the instrument. Sir C. Wheatstone was the first to make this difference between the flute and the clarinet known, and his results agree with the more thorough investigations of Helmholtz. In the oboe and the bassoon we have two reeds leaning together at a sharp angle with a slit between them, through which the air is driven. The pipe of the oboe is conical and its overtones are those of an open pipe — different, therefore, from a clarinet's. The pulpy end of a straw of green corn can be split by squeezing it, so as to make a double reed of this kind, and such a straw gives a musical tone. In the horn, the trumpet and the serpent, the player's lips act as the reed. These instruments are made of long conical tubes and their overtones are those of an open organ pipe. The music of the older instruments of this class was limited to their overtones, the particular tone called out depending on the force of the blast and the tension of the lips. Nowadays it is usual to fill the gaps between the successive overtones with keys, which let the player vary the length of the vibrating column of air.

The Voice

The most perfect of all reed instruments is the organ of the voice. In man the vocal organ sits at the top of the trachea, or windpipe, whose head is shaped to carry certain elastic bands that almost close the opening. When air is forced from the lungs through the slit between these vocal cords, they are thrown into vibration; by varying their tension the rate of vibration is varied and the sound changed in pitch. The vibrations of the vocal cords are practically unaffected by the resonance of the mouth — though we shall learn later that this resonance, by reinforcing one or another of the tones of the vocal cords, has a striking influence on the quality of the voice. The sweetness and smoothness of the voice depend on the slit of the glottis closing perfectly at regular intervals during the vibration.

[Figure 107: The vocal cords at rest, as the laryngoscope shows them — the pale bands running down each side of the opening at the head of the windpipe.]

The vocal cords can be lit up and viewed in a mirror suitably placed at the back of the mouth. Varied experiments of this kind have been carried out by Signor Garcia. I once tried to project M. Czermak's larynx on a screen in this room, but with only partial success. The organ can, however, be viewed directly in the laryngoscope, its motions in singing, speaking and coughing being strikingly visible. It is shown at rest in Fig. 107. The roughness of the voice in a cold is due, according to Helmholtz, to little flakes of mucus that get into the slit of the glottis and can be seen with the laryngoscope. The squeaky falsetto voice some people are afflicted with may, Helmholtz thinks, be produced by the drawing aside of the layer of mucus that ordinarily lies under the vocal cords and loads them. Their edges then become sharper and their weight less; and since their elasticity stays the same, they are shaken into faster tremors. The promptness and accuracy with which the vocal cords can change their tension, their shape and the width of the slit between them — to which must be added the selective resonance of the cavity of the mouth — make the voice the most perfect of musical instruments.

Footnote: I owe it to this eminent artist to draw attention to his experiments communicated to the Royal Society in May 1855 and recorded in the Philosophical Magazine for 1855, vol. x, page 218.
