Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle (1657–1757) was a nephew of the playwright Pierre Corneille and a young man of letters in Paris when he wrote this book. He lived to be nearly a hundred, and for more than forty years he was the permanent secretary of the Paris Academy of Sciences, the man whose job was to explain its work to the public. This book is where he learned how.

It appeared in 1686, when most educated people still pictured the Earth at the center of the universe. A narrator spends a summer at the country house of a Marquise, and over five evenings in her park (a sixth was added the next year) he teaches her the new astronomy: that the Earth turns, that the sun is a star, that the moon is a world like ours, and that the other planets, and perhaps the planets of other stars, are inhabited. She is quick, teasing and hard to fool, and the lessons are also a flirtation. It was the first great book of popular science, one of the first written for a woman reader, and it was read all over Europe for a century.

A few things will seem strange. The science is the science of 1686. Newton's Principia was published the following year, so there is no gravity here. The planets are carried around the sun by "vortices," the great whirlpools of invisible matter that René Descartes had proposed, and Fontenelle treats them as settled. His inhabited planets are a guess he admits is a guess; he enjoys it as much as he argues it. Some of his numbers were already out of date, and the moon has no air. The courtly banter was the manner of the Paris salons, and the jokes about the nations of the world as they turn beneath the Marquise are the joking of his age.

This edition is translated from the French of the 1800 Lyon printing of his final text, from Wikisource. It gives the Preface, his letter to a friend introducing the conversations, and all six evenings. In one sentence of the Fourth Evening, a remark that most Africans have no memory has been left out; the Mercurians he is describing still have none.
