To Monsieur Talleyrand-Perigord, Late Bishop of Autun

Sir,

I have read with great pleasure the pamphlet you have lately published on national education, and I dedicate this volume to you. It is the first dedication I have ever written. I write it to persuade you to read the book carefully, and because I believe you will understand me — which is more than I expect of the many pert little wits who may ridicule arguments they are unable to answer. But, sir, my respect for your understanding goes further than that. It goes so far that I am confident you will not throw my work aside and conclude in a hurry that I am wrong simply because you did not see the subject in the same light yourself.

Forgive my frankness, but I must say that you treated it far too quickly, content to consider it as it had always been considered — back when the rights of man, let alone of woman, were dismissed as fantasy. So I call on you now to weigh what I have said about the rights of woman and about national education, and I call in the firm tone of one human being addressing another. My arguments, sir, come from no private interest: I plead for my sex, not for myself. I have long thought independence the great blessing of life and the basis of every virtue, and I will always secure my own by keeping my wants small, even if it meant living on a bare hillside.

It is an affection for the whole human race, then, that sends my pen racing along in support of what I believe to be the cause of virtue. The same motive makes me long to see women placed where they would advance those glorious principles that give morality some substance, instead of holding them back. My view of the rights and duties of women seems to me to follow so naturally from a few simple principles that I can hardly believe some of the broad minds who framed your admirable constitution will not agree with me.

There is certainly a wider spread of knowledge in France than anywhere else in Europe, and I attribute it largely to the long habit of social exchange between the sexes. I say plainly what I think, however: in France the very essence of sensuality has been distilled for the pleasure of the voluptuary, and a kind of sentimental lust has taken hold. That, together with the system of double-dealing taught by the whole tenor of French political and civil government, has given the national character a sinister sort of shrewdness — finesse is the proper word for it — and a polish of manners that damages the substance beneath by hunting sincerity out of society. And modesty, which is virtue's fairest dress, has been more grossly insulted in France than even in England, until French women have come to call it *prudish* to observe the decencies that animals attend to by instinct.

Manners and morals are so closely related that they are often confused; and though the first ought to be nothing but the natural reflection of the second, still, when various causes have produced artificial and corrupt manners — which are caught very early — morality becomes an empty word. That personal reserve, and that sacred respect for cleanliness and delicacy in family life, which French women almost despise, are the graceful pillars of modesty. Far from despising them, if the pure flame of patriotism has ever reached their hearts, they ought to be labouring to improve the morals of their fellow citizens by teaching men not only to respect modesty in women but to acquire it themselves, since that is the only way to deserve women's regard.

In arguing for the rights of women, my main case rests on this simple principle: that unless a woman is prepared by education to become the companion of a man, she will halt the progress of knowledge. Truth must be common to everyone, or it will have no real influence on how people actually behave. And how can a woman be expected to play her part unless she knows why she ought to be good? Unless freedom strengthens her reason until she understands her duty and sees how it connects with her own real welfare? If children are to be brought up to understand what love of country really means, their mother must love her country too; and a love of humankind, from which an orderly train of virtues springs, can only come from thinking about the moral and civil interests of humankind — and a woman's education and situation at present shut her out from any such enquiry.

In this book I have set out many arguments which seemed to me conclusive, to prove that the prevailing notion that women have a character of their own, distinct from human character, undermines morality. I have argued that if the human body and mind are to be improved, chastity must be far more general than it is; and that chastity will never be respected among men so long as a woman's person is idolised while she has little virtue or sense to give it the grand marks of mental beauty or the appealing simplicity of real affection.

Consider these observations calmly, sir. A glimpse of this truth seemed to open before you when you remarked "that to see one half of the human race excluded by the other from all participation of government, was a political phenomenon that, according to abstract principles, it was impossible to explain." If that is so, what does your constitution rest on? If the abstract rights of man will bear discussion and explanation, then by the same reasoning the rights of woman will not shrink from the same test — though a different opinion prevails in this country, founded on the very argument you use to justify the oppression of women: long custom.

Consider, and I address you as a legislator, whether it is not inconsistent and unjust, when men are contending for their own freedom and for the right to judge for themselves what will make them happy, to keep women in subjection — even though you firmly believe you are acting in the way best calculated to make them happy. Who made man the sole judge, if woman shares with him the gift of reason?

This is exactly how tyrants of every denomination argue, from the weak king down to the weak father of a family. They are all eager to crush reason, and they all insist that they have usurped its throne only in order to be useful. Do you not play a similar part when you *force* all women, by denying them civil and political rights, to stay shut up in their families groping in the dark? For surely, sir, you will not maintain that a duty can be binding which is not founded on reason? If domestic life really is what women are made for, then arguments can be drawn from reason to show it; and, so nobly supported, the more understanding women acquire the more attached to that duty they will be, because they will comprehend it. Unless they do comprehend it, unless their morals rest on the same unchanging principles as men's, no authority on earth can make them discharge it in any virtuous way. They may be convenient slaves, but slavery will always have its usual effect, degrading the master and the abject dependent alike.

But if women are to be excluded, without any voice of their own, from a share in the natural rights of humankind, then first prove — to fend off the charge of injustice and inconsistency — that they lack reason. Otherwise this flaw in your *new constitution*, the first constitution ever founded on reason, will always show that man must in some form act the tyrant; and tyranny, in whatever part of society it raises its brazen face, will always undermine morality.

I have said repeatedly, and produced what seem to me unanswerable arguments drawn from plain fact to prove it, that women cannot be confined by force to domestic concerns. However ignorant they are, they will meddle in weightier matters, neglecting their private duties only to disturb, by cunning tricks, the orderly plans of reason that rise above their understanding.

Besides, while women are trained only to acquire personal accomplishments, men will look for pleasure in variety, and unfaithful husbands will make unfaithful wives. Such ignorant creatures will indeed be very excusable when, never taught to respect the public good and never allowed a single civil right, they try to get justice for themselves by retaliation.

Once that box of mischief is open in a society, what is left to preserve private virtue, the only guarantee of public freedom and general happiness?

Let there be no coercion *established* in society, then; let the common law of gravity take its course, and the sexes will fall into their proper places. And now that more equitable laws are forming your citizens, marriage may become more sacred: your young men may choose their wives out of affection, and your young women may let love root out vanity.

The father of a family will not then weaken his constitution and debase his feelings by visiting the prostitute, nor forget, while obeying the call of appetite, the purpose for which that appetite was planted in him. And the mother will not neglect her children in order to practise the arts of coquetry, once good sense and modesty have secured her the friendship of her husband.

But until men become attentive to the duties of a father, it is useless to expect women to spend time in the nursery which, being "wise in their generation," they choose to spend at the mirror. This exercise of cunning is only an instinct of nature, a way of getting indirectly a little of the power they are unjustly refused a share in. If women are not allowed to enjoy legitimate rights, they will make both themselves and men vicious in order to obtain illegitimate ones.

I wish, sir, to set enquiries of this kind afloat in France; and if they should end by confirming my principles, then when your constitution comes to be revised, the rights of woman may be respected — if it is fully proved that reason calls for that respect, and loudly demands *justice* for one half of the human race.

I am, sir, yours respectfully,

M. W.
