Chapter One: The Rights of Human Beings, and the Duties That Come with Them

In the present state of society it seems necessary to go back to first principles in search of the simplest truths, and to fight some prevailing prejudice for every inch of ground. To clear my way I must be allowed to ask a few plain questions. The answers will probably look as unarguable as the axioms that reasoning is built on — though once they get tangled up with the various motives people act from, they are flatly contradicted, either by men's words or by their conduct.

What does man's pre-eminence over the animals consist in? The answer is as clear as that a half is less than a whole: in reason.

What quality raises one being above another? Virtue, we answer without hesitating.

What were the passions planted in us for? So that man, by struggling with them, might reach a degree of knowledge denied to the animals — that is what experience whispers.

It follows that the perfection of our nature, and our capacity for happiness, must be measured by the degree of reason, virtue and knowledge that marks the individual and shapes the laws binding society together. And that knowledge and virtue flow naturally from the exercise of reason is equally undeniable, if you look at humankind as a whole.

Once the rights and duties of man are simplified in this way, it seems almost impertinent to try to illustrate truths that appear so incontestable. Yet prejudices are so deeply rooted, and have so clouded reason, and so many counterfeit qualities have taken the name of virtues, that it is necessary to follow the course of reason through all the confusion and error that accidental circumstances have led it into, comparing the simple axiom against the casual departures from it.

Men in general seem to use their reason to justify prejudices they have absorbed without knowing how, rather than to root them out. A mind must be strong to form its own principles resolutely, for there is a kind of intellectual cowardice about that makes many men shrink from the job, or do it only by halves. And the imperfect conclusions they draw are often very plausible, because they are built on partial experience, on views that are sound as far as they go but narrow.

Go back to first principles, and vice slinks away from close examination with all its native ugliness showing. But a set of shallow reasoners are forever exclaiming that these arguments prove too much, and that a measure rotten at its core may still be expedient. So expediency is set against simple principle again and again, until truth is lost in a fog of words, virtue in forms, and knowledge becomes a sounding nothing, drowned out by the plausible prejudices that borrow its name.

That the society is most wisely built whose constitution is founded on human nature strikes every thinking being so forcibly, in the abstract, that it looks like presumption to offer proof. Yet proof must be offered, or reason will never storm the stronghold of long custom. And to urge long custom as an argument for depriving men, or women, of their natural rights is one of those absurd sophistries that insult common sense daily.

The civilization of most of the people of Europe is very partial. Indeed one might ask whether they have gained any virtues in exchange for innocence worth the misery produced by the vices that have been plastered over their unsightly ignorance, and by the freedom they have bartered away for a splendid slavery. The desire to dazzle by wealth — the surest kind of pre-eminence a man can get — the pleasure of commanding flattering hangers-on, and a hundred other tangled, low calculations of doting self-love have all helped to overwhelm the mass of humanity and make liberty a convenient handle for mock patriotism. For as long as rank and titles are held to be of the utmost importance, before which genius "must hide its diminished head," it is, with a few exceptions, very unlucky for a nation when a man of ability without rank or property pushes himself into notice. What unheard-of misery have thousands suffered to buy a cardinal's hat for some scheming nobody who longed to be ranked with princes, or to lord it over them by seizing the papal crown!

So much wretchedness has flowed from hereditary honours, riches and monarchy that men of strong feeling have come close to blasphemy in the effort to justify the ways of providence. Man has been presented as independent of the power that made him, or as a lawless planet shooting out of its orbit to steal the heavenly fire of reason — and the vengeance of heaven, lurking in that subtle flame, punished his rashness quite sufficiently by bringing evil into the world.

Struck by this view of the misery and disorder running through society, and worn out with jostling against artificial fools, Rousseau fell in love with solitude; and being at the same time an optimist, he labours with uncommon eloquence to prove that man is naturally a solitary animal. Misled by his respect for the goodness of God — who certainly, for what man of sense and feeling can doubt it, gave life only in order to share out happiness — he treats evil as something positive, and as the work of man. He did not notice that he was exalting one divine attribute at the expense of another just as necessary to divine perfection.

Built on a false hypothesis, his arguments for a state of nature are plausible but unsound. Unsound, I say: because to assert that a state of nature is preferable to civilization in its highest possible perfection is, in other words, to put supreme wisdom on trial. And the paradox that God has made all things right and that evil was introduced by the creature he formed — knowing what he was forming — is as unphilosophical as it is impious.

When that wise Being who created us and placed us here saw the fair idea, he willed, by allowing it to be so, that the passions should unfold our reason, because he could see that present evil would produce future good. Could the helpless creature he called out of nothing break loose from his providence and boldly learn to know good by practising evil without his permission? No. How could that energetic champion of immortality argue so inconsistently? If humankind had stayed forever in the brutal state of nature — which even his magic pen cannot paint as a state where a single virtue took root — it would have been plain, though not to the sensitive unreflecting wanderer, that man was born to run the circle of life and death and to decorate God's garden for some purpose not easily squared with God's attributes.

But if, to crown the whole, rational creatures were to be produced, allowed to rise in excellence by exercising the powers planted in them for that very purpose; if kindness itself thought fit to call into existence a creature above the animals, able to think and to improve himself — then why should that priceless gift, and a gift it was if man was created with the capacity to rise above a state in which sensation produced nothing but animal ease, be called in so many words a curse? A curse it might be reckoned if all our existence were bounded by our stay in this world. For why should the gracious fountain of life give us passions and the power of reflection only to embitter our days and fill us with mistaken notions of dignity? Why should he lead us up from love of ourselves to those sublime emotions that the discovery of his wisdom and goodness excites, if those feelings were not set going to improve our nature, of which they form a part, and to make us capable of enjoying a more godlike share of happiness? Firmly persuaded that no evil exists in the world which God did not intend to take place, I build my belief on the perfection of God.

Rousseau exerts himself to prove that everything *was* right at the beginning; a crowd of authors, that everything *is* right now; and I, that everything *will be* right.

But, faithful to his first position, Rousseau ranks barbarism next after the state of nature; and calling on the ghost of Fabricius, he forgets that in conquering the world the Romans never dreamed of founding their own liberty on any solid basis, or of extending the reign of virtue. Eager to prop up his system, he brands every effort of genius as vicious, and, pronouncing savage virtues divine, raises to demigods men who were barely human — the brutal Spartans, who in defiance of justice and gratitude killed in cold blood the slaves who had proved themselves men by rescuing their oppressors.

Disgusted with artificial manners and artificial virtues, the citizen of Geneva threw out the wheat with the chaff instead of properly sifting the subject, never stopping to ask whether the evils his ardent soul turned from in indignation were the consequences of civilization or the leftovers of barbarism. He saw vice trampling on virtue, and the appearance of goodness taking the place of the real thing; he saw talents bent by power to sinister ends, and it never occurred to him to trace the enormous mischief back to arbitrary power, back to the hereditary distinctions that clash with the mental superiority which naturally raises one man above his fellows. He did not see that royal power in a few generations breeds idiocy into the noble stock, and holds out temptations that make thousands idle and vicious.

Nothing shows up the character of kingship more contemptibly than the various crimes that have raised men to that supreme dignity. Vile intrigues, unnatural crimes and every vice that degrades our nature have been the steps to that eminence; and yet millions of men have lain back and let the nerveless limbs of the descendants of such rapacious prowlers rest quietly on their bloodstained thrones.

What but a diseased vapour can hang over a society whose chief director has been educated in nothing but the invention of crimes, or the stupid routine of childish ceremonies? Will men never be wise? Will they never stop expecting corn from weeds, and figs from thistles?

Even when the most favourable circumstances come together, it is impossible for any man to acquire enough knowledge and strength of mind to discharge the duties of a king entrusted with uncontrolled power. How much worse, then, must those duties be violated when his very elevation is an insuperable bar to acquiring either wisdom or virtue; when every human feeling in him is stifled by flattery and every chance of reflection shut out by pleasure! Surely it is madness to make the fate of thousands depend on the whim of a weak fellow creature whose very station sinks him *necessarily* below the meanest of his subjects. But one power should not be pulled down in order to raise another, for all power intoxicates weak men; and the abuse of it proves that the more equality is established among men, the more virtue and happiness will reign in society. Yet this, and any similar maxim drawn from plain reason, raises an outcry. The church or the state is in danger, we are told, if faith in the wisdom of antiquity is anything less than total; and those who, roused by the sight of human misery, dare to attack human authority are abused as despisers of God and enemies of man. These are bitter slanders, and yet they reached one of the best of men, whose ashes still preach peace, and whose memory deserves a respectful pause whenever subjects so near his heart are being discussed.

Footnote: Dr. Price.

Having attacked the sacred majesty of kings, I shall hardly cause surprise by adding my firm conviction that every profession whose power rests on a great subordination of rank does real damage to morality.

A standing army, for instance, is incompatible with freedom, because subordination and severity are the very sinews of military discipline, and despotism is needed to give force to enterprises directed by a single will. A spirit fed on romantic notions of honour, a kind of morality founded on the fashion of the age, can only be felt by a few officers, while the main body has to be moved by command, like waves of the sea; for the strong wind of authority drives the crowd of junior officers forward with headlong fury, hardly knowing or caring why.

Besides, nothing can be so damaging to the morals of a country town as the occasional residence of a set of idle, superficial young men whose only occupation is flirtation, and whose polished manners make vice more dangerous by hiding its deformity under gay ornamental drapery. An air of fashion, which is really a badge of slavery and proves that the soul has no strong character of its own, overawes simple country people into imitating the vices when they cannot catch the slippery graces of politeness. Every regiment is a chain of little despots who, submitting and tyrannizing without ever exercising their reason, become dead weights of vice and folly on the community. A man of rank or fortune, certain of rising through connections, has nothing to do but pursue some extravagant whim, while the needy *gentleman*, who is to rise, as the phrase goes, by his merit, turns into a servile hanger-on or a contemptible pimp.

Sailors — the naval gentlemen — come under the same description, except that their vices take a different and coarser cast. They are more positively idle when they are not performing the ceremonies of their station, whereas the insignificant fluttering of soldiers might be called active idleness. Being more confined to the company of men, sailors develop a taste for humour and mischievous practical jokes, while soldiers, mixing often with well-bred women, pick up a sentimental cant. But the mind is equally out of the question, whether they indulge in the horse laugh or the polite simper.

May I extend the comparison to a profession where there is certainly more mind to be found? For the clergy have better opportunities of improvement, though subordination cramps their faculties almost as much. The blind submission to forms of belief that is imposed at college serves as an apprenticeship for the curate, who will most obsequiously respect the opinion of his rector or his patron if he means to get on in his profession. Perhaps there is no more forcible contrast anywhere than between the servile, dependent walk of a poor curate and the courtly bearing of a bishop — and the respect the one inspires and the contempt the other does make both of them equally useless at their separate jobs.

It is very important to notice that every man's character is shaped to some degree by his profession. A man of sense may have no more than a cast of expression, which wears off as you come to know him as an individual; whereas the weak, ordinary man has hardly any character except what belongs to his body — or at least all his opinions have been steeped so long in the vat consecrated by authority that you cannot taste the faint spirit yielded by the grapes of his own vine.

Society, then, as it becomes more enlightened, ought to be very careful not to establish bodies of men who must inevitably be made foolish or vicious by the very constitution of their profession.

In the infancy of society, when men were only just emerging from barbarism, chiefs and priests, touching the most powerful springs of savage conduct — hope and fear — must have had unlimited sway. An aristocracy is naturally the first form of government. But clashing interests soon lose their balance, and a monarchy and a priesthood break out of the confusion of ambitious struggles, both of them then secured on a foundation of feudal tenures. This appears to be the origin of royal and priestly power, and the dawn of civilization. But such combustible materials cannot be shut up for long; and finding a vent in foreign wars and internal rebellions, the people acquire some power in the tumult, which forces their rulers to gloss over their oppression with a show of right. So as war, agriculture, trade and literature expand the mind, despots are driven to use covert corruption to keep a firm grip on the power that used to be snatched by open force. And this lurking gangrene is spread quickest by luxury and superstition, the certain dregs of ambition. The idle puppet of a court first becomes a luxurious monster or a fastidious sensualist, and then turns the contagion his unnatural condition spreads into an instrument of tyranny.

Footnote: Men of ability scatter seeds that grow up and have a great influence on opinion as it forms; and once public opinion has come down on the side of reason, the overthrow of arbitrary power is not far off.

It is the plague-carrying purple of royalty that turns the progress of civilization into a curse and warps the understanding, until men of feeling begin to doubt whether the expansion of intellect produces more happiness or more misery. But the nature of the poison points to the antidote; and if Rousseau had climbed one step higher in his enquiry, or if his eye could have pierced the foggy atmosphere he almost disdained to breathe, his active mind would have darted forward to contemplate the perfection of man in the establishment of a true civilization, instead of taking its ferocious flight back into the night of sensual ignorance.
