Chapter Two: The Common Opinion That Each Sex Has a Character of Its Own

(Part 1 of 2)

To account for the tyranny of men, and to excuse it, a great many ingenious arguments have been produced to prove that in acquiring virtue the two sexes ought to be aiming at quite different characters — or, to say it plainly, that women are not allowed enough strength of mind to acquire anything that really deserves the name of virtue. Yet if we grant that women have souls, it would seem that providence has appointed only one road by which *mankind* can be led to either virtue or happiness.

If women are not a swarm of mayflies born to trifle, then why should they be kept ignorant under the plausible name of innocence? Men complain, and with reason, of the follies and caprices of our sex, when they are not busy sharply satirizing our headstrong passions and grovelling vices. Look, I would answer, at the natural effect of ignorance! A mind will always be unstable that has nothing but prejudices to rest on, and the current will run with destructive fury when there is nothing to break its force. Women are told from infancy, and taught by their mothers' example, that a little knowledge of human weakness — justly called cunning — a soft temper, *outward* obedience and a scrupulous attention to a childish kind of propriety will win them the protection of a man; and that if they happen to be beautiful, nothing else is needed for at least twenty years of their lives.

This is how Milton describes our first frail mother. Though when he tells us that women are formed for softness and sweet attractive grace, I cannot make out what he means, unless, in the true Muslim strain, he meant to deprive us of souls and to hint that we are beings designed only by sweet attractive grace and docile blind obedience to gratify a man's senses when he can no longer soar on the wing of contemplation.

How grossly they insult us, those who advise us to make ourselves nothing but gentle domestic brutes! Take that winning softness so warmly and so often recommended, which governs by obeying. What childish language, and how insignificant a creature — can it possibly be an immortal one? — who will stoop to govern by such underhand methods. "Certainly," says Lord Bacon, "man is of kin to the beasts by his body: and if he be not of kin to God by his spirit, he is a base and ignoble creature!" Men seem to me to behave in a very unphilosophical way when they try to secure women's good conduct by keeping them permanently in a state of childhood. Rousseau was more consistent when he wished to stop the progress of reason in both sexes; for if men eat of the tree of knowledge, women will get a taste of it too — though from the imperfect cultivation their understandings receive at present, all they arrive at is a knowledge of evil.

Children, I grant, should be innocent; but when the word is applied to a grown man or woman it is only a polite term for weakness. For if we allow that women were meant by providence to acquire human virtues, and by exercising their understandings that stability of character which is the firmest ground for our future hopes, then they must be allowed to turn towards the fountain of light, and not forced to steer by the twinkling of a mere satellite. Milton, I grant, was of a very different opinion, for he bows to the unchallengeable right of beauty — though it would be hard to make the two passages I am about to set side by side consistent with each other. But great men are often led into inconsistencies of just this kind by their senses.

	"To whom thus Eve with perfect beauty adorned:
	My author and disposer, what thou bidst
	Unargued I obey; so God ordains;
	God is thy law, thou mine; to know no more
	Is woman's happiest knowledge and her praise."

These are exactly the arguments I have used with children — except that I added: "Your reason is gaining strength now, and until it comes to some maturity you must look to me for advice. After that you ought to *think*, and rely on God alone."

Yet in the following lines Milton seems to agree with me, when he has Adam protest to his Maker:

	"Hast thou not made me here thy substitute,
	And these inferior far beneath me set?
	Among unequals what society
	Can sort, what harmony or delight?
	Which must be mutual, in proportion due
	Given and received; but in disparity
	The one intense, the other still remiss
	Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
	Tedious alike: of fellowship I speak
	Such as I seek fit to participate
	All rational delight."

In discussing the manners of women, then, let us set the sensual arguments aside and trace out what we ought to be trying to make of them, so that they may cooperate — if that is not too bold a way of putting it — with the Supreme Being.

By individual education I mean — since the sense of the word is not precisely fixed — such attention to a child as will slowly sharpen the senses, form the temper, regulate the passions as they begin to ferment, and set the understanding to work before the body reaches maturity; so that the adult has only to carry on the important business of learning to think and reason, not to begin it.

To prevent any misunderstanding I must add that I do not believe a private education can work the wonders some hopeful writers have attributed to it. Men and women are educated in great part by the opinions and manners of the society they live in. In every age there has been a stream of popular opinion that carries everything before it and gives a kind of family character to the century. It may fairly be concluded, then, that until society is differently constituted, not much can be expected from education. For my present purpose, however, it is enough to assert that whatever effect circumstances may have on our abilities, every being can become virtuous by exercising its own reason. For if a single being were created with vicious inclinations — that is, positively bad — what would save us from atheism? Or, if we worship a God, is that God not a devil?

The most perfect education, in my opinion, is therefore the exercise of the understanding best calculated to strengthen the body and form the heart; or, in other words, to enable a person to acquire such habits of virtue as will make them independent. In fact it is a farce to call any being virtuous whose virtues are not the result of exercising its own reason. This was Rousseau's opinion about men. I extend it to women, and confidently assert that they have been drawn out of their proper sphere by false refinement, and not by any attempt to acquire masculine qualities. Still, the royal homage they receive is so intoxicating that until the manners of the age are changed and rebuilt on more reasonable principles it may be impossible to convince them that the illegitimate power they get by degrading themselves is a curse, and that they must return to nature and equality if they want the calm satisfaction that unspoiled affections bring. But for that day we must wait — wait, perhaps, until kings and nobles, enlightened by reason and preferring the real dignity of a human being to childish pomp, throw off their gaudy hereditary trappings. And if women do not then give up the arbitrary power of beauty, they will have proved that they have *less* mind than men.

I may be accused of arrogance; still I must declare what I firmly believe, which is that every writer on the education and manners of women, from Rousseau to Dr. Gregory, has helped to make women more artificial and weaker characters than they would otherwise have been, and consequently more useless members of society. I might have put this conviction in a lower key, but I am afraid that would have been the whine of affectation rather than the faithful expression of what I feel — of the clear conclusion that experience and reflection have brought me to. When I reach that division of the subject I shall point out the particular passages I object to in the works of the authors I have just named; but first I must say that my objection extends to the whole drift of those books, which tend, in my view, to degrade one half of the human species and to make women pleasing at the cost of every solid virtue.

To reason on Rousseau's ground for a moment: if a man really did reach some perfection of mind at the same time his body reached maturity, then it might be quite proper, in order to make a husband and wife *one*, that she should rely entirely on his understanding; and the graceful ivy clasping the oak that supports it would make a whole in which strength and beauty were equally conspicuous. But husbands, alas, as well as their helpmates, are often only overgrown children — indeed, thanks to early debauchery, scarcely men even in their outward form. And if the blind lead the blind, nobody needs to come from heaven to tell us what follows.

Many causes, in the present corrupt state of society, help to enslave women by cramping their understandings and sharpening their senses. One that quietly does more mischief than all the rest, perhaps, is their disregard of order.

To do everything in an orderly way is a most important rule, and women, who generally receive only a disorderly sort of education, rarely observe it with the exactness that men do, having been broken into method from infancy. This careless guesswork — and what else can you call the random exertions of a sort of instinctive common sense that is never brought to the test of reason? — prevents them from generalizing from facts, so that they do today what they did yesterday, merely because they did it yesterday.

This contempt for the understanding in early life has worse consequences than is commonly supposed. The little knowledge that women of strong mind do acquire is, for various reasons, of a more scattered kind than men's, and is got more by sheer observation of real life than by comparing what they have individually observed with the results of experience generalized by reflection. Their dependent situation and their domestic employments lead them more into company, so that what they learn comes in snatches; and since learning is generally only a secondary thing with them, they never pursue any one branch with the persevering ardour that gives vigour to the faculties and clearness to the judgment. In the present state of society a little learning is required to keep up the character of a gentleman, and boys are obliged to submit to a few years of discipline. But in a woman's education the cultivation of the understanding is always subordinate to acquiring some bodily accomplishment — and even that fails, since a body weakened by confinement and by false notions of modesty never attains the grace and beauty that slack, half-formed limbs cannot show. Besides, in youth their faculties are not drawn out by competition; and having no serious scientific study, if they have natural shrewdness it is turned far too early onto life and manners. They dwell on effects and variations without tracing them back to causes; and complicated rules for regulating behaviour are a poor substitute for simple principles.

As proof that it is education that gives women this appearance of weakness, take the example of military men, who like women are sent out into the world before their minds have been stocked with knowledge or fortified with principles. The consequences are similar. Soldiers pick up a little superficial knowledge snatched from the muddy current of conversation, and from mixing constantly in society they acquire what is called a knowledge of the world; and this acquaintance with manners and customs has often been confused with a knowledge of the human heart. But can the crude fruit of casual observation, never brought to the test of a judgment formed by comparing reflection with experience, deserve such a name? Soldiers, like women, practise the minor virtues with punctilious politeness. Where is the difference of sex, then, when the education has been the same? All the difference I can see comes from the superior advantage of liberty, which lets the soldier see more of life.

It is wandering from my subject, perhaps, to make a political remark; but since the train of my reflections produced it naturally, I shall not pass it over in silence.

Standing armies can never be made up of resolute, robust men. They may be well-disciplined machines, but they will seldom contain men under the influence of strong passions or possessed of very vigorous faculties. And as for depth of understanding, I will venture to say that it is as rarely found in the army as it is among women — and the cause, I maintain, is the same. It may be added that officers are also particularly attentive to their persons, fond of dancing, crowded rooms, adventures and ridicule. Like the *fair* sex, the business of their lives is gallantry. They were taught to please, and they live only to please. Yet they do not lose their rank in the distinction of the sexes, for they are still reckoned superior to women — though what their superiority consists in, beyond what I have just mentioned, is difficult to discover.

The great misfortune is this: that both acquire manners before morals, and a knowledge of life before reflection has given them any acquaintance with the grand ideal outline of human nature. The consequence follows naturally. Satisfied with common nature, they fall prey to prejudices, and, taking all their opinions on credit, submit blindly to authority. So that if they have any sense, it is a kind of instinctive glance that catches proportions and decides questions of manners, but fails as soon as an argument has to be followed below the surface or an opinion taken apart.

May the same remark not be applied to women? Indeed the argument can be carried further, for both are thrown out of any useful station by the unnatural distinctions established in civilized life. Riches and hereditary honours have made ciphers of women in order to give consequence to the figure they stand beside; and idleness has produced a mixture of gallantry and despotism in society which leads the very men who are the slaves of their mistresses to tyrannize over their sisters, wives and daughters. It is only keeping them in rank and file, of course. Strengthen the female mind by enlarging it, and there will be an end to blind obedience; but since blind obedience is exactly what power always wants, tyrants and sensualists are quite right to try to keep women in the dark, the first because they only want slaves and the second because they only want a plaything. The sensualist has been the most dangerous tyrant of the two, and women have been duped by their lovers as princes are by their ministers, all the while dreaming that they reigned over them.

I am chiefly referring here to Rousseau, whose character of Sophia is undoubtedly a captivating one, though it seems to me grossly unnatural. It is not the superstructure I mean to attack, however, but the foundation of her character, the principles her education was built on. Warmly as I admire the genius of that able writer, whose opinions I shall often have occasion to quote, indignation always takes the place of admiration in me, and the rigid frown of insulted virtue wipes away the smile of pleasure his eloquent sentences usually raise, when I come to his voluptuous daydreams. Is this the man who in his ardour for virtue would banish all the soft arts of peace and carry us nearly back to Spartan discipline? Is this the man who loves to paint the useful struggles of passion, the triumphs of a good disposition, and the heroic flights that carry a glowing soul out of itself? How those mighty sentiments come down in the world when he is describing the pretty foot and enticing airs of his little favourite! But I shall leave the subject for now; and instead of severely rebuking the passing outpourings of an overweening sensibility, I shall only observe that anyone who has ever looked kindly at society must often have been pleased by the sight of a humble mutual love, not dignified by any sentiment nor strengthened by any shared intellectual pursuit. The domestic trifles of the day have supplied matter for cheerful conversation, and innocent caresses have eased labours that never called for much exercise of mind or stretch of thought. And yet has the sight of that moderate happiness not stirred more tenderness than respect? Something like what we feel watching children at play, or animals at their games — whereas the contemplation of the noble struggles of suffering merit raises admiration, and carries our thoughts to that world where sensation will give place to reason.

Women, then, are to be considered either as moral beings, or as creatures so weak that they must be entirely subject to the superior faculties of men.

Let us examine the question. Rousseau declares that a woman should never for a moment feel herself independent; that she should be governed by fear so as to exercise her *natural* cunning, and made into a coquettish slave in order to be a more alluring object of desire, a *sweeter* companion whenever a man chooses to relax. He carries the arguments he pretends to draw from the indications of nature further still, and hints that truth and fortitude, the cornerstones of all human virtue, are to be cultivated in a woman only within certain limits, because for the female character obedience is the great lesson, to be driven home with unrelenting rigour.

What nonsense! When will a great man arise with strength of mind enough to blow away the fumes that pride and sensuality have spread over this subject? If women are by nature inferior to men, their virtues must still be the same in kind, if not in degree — otherwise virtue is a merely relative idea. And consequently their conduct should rest on the same principles and have the same aim.

Connected with men as daughters, wives and mothers, their moral character may be measured by how they fulfil those simple duties; but the end, the great end of their efforts, should be to unfold their own faculties and acquire the dignity of a virtue they are conscious of. They may try to make their road a pleasant one, but they should never forget, any more than men should, that life does not yield the happiness that can satisfy an immortal soul. I do not mean to suggest that either sex should get so lost in abstract reflections or distant prospects as to forget the affections and duties lying in front of them, which are in truth the appointed means of producing the fruit of life. On the contrary, I would warmly recommend those affections and duties, even while I insist that they give most satisfaction when they are seen in their true, subordinate light.

The prevailing opinion that woman was created for man probably had its origin in Moses's poetical story. But since very few people who have given the subject any serious thought have ever supposed that Eve was literally one of Adam's ribs, the inference must be allowed to fall to the ground — or be admitted only so far as it proves that man, from the remotest antiquity, found it convenient to use his strength to subjugate his companion and his ingenuity to show that she ought to have her neck bent under the yoke, because she, like the animals, was created to do his pleasure.

Let no one conclude that I want to turn the order of things upside down. I have already granted that from the constitution of their bodies men appear to be designed by providence to attain a greater degree of virtue. I am speaking of the sexes collectively. But I see not the shadow of a reason for concluding that their virtues should differ in nature. How could they, in fact, if virtue has only one eternal standard? So if I reason consistently I must maintain, as strenuously as I maintain that there is a God, that both sexes have the same simple direction.

It follows, then, that cunning should not be set against wisdom, nor little cares against great exertions, nor an insipid softness varnished over with the name of gentleness against the fortitude that only grand views can inspire.

I shall be told that women would then lose many of their peculiar graces, and a well-known poet may be quoted against my unqualified assertions. For Pope has said, in the name of the whole male sex,

	"Yet ne'er so sure our passions to create,
	As when she touch'd the brink of all we hate."

What light that sally throws on men and women I shall leave the judicious to decide. For myself I shall be content to observe that I cannot see why, unless women are merely mortal creatures with no souls at all, they should always be degraded by being made to serve love or lust.

To speak disrespectfully of love is, I know, high treason against sentiment and fine feeling; but I want to speak the plain language of truth, and to address the head rather than the heart. To try to reason love out of the world would be to out-Quixote Cervantes and would offend just as much against common sense. But to try to restrain this tumultuous passion, and to show that it should not be allowed to dethrone our higher powers or usurp the sceptre that the understanding ought always to wield coolly, seems a less wild undertaking.

Youth is the season for love in both sexes; but in those days of thoughtless enjoyment some provision ought to be made for the more important years of life, when reflection takes the place of sensation. Rousseau, though, and most of the male writers who have followed in his steps, have warmly insisted that the whole tendency of a woman's education should be directed to one point: making her pleasing.

Let me reason with the supporters of this opinion who know anything of human nature. Do they imagine that marriage can uproot the habits of a lifetime? The woman who has been taught nothing but to please will soon find that her charms are slanting sunbeams, and that they cannot have much effect on her husband's heart when he sees them every day and the summer is over. Will she then have enough native energy to look into herself for comfort and cultivate her sleeping faculties? Or is it not more reasonable to expect that she will try to please other men, and, in the excitement of hoping for new conquests, try to forget the humiliation her love or her pride has suffered? When the husband stops being a lover — and the time will inevitably come — her desire to please will grow languid, or turn into a source of bitterness; and love, perhaps the most fleeting of all the passions, gives place to jealousy or vanity.

I am speaking now of women restrained by principle or by prejudice. Such women, though they would shrink from an affair with genuine horror, still want the homage of gallantry to convince them that their husbands are cruelly neglecting them; or else they spend days and weeks dreaming of the happiness enjoyed by kindred souls, until their health is undermined and their spirits broken by discontent. How can the great art of pleasing be such a necessary study, then? It is only useful to a mistress. The chaste wife and the serious mother should think of her power to please as no more than the polish on her virtues, and of her husband's affection as one of the comforts that make her task easier and her life happier. But whether she is loved or neglected, her first wish should be to make herself worthy of respect, and not to depend for all her happiness on a being subject to the same weaknesses as herself.

The amiable Dr. Gregory fell into a similar mistake. I respect his heart, but I entirely disapprove of his celebrated Legacy to His Daughters.

He advises his daughters to cultivate a fondness for dress, because a fondness for dress, he asserts, is natural to them. I cannot understand what either he or Rousseau means when they use that vague word so often. If they told me that in some pre-existent state the soul was fond of dress and brought the inclination with it into a new body, I should listen with a half smile, as I often do when I hear people ranting about innate elegance. But if he only meant that exercising the faculties will produce this fondness, I deny it. It is not natural. It arises, like false ambition in men, from a love of power.
