Chapter Two: The Common Opinion That Each Sex Has a Character of Its Own

(Part 2 of 2)

Dr. Gregory goes much further. He actually recommends dissimulation, and advises an innocent girl to give her own feelings the lie and not dance with spirit, at a moment when a light heart would make her feet eloquent without making her movements immodest. In the name of truth and common sense, why should a woman not admit that she can take more exercise than another — or, in other words, that she has a sound constitution? Why, in order to damp an innocent liveliness, must she be darkly told that men will draw conclusions she never dreamed of? Let the libertine draw whatever inference he pleases; but I hope no sensible mother will cramp the natural frankness of youth by instilling such indecent cautions. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; and one wiser than Solomon said that it is the heart that should be made clean, and not the trivial ceremonies that are observed — which are not very hard to fulfil with scrupulous exactness while vice reigns inside.

Women ought to try to purify their hearts. But how can they, when their uncultivated understandings leave them entirely dependent on their senses for occupation and amusement, when no noble pursuit lifts them above the little vanities of the day, or lets them curb the wild emotions that shake a reed which every passing breeze has power over? To gain the affection of a virtuous man, is affectation really necessary?

Nature has given woman a weaker frame than man. But to secure her husband's affection, must a wife who has exercised her mind and body while discharging the duties of a daughter, a wife and a mother, and has kept her constitution's natural strength and her nerves in healthy tone — must she, I say, stoop to use artifice and feign a sickly delicacy? Weakness may excite tenderness and gratify the arrogant pride of a man, but the lordly caresses of a protector will not satisfy a noble mind that longs for respect and deserves it. Fondness is a poor substitute for friendship.

In a harem, I grant, all these arts are necessary; the epicure must have his palate tickled or he will sink into apathy. But have women so little ambition that such a condition satisfies them? Can they idly dream their lives away in the lap of pleasure, or in the dullness of boredom, rather than claim their right to pursue reasonable pleasures and make themselves conspicuous by practising the virtues that give humankind its dignity? Surely she has no immortal soul who can loiter her life away employed only in decorating her person, so as to amuse the languid hours and soften the cares of a fellow creature who is willing to be cheered up by her smiles and her tricks when the serious business of the day is over.

Besides, the woman who strengthens her body and exercises her mind will, by managing her family and practising various virtues, become her husband's friend rather than his humble dependent. And if she deserves his regard by possessing such substantial qualities, she will not find it necessary to hide her affection, or to feign an unnatural coldness of constitution to excite his passion. In fact, if we go back to history, we shall find that the women who have distinguished themselves have been neither the most beautiful nor the gentlest of their sex.

Nature — or, to speak with strict propriety, God — has made all things right; but man has sought out many inventions to spoil the work. I am referring now to that part of Dr. Gregory's treatise where he advises a wife never to let her husband know the full extent of her feeling or her affection. A voluptuary's precaution, and as ineffectual as it is absurd. Love, by its very nature, must be transitory. To look for a secret that would make it constant would be as wild a search as the hunt for the philosopher's stone or the universal cure, and the discovery would be as useless — or rather as harmful — to humankind. The most sacred bond of society is friendship. A shrewd satirist put it well when he said that rare as true love is, true friendship is rarer still.

This is an obvious truth, and since its cause does not lie deep, it will not escape a brief glance of enquiry.

Love — the common passion, in which chance and sensation take the place of choice and reason — is felt to some degree by most of humankind; there is no need to speak here of the emotions that rise above love or sink below it. This passion, naturally increased by suspense and difficulty, draws the mind out of its usual state and exalts the affections. But once the security of marriage lets the fever of love subside, a healthy temperature is thought insipid only by those who have not intellect enough to put the calm tenderness of friendship and the confidence of respect in the place of blind admiration and the sensual emotions of fondness.

This is, and must be, the course of nature: friendship or indifference inevitably follows love. And this arrangement seems to harmonize perfectly with the system of government that prevails in the moral world. The passions are spurs to action and they open the mind; but they sink into mere appetites, into a momentary personal gratification, once the object is gained and the satisfied mind settles down to enjoy it. The man who had some virtue while he was struggling for a crown often becomes a voluptuous tyrant once it sits on his head. And when the lover is not lost in the husband, the doting fool, prey to childish whims and fond jealousies, neglects the serious duties of life, and the caresses that ought to build confidence in his children are lavished on his overgrown child, his wife.

If they are to fulfil the duties of life, and to pursue with any vigour the various employments that form a moral character, the master and mistress of a family ought not to go on loving each other with passion. I mean that they ought not to indulge emotions that disturb the order of society and monopolize thoughts that should be otherwise employed. A mind that has never been absorbed by a single object lacks vigour; if it can stay absorbed for long, it is weak.

A mistaken education, a narrow and uncultivated mind, and a great many prejudices about the sexes all tend to make women more constant than men; but I shall not touch on that branch of the subject at present. I will go further, and assert, without dreaming that it is a paradox, that an unhappy marriage is often very advantageous to a family, and that the neglected wife is generally the best mother. And this would nearly always be the result if the female mind were more enlarged. For it seems to be the common dispensation of providence that whatever we gain in present enjoyment is deducted from that treasure of life which is experience, and that while we are gathering the flowers of the day and revelling in pleasure we cannot be picking the solid fruit of labour and wisdom at the same time. The road lies in front of us; we must turn right or left; and the man who spends his life bounding from one pleasure to another must not complain if he acquires neither wisdom nor a character anyone respects.

Suppose for a moment that the soul is not immortal, and that we were created only for this present scene. Then I think we should have reason to complain that love, that infant fondness, ever grows insipid and cloys the senses. Let us eat, drink and love, for tomorrow we die, would in fact be the language of reason and the morality of life; and who but a fool would give up a reality for a passing shadow? But if, awed by observing how far the mind can improve, we disdain to confine our wishes or our thoughts to so comparatively mean a field of action — one that only looks grand and important because it is connected with a boundless prospect and with sublime hopes — then what need is there for falsehood in our conduct? Why must the sacred majesty of truth be violated to hold on to a deceitful good that saps the very foundation of virtue? Why must a woman's mind be tainted with coquettish arts in order to gratify the sensualist, and to stop love from settling into friendship, or into a compassionate tenderness where there are no qualities for friendship to be built on? Let the honest heart show itself, and let *reason* teach passion to submit to necessity; or else let the dignified pursuit of virtue and knowledge raise the mind above emotions which, when they are not kept within bounds, embitter the cup of life rather than sweeten it.

I do not mean the romantic passion that goes along with genius. Who can clip its wings? But that grand passion, out of all proportion to the puny enjoyments of life, is true only to the sentiment, and feeds on itself. The passions celebrated for lasting have always been unlucky ones. They gained their strength from absence and from a constitutional melancholy. The fancy has hovered round a form of beauty only dimly seen — whereas familiarity might have turned admiration into disgust, or at least into indifference, and given the imagination leisure to start fresh game. Taking this view of things, Rousseau is perfectly right to have Eloisa, the mistress of his soul, love St. Preux when her life was fading; but that is no proof that the passion is immortal.

Of the same complexion is Dr. Gregory's advice about delicacy of sentiment, which he tells a woman not to acquire if she has decided to marry. That decision, however — perfectly consistent with his earlier advice — he calls *indelicate*, and he earnestly urges his daughters to conceal it even while it governs their conduct: as though it were indelicate to have the common appetites of human nature.

Noble morality! And quite consistent with the cautious prudence of a small soul that cannot see beyond the present minute division of existence. If all the faculties of a woman's mind are to be cultivated only so far as they bear on her dependence on a man; if, once she has got a husband, she has reached her goal and, meanly proud, is satisfied with such a paltry crown, then let her grovel contentedly, raised by her occupations hardly at all above the animals. But if she is struggling for the prize of her high calling, let her cultivate her understanding without stopping to consider what sort of character the husband she is destined for may have. Let her simply determine, without being too anxious about present happiness, to acquire the qualities that ennoble a rational being; and then a rough, inelegant husband may offend her taste without destroying her peace of mind. She will shape her soul not to fit her companion's weaknesses but to bear with them: his character may be a trial to her virtue, but it will not be an obstacle to it.

If Dr. Gregory had confined his remark to romantic expectations of unchanging love and kindred feeling, he should have remembered that experience will banish what advice can never stop us wishing for, so long as the imagination is kept alive at the expense of reason.

I admit it often happens that women who have nursed a romantic and unnatural delicacy of feeling waste their lives *imagining* how happy they would have been with a husband who could love them with a fervent, daily increasing affection, all day long. But they might as well pine married as single, and would be no more unhappy with a bad husband than they are longing for a good one. That a proper education — or, to be more precise, a well-stocked mind — would let a woman support a single life with dignity, I grant. But that she should avoid cultivating her taste in case her husband occasionally offends it, is giving up substance for shadow. To tell the truth, I do not know what use an improved taste is at all, if it does not make a person more independent of the accidents of life, if it does not open new sources of enjoyment that depend on the solitary operations of the mind. People of taste, married or single alike, will always be disgusted by a variety of things that less observant minds never notice. The argument must not be made to hinge on that. But taking enjoyment as a whole, is taste to be called a blessing?

The question is whether it brings more pain than pleasure. The answer will decide whether Dr. Gregory's advice is sound, and will show how absurd and tyrannical it is to lay down a system of slavery in this way, or to try to educate moral beings by any rules other than those drawn from pure reason, which apply to the whole species.

Gentleness of manner, forbearance and long-suffering are such lovable, godlike qualities that in sublime poetry the Deity himself has been clothed with them; and perhaps no picture of his goodness fastens on human affection so strongly as those that show him abundant in mercy and ready to pardon. Gentleness seen in that light bears every mark of grandeur on its face, combined with the winning graces of stooping from a height. But what a different aspect it takes on when it is the submissive bearing of dependence — the prop of a weakness that loves because it needs protection, and forbears because it must endure injuries in silence, smiling under a lash it dares not snarl at. Abject as that picture is, it is the portrait of an accomplished woman according to the received opinion of female excellence, which plausible reasoners have separated from human excellence altogether. Or else they kindly give back the rib and make one moral being out of a man and a woman — not forgetting to give her all the "submissive charms."

Footnote: See Rousseau, and Swedenborg.

How women are to exist in that state where there is to be neither marrying nor giving in marriage, we are not told. For although moralists agree that the whole tenor of life seems to prove that *man* is being prepared by various circumstances for a future state, they agree just as consistently in advising *woman* to provide for the present only. Gentleness, docility and a spaniel-like affection are recommended on this ground as the cardinal virtues of the sex; and, disregarding the arbitrary economy of nature, one writer has declared that it is masculine in a woman to be melancholy. She was created to be the toy of man, his rattle, and it must jingle in his ears whenever he dismisses reason and chooses to be amused.

To recommend gentleness on a broad basis is, of course, strictly philosophical. A frail creature should work at being gentle. But when forbearance confuses right with wrong it stops being a virtue; and however convenient it may be in a companion, that companion will always be considered an inferior, and will inspire nothing but a vapid tenderness that easily degenerates into contempt. Still, if advice really could make a person gentle whose natural disposition did not admit of such a fine polish, something would have been gained for the general order. But if — as could very quickly be shown — this indiscriminate counsel produces nothing but affectation, and throws a stumbling block in the way of gradual improvement and any real bettering of the temper, then women are not much benefited by sacrificing solid virtues to superficial graces, however many years of royal sway those graces may win the individual.

As a philosopher I read with indignation the plausible epithets men use to soften their insults; and as a moralist I ask what is meant by such mongrel phrases as fair defects and amiable weaknesses. If there is only one criterion of morals, only one archetype for humanity, then women appear to be suspended by destiny like Muhammad's coffin in the popular tale: they have neither the unerring instinct of animals, nor are they allowed to fix the eye of reason on a perfect model. They were made to be loved, and must not aim at being respected, in case they should be hunted out of society as masculine.

But let us look at the subject another way. Do passive, indolent women make the best wives? Confining the discussion to this present moment of existence, let us see how such weak creatures play their part. Do the women who have propped up the prevailing prejudice by acquiring a few superficial accomplishments really contribute to their husbands' happiness? Do they display their charms merely to amuse them? And have women who absorbed notions of passive obedience early in life enough character to manage a household or educate children? So far from it, that after surveying the history of women I cannot help agreeing with the harshest satirist, and considering my sex as the weakest as well as the most oppressed half of the species. What does history show but marks of inferiority — and how few women have freed themselves from the galling yoke of sovereign man? So few that the exceptions remind me of an ingenious guess about Newton: that he was probably a being of a superior order accidentally caged in a human body. In the same style I have found myself imagining that the few extraordinary women who have rushed off in eccentric directions out of the orbit prescribed to their sex were *male* spirits, shut up by mistake in a female frame. But if it is unphilosophical to think of sex at all when the soul is in question, then the inferiority must depend on the bodily organs — or else the heavenly fire that is to quicken the clay is not handed out in equal portions.

But avoiding, as I have so far, any direct comparison of the two sexes as wholes, and frankly admitting women's inferiority as things appear at present, I shall only insist that men have increased that inferiority until women have sunk almost below the standard of rational creatures. Give their faculties room to unfold and their virtues room to gain strength, and then decide where the whole sex must stand on the intellectual scale. Yet let it be remembered that I am not asking for a place on the strength of a small number of distinguished women.

It is difficult for us half-blind mortals to say what heights human discovery and improvement may reach once the gloom of despotism lifts that makes us stumble at every step. But when morality has been settled on a more solid basis, then, without any gift of prophecy, I will venture to predict that woman will be either the friend or the slave of man. We shall no longer be in doubt, as we are now, whether she is a moral agent or the link joining man to the animals. If it should then turn out that, like the animals, women were principally created for the use of men, then men will let them bite the bridle patiently and will not mock them with empty praise. And if their rationality is proved, men will not obstruct their improvement merely to gratify their own sensual appetites. They will not use all the graces of rhetoric to advise women to surrender their understandings entirely to a man's guidance. They will not, when writing about the education of women, assert that women ought never to have the free use of reason, nor recommend cunning and dissimulation to beings who are acquiring, exactly as they are themselves, the virtues of humanity.

Surely there can be only one rule of right, if morality has an eternal foundation; and whoever sacrifices virtue, strictly so called, to present convenience, or whose *duty* it is said to be to act that way, lives only for the passing day and cannot be an accountable creature.

The poet should have dropped his sneer, then, when he says,

	"If weak women go astray,
	The stars are more in fault than they."

For that women are bound by the adamantine chain of destiny is quite certain, if it is settled that they are never to exercise their own reason, never to be independent, never to rise above opinion, never to feel the dignity of a rational will that bows to God alone, and often forgets that the universe contains anything besides itself and the model of perfection its ardent gaze is fixed on — adoring attributes which, softened into virtues, may be imitated in kind, even though their degree overwhelms the enraptured mind.

If, I say — for I would not try to impress by declamation when reason offers her sober light — if women really are capable of acting like rational creatures, then let them not be treated like slaves, or like the animals that depend on human reason when they live alongside us. Cultivate their minds, give them the wholesome, sublime curb of principle, and let them attain a conscious dignity by feeling themselves dependent on God alone. Teach them, as men are taught, to submit to necessity, instead of giving morals a sex in order to make them more pleasing.

Further: if experience should prove that they cannot attain the same degree of strength of mind, perseverance and fortitude, then let their virtues be the same in kind even though they struggle in vain for the same degree. The superiority of men will be just as clear, or clearer; and truth, being a simple principle admitting of no modification, would be common to both. The order of society as it is now regulated would not even be overturned, for women would then have only the rank reason assigned them, and no arts could be practised to level the balance, much less to tip it.

These may be called Utopian dreams. Thanks be to the Being who impressed them on my soul and gave me strength of mind enough to dare to exercise my own reason, until, depending on him alone to support my virtue, I look with indignation at the mistaken notions that enslave my sex.

I love man as my fellow creature; but his sceptre, real or usurped, does not extend to me, unless the reason of a particular individual demands my homage — and even then the submission is to reason and not to the man. In fact the conduct of an accountable being must be regulated by the workings of its own reason; or on what foundation does the throne of God rest?

It seems necessary to dwell on these obvious truths, because women have been insulted, as it were, in this way: stripped of the virtues that ought to clothe humanity, they have been decked out instead with artificial graces that let them exercise a short-lived tyranny. Love takes the place in them of every nobler passion, so that their sole ambition is to be beautiful, to stir emotion instead of inspiring respect. And this ignoble desire, like the servility of absolute monarchies, destroys all strength of character. Liberty is the mother of virtue; and if women are by their very constitution slaves, and are not allowed to breathe the sharp invigorating air of freedom, they must always languish like hothouse plants and be reckoned beautiful flaws in nature — and let it be remembered too that they are nature's only flaw.

As for the argument drawn from the subjection women have always been held in, it recoils on men. The many have always been enslaved by the few, and monsters who have shown hardly any discernment of human excellence have tyrannized over thousands of their fellow creatures. Why have men of superior endowments submitted to such degradation? For is it not universally acknowledged that kings, taken collectively, have always been inferior in ability and virtue to the same number of men picked out of the common mass — and yet are they not still treated with a reverence that is an insult to reason? China is not the only country where a living man has been made into a god. *Men* have submitted to superior strength in order to enjoy the pleasure of the moment with impunity; *women* have only done the same. And so, until it is proved that the courtier who servilely surrenders his birthright as a man is not a moral agent, it cannot be shown that woman is essentially inferior to man because she has always been subjugated.

Brute force has governed the world so far, and that the science of politics is in its infancy is plain from the way philosophers hesitate to give the knowledge most useful to man that definite name.

I shall not pursue the argument beyond establishing one obvious inference: that as sound politics spread liberty, humankind, women included, will become wiser and more virtuous.
