Chapter Three: The Same Subject Continued

Bodily strength, which used to be the mark of heroes, has now sunk into such undeserved contempt that men as well as women seem to think it unnecessary — women because it detracts from their feminine graces and from that lovely weakness which is the source of their undue power, and men because it looks incompatible with the character of a gentleman.

That both have run from one extreme into the other can easily be shown. But first it is worth noticing that a vulgar error has gained enough credit to give force to a false conclusion, in which an effect has been mistaken for a cause.

People of genius have very often damaged their constitutions by study, or by careless inattention to their health; and since the violence of their passions is proportioned to the vigour of their intellects, the sword wearing out the scabbard has become almost proverbial. From this superficial observers have inferred that men of genius usually have weak — or, to use the more fashionable word, delicate — constitutions. Yet I believe the opposite will turn out to be the fact. On careful enquiry I find that strength of mind has in most cases been accompanied by superior strength of body and a naturally sound constitution — not that robust tone of nerve and vigour of muscle which comes from bodily labour while the mind lies idle, or merely directs the hands.

Dr. Priestley has remarked, in the preface to his biographical chart, that most great men have lived beyond forty-five. And considering the thoughtless way they squandered their strength — investigating some favourite science, burning up the lamp of life and forgetting the midnight hour; or lost in poetic dreams, with fancy peopling the scene and the soul so disturbed by the passions that meditation had raised that it shook the constitution, while the objects of those passions, the baseless fabric of a vision, faded before the exhausted eye — considering all that, they must have had iron frames. Shakespeare never grasped the airy dagger with a nerveless hand, nor did Milton tremble when he led Satan far from the confines of his dreary prison. These were not the ravings of feebleness, the sickly outpourings of a disordered brain, but the exuberance of a fancy which, wandering "in a fine frenzy", was not continually reminded of its material shackles.

I am aware that this argument would carry me further than I may be supposed to want to go; but I follow truth, and, still holding to my first position, I will allow that bodily strength does seem to give men a natural superiority over women. That is the only solid basis on which the superiority of the sex can be built. But I still insist that not only the virtue but the *knowledge* of the two sexes should be the same in kind, if not in degree; and that women, considered not only as moral but as rational creatures, ought to try to acquire human virtues, or perfections, by the *same* means as men, instead of being educated as a fanciful sort of *half* being, one of Rousseau's wild chimeras.

But if strength of body is, with some show of reason, the boast of men, why are women so infatuated as to be proud of a defect? Rousseau has supplied them with a plausible excuse — one that could only have occurred to a man whose imagination had been allowed to run wild and to refine on the impressions made by exquisite senses. Its purpose, if you please, is to give men a pretext for yielding to a natural appetite without violating a romantic species of modesty which gratifies male pride and male libertinism.

Deluded by such sentiments, women sometimes boast of their weakness, cunningly obtaining power by playing on the *weakness* of men; and they may well glory in their illicit sway, for, like Turkish pashas, they have more real power than their masters. But virtue is sacrificed to momentary gratifications, and the respectability of a whole life to the triumph of an hour.

Women, like despots, have perhaps more power now than they would have if the world, divided and subdivided into kingdoms and families, were governed by laws drawn from the exercise of reason. But in getting that power — to carry the comparison on — their character is degraded, and licentiousness is spread through the whole of society. The many become a pedestal for the few. I will therefore venture to assert that until women are more rationally educated, the progress of human virtue and the improvement of knowledge must suffer continual checks. And if it is granted that woman was not created merely to gratify a man's appetite, nor to be the upper servant who provides his meals and looks after his linen, then it follows that the first care of any mother or father who really attends to a girl's education should be, if not to strengthen her body, at least not to destroy her constitution with mistaken notions of beauty and female excellence; and girls should never be allowed to absorb the pernicious idea that a defect can, by some chemical process of reasoning, be turned into an excellence. I am glad to find that the author of one of the most instructive books our country has produced for children agrees with me here, and I shall quote his apt remarks to lend the weight of his respectable authority to reason.

Footnote: A respectable old man gives the following sensible account of how he set about educating his daughter. "I tried to give both her mind and her body a degree of vigour that is seldom found in the female sex. As soon as she was strong enough for the lighter work of farming and gardening, I made her my constant companion. Selene — for that was her name — soon acquired a dexterity in all these country employments that I watched with equal pleasure and admiration. If women are generally feeble in body and mind alike, it comes less from nature than from education. We encourage a vicious idleness and inactivity which we falsely call delicacy; instead of hardening their minds with the sterner principles of reason and philosophy, we breed them up to useless arts that end in vanity and sensuality. In most of the countries I have visited they are taught nothing higher than a few modulations of the voice or a few useless postures of the body; their time is consumed in idleness or in trifles, and trifles become the only pursuits capable of interesting them. We seem to forget that our own domestic comfort, and the education of our children, must depend on the qualities of the female sex. And what comfort, or what education, is a race of beings corrupted from infancy and unacquainted with every duty of life fitted to give? To touch a musical instrument with useless skill, and to display their natural or affected graces to the eyes of idle, debauched young men who squander their fathers' estates in riotous and needless expense — these are the only arts women cultivate in most of the polished nations I have seen. And the consequences are uniformly what may be expected from such polluted sources: private misery, and public servitude. But Selene's education was regulated by different views and conducted on sterner principles — if that can be called sternness which opens the mind to a sense of moral and religious duty, and arms it most effectually against the inevitable evils of life." —Mr. Day's *Sandford and Merton*, Volume 3

But suppose it were proved that woman is naturally weaker than man. How does it follow that it is natural for her to labour at becoming weaker still than nature intended? Arguments of this cast are an insult to common sense and smell of passion. The *divine right* of husbands, like the divine right of kings, may, it is to be hoped, be disputed in this enlightened age without danger; and though conviction may not silence many boisterous disputants, still, when a prevailing prejudice is attacked, the wise will consider, and leave the narrow-minded to rail with thoughtless vehemence against innovation.

The mother who wishes to give her daughter a true dignity of character must, ignoring the sneers of the ignorant, proceed on a plan diametrically opposite to the one Rousseau has recommended with all the deluding charms of eloquence and philosophical sophistry. For his eloquence makes absurdities plausible, and his dogmatic conclusions puzzle without convincing anyone who has not the ability to refute them.

Throughout the whole animal kingdom every young creature needs almost continual exercise, and, in keeping with that hint, the infancy of children should be spent in harmless romping which exercises the feet and hands without needing much direction from the head or the constant attention of a nurse. In fact the care necessary for self-preservation is the first natural exercise of the understanding, just as little inventions to amuse the present moment unfold the imagination. But these wise designs of nature are frustrated by mistaken fondness or blind zeal. The child is never left a moment to its own direction — a girl least of all — and so is made dependent, and the dependence is then called natural.

To preserve personal beauty, woman's glory, the limbs and faculties are cramped with something worse than Chinese bandages; and the sedentary life girls are condemned to, while boys frolic in the open air, weakens the muscles and slackens the nerves. As for Rousseau's observations, since echoed by several writers, that girls have naturally — that is, from birth and independently of education — a fondness for dolls, for dressing up and for chattering, they are so childish that they do not deserve serious refutation. That a girl condemned to sit for hours together listening to the idle chat of feeble nurses, or attending her mother at her dressing table, should try to join in the conversation is indeed very natural. And that she should imitate her mother or her aunts, and amuse herself by adorning her lifeless doll as they adorn her, poor innocent baby, is undoubtedly the most natural consequence in the world. For men of the greatest abilities have seldom had strength enough to rise above the atmosphere around them; and if the page of genius has always been blotted by the prejudices of its age, some allowance should be made for a sex who, like kings, always see things through a false medium.

The fondness for dress so conspicuous in women can be easily accounted for in this way, without supposing it the result of any desire to please the sex they depend on. In short, the absurdity of supposing that a girl is naturally a coquette, and that a desire connected with nature's impulse to propagate the species should show itself even before an improper education has called it out prematurely by heating the imagination, is so unphilosophical that an observer as shrewd as Rousseau would never have adopted it, if he had not been in the habit of letting reason give way to his craving for singularity, and truth to a favourite paradox.

Yet giving a sex to the mind in this way was hardly consistent in a man who argued so warmly, and so well, for the immortality of the soul. But what a weak barrier truth is when it stands in the way of a hypothesis! Rousseau respected — almost adored — virtue, and yet let himself love with a sensual fondness. His imagination was constantly preparing inflammable fuel for his inflammable senses; and in order to reconcile that with his respect for self-denial, fortitude and the heroic virtues, which a mind like his could not admire coolly, he labours to invert the law of nature and puts forward a doctrine pregnant with mischief and insulting to the character of supreme wisdom.

His ridiculous stories, which are meant to prove that girls are *naturally* attentive to their persons, without laying any weight on daily example, are beneath contempt. And the tale of the little girl with such a correct taste that she gave up the pleasing amusement of making O's merely because she noticed it was an ungraceful attitude belongs with the anecdotes of the learned pig.

Footnote: "I once knew a young person who learned to write before she learned to read, and began to write with her needle before she could handle a pen. At first she took it into her head to make no letter but the O: she was constantly making it, in all sizes, and always the wrong way round. Unluckily, one day when she was intent on this employment, she happened to catch sight of herself in the looking glass; and, taking a dislike to the constrained attitude she sat in while writing, she threw away her pen like another Pallas and resolved never to make an O again. Her brother was equally averse to writing; but with him it was the confinement and not the constrained attitude that was most disgusting." —Rousseau's *Emilius*

I have probably had more opportunity of observing girls in their infancy than J. J. Rousseau. I can remember my own feelings, and I have looked steadily about me. So far from agreeing with him about the first dawn of the female character, I will venture to affirm that a girl whose spirits have not been damped by inactivity, and whose innocence has not been tainted by false shame, will always be a tomboy, and that a doll will never hold her attention unless confinement leaves her no alternative. In short, girls and boys would play harmlessly together if the distinction of sex were not drummed into them long before nature makes any difference. I will go further, and state it as an indisputable fact that most of the women within my own observation who have acted like rational creatures, or shown any vigour of intellect, have happened to be allowed to run wild — as some of the elegant improvers of the fair sex would put it.

The harmful consequences of neglecting health in infancy and youth reach further than is supposed: dependence of body naturally produces dependence of mind. How can a woman be a good wife or mother when most of her time is spent guarding against illness or enduring it? Nor can we expect a woman to work resolutely at strengthening her constitution and abstaining from enervating indulgences, if artificial notions of beauty and false descriptions of sensibility have been tangled up early with her motives for acting. Most men are obliged now and then to put up with bodily inconvenience and endure the weather; but genteel women are, quite literally, slaves to their bodies, and glory in the subjection.

I once knew a weak woman of fashion who was more than commonly proud of her delicacy and her sensibility. She thought a discriminating taste and a tiny appetite the height of human perfection, and acted accordingly. I have watched this feeble, artificial creature neglect every duty of life and then recline on a sofa in perfect self-satisfaction, boasting that she had no appetite as proof of a delicacy which extended to — or perhaps arose from — her exquisite sensibility; for it is hard to make such ridiculous jargon intelligible. And at that very moment I have seen her insult a worthy old gentlewoman whom unexpected misfortune had made dependent on her ostentatious charity, and who in better days had claims on her gratitude. Is it possible that a human creature could have become so weak and depraved if, like the Sybarites dissolved in luxury, everything resembling virtue had not been worn away, or had been impressed by mere precept — a poor substitute, it is true, for a cultivated mind, though it serves as a fence against vice?

Such a woman is no more an irrational monster than some of those Roman emperors who were depraved by lawless power. Yet since kings have been more under the restraint of law, and under the curb — however weak — of honour, the records of history are not filled with such unnatural instances of folly and cruelty; nor does the despotism that kills virtue and genius in the bud hang over Europe with the destructive blast that lays Turkey waste and leaves the men, like the soil, unfruitful.

Women are everywhere in this deplorable state. In order to preserve their innocence, as ignorance is politely called, truth is hidden from them, and they are made to assume an artificial character before their faculties have gained any strength. Taught from their infancy that beauty is woman's sceptre, the mind shapes itself to the body, and, roaming round its gilt cage, only seeks to adorn its prison. Men have a variety of employments and pursuits to engage their attention and give some character to the opening mind; but women, confined to one, and with their thoughts constantly directed to the most insignificant part of themselves, seldom look beyond the triumph of the hour. Yet if their understanding were once emancipated from the slavery that male pride and sensuality, and the short-sighted craving for immediate power that tyrants share, have subjected them to, we should probably read of their weaknesses with astonishment. I must be allowed to press the argument a little further.

Perhaps, if we allowed the existence of an evil being who, in the allegorical language of scripture, went about seeking whom he might devour, he could not degrade the human character more effectively than by giving a man absolute power.

This argument branches out in various directions. Birth, riches and every extrinsic advantage that raises a man above his fellows without any mental exertion really sinks him below them. In proportion to his weakness he is played upon by designing men, until the bloated monster has lost every trace of humanity. And that tribes of men, like flocks of sheep, should quietly follow such a leader is a contradiction that nothing but a desire for present enjoyment and a narrowness of understanding can explain. Brought up in slavish dependence, and enfeebled by luxury and sloth, where are we to find men who will stand forward to assert the rights of man, or claim the privilege of moral beings, who ought to have only one road to excellence? Slavery to monarchs and ministers, which the world will be long in freeing itself from, and whose deadly grip stops the progress of the human mind, is not yet abolished.

Let men, then, in the pride of power, not use the same arguments that tyrannical kings and venal ministers have used, and falsely assert that woman ought to be kept in subjection because she has always been so. When man, governed by reasonable laws, enjoys his natural freedom, let him despise woman if she does not share it with him; and until that glorious period arrives, when he holds forth on the folly of my sex let him not overlook his own.

Women who obtain power by unjust means, by practising vice or fostering it, do plainly lose the rank reason would assign them, and become either abject slaves or capricious tyrants. They lose all simplicity and all dignity of mind in acquiring power, and behave exactly as men behave when they have been raised by the same means.

It is time to effect a revolution in female manners, time to give women back their lost dignity, and to make them, as a part of the human species, work at reforming themselves in order to reform the world. It is time to separate unchangeable morals from local manners. If men are demigods, then let us serve them! And if the dignity of the female soul is as disputable as that of animals — if their reason gives too little light to direct their conduct while unerring instinct is denied them — then they are surely of all creatures the most miserable, and, bent beneath the iron hand of destiny, must submit to be a *fair defect* in creation. But to justify the ways of providence towards them by pointing out some unanswerable reason for making so large a portion of humankind accountable and not accountable at once would puzzle the subtlest casuist alive.

The only solid foundation for morality appears to be the character of the Supreme Being, whose harmony arises from a balance of attributes; and, to speak with reverence, one attribute seems to imply the *necessity* of another. He must be just, because he is wise; he must be good, because he is omnipotent. To exalt one attribute at the expense of another equally noble and necessary bears the stamp of man's warped reason, and is the homage of passion. Man, accustomed in his savage state to bow down before power, can seldom rid himself of that barbarous prejudice even when civilization has shown him how far mental strength is superior to bodily; and his reason stays clouded by these crude opinions even when he is thinking about the Deity. God's omnipotence is made to swallow up, or to preside over, all his other attributes, and anyone who thinks that power must be regulated by wisdom is supposed to be limiting it irreverently.

I disclaim the kind of humility which, having investigated nature, stops short at nature's author. The high and lofty One who inhabits eternity doubtless possesses many attributes we can form no conception of; but reason tells me that they cannot clash with those I adore, and I am compelled to listen to her voice.

It seems natural for man to search for excellence, and either to trace it in the object he worships or blindly to drape perfection over it like a garment. But what good effect can the second kind of worship have on the moral conduct of a rational being? He bows to power; he adores a dark cloud which may open on a bright prospect or burst in angry, lawless fury on his devoted head, and he does not know why. And if the Deity acts from the vague impulse of an undirected will, then man must follow his own will too, or else act by rules drawn from principles he has just declared it irreverent to apply. Both enthusiasts and cooler thinkers have fallen into this dilemma when they have laboured to free men from the wholesome restraints that a just conception of God's character imposes.

It is not impious to examine the attributes of the Almighty in this way; indeed, who that exercises his faculties at all can avoid it? For to love God as the fountain of wisdom, goodness and power appears to be the only worship of any use to a being who wants to acquire either virtue or knowledge. A blind, unsettled affection may, like the human passions, occupy the mind and warm the heart, while doing justice, loving mercy and walking humbly with our God is forgotten. I shall come back to this subject when I consider religion in a light quite opposite to the one Dr. Gregory recommends, who treats it as a matter of sentiment or taste.

To return from this apparent digression. It is to be wished that women would cherish an affection for their husbands founded on the same principle that devotion ought to rest on. There is no other firm base under heaven, and let them beware of the deceptive light of sentiment, too often used as a softer word for sensuality. It follows then, I think, that from infancy women should either be shut up like eastern princes, or educated in such a way as to be able to think and act for themselves.

Why do men halt between two opinions and expect impossibilities? Why do they expect virtue from a slave, or from a being whom the constitution of civil society has made weak, if not vicious?

Still, I know it will take a considerable time to root out the firmly planted prejudices that sensualists have sown. It will also take some time to convince women that they act against their own real interest, taken on any large scale, when they cherish or affect weakness under the name of delicacy; and to convince the world that the poisoned source of female vices and follies — if custom obliges me to use those words loosely as synonyms — has been the sensual homage paid to beauty. To beauty of feature, that is; for a German writer has shrewdly observed that a pretty woman, as an object of desire, is generally acknowledged so by men of every description, whereas a fine woman, who inspires more sublime emotions by displaying an intellectual beauty, may be overlooked, or noticed with indifference, by men who find their happiness in gratifying their appetites. I foresee the obvious retort: that while man remains as imperfect a being as he has so far shown himself, he will be more or less the slave of his appetites; and that since the women who gratify a dominant appetite obtain the most power, the sex is degraded by a physical if not by a moral necessity.

I grant that this objection has some force. But so long as so sublime a precept exists as "be pure as your heavenly father is pure", it would seem that man's virtues are not limited by the only Being who could limit them, and that he may press forward without asking whether so noble an ambition takes him out of his sphere. To the wild waves it was said, "this far you shall come, and no further; and here your proud waves shall be stopped." So they beat and foam in vain, restrained by the power that keeps the struggling planets in their orbits; matter yields to the great governing Spirit. But an immortal soul, not restrained by mechanical laws and struggling to free itself from the shackles of matter, adds to the order of creation instead of disturbing it, when, cooperating with the Father of spirits, it tries to govern itself by that unvarying rule which regulates the universe to a degree our imagination faints before.

Besides, if women are educated for dependence — that is, to act according to the will of another fallible being and to submit to power whether it is right or wrong — where are we to stop? Are they to be considered as deputies, allowed to reign over a small domain and answerable for their conduct to a higher tribunal, itself liable to error?

It will not be hard to prove that such deputies act like men who have been subdued by fear, and will make their children and servants endure their tyrannical oppression. Since they submit without reason, they will have no fixed rules to square their own conduct by, and will be kind or cruel just as the whim of the moment directs; and we ought not to be surprised if, galled sometimes by their own heavy yoke, they take a malignant pleasure in resting it on weaker shoulders.

But suppose a woman brought up to obedience marries a sensible man who directs her judgment without making her feel the servility of her position, so that she acts with as much propriety by this reflected light as can be expected when reason is taken at second hand. Even so she cannot guarantee the life of her protector. He may die and leave her with a large family.

A double duty then falls on her: to educate them in the character of both father and mother, to form their principles and secure their property. But she has never thought for herself, much less acted for herself. She has only learned to please men and to depend on them gracefully. Encumbered with children, how is she to get another protector — a husband to take the place of reason? A rational man, for we are not on romantic ground here, may think her a pleasing docile creature and still not choose to marry a *family* for love, when the world contains plenty more pretty creatures. What is to become of her, then? Either she falls an easy prey to some mean fortune hunter who defrauds her children of their father's inheritance and makes her miserable, or she becomes the victim of discontent and blind indulgence. Unable to educate her sons, or to impress them with respect — for it is no play on words to say that people are never respected, however important their station, if they are not respectable — she pines under the anguish of useless, helpless regret. The serpent's tooth enters into her very soul, and the vices of licentious youth bring her with sorrow, and perhaps with poverty as well, to the grave.

This is not an overdrawn picture. On the contrary, it is a very possible case, and something like it must have come under every attentive eye.

I have, however, assumed that she was well disposed, though experience shows that the blind can be led into a ditch as easily as along the beaten road. But suppose — and it is no very improbable guess — that a being taught only to please must go on finding her happiness in pleasing: what an example of folly, not to say of vice, she will be to her innocent daughters! The mother is lost in the coquette; and instead of making friends of her daughters she looks at them sideways, because they are rivals — crueller rivals than any others, because they invite comparison and drive her from the throne of beauty, having never once thought of a seat on the bench of reason.

It needs no lively pencil, no exaggerated outline of caricature, to sketch the domestic miseries and petty vices that such a mistress of a family spreads around her. And still she is only acting as a woman ought to act who has been brought up on Rousseau's system. She can never be reproached for being masculine or stepping out of her sphere. Indeed she may observe another of his grand rules, and, carefully keeping her reputation spotless, be reckoned a good sort of woman. Yet in what sense can she be called good? She abstains, it is true, and without much of a struggle, from committing gross crimes. But how does she fulfil her duties? Duties! In truth she has quite enough to think about in adorning her body and nursing a weak constitution.

As for religion, she never presumed to judge for herself, but conformed, as a dependent creature should, to the ceremonies of the church she was brought up in, piously believing that wiser heads than hers had settled that business, and that never doubting is her point of perfection. So she pays her tithe of mint and cumin, and thanks God that she is not as other women are. These are the blessed effects of a good education! These are the virtues of man's helpmate.

I must relieve myself by drawing a different picture.

Let fancy present a woman of tolerable understanding — I have no wish to leave the line of mediocrity — whose constitution, strengthened by exercise, has let her body reach its full vigour, while her mind has gradually expanded to take in the moral duties of life and to see what human virtue and dignity consist in. Formed in this way by the duties of her station, she marries from affection without losing sight of prudence; and, looking beyond marital bliss, she secures her husband's respect before there is any need to exert mean arts to please him and feed a dying flame which nature doomed to go out once its object became familiar, once friendship and forbearance take the place of a more ardent affection. That is the natural death of love, and domestic peace is not destroyed by struggles to prevent it. I am supposing the husband to be virtuous too; otherwise she needs independent principles even more.

Fate, however, breaks the tie. She is left a widow, perhaps without adequate provision — but she is not desolate. The pang of nature is felt; but after time has softened sorrow into a melancholy resignation, her heart turns to her children with redoubled fondness, and, anxious to provide for them, affection gives her maternal duties a sacred, heroic cast. She thinks that her virtuous efforts are seen not only by the eye from which all her comfort must now flow, and whose approval is life to her; her imagination, a little abstracted and exalted by grief, dwells also on the fond hope that the eyes her trembling hand closed may still see how she subdues every wayward passion to fulfil the double duty of being father as well as mother to her children. Raised to heroism by misfortune, she suppresses the first faint dawning of a natural inclination before it can ripen into love, and in the bloom of life forgets her sex — forgets the pleasure of an awakening passion that might have been inspired and returned again. She no longer thinks of pleasing, and a conscious dignity keeps her from priding herself on the praise her conduct earns. Her children have her love, and her brightest hopes lie beyond the grave, where her imagination often wanders.

I think I can see her surrounded by her children, reaping the reward of her care. The intelligent eye meets hers while health and innocence smile on their chubby cheeks; and as they grow up, the cares of life are lightened by their grateful attention. She lives to see the virtues she tried to plant on principle fixed into habits, and to see her children attain enough strength of character to endure adversity without forgetting their mother's example.

The task of life fulfilled in this way, she waits calmly for the sleep of death; and rising from the grave she may say: you gave me one talent, and here are five.

I wish to sum up what I have said in a few words, for here I throw down my gauntlet and deny the existence of sexual virtues, not excepting modesty. For men and women, truth, if I understand the meaning of the word, must be the same. Yet the fanciful female character so prettily drawn by poets and novelists demands the sacrifice of truth and sincerity; and so virtue becomes a relative idea with no other foundation than utility — and men claim the arbitrary right to judge that utility, shaping it to suit their own convenience.

Women, I allow, may have different duties to fulfil; but they are *human* duties, and the principles that should regulate the discharge of them, I stoutly maintain, must be the same.

To become respectable, they must exercise their understanding; there is no other foundation for independence of character. I mean explicitly to say that they must bow only to the authority of reason, instead of being the *modest* slaves of opinion.

In the higher ranks of life, how seldom do we meet a man of superior ability, or even of common attainments? The reason seems to me clear: the state they are born into was an unnatural one. Human character has always been formed by the employments an individual or a class pursues, and if the faculties are not sharpened by necessity they must stay blunt. The argument may fairly be extended to women; for, seldom occupied by any serious business, the pursuit of pleasure gives their character that insignificance which makes the society of the *great* so insipid. The same lack of firmness, produced by a similar cause, drives both to fly from themselves into noisy pleasures and artificial passions, until vanity takes the place of every social affection and the marks of humanity can hardly be made out at all. Such are the blessings of our civil governments as they are at present organized, that wealth and female softness tend equally to debase humankind, and both are produced by the same cause. But if women are rational creatures they should be spurred on to acquire virtues they can call their own; for how can a rational being be ennobled by anything that is not obtained by its *own* exertions?
