Chapter Five: Criticisms of the Writers Who Have Made Women Objects of Pity, Bordering on Contempt

(Part 1 of 3)

It remains now to examine the opinions plausibly maintained in certain modern publications on the female character and female education, which have set the tone for most of what is said, more casually, about women.

Section One: Rousseau

I shall begin with Rousseau, and give a sketch of his character of women in his own words, with comments and reflections in between. My comments, it is true, all spring from a few simple principles and might have been deduced from what I have already said; but the artificial structure has been raised with so much ingenuity that it seems necessary to attack it in more detail, and to make the application myself.

Sophia, says Rousseau, should be as perfect a woman as Emilius is a man; and to make her so, we must examine the character nature has given to her sex.

He then proceeds to prove that women ought to be weak and passive because a woman has less bodily strength than a man; from which he infers that she was formed to please him and to be subject to him, and that it is her duty to make herself *agreeable* to her master, this being the grand end of her existence.

If women were formed only to please men and be subject to them, the conclusion is sound: she ought to sacrifice every other consideration to making herself agreeable to him, and let this brutal instinct of self-preservation be the mainspring of everything she does, once it is proved to be the iron bed of fate, to fit which her character must be stretched or lopped, regardless of every moral or physical distinction. But if, as I think can be shown, the purposes even of this life, taken as a whole, are defeated by practical rules built on so ignoble a base, then I may be allowed to doubt whether woman was created for man. And though the cry of irreligion, or even of atheism, be raised against me, I will simply declare that if an angel from heaven told me that Moses's beautiful poetical cosmogony and his account of the fall of man were literally true, I could not believe what my reason told me was insulting to the character of the Supreme Being. Having no fear of the devil before my eyes, I venture to call this a suggestion of reason, rather than rest my weakness on the broad shoulders of the first seducer of my frail sex.

"Once it is demonstrated," Rousseau continues, "that man and woman are not, and ought not to be, constituted alike in temperament and character, it follows that they should not be educated in the same way. In following the directions of nature they ought certainly to act in concert, but they should not be engaged in the same employments. The end of their pursuits should be the same, but the means they take to accomplish it, and consequently their tastes and inclinations, should be different."

Footnote: Rousseau's *Emilius*, Volume 3, page 176.

"Girls are fond of dress from their earliest infancy. Not content with being pretty, they want to be thought so; all their little airs show that this thought occupies them, and they are hardly capable of understanding what is said to them before they can be governed by talk of what people will think of their behaviour. The same motive, used indiscreetly with boys, has no such effect: provided they are allowed to pursue their amusements as they please, they care very little what people think of them. It takes time and pains to make boys subject to this motive.

"Wherever girls get this first lesson from, it is a very good one. As the body is born, in a manner, before the soul, our first concern should be to cultivate the body; this order is common to both sexes, but the object of the cultivation differs. In one sex it is the development of bodily powers, in the other of personal charms — not that either strength or beauty ought to belong exclusively to one sex, but that the order of cultivating both is in this respect reversed. Women certainly need as much strength as will let them move and act gracefully, and men as much address as will let them act with ease."

* * *

"Children of both sexes have a great many amusements in common, and so they should; do they not have many in common when they are grown up as well? Each sex also has its own particular taste to distinguish it here. Boys love noisy, active games — beating a drum, whipping a top, dragging little carts about; girls, on the other hand, are fonder of things of show and ornament, such as mirrors, trinkets and dolls. The doll is the particular amusement of the female; and from this we see their taste plainly adapted to their destination. The physical part of the art of pleasing lies in dress, and that is all of the art children are capable of cultivating."

* * *

"Here, then, we see a primary propensity firmly established, which you need only follow up and regulate. The little creature will doubtless be very eager to know how to dress up her doll, to make its sleeve knots, its flounces, its head dress and so on. She is obliged to have so much recourse to the people about her for help with these things that it would be far more agreeable to her to owe them all to her own industry. Here we have a good reason for the first lessons usually taught to young girls, in which we do not seem to be setting them a task, but obliging them, by teaching them what is immediately useful to themselves. And in fact almost all of them learn to read and write with reluctance, but take very readily to the needle. They imagine themselves already grown up, and think with pleasure that such accomplishments will let them decorate themselves."

This is certainly nothing but an education of the body; but Rousseau is not the only man who has said indirectly that a young woman's person, without any mind at all — unless animal spirits count as one — is very pleasing. To keep it weak, and what some may call beautiful, the understanding is neglected, and girls are made to sit still, play with dolls and listen to foolish conversation; and then the effect of habit is urged on us as an undoubted indication of nature. I know it was Rousseau's opinion that the first years of youth should be spent forming the body, though in educating Emilius he departs from this plan. But the difference between strengthening the body, on which strength of mind largely depends, and merely giving it an easy motion, is a very wide one.

It is worth remarking that Rousseau's observations were made in a country where the art of pleasing had been refined only far enough to strain the coarseness out of vice. He did not go back to nature; or else his ruling appetite disturbed the operations of reason, or he would never have drawn such crude inferences.

In France, boys and girls, and girls particularly, are educated only to please, to manage their persons and regulate their outward behaviour; and their minds are corrupted at a very early age by the worldly and pious cautions they are given to guard them against immodesty. I am speaking of times past. The very confessions that mere children are obliged to make, and the questions the holy men ask — I state these facts on good authority — were enough to stamp a separate character on their sex; and the education society gave them was a school of coquetry and artifice. At ten or eleven, and often much sooner, girls began to flirt, and talked without reproof about establishing themselves in the world by marriage.

In short they were made women almost from birth, and listened to compliments instead of instruction. These weakened the mind — and then nature was supposed to have behaved like a stepmother when she formed this afterthought of creation.

Not allowing women any understanding, it was at least consistent to subject them to an authority independent of reason; and to prepare them for that subjection he gives the following advice:

"Girls ought to be active and diligent; nor is that all. They should also be subjected early to restraint. This misfortune, if it really is one, is inseparable from their sex, and they never throw it off except to suffer crueller evils. They must be subject all their lives to the most constant and severe restraint, which is decorum; so it is necessary to accustom them early to such confinement, that it may not cost them too dear later, and to the suppression of their whims, so that they may submit more readily to the will of others. If they are fond of being always at work, they should sometimes be made to lay it aside. Dissipation, levity and inconstancy are faults that spring up readily from their first propensities when those are corrupted or perverted by too much indulgence. To prevent this abuse we should teach them above all things to lay a due restraint on themselves. The life of a modest woman is reduced by our absurd institutions to a perpetual conflict with herself — though it is only just that this sex should share in the sufferings that arise from the evils it has caused us."

And why is the life of a modest woman a perpetual conflict? I should answer that this very system of education makes it one. Modesty, temperance and self-denial are the sober offspring of reason; but when sensibility is nursed at the expense of the understanding, such weak beings must be restrained by arbitrary means and subjected to continual conflicts. Give their mental activity a wider range, and nobler passions and motives will govern their appetites and sentiments.

"The ordinary attachment and regard of a mother — indeed, mere habit — will make her beloved by her children, if she does nothing to earn their hatred. Even the restraint she puts them under, if it is well directed, will increase their affection instead of lessening it; because, a state of dependence being natural to the sex, they perceive that they were formed for obedience."

This is begging the question; for servitude not only debases the individual, its effects seem to be passed on to posterity. Considering how long women have been dependent, is it surprising that some of them hug their chains and fawn like the spaniel? "These dogs," a naturalist observes, "at first kept their ears erect; but custom has overruled nature, and a token of fear has become a beauty."

"For the same reason," Rousseau adds, "women have, or ought to have, very little liberty; they are apt to indulge themselves excessively in whatever is allowed them. Addicted to extremes in everything, they are even more transported by their amusements than boys are."

The answer to this is very simple. Slaves and mobs have always indulged themselves in the same excesses once they broke loose from authority. A bent bow recoils violently when the hand that was forcibly holding it is suddenly relaxed; and sensibility, the plaything of outward circumstances, must either be subjected to authority or moderated by reason.

"From this habitual restraint," he goes on, "there results a tractableness that women have need of all their lives, since they remain constantly under subjection either to men or to the opinions of humankind, and are never permitted to set themselves above those opinions. The first and most important qualification in a woman is good nature, or sweetness of temper. Formed to obey a being as imperfect as man, often full of vices and always full of faults, she ought to learn early to endure even injustice, and to bear a husband's insults without complaining. It is not for his sake but for her own that she should be of a mild disposition. The perverseness and ill nature of women only aggravate their own misfortunes and their husbands' misconduct; they might easily see that these are not the weapons by which they gain the upper hand."

Formed to live with a being as imperfect as man, women ought to learn from exercising their faculties that forbearance is necessary. But all the sacred rights of humanity are violated by insisting on blind obedience — or else the most sacred rights belong *only* to man.

The being who patiently endures injustice and silently bears insults will soon become unjust herself, or unable to tell right from wrong. Besides, I deny the fact: this is not the true way to form or improve a temper. As a sex, men have better tempers than women, because they are occupied by pursuits that interest the head as well as the heart, and steadiness in the head gives the heart a healthy temperature. People of sensibility have seldom good tempers. The formation of the temper is the cool work of reason, mixing jarring elements with a happy art as life goes on. I never knew a weak or ignorant person with a good temper, though that constitutional good humour and that docility which fear stamps on the behaviour often go by the name. I say behaviour; for genuine meekness never reached the heart or mind except as the effect of reflection. And many sensible men, who find some of these gentle irritable creatures very troublesome company, will admit that simple restraint produces a great many bad humours in family life.

"Each sex," he argues further, "should preserve its own tone and manner: a meek husband may make a wife impertinent, but mildness of disposition on the woman's side will always bring a man back to reason, at least if he is not an absolute brute, and will sooner or later triumph over him." True — the mildness of reason will. But abject fear always inspires contempt, and tears are only eloquent when they run down fair cheeks.

What can a heart be made of that melts when it is insulted, and, instead of revolting at injustice, kisses the rod? Is it unfair to infer that her virtue is built on narrow views and on selfishness, when she can caress a man with true feminine softness at the very moment he is treating her tyrannically? Nature never dictated such insincerity; and though prudence of this sort is called a virtue, morality becomes a vague thing when any part of it is supposed to rest on falsehood. These are mere expedients, and expedients are only useful for the moment.

Let the husband beware of trusting too implicitly to this servile obedience. For if his wife can caress him with winning sweetness when he is angry — and when she ought to be angry herself, unless contempt has stifled a natural effervescence — she may do the same after parting from a lover. These are all preparations for adultery. Or, if the fear of the world or of hell restrains her desire to please other men when she can no longer please her husband, what substitute is to be found by a being formed by nature and art for no purpose but to please men? What can make up to her for the loss, and where is she to look for a fresh employment? Where is she to find strength of mind enough to decide to begin the search, when her habits are fixed and vanity has long ruled her chaotic mind?

But this partial moralist recommends cunning systematically and plausibly.

"Daughters should always be submissive; their mothers, however, should not be inexorable. To make a young person tractable she must not be made unhappy; to make her modest she must not be made stupid. On the contrary, I should not be displeased at her being permitted to use a little art — not to escape punishment for disobedience, but to exempt herself from the necessity of obeying. It is not necessary to make her dependence burdensome, only to let her feel it. Subtlety is a talent natural to the sex; and as I am persuaded that all our natural inclinations are right and good in themselves, I think this one should be cultivated like the rest. We need only prevent its abuse."

"Whatever is, is right," he then proceeds triumphantly to infer. Granted — yet perhaps no aphorism ever contained a more paradoxical assertion. It is a solemn truth with respect to God. He, I speak reverently, sees the whole at once, and saw its just proportions in the womb of time. But man, who can only inspect disjointed parts, finds a great many things wrong; and it is part of the system, and therefore right, that he should try to alter what looks wrong to him, even while he bows to the wisdom of his Creator and respects the darkness he is labouring to disperse.

The inference that follows is sound, supposing the principle to be sound: "The superior address peculiar to the female sex is a very equitable compensation for their inferiority in strength. Without it woman would not be man's companion but his slave; it is by her superior art and ingenuity that she preserves her equality and governs him while she pretends to obey. Woman has everything against her — our faults as well as her own timidity and weakness. She has nothing in her favour but her subtlety and her beauty. Is it not very reasonable, then, that she should cultivate both?" Greatness of mind can never live with cunning, or with address — for I shall not quibble about words when their plain meaning is insincerity and falsehood. I shall content myself with observing that if any class of humankind is so created that it must necessarily be educated by rules not strictly deducible from truth, then virtue is a matter of convention. How could Rousseau dare to assert, after giving this advice, that the object of both sexes in the grand end of existence should be the same, when he knew perfectly well that the mind is formed by its pursuits, and either expands as great views swallow up little ones, or becomes little itself?

Men have superior strength of body; but if it were not for mistaken notions of beauty, women would acquire enough of it to earn their own living, which is the true definition of independence, and to bear the bodily inconveniences and exertions that are needed to strengthen the mind.

Let us, then, by being allowed the same exercise as boys, not only in infancy but in youth, arrive at bodily perfection, so that we may know how far the natural superiority of man really extends. For what reason or virtue can be expected from a creature whose seedtime of life has been neglected? None — except that the winds of heaven happen to scatter a good many useful seeds on the fallow ground.

"Beauty cannot be acquired by dress, and coquetry is an art not so quickly or so early learned. While girls are still young, however, they are quite capable of studying an agreeable gesture, a pleasing modulation of voice, an easy carriage and bearing, and of learning to adapt their looks and attitudes gracefully to the time, the place and the occasion. Their application, therefore, should not be confined solely to the arts of industry and the needle, when they come to display other talents whose usefulness is already apparent."

"For my part, I would have a young Englishwoman cultivate her agreeable talents in order to please her future husband with as much care and assiduity as a young Circassian cultivates hers to fit her for the harem of an eastern pasha."

To make women completely insignificant, he adds: "The tongues of women are very voluble; they speak earlier, more readily and more agreeably than men, and they are accused of speaking a great deal more. So it ought to be, and I should be very ready to turn the reproach into a compliment. Their lips and their eyes have the same activity, and for the same reason. A man speaks of what he knows, a woman of what pleases her; the one requires knowledge, the other taste. The principal object of a man's talk should be what is useful, of a woman's what is agreeable. There ought to be nothing in common between their two kinds of conversation but truth."

"We ought not, therefore, to check the prattle of girls as we check that of boys, with the severe question 'What are you talking for?', but with another that is no less hard to answer: 'How will what you say be received?' In infancy, while they are still incapable of telling good from evil, they ought to observe it as a law never to say anything disagreeable to the person they are speaking to; and what will make this rule harder still to keep is that it must always be subordinate to the earlier one, of never speaking falsely or telling an untruth." To govern the tongue in that fashion must require great address indeed; and both men and women practise it too much. Out of the abundance of the heart, how few speak! So few that I, who love simplicity, would gladly give up politeness for a quarter of the virtue that has been sacrificed to an equivocal quality which at best should be nothing more than the polish on virtue.

But to finish the sketch. "It is easy to conceive that if male children are in no condition to form any true notions of religion, such ideas must be far beyond the conception of girls. That is the very reason why I would begin to speak to them earlier on the subject; for if we waited until they were capable of discussing such profound questions methodically, we should run the risk of never speaking to them about it as long as they lived. Reason in women is a practical reason, which makes them skilful at discovering the means to a known end, but would never enable them to discover the end itself. The social relations of the sexes are truly admirable: from their union there results a moral person of which woman may be called the eyes and man the hand, with this dependence on each other, that it is from the man that the woman learns what she is to see, and from the woman that the man learns what he ought to do. If woman could go back to first principles as well as man, and man could enter into details as well as woman, each being always independent of the other, they would live in perpetual discord and their union could not last. But in the harmony that naturally subsists between them, their different faculties tend to one common end. It is hard to say which of them contributes most to it: each follows the other's impulse; each obeys, and both are masters."

"Since a woman's conduct is subservient to public opinion, her faith in matters of religion should for that very reason be subject to authority. 'Every daughter ought to be of her mother's religion, and every wife of her husband's; for even if that religion were false, the docility which leads the mother and daughter to submit to the order of nature takes away, in the sight of God, the criminality of their error.' As they are in no condition to judge for themselves, they ought to abide by the decision of their fathers and their husbands as confidently as by that of the church."

Footnote: And what is the consequence if the mother's opinion and the husband's happen to disagree? An ignorant person cannot be reasoned out of an error, and when she is persuaded to give up one prejudice for another, her mind is unsettled. Indeed the husband may have no religion at all to teach her, though in such a situation she will greatly need some support for her virtue that is independent of worldly considerations.

"Since authority ought to regulate women's religion, it is not so necessary to explain the reasons for their belief as to lay down precisely what they are to believe. For a creed that offers the mind nothing but obscure ideas is the source of fanaticism, and one that offers absurdities leads to unbelief."

Absolute, unquestioned authority, it seems, must exist somewhere. But is this not a direct and exclusive appropriation of reason? The *rights* of humanity have been confined in this way to the male line from Adam downwards. Rousseau would carry his male aristocracy further still, for he hints that he would not blame those who argue for leaving woman in the profoundest possible ignorance, if it were not necessary — in order to preserve her chastity and justify a man's choice in the eyes of the world — to give her a little knowledge of men and of the customs human passions produce; otherwise she might breed at home without being made any less voluptuous and innocent by the exercise of her understanding. Except, of course, during the first year of marriage, when she might employ that understanding on dress, as Sophia does. "Her dress is extremely modest in appearance and yet very coquettish in fact. She does not display her charms, she conceals them; but in concealing them she knows how to work on your imagination. Everyone who sees her will say: there is a modest, discreet girl. But while you are near her, your eyes and affections wander all over her person and you cannot draw them away; and you would conclude that every part of her dress, simple as it looks, was put in order only to be taken to pieces by the imagination." Is this modesty? Is this a preparation for immortality? And again: what opinion are we to form of a system of education when its author says of his heroine "that with her, doing things well is only a *secondary* concern; her principal concern is to do them *neatly*"?

Secondary indeed are all her virtues and qualities. On religion, he has her parents address her — accustomed as she is to submission — with: "Your husband will instruct you in good time."

Having cramped a woman's mind in this way, if he has not made it a complete blank in order to keep it fair, he then advises her to reflect, so that a reflecting man may not yawn in her company once he is tired of caressing her. What has she to reflect about, who must obey? And would it not be a refinement of cruelty merely to open her mind so as to make the darkness and misery of her fate *visible*? Yet these are his sensible remarks; how consistent they are with what I have already had to quote, in order to give a fair view of the subject, the reader may decide.

"Those who spend their whole lives working for their daily bread have no ideas beyond their business or their interest, and all their understanding seems to lie in their fingers' ends. This ignorance is prejudicial neither to their integrity nor to their morals; it is often of service to them. Sometimes, by means of reflection, we are led to compound with our duty and end by substituting a jargon of words for things. Our own conscience is the most enlightened philosopher. A man need not be acquainted with Cicero's Offices to be a man of probity; and perhaps the most virtuous woman in the world is the least acquainted with any definition of virtue. But it is no less true that only an improved understanding can make society agreeable; and it is a melancholy thing for the father of a family who is fond of home to be obliged to be always wrapped up in himself, with nobody about him to whom he can communicate his thoughts.

"Besides, how should a woman without reflection be capable of educating her children? How should she discern what is proper for them? How should she incline them to virtues she does not know, or to a merit she has no idea of? She can only soothe them or scold them, make them insolent or timid; she will turn them into formal coxcombs or ignorant blockheads, but she will never make them sensible or amiable." How indeed should she, when her husband is not always at hand to lend her his reason — when the two of them together make only one moral being? A blind will, "eyes without hands", would go a very little way. And perhaps his abstract reason, which is supposed to concentrate the scattered beams of her practical reason, may be occupied in judging the flavour of a wine, or holding forth on the right sauces for turtle; or, more profoundly intent at a card table, he may be generalizing his ideas as he bets away his fortune, leaving all the details of education to his helpmate or to chance.

But granting that woman ought to be beautiful, innocent and silly in order to make her a more alluring and indulgent companion — what is her understanding being sacrificed for? And why is all this preparation necessary only, by Rousseau's own account, to make her her husband's mistress for a very short time? For no man ever insisted more on the transient nature of love. Hear the philosopher: "Sensual pleasures are transient. The habitual state of the affections always loses by their gratification. The imagination, which decks out the object of our desires, is lost in fruition. Except for the Supreme Being, who is self-existent, there is nothing beautiful but what is ideal."

But he returns to his unintelligible paradoxes when he addresses Sophia in these terms: "Emilius, in becoming your husband, has become your master and claims your obedience. Such is the order of nature. When a man is married, however, to such a wife as Sophia, it is proper that he should be directed by her: this too agrees with the order of nature. It is therefore in order to give you as much authority over his heart as his sex gives him over your person that I have made you the arbiter of his pleasures. It may cost you some disagreeable self-denial; but you will be certain of keeping your empire over him if you can keep it over yourself; and what I have already observed shows me that this difficult attempt is not beyond your courage.

"Would you have your husband constantly at your feet? Then keep him at some distance from your person. You will long maintain the authority of love if you know how to make your favours rare and valuable. This is how you may employ even the arts of coquetry in the service of virtue, and those of love in the service of reason."

I shall close my extracts with an accurate description of a comfortable couple. "And yet you must not imagine that even such management will always be enough. Whatever precautions are taken, enjoyment will by degrees take the edge off passion. But when love has lasted as long as it can, a pleasing habit takes its place, and the attachment of a mutual confidence succeeds the transports of passion. Children often form a more agreeable and permanent connection between married people than even love itself. When you cease to be the mistress of Emilius, you will go on being his wife and his friend; you will be the mother of his children."

Footnote: Rousseau's *Emilius*.

Children, he truly observes, form a much more permanent connection between married people than love does. Beauty, he declares, will not be valued, or even noticed, after a couple have lived six months together, and artificial graces and coquetry will pall on the senses just as surely. Why, then, does he say that a girl should be educated for her husband with the same care as for an eastern harem?

I now appeal from the daydreams of fancy and refined licentiousness to the good sense of humankind. If the object of education is to prepare women to become chaste wives and sensible mothers, is the method so plausibly recommended in that sketch really the one best calculated to produce those ends? Will anyone allow that the surest way to make a wife chaste is to teach her to practise the wanton arts of a mistress — called virtuous coquetry by the sensualist who can no longer relish the artless charms of sincerity, or taste the pleasure that arises from a tender intimacy, where confidence is unchecked by suspicion and made interesting by sense?
