Chapter Five: Criticisms of the Writers Who Have Made Women Objects of Pity, Bordering on Contempt

(Part 2 of 3)

The man who can be content to live with a pretty, useful companion who has no mind has lost, among his voluptuous gratifications, the taste for more refined enjoyments. He has never felt the calm satisfaction that refreshes a parched heart like the silent dew of heaven — the satisfaction of being loved by someone who could understand him. In his wife's company he is still alone, except when the man has sunk into the brute. "The charm of life," says a grave philosophical reasoner, "is sympathy; nothing pleases us more than to observe in other men a fellow feeling with all the emotions of our own breast."

But according to the reasoning that keeps women away from the tree of knowledge, the important years of youth, the usefulness of age and the rational hopes of a future life are all to be sacrificed in order to make a woman an object of desire for a short time. Besides, how could Rousseau expect women to be virtuous and constant when reason is not allowed to be the foundation of their virtue, nor truth the object of their enquiries?

But all Rousseau's errors of reasoning arose out of sensibility — and women are very ready to forgive a sensibility to their own charms. Where he should have reasoned he became impassioned, and reflection inflamed his imagination instead of enlightening his understanding. Even his virtues led him further astray; for, born with a warm constitution and a lively fancy, nature carried him towards the other sex with such eager fondness that he soon became lascivious. If he had given way to those desires the fire would have gone out naturally; but virtue, and a romantic kind of delicacy, made him practise self-denial. And then, when fear or delicacy or virtue held him back, he debauched his imagination instead; and, brooding on sensations that fancy had given force to, he traced them in the most glowing colours and sank them deep into his soul.

So he sought solitude — not to sleep beside the man of nature, or to investigate the causes of things calmly in the shade where Sir Isaac Newton indulged his contemplations, but merely to indulge his feelings. And he has painted what he felt so strongly, and with such warmth, that his readers' hearts are engaged and their imaginations inflamed; and, in proportion to the strength of their fancy, they imagine that their understanding has been convinced, when all they have done is sympathize with a poetic writer who skilfully exhibits the objects of sense, most voluptuously shadowed or gracefully veiled. And so, making us feel while we dream that we are reasoning, he leaves erroneous conclusions in our minds.

Why was Rousseau's life divided between ecstasy and misery? What other answer can be given than that the effervescence of his imagination produced both — and that if his fancy had been allowed to cool he might possibly have acquired more strength of mind? Still, if the purpose of life is to educate the intellectual part of us, then everything about him was right. Yet if death did not lead on to a nobler scene of action, it is likely he would have enjoyed a steadier happiness on earth, and felt the calm sensations of the man of nature, instead of being prepared for another stage of existence by nourishing the passions that agitate civilized man.

But peace to his spirit! I make war on his opinions, not his ashes. I make war only on the sensibility that led him to degrade woman by making her the slave of love.

	… "Curs'd vassalage,
	First idoliz'd till love's hot fire be o'er,
	Then slaves to those who courted us before."
	—Dryden

The pernicious tendency of those books in which the writers insidiously degrade women while prostrating themselves before their personal charms cannot be exposed too often or too severely.

Let us rise above such narrow prejudices, my dear contemporaries! If wisdom is desirable for its own sake, if virtue must be founded on knowledge to deserve the name, then let us try to strengthen our minds by reflection until our heads make a counterweight for our hearts. Let us not confine all our thoughts to the petty occurrences of the day, nor all our knowledge to an acquaintance with our lovers' or our husbands' hearts; but let every duty we practise be subordinate to the grand duty of improving our minds and preparing our affections for a more exalted state.

Beware, then, my friends, of letting your hearts be moved by every trivial incident. The reed is shaken by a breeze and dies every year, but the oak stands firm and braves the storm for centuries.

If we really were created only to flutter out our hour and die, then let us indulge our sensibility by all means, and laugh at the severity of reason. Yet even then, alas, we should want strength of body and mind, and life would be lost in feverish pleasures or wearisome languor.

But the system of education I so earnestly wish to see exploded seems to take for granted what ought never to be taken for granted: that virtue shields us from the accidents of life, and that fortune, slipping off her blindfold, will smile on a well-educated girl and bring an Emilius or a Telemachus along in her hand. Whereas in fact the reward virtue promises her followers is plainly confined to their own hearts; and often they must contend with the most vexatious worldly cares and put up with the vices and moods of relations they can never feel any friendship for.

There have been many women in the world who, instead of being supported by the reason and virtue of their fathers and brothers, have strengthened their own minds by struggling against those men's vices and follies — and who have never met a hero in the shape of a husband to pay them the debt humankind owed them and perhaps restore their reason to its natural dependent state, handing back to man the usurped prerogative of rising above opinion.

Section Two: Dr. Fordyce's Sermons

Dr. Fordyce's sermons have long formed part of a young woman's library; girls at school are even allowed to read them. But I should dismiss them instantly from my own pupil's shelf if I wanted to strengthen her understanding by leading her to form sound principles on a broad basis — or even if I were only anxious to cultivate her taste, though the sermons must be allowed to contain a good many sensible observations.

Dr. Fordyce may have had a very praiseworthy end in view; but these discourses are written in such an affected style that on that account alone, and even if I had nothing to object to in his *mellifluous* precepts, I should not let girls read them, unless I intended to hunt every spark of nature out of their composition and melt every human quality down into female weakness and artificial grace. I say artificial, because true grace arises from some kind of independence of mind.

Children, careless of pleasing anyone and anxious only to amuse themselves, are often very graceful; and the nobility, who have mostly lived among inferiors and always had money at command, acquire a graceful ease of bearing which should rather be called a habitual grace of body than that higher gracefulness which is really an expression of the mind. This mental grace, unnoticed by vulgar eyes, often flashes across a rough face and lights up every feature, showing simplicity and independence of mind. Then we read characters of immortality in the eye and see the soul in every gesture, though at rest neither the face nor the limbs may have much beauty to recommend them, nor the manner anything remarkable enough to attract general attention. Most people, however, look for something more *tangible* in the way of beauty; yet simplicity is generally admired when people do not stop to consider what they are admiring — and can there be simplicity without sincerity? But enough of these remarks, which are somewhat rambling, though the subject naturally called them up.

In declamatory periods Dr. Fordyce spins out Rousseau's eloquence, and in the most sentimental rant sets out his opinions about the female character and the behaviour a woman should adopt in order to make herself lovely.

He shall speak for himself, for this is how he makes nature address man: "Look at these smiling innocents, whom I have graced with my fairest gifts and committed to your protection; look on them with love and respect; treat them with tenderness and honour. They are timid and need to be defended. They are frail; oh, do not take advantage of their weakness! Let their fears and their blushes endear them to you. Let their confidence in you never be abused. But is it possible that any of you could be such barbarians, so supremely wicked, as to abuse it? Can you find it in your hearts to despoil these gentle, trusting creatures of their treasure, or to do anything to strip them of their native robe of virtue? Cursed be the impious hand that would dare to violate the unblemished form of Chastity! You wretch! You ruffian! Forbear, and do not venture to provoke heaven's fiercest vengeance." I know of no comment that could be made seriously on this curious passage, and I could produce a great many like it — some of them so very sentimental that I have heard rational men use the word indecent when they mentioned them with disgust.

Footnote: Can you? Can you? would be the most emphatic comment, if it were drawled out in a whining voice.

Throughout there is a display of cold, artificial feeling, and that parade of sensibility which boys and girls alike should be taught to despise as the sure mark of a small vain mind. Florid appeals are made to heaven, and to the *beauteous innocents* who are heaven's fairest images here below, while sober sense is left far behind. This is not the language of the heart, and it will never reach the heart, though it may tickle the ear.

I shall be told, perhaps, that the public have been pleased with these volumes. True — and Hervey's Meditations are still read, though he sinned equally against sense and taste.

I particularly object to the lover-like phrases of pumped-up passion scattered everywhere through them. If women are ever to be allowed to walk without leading-strings, why must they be coaxed into virtue by artful flattery and compliments on their sex? Speak to them in the language of truth and soberness, and away with the lullaby strains of condescending endearment. Let them be taught to respect themselves as rational creatures, instead of being led into a passion for their own insipid persons. It stirs my bile to hear a preacher holding forth on dress and needlework, and still more to hear him address the "British fair, the fairest of the fair", as if they had nothing but feelings.

Even when he is recommending piety he uses this argument: "Never, perhaps, does a fine woman strike more deeply than when, composed into pious recollection and possessed by the noblest considerations, she assumes, without knowing it, a superior dignity and new graces, so that the beauties of holiness seem to radiate about her and the bystanders are almost induced to fancy her already worshipping among her kindred angels." Why are women to be brought up like this with a desire for conquest? The very word, used in that sense, gives me a sickly qualm. Do religion and virtue offer no stronger motives, no brighter reward? Must women always be debased by being made to think about the sex of their companions? Must they always be taught to be pleasing? And when they level their small artillery at the heart of man, is it necessary to tell them that a little sense is enough to make their attention *incredibly soothing*? "As a small degree of knowledge entertains in a woman, so from a woman, though for a different reason, a small expression of kindness delights, particularly if she is beautiful." I should have supposed it was for the same reason.

Why are girls told that they resemble angels, when the effect is to sink them below women? Or that a gentle, innocent woman is the object that comes nearest to our idea of an angel? And yet they are told at the same time that they are only like angels while they are young and beautiful — so that it is their persons, not their virtues, that earn them this homage.

Idle, empty words! What can such delusive flattery lead to but vanity and folly? A lover, it is true, has a poetic licence to exalt his mistress; his reason is the bubble of his passion, and he tells no lie when he borrows the language of adoration. His imagination may raise the idol of his heart above humanity and go unblamed; and it would be a happy thing for women if they were only flattered by the men who loved them — I mean, who love the individual and not the sex. But should a grave preacher lard his discourses with such fooleries?

In sermons or in novels, however, voluptuousness is always true to its text. Moralists allow men to cultivate different qualities, as nature directs, and to take on the different characters that the same passions, modified almost infinitely, give to each individual. A virtuous man may have a choleric or a sanguine constitution, may be gay or grave without reproach; he may be so firm as to be nearly overbearing, or so weakly submissive as to have no will or opinion of his own. But all women are to be levelled by meekness and docility into a single character of yielding softness and gentle compliance.

I will use the preacher's own words. "Let it be observed that in your sex manly exercises are never graceful; that in a woman a masculine tone and figure, and a masculine air and bearing, are always forbidding; and that men of sensibility desire soft features and a flowing voice in every woman, a form that is not robust, and a delicate and gentle manner."

Is the following portrait not the portrait of a house slave? "I am astonished at the folly of many women who are still reproaching their husbands for leaving them alone, for preferring this or that company to theirs, for treating them with this or the other mark of disregard or indifference — when, to tell the truth, they have themselves largely to blame. Not that I would justify the men in anything wrong on their side. But if you had behaved to them with more *respectful observance* and a more *equal tenderness; studying their humours, overlooking their mistakes, submitting to their opinions* in matters of indifference, passing over little instances of unevenness, caprice or temper, giving *soft* answers to hasty words, complaining as seldom as possible, and making it your daily care to relieve their anxieties and anticipate their wishes, to enliven the dull hour and call up ideas of happiness — if you had pursued this conduct, I do not doubt that you would have kept and even increased their esteem, so far as to secure every degree of influence that could conduce to their virtue or to your mutual satisfaction; and your house might this day have been the home of domestic bliss." Such a woman ought to be an angel — or else she is an ass; for I can discern no trace of human character in this domestic drudge, neither reason nor passion, whose whole being is absorbed into a tyrant's.

Still, Dr. Fordyce must have very little acquaintance with the human heart if he really supposed such conduct would bring back a wandering love, instead of exciting contempt. No: beauty and gentleness and the rest may win a heart, but esteem, the only lasting affection, can only be got by virtue supported by reason. It is respect for the understanding that keeps tenderness for the person alive.

Since these volumes are so often put into the hands of young people, I have taken more notice of them than, strictly speaking, they deserve; but as they have helped to spoil the taste and weaken the understanding of so many of my fellow creatures, I could not pass over them in silence.

Section Three: Dr. Gregory's Legacy to His Daughters

Such fatherly concern runs through Dr. Gregory's Legacy to His Daughters that I begin the work of criticism with affectionate respect. But since this little volume has many attractions to recommend it to the most respectable part of my sex, I cannot silently pass over arguments that so plausibly support opinions which I believe have had the most damaging effect on the morals and manners of the female world.

His easy, familiar style is particularly suited to the tenor of his advice, and the melancholy tenderness that his respect for the memory of a beloved wife spreads through the whole work makes it very affecting. Yet there is a degree of concise elegance visible in many passages that disturbs this sympathy, and we come upon the author when we only expected to meet the father.

Besides, having two objects in view, he seldom held steadily to either. Wishing to make his daughters amiable, and afraid that unhappiness would be the only consequence of instilling sentiments that might draw them out of the track of common life without enabling them to act with a matching independence and dignity, he checks the natural flow of his thoughts and advises neither one thing nor the other.

In the preface he tells them a mournful truth: "that they will hear, at least once in their lives, the genuine sentiments of a man who has no interest in deceiving them."

Hapless woman! What can be expected of you, when the beings you are said naturally to depend on for reason and support all have an interest in deceiving you? This is the root of the evil that has cast a corroding mildew over all your virtues, and, blighting your opening faculties in the bud, has made you the weak thing you are. It is this separate interest, this insidious state of warfare, that undermines morality and divides humankind.

If love has made some women wretched, how many more has the cold, meaningless intercourse of gallantry made vain and useless? Yet this heartless attention to women is reckoned so manly, so polite, that until society is very differently organized I am afraid this relic of gothic manners will not be replaced by a more reasonable and affectionate way of behaving. Besides, to strip it of its imaginary dignity, I must observe that in the most civilized European states this lip service prevails to a very great degree, accompanied by an extreme dissoluteness of morals. In Portugal, the country I have particularly in mind, it takes precedence of the most serious moral obligations: a man is seldom assassinated while he is in a woman's company. The savage hand of robbery is unnerved by this chivalrous spirit; and if the blow of vengeance cannot be stayed, the lady is begged to pardon the rudeness and depart in peace, though sprinkled, perhaps, with her husband's or her brother's blood.

I shall pass over his remarks on religion, because I mean to discuss that subject in a separate chapter.

His remarks about behaviour, though many of them are very sensible, I entirely disapprove of, because it seems to me to be beginning at the wrong end. A cultivated understanding and an affectionate heart will never need starched rules of decorum; something more substantial than seemliness will be the result. And without understanding, the behaviour he recommends would be rank affectation. Decorum, indeed, is the one thing needful! Decorum is to supplant nature and banish all simplicity and variety of character from the female world. Yet what good can all this superficial counsel do? It is, however, much easier to prescribe this or that mode of behaviour than to set the reason to work; and when the mind has been stocked with useful knowledge and strengthened by being employed, the regulation of the behaviour may safely be left to its guidance.

Why, for instance, should the following caution be given, when art of every kind must contaminate the mind? Why entangle the grand motives of action, which reason and religion combine to enforce, with pitiful worldly shifts and sleight-of-hand tricks to gain the applause of gaping, tasteless fools? "Be even cautious in displaying your good sense. It will be thought that you are assuming a superiority over the rest of the company. But if you happen to have any learning, keep it a profound secret, especially from the men, who generally look with a jealous and malignant eye on a woman of great parts and a cultivated understanding." If men of real merit are above this meanness, as he afterwards observes, where is the necessity for the behaviour of a whole sex to be modulated to please fools, or to please men who, having little claim to respect as individuals, choose to keep close together in their phalanx? Men who insist on the superiority they share with all men, having no other, are certainly very excusable.

Footnote: Let women once acquire good sense, and, if it deserves the name, it will teach them how to employ it — or else of what use is it?

There would be no end to rules of behaviour if it were proper always to take the tone of the company; for by changing key forever in that way, a *flat* would often pass for a *natural* note.

Surely it would have been wiser to advise women to improve themselves until they rose above the fumes of vanity, and then let public opinion come round. For where are rules of accommodation to stop? The narrow path of truth and virtue inclines neither to the right nor to the left; it is a straightforward business, and those who are earnestly pursuing their road may leap over a good many decorous prejudices without leaving modesty behind. Make the heart clean and give the head employment, and I will venture to predict that there will be nothing offensive in the behaviour.

The air of fashion that so many young people are eager to acquire always strikes me like the studied attitudes in certain modern prints, copied with tasteless servility from the antique: the soul is left out, and none of the parts are tied together by anything that could properly be called character. This varnish of fashion, which seldom sticks very close to sense, may dazzle the weak; but leave nature to itself and it will seldom disgust the wise. Besides, when a woman has sense enough not to pretend to anything she does not understand to some degree, there is no need for any resolution to hide her talents under a bushel. Let things take their natural course and all will be well.

It is this system of dissimulation, running through the whole volume, that I despise. Women are always to *seem* to be this or that — and yet virtue might address them in Hamlet's words: Seems! I know not seems! I have that within which passes show!

The same note keeps sounding. In another place, after recommending delicacy without sufficiently distinguishing what he means by it, he adds: "The men will complain of your reserve. They will assure you that a franker behaviour would make you more amiable. But trust me, they are not sincere when they tell you so. I acknowledge that on some occasions it might make you more agreeable as companions, but it would make you less amiable as women — an important distinction that many of your sex are not aware of."

This desire to be always women is the very consciousness that degrades the sex. Except with a lover, I must repeat an earlier observation with emphasis: it would be well if women were only agreeable or rational companions. But in this respect his advice is even inconsistent with a passage I mean to quote with the most marked approval.

"The idea that a woman may allow all innocent freedoms provided her virtue is secure is both grossly indelicate and dangerous, and has proved fatal to many of your sex." With this opinion I entirely agree. Any man or woman of feeling must always wish to convince the person they love that it is the caresses of the individual, not of the sex, that are received and returned with pleasure, and that the heart is moved rather than the senses. Without this natural delicacy, love becomes a selfish personal gratification that soon degrades the character.

I carry the sentiment further still. Affection, where love is out of the question, authorises many personal endearments which, flowing naturally from an innocent heart, give life to behaviour; but the personal familiarity of appetite, gallantry or vanity is contemptible. When a man squeezes the hand of a pretty woman he has never seen before as he hands her into a carriage, she will regard the impertinent liberty as an insult, if she has any true delicacy, instead of being flattered by this meaningless homage to beauty. These are the privileges of friendship, or the momentary homage the heart pays to virtue when it flashes suddenly into view. Mere animal spirits have no claim on the kindnesses of affection.

Wishing to feed the affections with what is now the food of vanity, I would gladly persuade my sex to act on simpler principles. Let them deserve love, and they will get it, even if nobody ever tells them that "the power of a fine woman over the hearts of men, and of men of the finest parts, is even beyond what she imagines."

I have already noticed his narrow cautions about duplicity, female softness and delicacy of constitution; these are the changes he rings without ceasing, more decorously than Rousseau, it is true, but it all comes home to the same point. Anyone who takes the trouble to analyse these sentiments will find the first principles not quite so delicate as the structure raised on them.

The subject of amusements is treated too cursorily, and in the same spirit.

When I come to friendship, love and marriage it will be found that we differ materially in opinion. I shall not anticipate here what I have to say on those important subjects, but confine my remarks to the general tenor of his — to that cautious family prudence, and those confined views of a partial, unenlightened affection, which shut out pleasure and improvement in the vain hope of warding off sorrow and error, and which, in guarding the heart and mind so carefully, destroy all their energy as well. It is far better to be often deceived than never to trust; to be disappointed in love than never to love; to lose a husband's fondness than to forfeit his esteem.

How happy it would be for the world, and for individuals too, if all this useless anxiety to attain worldly happiness on a confined plan were turned into an anxious desire to improve the understanding. "Wisdom is the principal thing: *therefore* get wisdom; and with all your getting, get understanding." "How long, you simple ones, will you love simplicity, and hate knowledge?" says Wisdom to the daughters of men.
