Chapter Five: Criticisms of the Writers Who Have Made Women Objects of Pity, Bordering on Contempt

(Part 3 of 3)

Section Four: Against the Prerogative of Man

I do not mean to go through all the writers who have written on the manners of women; that would only be going over the old ground, for they have generally written in the same strain. But in attacking the boasted prerogative of man — the prerogative that may emphatically be called the iron sceptre of tyranny, the original sin of tyrants — I declare against all power built on prejudice, however venerable with age.

If the submission demanded is founded on justice, there is no appealing to a higher power, for God is justice itself. Let us, then, as children of the same parent, and not bastards merely because we were born later, reason together, and learn to submit to the authority of reason when her voice is distinctly heard. But if it can be shown that this throne of prerogative rests on nothing but a chaotic mass of prejudices with no inherent principle of order to hold them together — or on an elephant, or a tortoise, or even the mighty shoulders of a son of the earth — then those who dare to brave the consequences may escape, without any breach of duty and without sinning against the order of things.

While reason raises man above the brutal herd, and death is big with promises, only those are subject to blind authority who have no reliance on their own strength. "They are free who will be free!"

Footnote: "He is the free man, whom *truth* makes free!" —Cowper

The being who can govern itself has nothing to fear in life; but if anything is dearer to it than its own self-respect, the price must be paid to the last farthing. Virtue, like everything else that is valuable, must be loved for herself alone, or she will not come and live with us. She will not give us that peace "which passes understanding" when she is used merely as the stilts of a reputation and respected with pharisaical exactness because honesty is the best policy.

That the plan of life which lets us carry some knowledge and virtue into another world is also the one best calculated to give us contentment in this one cannot be denied. Yet few people act on the principle, though everyone allows that it is beyond dispute. Present pleasure, or present power, carries these sober convictions before it, and man bargains with happiness for the day and not for a lifetime. How few — how very few — have foresight or resolution enough to endure a small evil now in order to avoid a greater one later.

Woman in particular, whose virtue is built on mutual prejudices, seldom attains this greatness of mind. So, becoming the slave of her own feelings, she is easily subdued by other people's. Degraded in this way, her reason — her misty reason — is employed in polishing her chains rather than in snapping them.

Footnote: I mean to use a word that takes in more than chastity, the virtue that is supposed to belong to one sex.

I have listened with indignation to women arguing in the same track as men, and adopting with all the pertinacity of ignorance the very sentiments that brutalize them.

I must illustrate my point with a few examples. Mrs. Piozzi, who often repeated by rote what she did not understand, comes forward in Johnsonian periods.

"Do not look for happiness in singularity, and dread a refinement of wisdom as a deviation into folly." So she dogmatically addresses a newly married man; and to explain this pompous opening she adds: "I said that your lady's person would not grow more pleasing to you, but pray let her never suspect that it grows less so. That a woman will pardon an affront to her understanding much sooner than one to her person is well known, and none of us will contradict it. All our attainments, all our arts, are employed to gain and keep the heart of man; and what mortification can exceed the disappointment if the end is not obtained? There is no reproof, however pointed, no punishment, however severe, that a woman of spirit will not prefer to neglect; and if she can endure it without complaining, that only proves that she means to make it up to herself by other men's attention for her husband's slights."

These are truly masculine sentiments. "All our *arts* are employed to gain and keep the heart of man" — and what is the inference? That if her person is neglected, and was there ever a person, even one formed with the symmetry of a Medici Venus, that was not slighted in the end, she will make it up to herself by trying to please other men. Noble morality! And so the understanding of a whole sex is insulted and their virtue is deprived of the common basis of all virtue. A woman must know that her person cannot be as pleasing to her husband as it was to her lover; and if she is offended with him for being a human creature, she may as well whine about the loss of his heart as about any other foolish thing. This very want of discernment, or unreasonable anger, proves that he could not have changed his fondness for her person into an affection for her virtues or a respect for her understanding.

While women avow such opinions and act on them, their understandings at least deserve the contempt and abuse that men who *never* insult their persons have pointedly aimed at the female mind. And it is the sentiments of these polite men, who do not wish to be encumbered with a mind, that vain women thoughtlessly adopt. Yet they ought to know that only an insulted reason can spread that *sacred* reserve about the person which makes human affections — for human affections always have some base alloy in them — as permanent as is consistent with the grand end of existence, the attainment of virtue.

The Baroness de Staël speaks the same language as the lady just quoted, with more enthusiasm. Her eulogy on Rousseau happened to fall into my hands, and her sentiments, which are the sentiments of too many of my sex, may serve as a text for a few comments. "Though Rousseau," she observes, "has tried to prevent women from interfering in public affairs and playing a brilliant part in the theatre of politics, yet how much he has done, in speaking of them, to satisfy them! If he wished to deprive them of some rights foreign to their sex, how completely has he restored to them all those they have a claim to! And in trying to diminish their influence over the deliberations of men, how sacredly has he established the empire they hold over men's happiness! In helping them down from a usurped throne, he has seated them firmly on the one nature destined them for; and though he is full of indignation against them when they try to resemble men, yet when they come before him with all *the charms, weaknesses*, *virtues* and *errors* of their sex, his respect for their *persons* amounts almost to adoration." True! For there never was a sensualist who paid more fervent adoration at the shrine of beauty. So devout, indeed, was his respect for the person that, chastity excepted for obvious reasons, he only wished to see it embellished by charms, weaknesses and errors. He was afraid that the austerity of reason would disturb the soft playfulness of love. The master wanted a meretricious slave to fondle, entirely dependent on his reason and his bounty; he did not want a companion he would be obliged to esteem, or a friend he could entrust with the education of his children if death took their father before he had finished the sacred task. He denies woman reason, shuts her out from knowledge and turns her away from truth — and yet he is pardoned, because "he admits the passion of love." It would take some ingenuity to show why women should be under such an obligation to him for admitting love, when it is clear that he admits it only for the relaxation of men and the perpetuation of the species. But he talked with passion, and that powerful spell worked on the sensibility of a young admirer. "What does it matter to women," this rhapsodist goes on, "that his reason disputes the empire with them, when his heart is devotedly theirs?" It is not empire but equality that they ought to be contending for. Yet if all they wanted was to prolong their sway, they should not trust entirely to their persons; for though beauty may win a heart, it cannot keep one, even in full bloom, unless the mind lends it at least a few graces.

Once women are enlightened enough to see their real interest on any grand scale, they will, I am persuaded, be very ready to give up all the prerogatives of love that are not mutual — speaking of them as lasting prerogatives — for the calm satisfaction of friendship and the tender confidence of a settled esteem. They will not put on insolent airs before marriage, or submit abjectly afterwards; but, trying to act like reasonable creatures in both situations, they will not be tumbled from a throne to a stool.

Madame de Genlis has written several entertaining books for children, and her letters on education offer many useful hints that sensible parents will certainly make use of; but her views are narrow, and her prejudices are as unreasonable as they are strong.

I shall pass over her vehement argument for the eternity of future punishments, because I blush to think that a human being should ever argue vehemently in such a cause, and shall make only a few remarks on her absurd way of making parental authority supplant reason. For everywhere she inculcates not only *blind* submission to parents but blind submission to the opinion of the world.

Footnote: A person is not to act in this or that way, though convinced it is right, because some ambiguous circumstance might lead the world to *suspect* that they acted from other motives. This is sacrificing the substance for a shadow. Let people watch their own hearts and act rightly as far as they can judge, and they may wait patiently until the opinion of the world comes round. It is best to be directed by a simple motive, for justice has too often been sacrificed to propriety — which is another word for convenience.

She tells the story of a young man engaged at his father's express wish to a girl with a fortune. Before the marriage can take place the girl loses her fortune and is thrown friendless on the world. The father practises the most infamous arts to separate his son from her; and when the son detects his villainy and, following the dictates of honour, marries the girl, nothing but misery follows, because, if you please, he married *without* his father's consent. What ground can religion or morality rest on, when justice is defied like this? In the same style she presents an accomplished young woman as ready to marry anybody her *mamma* chose to recommend, and as actually marrying the young man of her own choice without feeling any emotion of passion at all, because a well-educated girl had not had time to fall in love. Is it possible to have much respect for a system of education that insults reason and nature in this way?

Many similar opinions occur in her writings, mixed with sentiments that do honour to her head and heart. Yet so much superstition is mixed with her religion, and so much worldly wisdom with her morality, that I would not let a young person read her works unless I could talk the subjects over afterwards and point out the contradictions.

Mrs. Chapone's Letters are written with such good sense and such unaffected humility, and contain so many useful observations, that I mention them only to pay their worthy author this tribute of respect. I cannot always agree with her, it is true, but I always respect her.

The very word respect brings Mrs. Macaulay to my mind — undoubtedly the woman of the greatest abilities this country has ever produced. And yet this woman has been allowed to die without sufficient respect being paid to her memory.

Posterity, however, will be more just, and will remember that Catharine Macaulay was an example of intellectual attainments supposed to be incompatible with the weakness of her sex. Indeed, no sex appears in her style of writing; it is like the sense it conveys, strong and clear.

I will not call her understanding masculine, because I do not admit any such arrogant assumption of reason; but I maintain that it was a sound one, and that her judgment, the matured fruit of profound thinking, proved that a woman can acquire judgment in the fullest sense of the word. Possessing more penetration than shrewdness and more understanding than fancy, she writes with a sober energy and a closeness of argument; yet sympathy and benevolence give her sentiments an interest and give her arguments the vital heat that forces a reader to weigh them.

Footnote: Since I agree with Mrs. Macaulay about many branches of education, I refer the reader to her valuable work rather than quoting her sentiments in support of my own.

When I first thought of writing these criticisms I anticipated Mrs. Macaulay's approval with a little of that sanguine ardour it has been the business of my life to hold down; but I soon heard, with the sickly qualm of disappointed hope and the still seriousness of regret, that she was no more.

Section Five: Lord Chesterfield's Letters

In surveying the various works that have been written on education, Lord Chesterfield's Letters must not be passed over in silence. Not that I mean to analyse his unmanly, immoral system, or even to pick out the useful shrewd remarks that occur in his frivolous correspondence. I only mean to make a few reflections on their avowed purpose: the art of acquiring an early knowledge of the world. It is an art that preys secretly, like the worm in the bud, on the expanding powers, and turns to poison the generous juices that should be rising with vigour in a young frame and inspiring warm affections and great resolves.

For everything, says the wise man, there is a season; and who would look for the fruits of autumn during the kindly months of spring? But this is mere declamation, and I mean to reason with those worldly-wise instructors who, instead of cultivating the judgment, instil prejudices, and harden a heart that gradual experience would only have cooled. An early acquaintance with human infirmity, or what is called knowledge of the world, is in my opinion the surest way to contract the heart and damp that natural youthful ardour which produces not only great talents but great virtues. For the vain attempt to bring forth the fruit of experience before the sapling has put out its leaves only exhausts its strength and prevents it taking a natural form — just as the form and strength of cooling metals are injured when the attraction that holds them together is disturbed.

Tell me, you who have studied the human mind, is it not a strange way of fixing principles to show young people that principles are seldom stable? And how can they be fortified into habits when they are proved fallacious by example? Why should the ardour of youth be damped like this, and the luxuriance of fancy cut back to the quick? This dry caution may guard a character against worldly mischances, it is true; but it will infallibly rule out any excellence in virtue or in knowledge. The stumbling block that suspicion throws across every path will prevent any vigorous exertion of genius or benevolence, and life will be stripped of its most alluring charm long before its calm evening, when a man should be able to retire into contemplation for comfort and support.

A young man who has been brought up among friends at home, and encouraged to store his mind with as much speculative knowledge as reading can give, along with the natural reflections that youthful ebullitions of animal spirits and instinctive feelings inspire, will enter the world with warm and mistaken expectations. But this seems to be the course of nature; and in morals as in works of taste we should observe her sacred indications, and not presume to lead where we ought obediently to follow.

In the world few people act from principle: present feelings and early habits are the great springs of action. But how deadened the first would be, and how much like corroding iron fetters the second, if the world were shown to young people exactly as it is, before any knowledge of humankind or of their own hearts, slowly gained by experience, had made them forbearing. Their fellow creatures would not then be seen as frail beings like themselves, condemned to struggle with human infirmities and showing now the light and now the dark side of their character, drawing out alternate feelings of love and disgust; they would be guarded against like beasts of prey, until every enlarged social feeling — in a word, humanity — had been rooted out.

In life, by contrast, as we gradually discover the imperfections of our nature we discover virtues too; and various circumstances attach us to our fellow creatures when we mix with them and look at the same objects — circumstances never thought of in acquiring a hasty, unnatural knowledge of the world. We see a folly swell into a vice by almost imperceptible degrees, and pity even while we blame. But if the hideous monster burst on our sight all at once, then fear and disgust, making us more severe than any man ought to be, might lead us in blind zeal to usurp the character of omnipotence and pronounce damnation on our fellow mortals — forgetting that we cannot read the heart, and that the seeds of the same vices lurk in our own.

I have already remarked that we expect more from instruction than mere instruction can give. Instead of preparing young people to meet the evils of life with dignity, and to acquire wisdom and virtue by exercising their own faculties, we heap precept on precept and demand blind obedience where conviction should be brought home to the reason.

Suppose, for instance, that a young person in the first ardour of friendship makes a god of the person they love. What harm can come of this mistaken, enthusiastic attachment? Perhaps it is necessary for virtue to appear first in a human form in order to make an impression on young hearts; the ideal model that a more mature and exalted mind looks up to and shapes for itself would escape their sight altogether. If a person does not love the brother he has seen, how can he love God? asked the wisest of men.

It is natural for youth to adorn the first object of its affection with every good quality; and the emulation produced by ignorance — or, to speak more properly, by inexperience — brings forward the very mind that is capable of forming such an affection. Then, when in the course of time perfection turns out not to be within mortal reach, virtue in the abstract is thought beautiful and wisdom sublime. Admiration gives place to friendship properly so called, because it is cemented by esteem; and the person walks alone, depending on heaven alone for that emulous panting after perfection which always glows in a noble mind. But a man must gain this knowledge by exerting his own faculties; and surely it is the blessed fruit of disappointed hope. For He who delights to spread happiness and show mercy to the weak creatures who are learning to know him never planted a good propensity in us to be a tormenting will-o'-the-wisp.

We now let our trees spread with a wild luxuriance, and do not expect to combine the majestic marks of time with youthful graces by force; we wait patiently until they have struck their roots deep and braved many a storm. Is the mind, then, which advances towards perfection more slowly in proportion to its dignity, to be treated with less respect? Reasoning by analogy, everything around us is in a progressive state; and when an unwelcome knowledge of life produces something like a satiety of living, and we discover in the natural course of things that all that is done under the sun is vanity, we are drawing near the awful close of the drama. The days of activity and hope are over, and the opportunities the first stage of existence has offered for advancing in the scale of intelligence must soon be summed up. A knowledge of the futility of life at that period — or earlier, if it is gained by experience — is very useful, because it is natural. But when a frail being is shown the follies and vices of humankind so that he may be taught to guard prudently against the common accidents of life by sacrificing his heart, then surely it is not speaking harshly to call it the wisdom of this world, as against the nobler fruit of piety and experience.

I will venture a paradox and give my opinion without reserve. If men were born only to complete a circle of life and death, it would be wise to take every step foresight could suggest to make life happy. Moderation in every pursuit would then be the supreme wisdom, and the prudent voluptuary might enjoy a degree of contentment though he neither cultivated his understanding nor kept his heart pure. Prudence, supposing we were mortal, would be true wisdom, or, to be more explicit, would procure the greatest portion of happiness taking life as a whole; but knowledge beyond the conveniences of life would be a curse.

Why should we injure our health with close study? The exalted pleasure that intellectual pursuits give would hardly be equivalent to the hours of languor that follow, especially if we have to reckon in the doubts and disappointments that cloud our researches. Vanity and vexation close every enquiry, for the cause we particularly wished to discover flies before us as we advance, like the horizon. The ignorant, on the contrary, are like children, and suppose that if they could only walk straight forward they would arrive at last where the earth and the clouds meet. Yet, disappointed as we are in our researches, the mind gains strength from the exercise — enough, perhaps, to comprehend the answers it may receive at another stage of existence to the anxious questions it asked here, when the understanding was fluttering on feeble wings round the visible effects and trying to dive down to the hidden cause.

The passions too, the winds of life, would be useless if not injurious, if the substance that composes our thinking selves, after we had thought in vain, merely became the support of vegetable life and went to invigorate a cabbage or blush in a rose. The appetites would answer every earthly purpose and produce a more moderate and lasting happiness. But the powers of the soul that are of so little use here, and that probably disturb our animal enjoyments even while a conscious dignity makes us glory in having them, prove that life is only an education, a state of infancy, whose one hope worth cherishing should not be thrown away. I mean to infer, therefore, that we ought to have a precise idea of what we want education to achieve; for the immortality of the soul is contradicted by the actions of a great many people who firmly profess to believe in it.

If your first consideration is to secure ease and prosperity on earth and to leave the future to look after itself, then you act prudently in giving your child an early insight into the weaknesses of his nature. You may not, it is true, make an Inkle of him; but do not imagine that a boy who has absorbed a mean opinion of human nature very early will stick to anything more than the letter of the law, or think it necessary to rise much above the common standard. He may avoid gross vices, because honesty is the best policy; but he will never aim at great virtues. The example of writers and artists will illustrate the remark.

I must therefore venture to doubt whether what has been treated as an axiom in morals may not have been a dogmatic assertion made by men who have coolly seen humankind through the medium of books; and I say, in direct contradiction to them, that the regulation of the passions is not always wisdom. On the contrary, it would seem that one reason why men have better judgment and more fortitude than women is undoubtedly that they give freer scope to the grand passions and, by going astray more often, enlarge their minds. If they then fix on some stable principle by exercising their own reason, they probably have to thank the force of their passions, nourished by *false* views of life and allowed to leap over the boundary that keeps a man contented. But if in the dawn of life we could soberly survey the scene before us as if in perspective, and see everything in its true colours, how could the passions ever gain strength enough to unfold our faculties?

Let me now, as from a height, survey the world stripped of all its false, deluding charms. The clear air lets me see each object in its true perspective, while my heart is still. I am as calm as the prospect on a morning when the mists disperse slowly and silently unveil the beauties of nature, refreshed by rest.

In what light does the world appear now? I rub my eyes and think, perhaps, that I am only just waking from a vivid dream.

I see the sons and daughters of men pursuing shadows and anxiously wasting their powers to feed passions that have no adequate object — unless the very excess of these blind impulses, pampered by that lying yet constantly trusted guide the imagination, does in fact prepare them for some other state and so make short-sighted mortals wiser without their meaning to be, or, what comes to the same thing, while they were chasing some imaginary present good.

Having looked at things in this light, it would not be very fanciful to imagine that this world is a stage on which a pantomime is performed daily for the amusement of superior beings. How they would be entertained to see the ambitious man consuming himself in the pursuit of a phantom, chasing the bubble fame into "the cannon's mouth" that was to blow him into nothing — for once consciousness is gone it does not matter whether we go up in a whirlwind or come down in rain. And if they compassionately sharpened his sight and showed him the thorny path that leads to eminence, sinking like a quicksand as he climbs and disappointing his hopes when they are almost within his grasp, would he not leave the honour of amusing them to somebody else and set about securing the present moment — though, from the constitution of his nature, he would not find it easy to catch that flying stream? Such slaves we are to hope and fear!

But vain as the ambitious man's pursuit is, he is often striving for something more substantial than fame; fame alone would be the veriest meteor, the wildest fire that ever lured a man to ruin. What — renounce the most trifling gratification in order to be applauded when he is no longer there to hear it! Why this struggle, whether man is mortal or immortal, if that noble passion did not really raise him above his fellows?

And love! What diverting scenes it would produce — Pantaloon's tricks must yield to a more egregious folly. To see a mortal adorn an object with imaginary charms, and then fall down and worship the idol he set up himself — how ridiculous! But what serious consequences follow, to rob a man of the portion of happiness that the Deity, in calling him into existence, has indubitably promised him — for on what else can his attributes rest? Would not all the purposes of life have been much better served if he had only felt what has been called physical love? And would not the sight of the object, seen without the medium of imagination, soon reduce the passion to an appetite, if reflection, the noble distinction of man, did not give it force and make it an instrument for raising him above this earthly dross, by teaching him to love the centre of all perfection — whose wisdom appears clearer and clearer in the works of nature as reason is illuminated and exalted by contemplation, and by acquiring that love of order which the struggles of passion produce?

The habit of reflection, and the knowledge gained by nursing any passion, could be shown to be equally useful even if the object proved equally illusory; for all objects would look the same if they were not magnified by the governing passion the Author of all good implanted in us to call out and strengthen the faculties of each individual, and to let it gather all the experience an infant can gather, who does certain things and cannot tell why.

I come down from my height and, mixing with my fellow creatures, feel myself hurried along in the common stream. Ambition, love, hope and fear exert their usual power, though reason has convinced us that their present and most attractive promises are only lying dreams. But if the cold hand of circumspection had damped every generous feeling before it left any permanent mark on the character or fixed any habit, what could be expected but a selfish prudence and a reason rising only just above instinct? Who that has read Dean Swift's disgusting description of the Yahoos, and his insipid one of the Houyhnhnms, with a philosophical eye can fail to see the futility of degrading the passions, or of making a man rest content?

A young man should *act*; for if he had the experience of a grey head he would be fitter for death than for life, and his virtues, residing in his head rather than his heart, could produce nothing great, while his understanding, prepared for this world, would not prove by any noble flights that it had a title to a better one.

Besides, it is not possible to give a young person a just view of life. He must have struggled with his own passions before he can estimate the force of the temptation that betrayed his brother into vice. Those who are entering life and those who are leaving it see the world from such very different points of view that they can seldom think alike, unless the unfledged reason of the first has never attempted a solitary flight.

When we hear of some daring crime, it comes on us full in the deepest shade of turpitude and rouses indignation; but the eye that watched the darkness thicken by degrees must look at it with a more compassionate forbearance. The world cannot be seen by an unmoved spectator; we must mix in the crowd and feel as men feel before we can judge of their feelings. If we mean, in short, to live in the world in order to grow wiser and better, and not merely to enjoy the good things of life, we must acquire a knowledge of others at the same time that we become acquainted with ourselves. Knowledge acquired any other way only hardens the heart and perplexes the understanding.

I may be told that the knowledge gained in this way is sometimes bought too dear. I can only answer that I very much doubt whether any knowledge can be got without labour and sorrow, and that those who wish to spare their children both should not complain if their children turn out neither wise nor virtuous. They only aimed at making them prudent — and prudence, early in life, is nothing but the cautious craft of an ignorant self-love.

I have observed that young people whose education has had particular attention paid to it are generally very superficial and conceited, and far from pleasing in any respect, because they had neither the unsuspecting warmth of youth nor the cool depth of age. I cannot help imputing this unnatural appearance chiefly to the hasty, premature instruction that leads them to repeat presumptuously all the crude notions they have taken on trust — so that the careful education they received makes them the slaves of prejudice for the rest of their lives.

Mental exertion, like bodily exertion, is irksome at first, so much so that most people would gladly let others both work and think for them. An observation I have often made will illustrate what I mean. When, in a circle of strangers or acquaintances, a person of moderate abilities asserts an opinion heatedly, I will venture to say — for I have traced this to its source very often — that the opinion is a prejudice. These echoes have a high respect for the understanding of some relation or friend, and, without fully comprehending the opinions they are so eager to retail, they maintain them with an obstinacy that would astonish even the person who concocted them.

I know a fashion now prevails of respecting prejudices, and that when anyone dares to face them, though moved by humanity and armed with reason, he is superciliously asked whether his ancestors were fools. No, I should answer; opinions of every description were probably all considered at first, and so were founded on some reason. But quite often, of course, it was a local expedient rather than a fundamental principle that would be reasonable at all times. Moss-covered opinions take on the disproportionate form of prejudices when they are lazily adopted only because age has given them a venerable look, though the reason they were built on has ceased to be a reason, or cannot be traced. Why are we to love prejudices merely because they are prejudices? A prejudice is a fond, obstinate persuasion for which we can give no reason; for the moment a reason can be given for an opinion it stops being a prejudice, though it may be an error of judgment. Are we, then, advised to cherish opinions only in order to set reason at defiance? This way of arguing, if it can be called arguing, reminds me of what is vulgarly called a woman's reason. For women sometimes declare that they love or believe certain things *because* they love or believe them.

It is impossible to converse to any purpose with people who in this style use nothing but affirmatives and negatives. Before you can bring them to a point to start fairly from, you must go back to the simple principles that came before the prejudices power has broached; and it is ten to one that you are stopped by the philosophical assertion that certain principles are as practically false as they are abstractly true. Indeed one may infer that reason has whispered some doubts, for it generally happens that people assert their opinions most heatedly when they are beginning to waver: striving to drive out their own doubts by convincing an opponent, they grow angry when those gnawing doubts are thrown back to prey on themselves.

The fact is that men expect from education what education cannot give. A sagacious parent or tutor may strengthen the body and sharpen the instruments the child is to gather knowledge with; but the honey must be the reward of the individual's own industry. It is almost as absurd to try to make a boy wise on somebody else's experience as to expect a body to grow strong on exercise that is only talked about, or watched.

Many of the children whose conduct has been most narrowly watched become the weakest men, because their instructors only instil into their minds certain notions that have no foundation except the instructor's authority; and if that instructor is loved or respected, the mind is cramped in its exertions and unsteady in its advances. In such a case the business of education is only to guide the shooting tendrils to a proper pole; and yet, after laying precept on precept without ever letting a child acquire judgment for itself, parents expect them to act by this borrowed, fallacious light exactly as if they had lit it themselves, and to be, when they enter life, what their parents are at the close of it. They do not consider that a tree, and even the human body, does not strengthen its fibres until it has reached its full growth.

There seems to be something analogous in the mind. The senses and the imagination give the character its form during childhood and youth; and the understanding, as life advances, gives firmness to the first fair purposes of feeling — until virtue arises from the clear conviction of reason rather than from the impulse of the heart, and morality is made to rest on a rock that the storms of passion beat against in vain.

I hope I shall not be misunderstood when I say that religion will not have this consolidating power unless it is founded on reason. If it is merely the refuge of weakness or of wild fanaticism, and not a governing principle of conduct drawn from self-knowledge and from a rational opinion about the attributes of God, what can it be expected to produce? The religion that consists in warming the affections and exalting the imagination is only the poetical part of it, and may give an individual pleasure without making that individual any more moral. It may be a substitute for worldly pursuits and still narrow the heart instead of enlarging it. Virtue must be loved as sublime and excellent in itself, and not for the advantages it brings or the evils it wards off, if any great degree of excellence is to be expected. Men will not become moral by building castles in the air in a future world to make up for the disappointments they meet with in this one, if they turn their thoughts away from the duties in front of them towards religious daydreams.

Most prospects in life are spoiled by the shuffling worldly wisdom of men who, forgetting that they cannot serve God and money, try to blend contradictory things. If you wish to make your son rich, take one road; if you are only anxious to make him virtuous, you must take another. But do not imagine that you can bound from one to the other without losing your way.

Footnote: See an excellent essay on this subject by Mrs. Barbauld, in *Miscellaneous Pieces in Prose*.
