Chapter Six: The Effect That Early Associations of Ideas Have on Character

Educated in the enervating style recommended by the writers I have been criticizing, and given no chance by their subordinate place in society to recover the ground they have lost, is it surprising that women everywhere look like a defect in nature? Is it surprising, when we consider how decisively an early association of ideas affects the character, that they neglect their understandings and turn all their attention to their persons?

The great advantages that naturally follow from stocking the mind with knowledge are obvious from these considerations. The association of our ideas is either habitual or instantaneous, and the second kind seems to depend on the original temperature of the mind rather than on the will. Once ideas and matters of fact have been taken in, they lie by for use until some chance circumstance makes information that was received at very different periods of our lives dart into the mind with illustrative force. Many recollections are like a flash of lightning, one idea assimilating and explaining another with astonishing speed. I am not talking here about that quick perception of truth which is so intuitive that it baffles investigation, and leaves us unable to decide whether it is memory or reasoning, lost sight of in its own swiftness, that opens the dark cloud. Over those instantaneous associations we have little power; for once the mind has been enlarged by roving flights or by profound reflection, the raw materials will to some degree arrange themselves. The understanding, it is true, may keep us from going out of drawing when we group our thoughts, or transcribe the warm sketches of fancy from the imagination; but it is the animal spirits, the individual character, that give the colouring. How little power we have over that subtle electric fluid, and how little power reason can gain over it! These fine, intractable spirits appear to be the essence of genius, and, beaming in its eagle eye, produce in the highest degree that happy energy of associating thoughts which surprises, delights and instructs. These are the glowing minds that concentrate pictures for their fellow creatures, forcing them to look with interest at objects reflected from an impassioned imagination which they had passed over in nature itself.

Footnote: When I have felt inclined to laugh at materialists, I have sometimes asked whether, since the most powerful effects in nature are apparently produced by fluids — the magnetic and so on — the passions might not be fine volatile fluids that embrace humanity and hold its more refractory elementary parts together; or whether they are simply a liquid fire pervading the more sluggish materials and giving them life and heat.

I must be allowed to explain myself. Most people cannot see or feel poetically; they lack fancy, and so they fly from solitude in search of tangible objects. But when an author lends them his eyes they can see as he saw, and be entertained by images they could never have picked out for themselves, though the images lay in front of them.

Education, then, only supplies the man of genius with knowledge to give variety and contrast to his associations. But there is also an habitual association of ideas, growing "with our growth", which has a great effect on the moral character of humankind and gives the mind a turn that usually stays with it for life. The understanding is so ductile, and yet so stubborn, that the associations formed by accidental circumstances during the period the body takes to reach maturity can seldom be untangled by reason. One idea calls up another, its old associate, and memory, faithful to first impressions — particularly when the intellectual powers are not employed in cooling our sensations — retraces them with mechanical exactness.

This habitual slavery to first impressions has a more damaging effect on the female character than on the male, because business and the other dry employments of the understanding tend to deaden the feelings and break associations that do violence to reason. But women, who are made women of while they are mere children and brought back to childhood when they ought to be leaving the go-cart forever, have not strength of mind enough to rub out the artificial additions that have smothered nature.

Everything they see or hear serves to fix impressions, call up emotions and form associations that give their minds a character supposed to belong to their sex. False notions of beauty and delicacy stunt the growth of their limbs and produce a sickly tenderness rather than a fineness of organs; and, weakened in this way by being employed in unfolding their first associations rather than examining them — associations forced on them by every object around them — how are they to attain the vigour they would need to throw off their artificial character? Where are they to find the strength to fall back on reason and rise above a system of oppression that blights the fair promises of spring? This cruel association of ideas, which everything conspires to twist into all their habits of thinking, or, to be more precise, of feeling, gains new force when they begin to act a little for themselves; for they then see that pleasure and power are only to be got through their skill in exciting emotion in men. Besides, all the books written expressly for their instruction, which make the first impression on their minds, teach the same opinions. Educated in a bondage worse than Egyptian, it is unreasonable as well as cruel to reproach them with faults they could hardly avoid, unless we suppose a degree of native vigour that falls to the lot of very few people of either sex.

The severest sarcasms, for instance, have been aimed at women, and they have been ridiculed for repeating "a set of phrases learnt by rote", when nothing could be more natural, considering the education they get and the fact that their "highest praise is to obey, unargued" the will of man. If they are not allowed enough reason to govern their own conduct, then everything they learn must be learned by rote. And when all their ingenuity is called out to arrange their dress, "a passion for a scarlet coat" is so natural that it has never surprised me. And granting that Pope's summary of their character is just, "that every woman is at heart a rake", why should they be bitterly censured for looking for a congenial mind and preferring a rake to a man of sense?

Rakes know how to work on their sensibility, while the modest merit of reasonable men naturally has less effect on their feelings; such men cannot reach the heart by way of the understanding, because they have few sentiments in common with it.

It seems a little absurd to expect women to be more reasonable than men in their *likings*, and still to deny them the uncontrolled use of reason. When do men *fall in love* with sense? When do they, with all their superior powers and advantages, turn from the person to the mind? And how can they then expect women, taught only to observe behaviour and to acquire manners rather than morals, to despise what they have spent their whole lives labouring to attain? Where are they suddenly to find judgment enough to weigh patiently the good sense of an awkward, virtuous man, when his manners, which they are made critical judges of, are off-putting, and his conversation cold and dull because it does not consist of pretty repartees or well-turned compliments? To admire or esteem anything for any length of time, we must at least have our curiosity roused by knowing to some degree what we admire; for we cannot estimate the value of qualities and virtues that are above our comprehension. Such a respect, when it is felt, may be very sublime, and the confused consciousness of humility may make the dependent creature an interesting object from some points of view; but human love must have coarser ingredients, and the person will very naturally come in for its share — an ample share, in most cases.

Love is to a great extent an arbitrary passion, and will reign, like certain other stalking mischiefs, on its own authority, without condescending to reason. It can also be easily distinguished from esteem, the foundation of friendship, because it is often excited by fleeting beauties and graces — though to give the sentiment any energy something more solid must deepen the impression and set the imagination to work, making what is fairest into what is first and best.

Common passions are excited by common qualities. Men look for beauty and the simper of good-humoured docility; women are captivated by easy manners. A gentlemanly man seldom fails to please them, and their thirsty ears drink in the insinuating nothings of politeness eagerly, while they turn away from the unintelligible sounds of that charmer, reason, however wisely he charms. As for superficial accomplishments, the rake certainly has the advantage, and of those women can form an opinion, since it is their own ground. Made gay and giddy by the whole tenor of their lives, the very look of wisdom, or the severe graces of virtue, must seem lugubrious to them and produce a kind of restraint that they, and love, that sportive child, naturally revolt from. Having no taste except of the lighter kind, since taste is the offspring of judgment, how can they discover that true beauty and grace must arise from the play of the mind? And how can they be expected to relish in a lover what they do not possess themselves, or possess very imperfectly? The sympathy that unites hearts and invites confidence is so very faint in them that it cannot catch fire and rise into passion. No, I say it again: the love such minds cherish must have coarser fuel.

The inference is obvious. Until women are led to exercise their understandings, they should not be satirized for their attachment to rakes, nor even for being rakes at heart, when that appears to be the inevitable consequence of their education. Those who live to please must find their enjoyment, their happiness, in pleasure. It is a trite remark, but a true one, that we never do anything well unless we love it for its own sake.

Suppose, however, for a moment that women were, in some future revolution of time, to become what I sincerely wish them to be. Then even love would acquire a more serious dignity and be purified in its own fires; and virtue, giving their affections a true delicacy, would make them turn from a rake in disgust. Reasoning then, as well as feeling — which is at present woman's only province — they could easily guard against exterior graces, and would quickly learn to despise a sensibility that had been excited and worn out among women whose trade was vice and allurement's wanton airs. They would remember that the flame they wished to kindle — one must use the appropriate expressions — had been burnt out by lust, and that a sated appetite, having lost all relish for pure and simple pleasures, could only be roused by the licentious arts of variety. What satisfaction could a woman of delicacy promise herself in a union with such a man, when the very artlessness of her affection might seem insipid to him? This is how Dryden describes the situation:

	"Where love is duty on the female side,
	On theirs mere sensual gust, and sought with surly pride."

But there is one grand truth women have still to learn, though it matters a great deal that they should act on it. In choosing a husband they should not be led astray by the qualities of a lover — for a lover is what a husband, even supposing him wise and virtuous, cannot long remain.

If women were more rationally educated, and could take a more comprehensive view of things, they would be content to love only once in their lives, and after marriage would calmly let passion subside into friendship — into that tender intimacy which is the best refuge from care, and which is built on affections so pure and so quiet that idle jealousies would not be allowed to disturb the discharge of the sober duties of life, or to monopolize thoughts that ought to be otherwise employed. Many men live in that state; but few, very few women. And the difference can easily be accounted for without falling back on a character proper to each sex. Men, for whom we are told women were made, have occupied women's thoughts too much; and this association has so entangled love with all their motives for acting that — to harp a little on an old string — having been employed solely either in preparing themselves to excite love or in actually putting their lessons into practice, they cannot live without it. But when a sense of duty, or the fear of shame, obliges them to restrain this pampered desire to please beyond a certain point — too far for delicacy, it is true, though far short of criminality — they obstinately determine to love their husbands, I am speaking of their passion, to the end of the chapter. And then, acting the part they foolishly demanded of their lovers, they become abject wooers and fond slaves.

Men of wit and fancy are often rakes, and fancy is the food of love. Such men will inspire passion. Half of my sex, in its present infantile state, would pine for a Lovelace, a man so witty, so graceful and so valiant; and can they *deserve* blame for acting on principles so constantly drummed into them? They want a lover and a protector, and here he is, kneeling in front of them — bravery prostrate before beauty! A husband's virtues are thrown into the background by love, and gay hopes and lively emotions banish reflection until the day of reckoning comes. And come it surely will, to turn the sprightly lover into a surly, suspicious tyrant who contemptuously insults the very weakness he fostered. Or, supposing the rake reformed, he cannot get rid of old habits quickly. When a man of ability is first carried away by his passions, sentiment and taste have to varnish the enormities of vice and give a zest to brutal indulgences; but once the gloss of novelty has worn off and pleasure palls on the senses, lasciviousness becomes barefaced and enjoyment is nothing but the desperate effort of a weakness fleeing from reflection as from a legion of devils. Oh, virtue, you are no empty name! All that life can give, you give.

If not much comfort is to be expected from the friendship of a reformed rake of superior abilities, what is the consequence when he lacks sense as well as principles? Truly, misery in its most hideous shape. When the habits of weak people have been consolidated by time, reform is barely possible, and actually makes wretched the very people who have not mind enough to be amused by innocent pleasure. As with the tradesman who retires from the hurry of business, nature presents them with nothing but a universal blank, and their restless thoughts prey on their damped spirits. Their reformation, like his retirement, actually makes them miserable, because it takes away all their employment by quenching the hopes and fears that used to set their sluggish minds in motion.

If such is the force of habit, if such is the bondage of folly, how carefully we ought to guard the mind against storing up vicious associations! And how equally careful we should be to cultivate the understanding, and save the poor creature from the weak, dependent state of even a harmless ignorance. For it is the right use of reason alone that makes us independent of everything except the unclouded Reason itself — "whose service is perfect freedom".
