Chapter Nine: The Harm Done by the Unnatural Distinctions Society Establishes

From the respect paid to property flow, as from a poisoned spring, most of the evils and vices that make this world such a dreary scene to a contemplative mind. For it is in the most polished society that noisome reptiles and venomous serpents lurk under the rank grass; and there voluptuousness is pampered by the still, sultry air, which relaxes every good disposition before it can ripen into virtue.

One class presses on another, since all are aiming to win respect on account of their property; and property, once gained, will procure the respect that is only due to talents and virtue. Men neglect the duties that belong to them as men and are treated like demigods all the same; religion too is separated from morality by a ceremonial veil — and then men wonder that the world is almost literally a den of sharpers or of oppressors.

There is a homely proverb that speaks a shrewd truth: whoever the devil finds idle, he will employ. And what but habitual idleness can hereditary wealth and titles produce? For a man is so constituted that he can only come to a proper use of his faculties by exercising them, and he will not exercise them unless necessity of some kind first sets the wheels in motion. Virtue likewise can only be acquired by discharging the duties we owe to one another; but the importance of these sacred duties will hardly be felt by a being who has been flattered out of his humanity by sycophants. There must be more equality established in society, or morality will never gain ground; and this virtuous equality will not stand firm even when it is founded on a rock, if one half of humankind is chained to the bottom of it by fate, for they will be continually undermining it out of ignorance or pride.

It is vain to expect virtue from women until they are to some degree independent of men. It is vain, indeed, to expect that strength of natural affection which would make them good wives and good mothers. While they are absolutely dependent on their husbands they will be cunning, mean and selfish; and men who can be gratified by the fawning fondness of a spaniel-like affection have not much delicacy, for love is not to be bought in any sense of the word — its silken wings shrivel up the instant anything but a return in kind is looked for. Yet while wealth enervates men, and women live, as it were, by their personal charms, how can we expect either to discharge those ennobling duties that require exertion and self-denial alike? Hereditary property sophisticates the mind, and its unfortunate victims, if I may put it that way, swaddled from their birth, seldom exert the locomotive faculty of body or of mind. Seeing everything through one medium, and that a false one, they cannot make out where true merit and happiness lie. False indeed the light must be, when the drapery of a situation hides the man and makes him stalk about in masquerade, dragging from one scene of dissipation to another the nerveless limbs that hang in stupid listlessness, and rolling the vacant eye that tells us plainly there is nobody at home.

I mean to infer, therefore, that any society is improperly organized which does not compel men and women to discharge their respective duties by making that the only road to the good opinion of their fellow creatures, which every human being wants to gain somehow. The respect paid to wealth and to mere personal charms is consequently a true north-east wind, blighting the tender blossoms of affection and virtue. Nature has wisely attached affections to duties, to sweeten labour and to give the exertions of reason the vigour that only the heart can give. But an affection put on merely because it is the badge assigned to a certain character, while its duties go unfulfilled, is one of those empty compliments that vice and folly are obliged to pay to virtue and to the real nature of things.

To illustrate my opinion I need only observe that when a woman is admired for her beauty and lets herself be so far intoxicated by the admiration that she neglects the indispensable duty of a mother, she sins against herself by neglecting to cultivate an affection that would equally tend to make her useful and happy. True happiness — by which I mean all the contentment and virtuous satisfaction that can be snatched in this imperfect state — must arise from well-regulated affections, and every affection includes a duty. Men are not aware of the misery they cause, and the vicious weakness they encourage, by urging women to do nothing but make themselves pleasing. They do not consider that they thus set natural and artificial duties clashing, sacrificing the comfort and respectability of a woman's whole life to voluptuous notions of beauty, when in nature all of it harmonizes.

Cold must be the heart of a husband, unless early debauchery has made him unnatural, who does not feel more delight in seeing his child nursed by its mother than the most artful wanton tricks could ever raise in him. Yet wealth leads women to spurn this natural way of cementing the marriage tie and twining esteem in with fonder recollections. To preserve their beauty and wear the flowery crown of the day, which gives them a sort of right to reign for a short time, they neglect to stamp impressions on their husbands' hearts that would be remembered with more tenderness, when the snow on the head began to chill the breast, than even their virgin charms. The maternal solicitude of a reasonable, affectionate woman is a most affecting thing, and the chastened dignity with which a mother returns the caresses that she and her child receive from a father who has been fulfilling the serious duties of his station is not only a respectable but a beautiful sight. So peculiar are my feelings — and I have tried not to catch any artificial ones — that after being wearied by the sight of insipid grandeur, and of the slavish ceremonies that supply the place of domestic affection with cumbrous pomp, I have turned to some other scene to relieve my eye by resting it on the refreshing green nature scatters everywhere. I have looked with pleasure then at a woman nursing her children and discharging the duties of her station with, perhaps, only one servant to take the drudgery of the household off her hands. I have seen her prepare herself and her children, with no luxury but cleanliness, to receive her husband, who came home weary in the evening to find smiling babies and a clean hearth. My heart has loitered among the group, and has even throbbed with sympathetic emotion when the scraping of the well-known foot outside raised a pleasing tumult.

While my benevolence was gratified by contemplating this artless picture, I have thought that a couple of this description, equally necessary to and independent of each other because each fulfilled the duties of their station, possessed everything life can give. Raised far enough above abject poverty not to have to weigh the consequence of every farthing they spend, and with enough not to be driven to the frigid system of economy that narrows heart and mind together. My conceptions are so vulgar, I confess, that I do not know what more is wanted to make this the happiest as well as the most respectable situation in the world, except a taste for literature to throw a little variety and interest into their conversation, and some spare money to give to the needy and to buy books with. For it is not pleasant, when the heart is opened by compassion and the head busy arranging plans of usefulness, to have a prim little imp forever twitching your elbow back to keep your hand from drawing out an almost empty purse, and whispering some prudential maxim about justice coming first.

Destructive as riches and inherited honours are to the human character, women are if possible more debased and cramped by them than men, because men may still unfold their faculties to some degree by becoming soldiers and statesmen.

As soldiers, I grant, they can now mostly gather nothing but vainglorious laurels, while they adjust the European balance to a hair, taking particular care that no bleak northern corner or strait tips the beam. But the days of true heroism are over, when a citizen fought for his country like a Fabricius or a Washington and then went back to his farm to let his virtuous fervour run in a more placid but no less wholesome stream. No: our British heroes come more often from the gaming table than from the plough, and their passions have been inflamed by hanging in dumb suspense on the turn of a die rather than sublimated by panting after the adventurous march of virtue in the pages of history.

The statesman, it is true, might more properly leave the faro bank or the card table to take the helm, for he has still only to shuffle and to trick. The whole system of British politics, if it may courteously be called a system, consists in multiplying dependants and contriving taxes that grind the poor to pamper the rich; so a war, or any wild goose chase, is what common speech calls a lucky turn-up of patronage for the minister, whose chief merit is the art of keeping himself in place.

It is not necessary, then, that he should have any bowels for the poor, so long as he can secure the odd trick for his family. Or if some show of respect for what is called with ignorant ostentation an Englishman's birthright happens to be expedient, in order to fool the gruff mastiff he has to lead by the nose, he can make an empty show very safely by giving his own single vote and letting his light squadron file off to the other side. And when a question of humanity is raised, he may dip a sop in the milk of human kindness to silence Cerberus, and talk of the interest his heart takes in an attempt to stop the earth crying out for vengeance as it drinks in its children's blood — while his cold hand at that very moment rivets their chains by sanctioning the abominable trade. A minister is a minister only so long as he can carry a point he is determined to carry. Yet it is not necessary for a minister to feel like a man, when a bold push might shake his seat.

But to have done with these episodes, let me come back to the more plausible slavery that chains the very soul of woman, keeping her forever in the bondage of ignorance.

The preposterous distinctions of rank, which make civilization a curse by dividing the world between voluptuous tyrants and cunning, envious dependants, corrupt almost every class of people equally; because respectability is attached not to discharging the duties of life but to the station, and when the duties are not fulfilled, the affections cannot gain strength enough to fortify the virtue they are the natural reward of. Still, there are a few loopholes a man may creep out of and dare to think and act for himself; but for a woman it is a herculean task, because she has difficulties peculiar to her sex to overcome, which take almost superhuman powers.

A truly benevolent legislator always tries to make it every individual's interest to be virtuous; and so, private virtue becoming the cement of public happiness, an orderly whole is consolidated by the tendency of all the parts towards a common centre. But the private or public virtue of women is very doubtful, for Rousseau and a long list of male writers insist that she should be subject all her life to a severe restraint, the restraint of propriety. Why subject her to propriety — blind propriety — if she is capable of acting from a nobler spring, if she is an heir of immortality? Is sugar always to be produced by human blood? Is one half of the human species, like the enslaved Africans, to be subject to prejudices that brutalize them, when principles would be a surer guard, and all so that the cup of man may be sweetened? Is this not an indirect way of denying women reason? For a gift is a mockery if it is unfit for use.

Women, like men, are made weak and luxurious by the relaxing pleasures wealth procures; but besides that, they are made slaves to their persons, and must make themselves alluring so that a man may lend them his reason to guide their tottering steps aright. Or, if they are ambitious, they must govern their tyrants by underhand tricks; for where there are no rights there can be no duties either. The laws respecting women, which I mean to discuss in a later part, make an absurd unit of a man and his wife; and then, by the easy transition of considering only him as responsible, she is reduced to a mere cipher.

The being who discharges the duties of its station is independent; and, speaking of women at large, their first duty is to themselves as rational creatures, and the next in importance, as citizens, is the one that includes so many others, the duty of a mother. Any rank in life that excuses them from fulfilling this duty necessarily degrades them by turning them into dolls. Or, if they do turn to something more important than fitting drapery on a smooth block, their minds are occupied by some soft platonic attachment; or the actual management of an intrigue may keep their thoughts moving. For when they neglect domestic duties they have no power to take the field and march and countermarch like soldiers, or to wrangle in the senate, to keep their faculties from rusting.

I know that Rousseau has exultingly exclaimed, as proof of the inferiority of the sex, how can they leave the nursery for the camp? And the camp has been called by some moralists the school of the most heroic virtues, though I think it would puzzle a keen casuist to prove the reasonableness of most of the wars that have dubbed men heroes. I do not mean to consider the question critically, because, having often looked on these freaks of ambition as the first natural mode of civilization, when the ground must be torn up and the woods cleared by fire and sword, I do not choose to call them pests. But surely the present system of war has little connection with virtue of any description, being rather the school of *finesse* and effeminacy than of fortitude.

Yet if defensive war, the only justifiable war in the present advanced state of society, where virtue can show its face and ripen amid the rigours that purify the air on a mountain top, were alone adopted as just and glorious, then the true heroism of antiquity might animate women's breasts again. But gently, gentle reader, male or female, do not alarm yourself; for though I have contrasted the character of a modern soldier with that of a civilized woman, I am not going to advise women to turn their distaffs into muskets, however sincerely I wish to see the bayonet turned into a pruning hook. I was only refreshing an imagination wearied with contemplating the vices and follies that all flow from a foul stream of wealth which has muddied the pure rills of natural affection — refreshing it by supposing that society may some day be so constituted that a man must fulfil the duties of a citizen or be despised, and that while he was employed in some department of civil life his wife, an active citizen too, would be equally intent on managing her family, educating her children and helping her neighbours.

But to make her really virtuous and useful, if she discharges her civil duties she must not be left without the protection of the civil laws as an individual; she must not depend on her husband's bounty for her subsistence during his life or her support after his death. For how can a being be generous who has nothing of her own, or virtuous who is not free? The wife who in the present state of things is faithful to her husband and neither nurses nor educates her children scarcely deserves the name of a wife, and has no right to the name of citizen. But take away natural rights, and duties are at an end.

Women infallibly become nothing but the wanton solace of men when they are so weak in mind and body that they can exert themselves only to chase some frothy pleasure or invent some frivolous fashion. What can be a more melancholy sight to a thinking mind than to look into the many carriages driving helter-skelter about this city in the morning, full of pale-faced creatures flying from themselves? I have often wished, with Dr. Johnson, to set some of them up in a little shop with half a dozen children looking up to their languid faces for support. I am much mistaken if some latent vigour would not soon give health and spirit to their eyes; and some lines drawn by the exercise of reason on those blank cheeks, which before were only dimpled, might restore lost dignity to the character, or rather let it attain the true dignity of its nature. Virtue is not to be acquired even by speculation, much less by the negative supineness that wealth naturally breeds.

Besides, when poverty is more disgraceful than even vice, is morality not cut to the quick? Still, to avoid being misunderstood: though I consider that women in the common walks of life are called by religion and reason to fulfil the duties of wives and mothers, I cannot help lamenting that women of a superior cast have no road open to them by which they could pursue wider plans of usefulness and independence. I may raise a laugh by dropping a hint I mean to pursue at some future time, for I really think that women ought to have representatives, instead of being arbitrarily governed with no direct share allowed them in the deliberations of government.

But since the whole system of representation in this country is now only a convenient handle for despotism, they need not complain, for they are as well represented as a numerous class of hard-working tradesmen who pay for the support of royalty when they can hardly stop their own children's mouths with bread. How are those people represented whose very sweat supports the splendid stable of an heir apparent, or varnishes the carriage of some female favourite who looks down on shame? Taxes on the very necessities of life enable an endless tribe of idle princes and princesses to pass in stupid pomp before a gaping crowd who almost worship the very parade that costs them so dear. This is mere gothic grandeur, something like the barbarous, useless parade of keeping mounted sentries at Whitehall, which I could never look at without a mixture of contempt and indignation.

How strangely the mind must be sophisticated when this sort of state impresses it! But until these monuments of folly are levelled by virtue, similar follies will leaven the whole mass; for the same character will prevail to some degree throughout society taken as a whole. The refinements of luxury, and the vicious repinings of envious poverty, will equally banish virtue from a society, considered as that society's characteristic, or else allow it to appear only as one of the stripes in the harlequin coat that civilized man wears.

In the higher ranks of life every duty is done by deputy, as if duties could ever be waived; and the vain pleasures that the resulting idleness forces the rich to pursue look so enticing to the rank below that the many scramblers after wealth sacrifice everything to tread on their heels. The most sacred trusts are then treated as sinecures, because they were got by influence and only sought so that a man might keep *good company*. Women in particular all want to be ladies — which is simply to have nothing to do but drift about, hardly caring where, because they cannot tell what for.

But what have women to do in society, I may be asked, except to loiter with an easy grace? Surely you would not condemn them all to suckle fools and chronicle small beer! No. Women might certainly study the art of healing and be physicians as well as nurses. And decency seems to allot midwifery to them, though I am afraid the word midwife will soon give place in our dictionaries to accoucheur, and one proof of the sex's former delicacy be rubbed out of the language.

They might also study politics and settle their benevolence on the broadest basis; for reading history will be hardly more useful than reading romances if it is read as mere biography, and if the character of the times, the political improvements, the arts and so on are not observed — in short, if it is not considered as the history of humanity, and not of the particular men who filled a niche in the temple of fame and then dropped into the black rolling stream of time that sweeps everything silently before it into the shapeless void called eternity. Though how can it be called a shape, that shape had none?

They might likewise go into various kinds of business if they were educated in a more orderly way, and that might save many of them from common and from legal prostitution. Women would not then marry for a living, as men accept places under government and then neglect the duties implied in them; nor would an attempt to earn their own subsistence — a most praiseworthy attempt — sink them almost to the level of the poor abandoned creatures who live by prostitution. For are milliners and dressmakers not reckoned the next class down? The few employments open to women, so far from being liberal, are menial; and when a superior education lets them take charge of children's education as governesses, they are not treated like the tutors of sons — though even clerical tutors are not always treated in a way calculated to make them respectable in their pupils' eyes, to say nothing of their private comfort. But since women educated as gentlewomen are never intended for the humiliating position necessity sometimes forces them into, such positions are regarded as a degradation; and anyone who has to be told that nothing sharpens the sensibility so painfully as such a fall in life knows very little of the human heart.

Some of these women may have been kept from marrying by a proper spirit or delicacy, and others may have had no chance of escaping in that pitiful way from servitude. Is any government not very defective, then, and very careless of the happiness of one half of its members, if it makes no provision for honest, independent women by encouraging them to fill respectable posts? But if their private virtue is to become a public benefit they must have a civil existence in the state, married or single; or we shall go on seeing some worthy woman, whose sensibility undeserved contempt has made painfully acute, droop like "the lily broken down by a ploughshare".

It is a melancholy truth — yet such are the blessed effects of civilization! — that the most respectable women are the most oppressed; and unless their understandings are far above the common run of understandings in either sex, they must become contemptible from being treated as contemptible beings. How many women waste their lives away as the prey of discontent, who might have practised as physicians, run a farm, managed a shop, and stood upright supported by their own industry, instead of hanging their heads surcharged with the dew of sensibility that consumes the very beauty it first gave lustre to! Indeed I doubt whether pity and love are such close kin as poets pretend, for I have seldom seen much compassion excited by the helplessness of women unless they happened to be beautiful — and then, perhaps, pity was the soft handmaid of love, or the harbinger of lust.

How much more respectable is the woman who earns her own bread by fulfilling some duty than the most accomplished beauty! Beauty, did I say? I am so alive to the beauty of moral loveliness, the harmonious propriety that tunes the passions of a well-regulated mind, that I blush at making the comparison. Yet I sigh to think how few women aim at that respectability by withdrawing from the giddy whirl of pleasure, or from the indolent calm that stupefies the good sort of women it draws in.

Proud of their weakness, however, they must always be protected, guarded from care and from all the rough labours that give the mind dignity. If this is the decree of fate, if they will make themselves insignificant and contemptible so as to waste life away sweetly, then let them not expect to be valued when their beauty fades; for it is the fate of the fairest flowers to be admired and then pulled to pieces by the careless hand that plucked them. In how many ways do I wish, out of the purest benevolence, to impress this truth on my sex! Yet I fear they will not listen to a truth that dear-bought experience has brought home to many an agitated heart, nor willingly give up the privileges of rank and sex for the privileges of humanity, which those who do not discharge its duties have no claim to.

Those writers are particularly useful, in my opinion, who make one human being feel for another, independently of the station he fills or the drapery of artificial sentiment. I would gladly convince reasonable men of the importance of some of my remarks, and persuade them to weigh the whole tenor of my observations dispassionately. I appeal to their understandings; and as a fellow creature I claim, in the name of my sex, some interest in their hearts. I beg them to help emancipate their companion — to make her a helpmate for them.

If men would only generously snap our chains and be content with a rational fellowship instead of slavish obedience, they would find us more observant daughters, more affectionate sisters, more faithful wives, more reasonable mothers — in a word, better citizens. We should then love them with a true affection, because we should have learned to respect ourselves; and a worthy man's peace of mind would not be disturbed by his wife's idle vanity, nor his babies sent to nestle at a stranger's breast because they never found a home at their mother's.
