Chapter Thirteen: Examples of the Folly That Women's Ignorance Produces, with Closing Reflections on a Revolution in the Manners of Women

(Part 1 of 2)

There are many follies more or less peculiar to women: sins against reason, of commission as well as omission, though all of them flow from ignorance or prejudice. I shall point out only those that seem damaging to their moral character. And in criticizing them I particularly want to prove that the weakness of mind and body which men have tried by various motives to perpetuate prevents women from discharging the very duty peculiar to their sex. For when weakness of body will not let them nurse their children, and weakness of mind makes them spoil their tempers — is woman then in a natural state?

Section One: Fortune-Tellers and Credulity

One glaring instance of the weakness that comes from ignorance claims attention first, and calls for severe reproof.

In this city a number of lurking leeches make a living, infamously, by working on the credulity of women, pretending to cast nativities, to use the technical phrase. And many women who, proud of their rank and fortune, look down on ordinary people with sovereign contempt show by this credulity that the distinction is arbitrary, and that they have not cultivated their minds enough to rise above vulgar prejudices. Women, never having been led to consider the knowledge of their duty as the one thing needful to know, or to live in the present moment by discharging it, are very anxious to peep into the future, to learn what they have to expect that might make life interesting, and to fill up the vacuum of ignorance.

I must be allowed to remonstrate seriously with the ladies who follow these idle inventions; for ladies, mistresses of families, are not ashamed to drive in their own carriages to the fortune-teller's door. And if any of them should read this book, I beg them to answer the following questions in their own hearts, remembering that they are in the presence of God.

Do you believe that there is only one God, and that he is powerful, wise and good?

Do you believe that all things were created by him, and that every being depends on him?

Do you rely on his wisdom, so conspicuous in his works and in your own frame; and are you convinced that he has ordered everything outside the reach of your senses in the same perfect harmony, to fulfil his designs?

Do you acknowledge that the power of looking into the future, and of seeing things that are not as though they were, is an attribute of the Creator? And if he thought fit to impart to his creatures, by an impression on their minds, some event still hidden in the shades of time and unborn, to whom would the secret be revealed by direct inspiration? The opinion of the ages will answer that question: to reverend old men, and to people distinguished for eminent piety.

The oracles of antiquity were delivered in that way, by priests dedicated to the service of the god who was supposed to inspire them. The glare of worldly pomp surrounding these impostors, and the respect paid them by artful politicians who knew how to use so convenient an engine for bending the necks of the strong under the dominion of the cunning, spread a sacred, mysterious veil of sanctity over their lies and abominations.

Impressed by such solemn devotional parade, a Greek or Roman lady might be excused for enquiring of the oracle when she was anxious to pry into the future or to ask about some doubtful event; and her enquiries, however contrary to reason, could not be called impious. But can professing Christians ward off that charge? Can a Christian suppose that the favourites of the Most High would be obliged to lurk in disguise and practise the most dishonest tricks to cheat silly women out of the money that the poor cry for in vain?

Do not say such questions are an insult to common sense; for it is your own conduct, you foolish women, that brings odium on your sex. And these reflections ought to make you shudder at your own thoughtlessness and irrational devotion, for I do not suppose that all of you laid your religion aside, such as it is, when you entered those mysterious dwellings. Yet, since I have been supposing throughout that I am talking to ignorant women — and ignorant you are, in the most emphatic sense of the word — it would be absurd to reason with you about the egregious folly of wanting to know what Supreme Wisdom has concealed.

Probably you would not understand me if I tried to show you that it would be absolutely inconsistent with the grand purpose of life, which is to make human creatures wise and virtuous; and that if it were sanctioned by God it would disturb the order established in creation — while if it is not sanctioned by God, do you expect to hear the truth? Can events be foretold, events that have not yet taken on a body and become subject to mortal inspection? Can they be foreseen by a vicious worldling who pampers his appetites by preying on the foolish?

Perhaps, however, you devoutly believe in the devil, and imagine, to shift the question, that he may assist his votaries. But if you really believe in the power of such a being, an enemy to goodness and to God, can you go to church after being under an obligation to him?

From these delusions to the still more fashionable deceptions practised by the whole tribe of magnetizers, the transition is very natural. And with regard to them, it is equally proper to ask women a few questions.

Do you know anything about the construction of the human frame? If not, it is proper you should be told what every child ought to know: that when its admirable economy has been disturbed by intemperance or idleness — I am not speaking of violent disorders but of chronic diseases — it must be brought back to a healthy state by slow degrees. And that if the functions of life have not been materially injured, regimen, which is another word for temperance, along with air, exercise and a few medicines prescribed by people who have studied the human body, are the only human means yet discovered of recovering that priceless blessing, health, which will bear investigation.

Do you then believe that these magnetizers who pretend, by hocus-pocus tricks, to work a miracle are delegated by God, or assisted by the solver of all difficulties of this kind, the devil?

When they put to flight, as it is said, disorders that have baffled the powers of medicine, do they work in conformity with the light of reason? Or do they perform these wonderful cures by supernatural aid?

By communication, an adept may answer, with the world of spirits. A noble privilege, it must be allowed. Some of the ancients mention familiar spirits who guarded them from danger by kindly intimating — we cannot guess in what manner — when danger was near, or by pointing out what they ought to undertake. Yet the men who claimed this privilege outside the order of nature insisted that it was the reward or the consequence of superior temperance and piety. But the present workers of wonders are not raised above their fellows by any superior temperance or sanctity. They do not cure for the love of God but for money. These are the priests of quackery, though it is true they do not have the convenient expedient of selling masses for souls in purgatory, nor churches where they can display crutches and models of limbs made whole by a touch or a word.

I am not familiar with the technical terms, nor initiated into the mysteries, so I may speak improperly; but it is clear that men who will not conform to the law of reason and earn a living honestly, by degrees, are very fortunate to have become acquainted with such obliging spirits. We cannot give the spirits credit for much sagacity or goodness, at any rate, or they would have chosen nobler instruments when they wished to show themselves the benevolent friends of humankind.

It is, however, little short of blasphemy to claim such a power.

From the whole tenor of the dispensations of Providence it appears evident to sober reason that certain vices produce certain effects. And can anyone so grossly insult the wisdom of God as to suppose that a miracle will be permitted to disturb his general laws, and restore the intemperate and vicious to health merely so that they can go on in the same course with impunity? Be whole, and sin no more, said Jesus. And are greater miracles to be performed by people who do not follow in his footsteps — who healed the body in order to reach the mind?

Mentioning the name of Christ after such vile impostors may displease some of my readers. I respect their warmth; but let them not forget that the followers of these delusions bear his name and profess to be the disciples of him who said that by their works we should know who were the children of God and who the servants of sin. I allow that it is easier to touch the body of a saint, or to be magnetized, than to restrain our appetites or govern our passions; but health of body or of mind can only be recovered by those means, or else we make the Supreme Judge partial and vengeful.

Is he a man, that he should change, or punish out of resentment? He, the common father, wounds only to heal, says reason; and since our irregularities produce certain consequences, we are forcibly shown the nature of vice, so that, learning by experience to tell good from evil, we may hate the one and love the other in proportion to the wisdom we attain. The poison contains its own antidote; and either we reform our evil habits and stop sinning against our own bodies, to use the forcible language of scripture, or a premature death, the punishment of sin, snaps the thread of life.

Here an awful stop is put to our enquiries. But why should I conceal what I think? Considering the attributes of God, I believe that whatever punishment follows will tend, like the anguish of disease, to show the malignity of vice for the purpose of reformation. Positive punishment appears so contrary to the nature of God, discoverable in all his works and in our own reason, that I could sooner believe the Deity paid no attention to human conduct at all than that he punished without the benevolent design of reforming.

Merely to suppose that an all-wise and powerful Being, as good as he is great, should create a being while foreseeing that after fifty or sixty years of feverish existence it would be plunged into never-ending woe is blasphemy. What will the worm feed on that is never to die? On folly, on ignorance, you say. I should blush with indignation to draw the natural conclusion, if I could set it down, and should wish to withdraw myself from the wing of my God. On such a supposition, I speak with reverence, he would be a consuming fire. We should wish, though vainly, to fly from his presence, when fear had absorbed love and darkness enveloped all his counsels.

I know that many devout people boast of submitting blindly to the will of God, as to an arbitrary sceptre or rod, on the same principle as the Indians worship the devil. In other words, like people in the common concerns of life, they do homage to power and cringe under the foot that can crush them. Rational religion, on the contrary, is submission to the will of a being so perfectly wise that everything he wills must be directed by the proper motive, and must be reasonable.

And if that is how we respect God, can we give credit to the mysterious insinuations that insult his laws? Can we believe, though it stared us in the face, that he would work a miracle to authorize confusion by sanctioning an error? We must either accept these impious conclusions, or treat with contempt every promise to restore a diseased body to health by supernatural means, or to foretell incidents that only God can foresee.

Section Two: Sentiment and the Reading of Novels

Another instance of that feminine weakness of character so often produced by a confined education is a romantic twist of the mind, which has very properly been called *sentimental*.

Women, subjected by ignorance to their own sensations and taught to look for happiness only in love, refine on sensual feelings and adopt metaphysical notions about that passion which lead them shamefully to neglect the duties of life — and often, in the middle of these sublime refinements, they plunge into actual vice.

These are the women who are amused by the reveries of stupid novelists, who, knowing little of human nature, work up stale tales and describe meretricious scenes, all retailed in a sentimental jargon that equally corrupts the taste and draws the heart aside from its daily duties. I do not mention the understanding, because, never having been exercised, its slumbering energies lie inactive, like the lurking particles of fire that are supposed to pervade all matter.

Women, in fact, denied all political privileges and allowed no civil existence once married, except in criminal cases, naturally have their attention drawn away from the interest of the whole community to that of its minute parts — though any member of society must perform their private duty very imperfectly when it is not connected with the general good. The mighty business of a woman's life is to please; and, kept out of more important concerns by political and civil oppression, sentiments become events, and reflection deepens what it should and would have effaced, if the understanding had been allowed a wider range.

But, confined to trifling employments, women naturally absorb the opinions inspired by the only kind of reading calculated to interest an innocent, frivolous mind. Unable to grasp anything great, is it surprising that they find the reading of history a very dry business, and discussions addressed to the understanding intolerably tedious and almost unintelligible? So they are necessarily dependent on the novelist for amusement. Yet when I exclaim against novels, I mean by contrast with works that exercise the understanding and regulate the imagination. Any kind of reading I think better than leaving a blank a blank, because the mind must be enlarged a little, and gain a little strength, by any slight exertion of its thinking powers; and besides, even productions addressed only to the imagination raise a reader a little above the gross gratification of appetites that the mind has given no shade of delicacy to.

This observation is the result of experience. I have known several capable women, and one in particular who was a very good woman — as good as such a narrow mind would let her be — who took care that her daughters, three in number, should never see a novel. Being a woman of fortune and fashion, she provided them with various masters, and a sort of menial governess to watch their steps. From their masters they learned what tables and chairs and so on are called in French and Italian; but as the few books that came their way were either far above their capacities or devotional, they acquired neither ideas nor sentiments, and passed their time, when they were not compelled to repeat *words*, in dressing, quarrelling with one another, or talking to the maids in secret, until they were brought out as marriageable.

Their mother, a widow, was busy meanwhile keeping up her connections, as she called a numerous acquaintance, in case her girls should lack a proper introduction into the great world. And these young ladies, with minds vulgar in every sense of the word and with spoiled tempers, entered life puffed up with notions of their own consequence, looking down with contempt on anyone who could not match them in dress and display.

As for love, nature, or their nurses, had taken care to teach them the physical meaning of the word; and as they had few subjects of conversation and fewer refinements of sentiment, they expressed their gross wishes in no very delicate phrases when they spoke freely and talked about matrimony.

Could these girls have been harmed by reading novels? I had almost forgotten one shade in the character of one of them: she affected a simplicity bordering on folly, and would utter, with a simper, the most immodest remarks and questions, the full meaning of which she had picked up while she was shut away from the world, afraid to speak in the presence of her mother, who governed with a high hand. They were all educated, as their mother prided herself, in the most exemplary manner, and read their chapters and psalms before breakfast, never touching a silly novel.

That is only one instance; but I remember many other women who, never led by degrees to proper studies and never allowed to choose for themselves, have indeed been overgrown children — or else have picked up, from mixing in the world, a little of what is called common sense, meaning a distinct way of seeing common occurrences as they stand detached. But what deserves the name of intellect, the power of forming general or abstract ideas, or even intermediate ones, was out of the question. Their minds were quiescent, and when they were not roused by tangible objects and employments of that sort, they were low-spirited, and would cry, or go to sleep.

When, therefore, I advise my sex not to read such flimsy works, it is to induce them to read something better; for I agree with a sagacious man who, having a daughter and a niece in his care, followed a very different plan with each.

The niece, who had considerable ability, had been indulged in desultory reading before she was left to his guardianship. Her he tried to lead, and did lead, to history and moral essays. But his daughter, whom a fond weak mother had indulged and who consequently hated anything resembling application, he allowed to read novels, justifying himself by saying that if she ever acquired a relish for reading them he would have some foundation to work on, and that mistaken opinions were better than none at all.

In fact the female mind has been so totally neglected that knowledge could only be got from this muddy source, until some women of superior talent learned from reading novels to despise them.

The best method for correcting a fondness for novels, I believe, is to ridicule them — not indiscriminately, for then it would have little effect, but by having a judicious person with some turn for humour read several aloud to a young girl, pointing out by tone and by apt comparison with pathetic incidents and heroic characters in history how foolishly and ridiculously they caricature human nature. Just opinions might then be put in the place of romantic sentiments.

In one respect, however, the majority of both sexes are alike, and show an equal want of taste and modesty. Ignorant women, forced to be chaste to preserve their reputations, let their imaginations revel in the unnatural and meretricious scenes sketched by the novel-writers of the day, dismissing as insipid the sober dignity and matronly grace of history; while men carry the same vitiated taste into life, and fly for amusement to the wanton, away from the unsophisticated charms of virtue and the grave respectability of sense.

Footnote: I am not now referring to that superiority of mind which leads to the creation of ideal beauty, when life, surveyed with a penetrating eye, appears a tragicomedy in which little can be found to satisfy the heart without the help of fancy.

Besides, reading novels makes women, and ladies of fashion particularly, very fond of using strong expressions and superlatives in conversation; and though the dissipated, artificial life they lead prevents them from cherishing any strong legitimate passion, the language of passion in affected tones slips forever off their glib tongues, and every trifle produces those phosphoric flashes that only mimic the flame of passion in the dark.
