Chapter Thirteen: Examples of the Folly That Women's Ignorance Produces, with Closing Reflections on a Revolution in the Manners of Women

(Part 2 of 2)

Section Three: Dress and Vanity

Ignorance, and the mistaken cunning that nature sharpens in weak heads as a principle of self-preservation, make women very fond of dress, and produce all the vanity such a fondness may naturally be expected to breed, to the exclusion of emulation and magnanimity.

I agree with Rousseau that the physical part of the art of pleasing consists in ornament; and for that very reason I would guard girls against the contagious fondness for dress so common among weak women, so that they may not stop at the physical part. Yet weak indeed are the women who imagine they can please for long without the aid of the mind — in other words, without the moral art of pleasing. And the moral art, if it is not a profanation to use the word art of a grace that is the effect of virtue rather than the motive for action, is never found together with ignorance. The sportiveness of innocence, so pleasing to refined libertines of both sexes, is quite different in essence from this superior gracefulness.

A strong inclination for outward ornament always appears in barbarous states — only there it is the men and not the women who adorn themselves; for wherever women are allowed to be so far on a level with men, society has advanced at least one step in civilization.

The attention to dress, then, which has been thought a propensity of one sex, I think natural to humankind. But I ought to put it more precisely. When the mind is not sufficiently opened to take pleasure in reflection, the body will be adorned with assiduous care, and ambition will show itself in tattooing or painting it.

The first inclination is carried so far that even the hellish yoke of slavery cannot stifle the savage craving for admiration that enslaved people inherit from both their parents alike, for the hard-earned savings of a slave are commonly spent on a little tawdry finery. And I have seldom known a good servant, male or female, who was not particularly fond of dress. Their clothes were their riches. And I argue by analogy that the fondness for dress, so extravagant in women, arises from the same cause: a want of cultivation of mind. When men meet they talk about business, politics or literature; but, says Swift, "how naturally do women apply their hands to each other's lappets and ruffles." And it is very natural, for they have no business to interest them, no taste for literature, and they find politics dry, because they have not acquired a love of humankind by turning their thoughts to the grand pursuits that exalt the human race and promote general happiness.

Besides, the paths to power and fame that men pursue by accident or choice are various; and though they jostle each other — for men of the same profession are seldom friends — there are a great many more of their fellow creatures they never clash with at all. But women are very differently situated with regard to each other, for they are all rivals.

Before marriage their business is to please men, and afterwards, with a few exceptions, they follow the same scent with all the persevering pertinacity of instinct. Even virtuous women never forget their sex in company, for they are forever trying to make themselves *agreeable*. A female beauty and a male wit appear to be equally anxious to draw the company's attention to themselves — and the animosity of rival wits is proverbial.

Is it surprising, then, that when a woman's whole ambition centres on beauty, and self-interest gives vanity additional force, perpetual rivalries should follow? They are all running the same race, and would be more than mortally virtuous if they did not look at each other with a suspicious and even envious eye.

An immoderate fondness for dress, for pleasure and for power are the passions of savages: the passions that occupy uncivilized beings who have not yet extended the dominion of the mind, or even learned to think with the energy needed to link up the abstract train of thought that produces principles. And that women, from their education and the present state of civilized life, are in the same condition cannot, I think, be disputed. To laugh at them, then, or satirize the follies of a being who is never to be allowed to act freely by the light of her own reason, is as absurd as it is cruel; for it is entirely natural and certain that those who are taught to obey authority blindly will try to elude it cunningly.

Yet let it be proved that they ought to obey men implicitly, and I shall agree at once that it is a woman's duty to cultivate a fondness for dress in order to please, and a propensity to cunning for her own preservation.

But virtues supported by ignorance must always be unsteady — the house built on sand could not stand a storm. It is hardly necessary to draw the inference. If women are to be made virtuous by authority, which is a contradiction in terms, then let them be shut up in harems and watched with a jealous eye. Have no fear that the iron will enter into their souls; for the souls that can bear such treatment are made of yielding stuff, just animated enough to give the body life.

	"Matter too soft a lasting mark to bear,
	And best distinguish'd by black, brown, or fair."

The cruellest wounds will soon heal, of course, and they may still people the world and dress to please men — all the purposes that certain celebrated writers have allowed they were created to fill.

Section Four: The Sensibility Women Are Supposed to Have

Women are supposed to have more sensibility, and even more humanity, than men, and their strong attachments and instantaneous emotions of compassion are offered as proof. But the clinging affection of ignorance has seldom anything noble in it, and can mostly be resolved into selfishness, like the affection of children and of animals. I have known many weak women whose sensibility was entirely engrossed by their husbands; and as for their humanity, it was very faint indeed, or rather it was only a passing emotion of compassion. "Humanity does not consist in a squeamish ear," says an eminent orator. "It belongs to the mind as well as the nerves."

But this kind of exclusive affection, though it degrades the individual, should not be brought forward as proof of the inferiority of the sex, because it is the natural consequence of confined views. Even women of superior sense, having their attention turned to little employments and private plans, rarely rise to heroism unless they are spurred on by love; and love as a heroic passion, like genius, appears only once in an age. So I agree with the moralist who asserts "that women have seldom so much generosity as men", and that their narrow affections, to which justice and humanity are often sacrificed, make the sex apparently inferior — especially as those affections are commonly inspired by men. But I maintain that the heart would expand as the understanding gained strength, if women were not kept down from their cradles.

I know that a little sensibility and a great deal of weakness will produce a strong attachment between the sexes, and that reason must cement friendship; so I allow that more friendship is to be found in the male world than the female, and that men have a higher sense of justice. The exclusive affections of women do indeed resemble Cato's most unjust love for his country. He wished to crush Carthage not to save Rome but to promote its vainglory; and it is generally to principles like these that humanity is sacrificed, for genuine duties support each other.

Besides, how can women be just or generous when they are the slaves of injustice?

Section Five: The Rearing of Children

Since the rearing of children — that is, laying a foundation of sound health of body and mind in the rising generation — has justly been insisted on as woman's peculiar destination, the ignorance that unfits her for it must be contrary to the order of things. And I maintain that women's minds can take in much more than they are given, and ought to, or they will never become sensible mothers. Many men attend to the breeding of horses and oversee the running of the stable who would think themselves degraded — strange want of sense and feeling! — by paying any attention to the nursery. Yet how many children are absolutely murdered by the ignorance of women! And when they escape, and are destroyed neither by unnatural negligence nor by blind fondness, how few are properly managed as far as the infant mind goes! So that a child which has been allowed to grow vicious at home is sent to school to have its spirit broken; and the methods used there, which must be used to keep a number of children in order, scatter the seeds of nearly every vice in soil that has just been forcibly torn up.

I have sometimes compared the struggles of these poor children, who ought never to have felt restraint and would not have needed to if they had always been held with an even hand, to the despairing plunges of a spirited filly I once watched being broken on a beach: its feet sinking deeper into the sand every time it tried to throw its rider, until at last it sullenly submitted.

I have always found horses, an animal I am attached to, very tractable when they are treated with humanity and steadiness; so I doubt whether the violent methods used to break them do not do them real harm. I am certain, at any rate, that a child should never be forcibly tamed like that after being injudiciously allowed to run wild; for every violation of justice and reason in the treatment of children weakens their reason. And children take on a character so early that the base of the moral character is fixed, experience leads me to infer, before their seventh year — the very period during which women are allowed the sole management of them. Afterwards it too often happens that half the business of education is correcting, and very imperfectly if it is done in a hurry, the faults they would never have acquired if their mothers had had more understanding.

One striking instance of women's folly must not be left out: the way they treat servants in front of children, letting them suppose that servants ought to wait on them and put up with their moods. A child should always be made to accept help from a man or a woman as a favour; and as the first lesson in independence, children should be taught by their mother's practical example not to demand the personal attendance that it is an insult to humanity to demand when one is in health. Instead of being led to assume airs of consequence, a sense of their own weakness should first make them feel the natural equality of all people. Yet how often have I heard with indignation servants imperiously called to put children to bed, and sent away again and again because master or miss was hanging about mamma to stay a little longer. Made to dance slavish attendance on the little idol in this way, they were treated to all the disgusting moods that characterize a spoiled child.

In short, speaking of most mothers, they either leave their children entirely to the care of servants, or else treat them, because they are their children, as if they were little demigods — though I have always observed that the women who idolize their children in this way seldom show common humanity to a servant, or feel the least tenderness for any children but their own.

It is these exclusive affections, and this individual way of seeing things produced by ignorance, that keep women forever at a standstill as far as improvement goes, and make so many of them dedicate their lives to their children only to weaken their bodies and spoil their tempers — frustrating besides any plan of education a more rational father may adopt; for unless the mother agrees with him, the father who restrains will always be considered a tyrant.

But a woman with a sound constitution may fulfil the duties of a mother and still keep her person scrupulously neat, and help to support her family if that is necessary, or improve her mind by reading and by conversation with both sexes indiscriminately. For nature has ordered things so wisely that if women nursed their own children they would preserve their own health, and there would be such an interval between the birth of each child that we should seldom see a house full of babies. And if they followed a plan of conduct and did not waste their time following the fashionable vagaries of dress, the management of household and children need not shut them out of literature, nor prevent them from attaching themselves to a science with the steady eye that strengthens the mind, or practising one of the fine arts that cultivate the taste.

But visiting to display finery, card-playing and balls, not to mention the idle bustle of a morning's trifling, draw women away from their duty and make them insignificant — make them pleasing, in the present sense of the word, to every man except their husband. For a round of pleasures in which the affections are never exercised cannot be said to improve the understanding, though it is mistakenly called seeing the world; and such senseless intercourse, which becomes a habitual necessity even after it has stopped amusing anyone, makes the heart cold and averse to duty.

But until there is more equality in society, until ranks are confounded and women freed, we shall not see that dignified domestic happiness whose simple grandeur ignorant or vitiated minds cannot relish; nor will the important task of education ever be properly begun until a woman's person is no longer preferred to her mind. For it would be as sensible to expect corn from weeds, or figs from thistles, as to expect a foolish, ignorant woman to be a good mother.

Section Six: Concluding Reflections

It is not necessary to tell the sagacious reader, now that I come to my concluding reflections, that the discussion of this subject consists merely in laying open a few simple principles and clearing away the rubbish that obscured them. But not all readers are sagacious, so I must be allowed to add some explanatory remarks to bring the subject home to reason — to that sluggish reason which supinely takes opinions on trust and then obstinately defends them to spare itself the labour of thinking.

Moralists have unanimously agreed that unless virtue is nursed by liberty it will never gain its proper strength; and what they say of man I extend to humankind, insisting that in every case morals must be fixed on unchanging principles, and that no being can be called rational or virtuous who obeys any authority but that of reason.

To make women truly useful members of society, I argue that they should be led, by having their understandings cultivated on a large scale, to acquire a rational love of their country founded on knowledge; for it is obvious that we take little interest in what we do not understand. And to show why this general knowledge matters so much, I have tried to show that private duties are never properly fulfilled unless the understanding enlarges the heart, and that public virtue is only an aggregate of private virtue. But the distinctions established in society undermine both, by beating out the solid gold of virtue until it is nothing but the tinsel covering of vice. For while wealth makes a man more respectable than virtue does, wealth will be sought before virtue; and while women's persons are caressed when a childish simper shows an absence of mind, the mind will lie fallow. Yet true voluptuousness must come from the mind. For what can equal the sensations produced by mutual affection supported by mutual respect? What are the cold or feverish caresses of appetite but sin embracing death, compared with the modest overflowings of a pure heart and an exalted imagination? Yes, let me tell the libertine of fancy, when he despises understanding in a woman, that the mind he disregards is what gives life to the enthusiastic affection from which rapture, short-lived as it is, can alone flow — and that without virtue an attachment between the sexes must gutter out like a tallow candle in the socket, leaving an intolerable disgust behind. To prove it I need only observe that men who have wasted a great part of their lives among women, seeking pleasure with them in eager thirst, hold the meanest opinion of the sex. Virtue, true refiner of joy! If foolish men were to frighten you off the earth in order to give free rein to all their appetites unchecked, some sensual fellow of taste would scale the heavens to invite you back, to give their pleasure a zest.

That women at present are made foolish or vicious by ignorance is not, I think, to be disputed; and that the most wholesome effects, tending to improve humankind, might be expected from a *revolution* in the manners of women appears at least probable from that observation. For since marriage has been called the parent of the endearing charities that draw us out of the brutal herd, the corrupting intercourse that wealth, idleness and folly produce between the sexes is more universally damaging to morality than all the other vices of humankind put together. The most sacred duties are sacrificed to adulterous lust, because before marriage men, by a promiscuous intimacy with women, have learned to think of love as a selfish gratification — learned to separate it not only from esteem but even from the affection merely built on habit, which at least mixes a little humanity into it. Justice and friendship are set at defiance too, and that purity of taste is spoiled which would naturally lead a man to relish an artless display of affection rather than affected airs. But that noble simplicity of affection which dares to appear unadorned has few attractions for the libertine, though it is the charm which, in cementing the marriage tie, secures the necessary parental attention for the pledges of a warmer passion; for children will never be properly educated until there is friendship between their parents. Virtue flies from a house divided against itself, and a whole legion of devils takes up residence there.

The affection of husbands and wives cannot be pure when they have so few sentiments in common, and when so little confidence is established at home, as must be the case when their pursuits are so different. The intimacy from which tenderness ought to flow will not, and cannot, exist between the vicious.

Maintaining, then, that the distinction between the sexes on which men have insisted so warmly is arbitrary, I have dwelt on an observation that several sensible men I have discussed the subject with allowed to be well founded. It is simply this: that the little chastity to be found among men, and their consequent disregard of modesty, tend to degrade both sexes; and further, that the modesty of women, described as belonging to their sex, will often be only the artful veil of wantonness instead of the natural reflection of purity, until modesty is universally respected.

From the tyranny of man, I firmly believe, the greater number of female follies proceed; and the cunning which I admit forms part of women's character at present is, as I have repeatedly tried to prove, produced by oppression.

Were dissenters, for instance, not a class of people who could with strict truth be described as cunning? And may I not lay some weight on that fact to prove that when any power but reason curbs the free spirit of a human being, dissimulation is practised and all the various shifts of artifice are naturally called out? A great attention to decorum, carried to the point of scrupulosity, and all that puerile bustle about trifles and consequential solemnity that Butler's caricature of a dissenter brings to mind, shaped their persons as well as their minds in a mould of prim littleness. I speak collectively, for I know how many ornaments to human nature have been enrolled among the sects. Yet I assert that the same narrow prejudice in favour of their sect that women have in favour of their families prevailed in the dissenting part of the community, however worthy in other respects; and that the same timid prudence, or headstrong effort, often disgraced the exertions of both. Oppression thus formed many features of their character that coincide perfectly with those of the oppressed half of humankind. For is it not notorious that dissenters were, like women, fond of deliberating together and asking one another's advice, until by a complication of little contrivances some little end was brought about? A similar attention to preserving their reputation was conspicuous in the dissenting world and in the female one, and was produced by a similar cause.

In asserting the rights that women, in common with men, ought to contend for, I have not tried to extenuate their faults, but to prove them the natural consequence of their education and their station in society. And if that is so, it is reasonable to suppose that they will change their character, and correct their vices and follies, when they are allowed to be free in a physical, moral and civil sense.

Let woman share the rights, and she will emulate the virtues of man; for she must grow more perfect once emancipated, or else justify the authority that chains so weak a being to her duty. If the latter, it will be expedient to open a fresh trade with Russia for whips — a present a father should always make his son-in-law on the wedding day, so that a husband may keep his whole family in order by the same means, and reign without any violation of justice, wielding this sceptre as sole master of his house because he is the only being in it who has reason; the divine, indefeasible, earthly sovereignty breathed into man by the Master of the universe. Granting that position, women have no inherent rights to claim; and by the same rule their duties vanish too, for rights and duties are inseparable.

Be just, then, you men of understanding! Do not mark what women do amiss more severely than you mark the vicious tricks of the horse or the donkey you provide fodder for; and allow her the privileges of ignorance, if you deny her the rights of reason — or you will be worse than Egyptian taskmasters, expecting virtue where nature has given no understanding.
