The Sixth Evening: New Thoughts, and the Latest Discoveries in the Sky

It had been a long time since the Marquise and I had talked about the worlds. We had even started to forget that we ever had. Then one day I went to call on her, and arrived just as two gentlemen, clever men and fairly well known in society, were leaving.

"You can see what kind of visit I've just had," she said as soon as she saw me. "I'll admit it's left me suspecting that you may have spoiled my mind."

"I'd be very proud," I answered, "to have had that much power over you. I can't imagine anything harder to bring off."

"I'm afraid you've managed it all the same," she said. "I don't know how the conversation turned to the worlds with those two men who just left. Maybe they steered it there on purpose, out of mischief. Anyway, I lost no time in telling them that all the planets are inhabited. One of them said he was quite sure I didn't believe it. I told him, with all the sincerity in the world, that I did. He kept taking it for a pretense, the joke of a woman who wanted to amuse herself. I decided the reason he was so stubborn about not believing me, even about my own opinions, was that he thought too well of me to imagine I could hold such an extravagant idea. The other one doesn't think so highly of me, so he took me at my word. Why did you get me hooked on something that the people who respect me can't believe I'd say seriously?"

"But Madame," I replied, "why did you say it seriously to people who I'm sure weren't capable of following any argument that was the least bit serious? Is that any way to expose the inhabitants of the planets? Let's be content to be a small, select company of believers, and not spread our mysteries among the common crowd."

"What!" she cried. "You call the two men who just left here the common crowd?"

"They're very clever," I said, "but they never reason. Reasoners are hard people, and they'll call those two the crowd without a second thought. And the other side takes its revenge by making the reasoners look ridiculous. It seems to me a very well-established arrangement that each kind of person despises whatever it lacks. If it were possible, we ought to adapt ourselves to each. It would have been far better to joke about the inhabitants of the planets with those two men, since they know how to joke, than to reason about them, since they don't know how. You'd have left with their good opinion, and the planets wouldn't have lost a single inhabitant."

"Betraying the truth!" said the Marquise. "You have no conscience."

"I confess," I said, "that I don't have great zeal for truths of that kind, and I gladly sacrifice them to the smallest conveniences of social life. I can see, for example, what it is that stops the opinion about inhabited planets from passing for as likely as it is, and what always will. The planets present themselves to our eyes as bodies that give off light, not as broad fields or meadows. We could easily believe that fields and meadows were inhabited, but luminous bodies? No way. Reason can come and tell us as much as it likes that the planets have fields and meadows, but reason arrives too late. The first glance has already done its work on us, and we won't listen to reason anymore: the planets are just luminous bodies. And then, what would their inhabitants even look like? Our imagination would have to picture their shapes right away, and it can't, so the quickest thing is to believe they don't exist. Would you have me go to war against those formidable powers called the senses and the imagination, just to establish the inhabitants of the planets, whose interests concern me only from a fair distance? That would take a lot of courage. It isn't easy to persuade people to put their reason in place of their eyes. Sometimes I meet people sensible enough to believe, after a thousand proofs, that the planets are Earths. But they don't believe it the way they would if they had never seen the planets looking different. They keep remembering the first idea they formed, and they never quite get over it. Those are the people who, even while believing our opinion, seem to be doing it a favor, and only support it because of a certain pleasure they take in how unusual it is."

"Well, but," she interrupted, "isn't that enough for an opinion that's merely likely?"

"You'd be very surprised," I said, "if I told you that the word 'likely' is rather modest. Is it merely likely that Alexander existed? You feel quite sure of it. What is that certainty based on? On the fact that you have every proof you could want in a matter like this, and that no reason for doubt comes up that could hold your mind back and stop it. Otherwise, you've never seen Alexander, and you have no mathematical demonstration that he had to exist. But what would you say if the inhabitants of the planets were in roughly the same position? No one can show them to you, and you can't ask for a demonstration like a problem in mathematics. But you have every proof one could want for a thing like this: the complete resemblance of the planets to the Earth, which is inhabited; the impossibility of imagining any other purpose they could have been made for; the fertility and magnificence of nature; the consideration nature seems to have shown for the needs of their inhabitants, such as giving moons to the planets far from the Sun, and more moons to the farthest ones. And, most important of all, everything points one way and nothing at all points the other. You couldn't come up with the slightest ground for doubt unless you took back the eyes and the mind of the crowd. In short, suppose these inhabitants of the planets do exist. They couldn't announce themselves with more signs, or with clearer ones. After that, it's for you to decide whether you want to treat them as merely likely."

"But you wouldn't want it to seem as certain to me as it does that Alexander existed?" she said.

"Not quite," I answered. "Even though we have as much proof about the inhabitants of the planets as we can have in our position, there isn't a great quantity of it."

"I'm going to give up on the inhabitants of the planets," she interrupted, "because I no longer know what rank to give them in my mind. They aren't quite certain, and they're more than likely. It confuses me too much."

"Ah, Madame," I said, "don't be discouraged. The plainest, crudest clocks tell the hours. Only the ones built with more art tell the minutes. In the same way, ordinary minds feel the difference between simple likelihood and complete certainty. But only the finer minds feel the more and the less of certainty or likelihood, and mark off the minutes of it, so to speak, by their feeling. Put the inhabitants of the planets a little below Alexander, but above I don't know how many points of history that aren't fully proved, and I think they'll be well placed there."

"I like order," she said, "and you do me a favor by arranging my ideas. But why didn't you take that trouble already?"

"Because it doesn't do much harm," I answered, "if you believe in the inhabitants of the planets a little more or a little less than they deserve. I'm sure you don't believe in the motion of the Earth as much as you ought to. Is that a great loss to you?"

"Oh, as for that," she said, "I do my duty. You have nothing to reproach me with. I firmly believe the Earth turns."

"And yet I haven't told you the best reason that proves it," I said.

"Ah!" she cried. "So it was a betrayal, making me believe things on weak proofs. Did you not think me worthy of believing on good reasons?"

"I only proved things to you," I answered, "with gentle little arguments, suited to your use. Should I have used ones as solid and sturdy as if I'd had to take on a Doctor of the university?"

"Yes," she said. "Take me for a Doctor right now, and let's see this new proof of the Earth's motion."

"Gladly," I said, "here it is. I'm very fond of it, perhaps because I believe I found it myself. But it's so good and so natural that I wouldn't dare swear I'm its inventor. One thing is sure: a stubborn scholar who wanted to answer it would be reduced to talking at great length, which is the only way a scholar can ever be confounded. Either all the heavenly bodies turn around the Earth in twenty-four hours, or the Earth turns on itself in twenty-four hours and passes that motion on to all the heavenly bodies. But that they really make this twenty-four-hour revolution around the Earth is the least likely thing in the world, even though the absurdity doesn't leap to the eye at first. All the planets certainly make their great revolutions around the Sun. But these revolutions differ from one another according to the planets' distances from the Sun. The farthest ones take longer to make their circuit, which is only natural. The same order holds even among the small secondary planets that circle a large one. The four moons of Jupiter and the five of Saturn make their circles in more or less time around their great planet, depending on whether they're farther from it or nearer. Besides, it's certain that the planets also turn on their own centers, and these motions are unequal too. No one knows for sure what governs this inequality. It may be the planets' different sizes, or their different solidity, or the different speeds of the particular vortices that enclose them, and of the liquid matter that carries them along. But the inequality itself is quite certain. And in general, this is the order of nature: whatever several things have in common turns up at the same time varied by particular differences."

"I follow you," the Marquise interrupted, "and I think you're right. Yes, I agree with you. If the planets turned around the Earth, they'd turn in unequal times according to their distances, just as they do around the Sun. Isn't that what you mean?"

"Exactly, Madame," I said. "Their unequal distances from the Earth ought to produce differences in this supposed motion around the Earth. And the fixed stars, which are so prodigiously far from us, so far above anything that could take on a general motion around us, or at least placed where that motion ought to be very weak: wouldn't it be quite likely that they don't turn around us in twenty-four hours, the way the Moon does, which is so close? And the comets, which are strangers in our vortex and follow such different paths there: shouldn't they be excused from all turning around us in that same twenty-four hours? But no. Planets, fixed stars, comets, everything will turn around the Earth in twenty-four hours. Even so, if there were a few minutes of difference among these motions, we could live with it. But they'll all be of the most exact equality, or rather of the only exact equality in the world: not one minute more or less. Truly, that has to be strangely suspicious."

"Oh!" said the Marquise. "Since it's possible that this great equality exists only in our imagination, I feel quite sure it doesn't exist outside it. I'm glad that something that isn't in nature's character falls entirely on us, and that nature is let off, even if it's at our expense."

"For my part," I said, "I'm so much an enemy of perfect equality that I don't find it right that all the turns the Earth makes on itself each day should be precisely twenty-four hours and always equal to one another. I'd be rather inclined to believe there are differences."

"Differences!" she cried. "Don't our pendulum clocks show a perfect equality?"

"Oh," I answered, "I challenge the pendulum clocks. They can't be perfectly accurate themselves. And if one day they showed that one twenty-four-hour turn was longer or shorter than another, people would rather believe the clocks were out of order than suspect the Earth of any irregularity in its revolutions. A funny sort of respect they have for it! I wouldn't trust the Earth much more than a clock. Pretty much the same things that would throw one off would throw off the other. I only think the Earth takes longer than a clock to go noticeably wrong, and that's the only advantage we can grant it. Couldn't it be gradually drawing nearer to the Sun? And then, finding itself in a place where the matter was more agitated and the motion faster, it would complete its double revolution, around the Sun and around itself, in less time. The years would be shorter, and so would the days. We couldn't notice it, because we'd still divide the years into three hundred sixty-five days and the days into twenty-four hours. So, without living any longer than we do now, we'd live more years. And the opposite: if the Earth moved away from the Sun, we'd live fewer years than we do, and yet we wouldn't live any less."

"It seems quite likely," she said, "that even if that were so, long ages upon ages would produce only very small differences."

"I agree," I said. "Nature doesn't proceed abruptly. Her method is to bring everything about by degrees that are only noticeable in very sudden, very easy changes. We're hardly able to notice any but the change of the seasons. The others, which happen with a certain slowness, almost always escape us. And yet everything is in perpetual motion, and so everything changes. Even a certain young lady whom people saw in the Moon through telescopes, perhaps forty years ago, has aged considerably. She had a rather beautiful face. Her cheeks have sunk in, her nose has grown longer, her forehead and chin have jutted forward, so that all her charms are gone, and people even fear for her life."

"What are you telling me?" the Marquise interrupted.

"It's no joke," I said. "In the Moon you could make out a particular shape that looked like a woman's head emerging from among some rocks, and a change has happened in that spot. Some pieces of mountain have fallen, and they've left three peaks exposed, which now can only serve to make up the forehead, nose and chin of an old woman."

"Doesn't it seem," she said, "as if some spiteful fate has a special grudge against beauty? It went after exactly this young lady, out of the whole Moon."

"Perhaps, to make up for it," I replied, "the changes that happen on our Earth improve some face that the people of the Moon see there. I mean some face in the Moon's own manner, because everyone projects onto objects the ideas they're full of. Our astronomers see the faces of young ladies on the Moon. It might be that women who observed it would see handsome men's faces there. As for me, Madame, I wonder whether I wouldn't see you there."

"I admit," she said, "that I couldn't help feeling obliged to anyone who found me there. But I'm going back to what you were saying a moment ago. Do considerable changes happen on the Earth?"

"It seems very likely," I answered, "that they have. Many mountains, high up and far from the sea, have great beds of seashells, which necessarily show that water once covered them. Often, still quite far from the sea, you find stones with petrified fish in them. Who could have put them there, if the sea hadn't been there? The fables say that Hercules separated two mountains with his own two hands, Calpe and Abyla, which stood between Africa and Spain and held back the ocean. The sea then rushed violently in over the land and made the great gulf we call the Mediterranean. Fables aren't entirely fables. They're histories of distant times that have been distorted, either by the ignorance of peoples or by their love of the marvelous, both very ancient diseases of mankind. That Hercules split two mountains with his hands isn't very believable. But that in the time of some Hercules (for there were fifty of them) the Ocean broke through two mountains weaker than the rest, perhaps with the help of an earthquake, and threw itself in between Europe and Africa, I could believe without much difficulty. That was a fine spot the people of the Moon then saw suddenly appear on our Earth, for you know, Madame, that the seas are spots. At least, the common opinion is that Sicily was separated from Italy, and Cyprus from Syria. New islands have sometimes formed in the sea. Earthquakes have swallowed mountains, raised others, and changed the course of rivers. Philosophers make us fear that the kingdom of Naples and Sicily, which are lands resting on great underground vaults full of sulfur, may melt away some day, when the vaults are no longer strong enough to resist the fires they hold inside, and which they now let out through vents like Vesuvius and Etna. That's enough to vary the show we put on for the people of the Moon a little."

"I'd much rather," said the Marquise, "bore them by always giving them the same one than entertain them with swallowed provinces."

"That would be nothing," I went on, "compared with what goes on in Jupiter. On its surface there appear what look like bands wrapped around it, and you can tell them apart from each other, or from the gaps between them, by their different degrees of brightness or darkness. They're lands and seas, or at any rate large parts of Jupiter's surface that differ from each other in the same way. Sometimes these bands narrow, sometimes they widen. Sometimes they break up and then join together again. New ones form in various places and others fade away. All these changes, which only our best telescopes can detect, are in themselves far greater than if our Ocean flooded all the dry land and left new continents in its place. Unless the inhabitants of Jupiter are amphibious and live equally on land and in the water, I don't quite know what becomes of them. You also see great changes on the surface of Mars, even from one month to the next. In that little time, seas cover great continents, or draw back with an ebb and flow infinitely more violent than ours, or at least something equivalent. Our planet is very calm next to those two, and we have great reason to be thankful for it, even more so if it's true that in Jupiter countries as large as all of Europe have been set ablaze."

"Set ablaze!" cried the Marquise. "Now that would be real news!"

"Very real news," I said. "About twenty years ago, perhaps, a long band of light was seen on Jupiter, brighter than the rest of the planet. We've had floods here, but rarely. Perhaps on Jupiter they have great fires, also rarely, in addition to the floods, which are common there. But however that may be, this light on Jupiter is not to be compared with another one, which, by all appearances, is as old as the world, and which nobody had ever seen."

"How does a light manage to hide?" she said. "It would take a singular talent."

"This one," I answered, "only shows itself at twilight, so that most of the time the twilight is long enough and strong enough to cover it. And when the twilight does let it show, either the haze on the horizon steals it away, or it's so faint that unless you're very careful, you take it for the twilight itself. But at last, for thirty years now, it has been reliably picked out, and for a while it was the delight of the astronomers, whose curiosity needed to be woken up by something of a new kind. They could have discovered any number of new secondary planets and hardly have been moved. The last two moons of Saturn, for example, didn't charm or enchant them the way the satellites, the moons, of Jupiter did. We get used to everything. So for a month before and after the spring equinox, once the Sun has set and the twilight is over, you can see a certain whitish light that looks like a comet's tail. You can see it before sunrise, and before dawn around the September equinox, and you can see it evening and morning around the winter solstice. Outside those times it can't, as I just told you, be separated from the twilight, which is too strong and lasts too long. For it's supposed to be always there, and everything about it looks that way. People are beginning to guess that it's produced by some great mass of rather thick matter surrounding the Sun out to a certain distance. Most of the Sun's rays pierce through this enclosure and come to us in a straight line. But some, striking the inner surface of this matter, are thrown back toward us. They reach us at times when the direct rays either can't reach us yet, in the morning, or can't reach us anymore, in the evening. Since these reflected rays start from higher up than the direct rays, we have to get them earlier and lose them later.

"On that basis, I have to take back what I told you, that the Moon shouldn't have any twilight because it isn't surrounded by thick air the way the Earth is. It won't lose out. Its twilight will come from this kind of thick air around the Sun, which sends its rays back to places the ones coming directly from it can't reach."

"But doesn't that also give," said the Marquise, "guaranteed twilight to all the planets? They won't each need to be wrapped in a heavy air of their own, since the air around the Sun alone can do that for every planet in the vortex. Given the leaning toward economy that I know nature has, I'd quite willingly believe she used only this one means."

"And yet," I replied, "despite that economy, our Earth would have two causes of twilight. One of them, the Sun's thick air, would be rather useless, and could only be an object of curiosity for the people in the observatory. But to tell the whole story, it may be that only the Earth pushes out of itself vapors and exhalations coarse enough to produce twilight. And nature would have been right to provide by a general means for the needs of all the other planets, which will be, so to speak, purer, and whose evaporations will be subtler. Perhaps we are the ones, out of all the inhabitants of the worlds in our vortex, who needed to be given the coarsest, thickest air to breathe. With what contempt the inhabitants of the other planets would look at us if they knew that!"

"They'd be wrong," said the Marquise. "No one is to be despised for being wrapped in thick air, since the Sun itself has some wrapped around it. Tell me, please, isn't this air produced by certain vapors that you once told me come out of the Sun? And doesn't it serve to soften the first force of the rays, which might otherwise have been excessive? I can imagine that the Sun might naturally be veiled, so as to be better suited to our needs."

"There, Madame," I answered, "is the small beginning of a system, and you've made it quite happily. One could add that these vapors would produce a kind of rain that fell back into the Sun to cool it, the same way people sometimes throw water on a forge when the fire is too fierce. There's nothing you shouldn't assume about nature's skill. But she has another, very particular kind of skill in hiding from us, and we shouldn't be too quick to feel sure we've guessed her way of working, or her designs. With new discoveries, we shouldn't hurry too much to theorize, even though we always have plenty of desire to. True philosophers are like elephants, which, when they walk, never put the second foot down until the first is planted firmly."

"The comparison seems all the more apt to me," she interrupted, "because the merit of both kinds, elephants and philosophers, has nothing to do with outward charm. I'm willing to copy the judgment of both. Tell me a few more of the latest discoveries, and I promise not to build a hasty system."

"I've just told you," I answered, "all the news I know from the sky, and I don't think there's any fresher. I'm sorry it isn't as startling and marvelous as some observations I was reading the other day in a summary of the Annals of China, written in Latin. In it you find thousands of stars at once falling from the sky into the sea with a great crash, or dissolving and going off in rain. That wasn't seen only once in China. I found the observation at two rather distant times, not counting a star that goes off in the east and bursts like a rocket, again with a great noise. It's a pity that those sights are reserved for China, and that our countries have never had their share. It wasn't long ago that all our philosophers believed they had experience on their side when they claimed that the heavens and all the heavenly bodies were incorruptible and incapable of change. And all that time, other men at the other end of the Earth were watching stars dissolve by the thousands. That's quite a difference."

"But," she said, "haven't I always heard that the Chinese were such great astronomers?"

"That's true," I said. "But the Chinese have gained from being separated from us by a long stretch of land, just as the Greeks and Romans have from being separated from us by a long run of centuries. Any distance has the right to impress us. In truth, I keep believing more and more that there's a certain genius which has never yet gone beyond our Europe, or at least hasn't strayed far from it. Perhaps it isn't allowed to spread over a great expanse of land at once, and some fate has drawn rather narrow limits for it. Let's enjoy it while we have it. The best thing about it is that it doesn't shut itself up in the sciences and dry speculation. It extends with equal success to matters of pleasure and taste, in which I doubt that any people equals us. Those, Madame, are the things that are yours to take up, and they should make up all of your philosophy."
