+ as much as we pleased in atomic properties, we would find that all drops of the same radius, density, and surface tension, executed their oscillations in the same time. We add that the truth of this reply may be checked by an appeal to experiment. But our critic may not even yet be satisfied. He may ask how we were sure beforehand that among the various properties of the liquids of which the drop might be composed the surface tension was the only property affecting the time of oscillation. It may seem quite conceivable to him that the time of oscillation might depend on the viscosity or compressibility, and if we are compelled to appeal to experiment, of what value is our dimensional analysis? To which we would be forced to reply that we have indeed had a wider experimental experience than our critic, and that there are conditions under which the time of oscillation does depend on the viscosity or compressibility in addition to the surface tension, but that it will be found as a matter of experiment that if the radius of the drop is made smaller and smaller there is a point beyond which the compressibility will be found to play an imperceptibly small part, and in the same way if the viscosity of the liquid is made smaller and smaller, there will also be a point beyond which any further reduction of the viscosity will not perceptibly affect the oscillation time. And we add that it is to such conditions as these that our analysis applies. Instead of appealing to direct experiment to justify our assertions, we might, since our critic is an intelligent critic, appeal to that generalization from much experiment contained in the equations of hydrodynamics, and show by a detailed application of the equations to the present problem that compressibility and viscosity may be neglected beyond certain limiting conditions.

We shall thus ultimately be able to satisfy our critic of the correctness of our procedure, but to do it requires a considerable background of physical experience, and the exercise of a discreet judgment. The untutored savage in the bushes would probably not be able to apply the methods of dimensional analysis to this problem and obtain results which would satisfy us.

Now let us consider a third problem. Given two bodies of masses \(m_1\) and \(m_2\) in empty space, revolving about each other in a spherical orbit under their mutual gravitational attraction. We wish to find how the time of revolution depends on the other variables. We make a list of the various quantities as before.
