That is, instead of obtaining a result with an unknown function of only one argument, we should have obtained a function of two arguments. Now a function of two arguments is of course very much less restricted in its character than a function of only one argument. For instance, if the function is of the form suggested in two arguments, it would not follow at all that the effect of changing the velocity is the same as that of changing the heat capacity. Riabouchinsky, therefore, makes a real point.

Lord Rayleigh replies to Riabouchinsky as follows on page 644 of the same volume of *Nature.*

The question raised by Dr. Riabouchinsky belongs rather to the logic than the use of the principle of similitude, with which I was mainly concerned. It would be well worthy of further discussion. The conclusion that I gave follows on the basis of the usual Fourier equations for the conduction of heat, in which temperature and heat are regarded as *sui generis.* It would indeed be a paradox if the further knowledge of the nature of heat afforded us by molecular theory put us in a worse position than before in dealing with a particular problem. The solution would seem to be that the Fourier equations embody something as to the nature of heat and temperature which is ignored in the alternative argument of Dr. Riabouchinsky.

This reply of Lord Rayleigh is, I think, likely to leave us cold. Of course we do not question the ability of Lord Rayleigh to obtain the correct result by the use of dimensional analysis, but must we have the experience and physical intuition of Lord Rayleigh to obtain the correct result also? Might not perhaps a little examination of the logic of the method of dimensional analysis enable us to tell whether temperature and heat are "really" independent units or not, and what the proper way of choosing our fundamental units is?

Beside the prime question of the proper number of units to choose in writing our dimensional formulas, this problem of heat transfer raises many others also of a more physical nature. For instance, why are we justified in neglecting the density, or the viscosity, or the compressibility, or the thermal expansion of the liquid, or the absolute temperature? We will probably find ourselves able to justify the neglect of all these quantities, but the justification will involve real argument and a considerable physical experience with physical systems of the kind which we have been considering. The
