We now no longer encounter the previous difficulty, but immediately, with the help of our experience with more complicated examples, find the solution to be \[ m = \text{Const}\,\frac{e^2}{r c^2}. \]

This formula may be verified from any book on electrodynamics, and our critic is again justified. We worry over the matter of the dimensional constant, and ultimately take some comfort on recollecting that \(c\) is also the ratio of the electrostatic to the electromagnetic units, but still it is not very clear to us why this ratio should enter.

On reflecting on the solutions of the problems above, we are troubled by yet another question. Why is it that an equation which correctly describes a relation between various measurable physical quantities must in its form be independent of the size of the fundamental units? There does not seem to be any necessity for this in the nature of the measuring process itself. An equation is a description of a phenomenon, or class of phenomena. It is a statement in compact form that if we operate with a physical phenomenon in certain prescribed ways so as to obtain a set of numbers describing the results of the operations, these numbers will satisfy a certain equation when substituted into it. For instance, let us suppose ourselves in the position of Galileo, trying to determine the law of falling bodies. The material of our observation is all the freely falling bodies available at the surface of the earth. We use as our instruments of measurement a certain unit of length, let us say the yard, and a certain unit of time, let us say the minute. With these instruments we operate on all falling bodies according to definite rules. That is, we obtain all the pairs of numbers we can by associating for any and all of the bodies the distance which it has fallen from rest with the interval of time which has elapsed since it started to fall. And we make a great discovery in the observation that the number expressing the distance of fall of any body, no matter what its size or physical properties or the distance it has fallen, is always a fixed constant factor times the square of the number expressing the corresponding elapsed time. The numbers which we have obtained by measurement to fit into this relationship were obtained with certain definite sized units, and our description is a valid
