+ description, and our discovery is an important discovery even under the restriction that distance and time are to be measured with the same particular units as those which we originally employed.

We can write our discovery in the form of an equation \[ s = \text{Const}\; t^2. \]

Now an inhabitant of some other country, who uses some other system of units equally as unscientific as the yard and the minute, hears of our discovery, and tries our experiments with his measuring instruments. He verifies our result, except that he must use a different factor of proportionality in the equation. That is, the constant depends on the size of the units used in the measurements, or in other words, is a dimensional constant.

The verification of our discovery by an inhabitant of another country is reported to us, and we retire to contemplate. We at length offer the comment that this is as it should be, and that it could not well be otherwise. We offer to predict in advance just how the constant should be changed to fit with any system of measurement, and on being asked for details, make the sophisticated suggestion that we so change the constant as to exactly neutralize any change in the numbers representing the length or the time, so that we will still have essentially the same equation as before. In particular, if the unit of length is made half as large as originally, so that the number measuring a certain distance of fall is now twice as large as it was formerly, we multiply the constant by 2 so as to compensate for the factor 2 by which otherwise the left-hand side of the equation would be too large. Similarly if the unit of time is made three times as long as formerly, so that the number expressing the duration of a certain free fall becomes only \(1/3\) of its original value, then we will multiply the constant by 9 to compensate for the factor \(1/9\), by which otherwise the right-hand side of the equation would be too small. In other words, we give to the constant the dimensions of plus one in length, and minus two in time, and so obtain a formula valid no matter what the size of the fundamental units.

This experience emboldens us, and we try its success with other much more complicated systems. For instance, we make observations of the height of the tides at our nearest port, using a foot rule to measure the height of the water, and a clock graduated in hours as
