+ the number which is the measure of a velocity, \(x_2\) may stand for the number which is the measure of a viscosity, etc. By a sort of shorthand method of statement we may abbreviate this long-winded description into saying that \(x_1\) is a velocity, but of course it really is not, but is only a number which measures velocity.

Now the first observation which we make with regard to a functional relation like the above is that the arguments fall into two groups, depending on the way in which the numbers are obtained physically. The first group of quantities we call primary quantities. These are the quantities which, according to the particular set of rules of operation by which we assign numbers characteristic of the phenomenon, are regarded as fundamental and of an irreducible simplicity. Thus in the ordinary systems of mechanics, the fundamental quantities are taken as mass, length, and time. In any functional relation such as the above, certain arguments of the function may be the numbers which are the measure of certain lengths, masses, or times. Such quantities we will agree to call primary quantities.

In the measurement of primary quantities, certain rules of operation must be set up, establishing the physical procedure by which it is possible to measure a length in terms of a particular length which we choose as the unit of length, or a time in terms of a particular interval of time selected as the standard, or in general, it is characteristic of primary quantities that there are certain rules of procedure by which it is possible to measure any primary quantity directly in terms of units of its own kind. Now it will be found that we always make a tacit requirement in selecting the rules of operation by which primary quantities are measured in terms of quantities of their own kind. This requirement for measurement of length, for example, is that if a new unit of length is chosen let us say half the length of the original unit, then the rules of operation must be such that the number which represents the measure of any particular concrete length in terms of the new unit shall be twice as large as the number which was its measure in terms of the original unit. Very little attention seems to have been given to the methodology of systems of measurement, and I do not know whether this characteristic of all our systems of measurement has been formulated or not, but it is evident on examination of any system of measurement in actual use that it has these properties. The possession of this property involves a most important consequence, which is that the
