+ ratio of the numbers expressing the measures of any two concrete lengths, for example, is independent of the size of the unit with which they are measured. This consequence is of course at once obvious, for if we change the size of the fundamental unit by any factor, by hypothesis we change the measure of every length by the reciprocal of that factor, and so leave unaltered the ratio of the measures of any two lengths. This means that the ratio of the lengths of any two particular objects has an absolute significance independent of the size of the units. This may be put into the converse form, as is evident on a minute's reflection. If we require that our system of measurement of primary kinds of quantity in terms of units of their own kind be such that the ratio of the measures of any two concrete examples shall be independent of the size of the unit, then the measures of the concrete examples must change inversely as the size of the unit.

Besides primary quantities, there is another group of quantities which we may call secondary quantities. The numerical measures of these are not obtained by some operation which compares them directly with another quantity of the same kind which is accepted as the unit, but the method of measurement is more complicated and roundabout. Quantities of the second kind are measured by making measurements of certain quantities of the first kind associated with the quantity under consideration, and then combining the measurements of the associated primary quantities according to certain rules which give a number that is defined as the measure of the secondary quantity in question. For example, a velocity as ordinarily defined is a secondary quantity. We obtain its measure by measuring a length and the time occupied in traversing this length (both of these being primary quantities), and dividing the number measuring the length by the number measuring the time (or dividing the length by the time according to our shorthand method of statement).

Now there is a certain definite restriction on the rules of operation which we are at liberty to set up in defining secondary quantities. We make the same requirement that we did for primary quantities, namely, that the ratio of the numbers measuring any two concrete examples of a secondary quantity shall be independent of the size of the fundamental units used in making the required primary measurements. That is, to say that one substance is twice as viscous as another, for example, or that one automobile is travel-
