+ ling three times as rapidly as another, has absolute significance, independent of the size of the fundamental primary units.

This requirement is not necessary in order to make measurement itself possible. Any rules of operation will serve as the basis of a system of measurement by which numbers may be assigned to phenomena in such a way that the particular aspect of the phenomenon on which we are concentrating attention is uniquely defined by the number in conjunction with the rules of operation. But the requirement that the ratio be constant, or we may say the requirement of the absolute significance of relative magnitude, is essential to all the systems of measurement in scientific use. In particular, it is an absolute requirement if the methods of dimensional analysis are to be applied to the results of the measurements. Dimensional analysis cannot be applied to systems which do not meet this requirement, and accordingly we consider here only such systems.

It is particularly to be noticed that the line of separation between primary and secondary quantities is not a hard and fast one imposed by natural conditions, but is to a large extent arbitrary, and depends on the particular set of rules of operation which we find convenient to adopt in defining our system of measurement. For instance, in our ordinary system of mechanics, force is a secondary quantity, and its measure is obtained by multiplying a number which measures a mass and the number which measures an acceleration (itself a secondary quantity). But physically, force is perfectly well adapted to be used as a primary quantity, since we know what we mean by saying that one force is twice another, and the physical processes are known by which force may be measured in terms of units of its own kind. It is the same way with velocities; it is possible to set up a physical procedure by which velocities may be added together directly, and which makes it possible to measure velocity in terms of units of its own kind, and so to regard velocity as a primary quantity. It is perhaps questionable whether all kinds of physical quantity are adapted to be treated, if it should suit our convenience, as primary quantities. Thus it is not at once obvious whether a physical procedure could be set up by which two viscosities could be compared directly with each other without measuring other kinds of quantity.

But this question is not essential to our progress, although of great interest in itself, and need not detain us. The facts are simply these. The assigning of numerical magnitudes to measurable quanti-
