+ the various primary quantities. For the sake of simplicity, the coefficient is almost always chosen to be unity, although there is no necessity in such a choice. There are systems in use in which the factor is not always chosen as unity. Thus the so-called rational and the ordinary electrostatic units differ by a factor \(\sqrt{4\pi}\). Any differences in the numerical coefficient are not important, and are always easy to deal with, but the exponents of the powers are a matter of vital importance. The exponent of the power of any particular primary quantity is by definition the "dimension" of the secondary quantity in that particular primary quantity.

The "dimensional formula" of a secondary quantity is the aggregate of the exponents of the various primary quantities which are involved in the rules of operation by which the secondary quantity is measured. In order to avoid confusion, the exponents are associated with the symbols of the primary quantities to which they belong, that symbol being itself written as raised to the power in question.

For example, a velocity is measured by definition by dividing a certain length by a certain time (do not forget that this really means dividing the number which is the measure of a certain length by the number which measures a certain time). The exponent of length is therefore plus one, and the exponent of time is minus one, and the dimensional formula of velocity is \(LT^{-1}\). In the same way a force is defined in the ordinary Newtonian mechanical system as mass times acceleration. The dimensions of force are therefore equal to mass times the dimensions of acceleration. The dimensions of acceleration are obtained from its definition as time rate of change of velocity to be \(LT^{-2}\), which gives for the dimensions of force \(MLT^{-2}\).

It is to be noticed that the dimensions of any primary quantity are by a simple extension of the definition above merely the dimensional symbol of the corresponding primary quantity itself.

It is particularly to be emphasized that the dimensions of a primary quantity as defined above have no absolute significance whatever, but are defined merely with respect to that aspect of the rules of operation by which we obtain the measuring numbers associated with the physical phenomenon. The dimensional formula need not even suggest certain essential aspects of the rules of operation. For example, in the dimensional formula of force as mass times acceleration, the fact is not suggested that force and acceleration are vectors, and the components of each in the same direction must be com-
