+ pared. Furthermore, in our measurements of nature, the rules of operation are in our control to modify as we see fit, and we would certainly be foolish if we did not modify them to our advantage according to the particular kind of physical system or problem with which we are dealing. We shall in the following find many problems in which there is an advantage in choosing our system of measurement, that is, our rules of operation, in a particular way for the particular problem. Different systems of measurement may differ as to the kinds of quantity which we find it convenient to regard as fundamental and in terms of which we define the others, or they may even differ in the number of quantities which we choose as fundamental. All will depend on the particular problem, and it is our business to choose the system in the way best adapted to the problem in hand.

There is therefore no meaning in saying "the" dimensions of a physical quantity, until we have also specified the system of measurement with respect to which the dimensions are determined. This is not always kept clearly in mind even by those who in other conditions recognize the relative nature of a dimensional formula. As for example, Buckingham in *Phys. Rev.* 4, 357, 1914, says: ". . . Mr. Tolman's reasoning is based on the assumption that absolute temperature has the dimensions of energy, and this assumption is not permissible." Tolman,\(^1\) in a reply, admitted the correctness of this position. My position in this matter would be that Mr. Tolman has a right to make the dimensions of temperature the dimensions of energy if it is compatible with the physical facts (as it seems to be) and if it suits his convenience.

This view of the nature of a dimensional formula is directly opposed to one which is commonly held, and frequently expressed. It is by many considered that a dimensional formula has some esoteric significance connected with the "ultimate nature" of an object, and that we are in some way getting at the ultimate nature of things in writing their dimensional formulas. Such a point of view sees something absolute in a dimensional formula and attaches a meaning to such phrases as "really" independent, as in Riabouchinsky's comments on Lord Rayleigh's analysis of a certain problem in heat transfer. For this point of view it becomes important to find the "true" dimensions, and when the "true" dimensions are found, it is expected that something new will be suggested about the physical properties of the system. To this view it is
