+ quantity with respect to those units. When used in this very restricted sense, the formulae only indicate numerical relations between the various units. It is possible, however, to regard the matter from a wider point of view, as has been emphasized by Professor Rücker in the paper referred to. The dimensional formulae may be taken as representing the physical identities of the various quantities, as indicating, in fact, how our conceptions of their physical nature (in terms, of course, of other and more fundamental conceptions) are formed, just as the formula of a chemical substance indicates its composition and chemical identity. This is evidently a more comprehensive and fundamental view of the matter, and from this point of view the primitive numerical signification of a dimensional formula as merely a change ratio between units becomes a dependent and secondary consideration.

The question then arises, what is the test of the identity of a physical quantity? Plainly it is the manner in which the unit of that quantity is built up (ultimately) from the fundamental units \(L\), \(M\), and \(T\), and not merely the manner in which its magnitude changes with those units.

That the dimensional formulae are regarded from this higher standpoint, that is, regarded as being something more than mere "change ratios" between units, is shown by the fact that difficulties are felt when the dimensions of two different quantities, *e.g.*, couple and work, happen to be the same.

S. P. ^^Thompson^^, Elementary Lessons in Electricity and Magnetism, p. 352.

It seems absurd that there should be two different units of electricity.

R. A. ^^Fessenden^^, Phys. Rev. 10:8, 1900.

The difference between the dimensional formula and the qualitative formula or quality of a thing is that, according to the definitions of the writers quoted above, the dimensions "are arbitrary," are "merely a matter of definition and depend entirely upon the system of units we adopt," whilst the quality is an expression of the absolute nature, and never varies, no matter what system of units we adopt. For this to be true, no qualities must be suppressed.

REFERENCES

(1) R. C. Tolman, Phys. Rev. 6, 1915, p. 226, footnote.
