This point of view seems perfectly possible, and as far as any results go, it cannot be distinguished from that which I have adopted. However, by regarding the symbols in the dimensional formula as reminders of the rules of operation which we used physically in getting the numerical measure of the quantity, it seems to me that we are retaining a little closer contact with the actual physics of the situation than when we regard the symbols as representing the factors used in changing from one set of units to another, which after all is a more or less sophisticated thing to do, and which is not our immediate concern when first viewing a phenomenon.

Beside the sort of change of unit considered above, in which we change merely the sizes of the fundamental units, there is another sort of change of unit to be considered, in which we pass from one system of measurement to another in which the fundamental units are not only different in size, but different in character.\(^2\) Thus, for example, in our ordinary system of units of Newtonian mechanics we regard mass, length, and time as the fundamental units, but it is well known that we might equally regard force, length, and time as fundamental. We may therefore expect to encounter problems of this sort: how shall we express a kinetic energy of \(10 \text{ gm cm}^2 \text{ sec}^{-2}\) in a system in which the units are the dyne, the cm, and the sec?

There are obviously two problems involved here. One is to find the dimensional formula of kinetic energy in terms of force, length, and time, and the other is to find the new value of the numerical coefficient in that particular system in which the unit of force is the dyne, the unit of length the centimeter, and the unit of time the second.

The transformed dimensional formula is obtained easily if we observe the steps by which we pass from one system to the other. The transition is of course to be made in such a way that the two systems are consistent with each other. Thus if force is equal to mass times acceleration in one system, it is still to be equal to mass times acceleration in the other. If this were not so, we would be concerned merely with a formal change, and the thing which we might call force in the one system would not correspond to the same physical complex in the other. This relation of force and mass in the two systems is maintained by an application of simple algebra. In the first system we define force as mass times acceleration, and in the second we define mass as force divided by acceleration. Thus in each system the secondary quantity is expressed in terms of the
