CHAPTER IV

THE \(\Pi\) THEOREM

^^In^^ the second chapter we saw that the dimensional formulas of all the quantities with which we shall have to deal are expressible as products of powers of the fundamental quantities. Let us see what inferences this enables us to draw about the forms of the relations which may hold between the various measurable quantities connected with a natural phenomenon.

We also saw in the second chapter that at least sometimes the functional relation will involve certain so-called dimensional constants as well as measurable quantities. We met two examples of dimensional constants, namely, the gravitational constant, and the velocity of light in empty space, and we assigned dimensional formulas to these constants. Now it is most important to notice that these two dimensional constants had dimensional formulas of the type proved to be necessary for the measurable quantities, namely, they were expressible as products of powers of the fundamental quantities. This is no accident, but it is true of all the dimensional constants with which we shall have to deal. The proof can best be given later when we have obtained a little clearer insight into the nature of a dimensional constant. A certain apparent exception, the so-called logarithmic constant, will also be dealt with later. We may remark here, however, that one class of dimensional constant must obviously be of this form. We saw that if we start with an empirical equation which experimentally has been found to be true from measurements with a particular set of units, this equation can be made to hold for all sizes of the units by the device of introducing as a factor with each measurable quantity a dimensional constant of dimensions the reciprocal of those of the measured quantity. Since the dimensions of every measured quantity are products of powers, the dimensions of the reciprocal must also be products of powers, and the theorem is proved for this restricted class of dimensional constants. We will for the present accept as true the statement that all dimensional constants have this type of dimensional formula.
