In the general case, where there are \(n-m\) independent solutions, it is generally possible to select \(n-m\) of the quantities \(a\), \(b\), \(c\), etc., in any convenient way, assign to them \(n-m\) sets of independent values, and solve for the remaining quantities, thus obtaining \(n-m\) sets of values which determine \(n-m\) dimensionless products. Sometimes this is not possible, and the particular set of the quantities \(a\), \(b\), \(c\), etc., to which arbitrary values can be assigned cannot be chosen with complete freedom. This occurs when certain determinants chosen from the array of the exponents vanish. We will not stop here to develop a general theory, but let the exceptions take care of themselves, as it is always easy to do in any special problem.

It is to be noticed that the \(\Pi\) theorem does not contain anything essentially new, and does not enable us to treat any problems which we could not already have handled by the methods of the introduction. The advantage of the theorem is one of convenience; it places the result in a form in which it can be used with little mental effort, and in a form of a good deal of flexibility, so that the results of the dimensional analysis may be exhibited in a variety of forms, depending on the variables in which we are particularly interested. In this way it has very important advantages.

The result of this dimensional analysis places no restrictions whatever on the form of the functions by which the results of experiments may be expressed, but the restriction is on the form of the arguments only. However complicated the function, if it is one which satisfies the fundamental requirements of the theory as developed above, it must be possible to rearrange the terms in such a way that it appears as a function of dimensionless arguments only. Now in using the theorem we are nearly always interested in expressing one of the quantities as a function of the others. This is done by solving the function for the particular dimensionless product in which the variable in question is located, and then multiplying that dimensionless product (and of course the other side of the equation as well) by the reciprocal of the other quantities which are associated with it in the dimensionless product. The result is that on the one side of the equation the variable stands alone, while on the other side is a product of certain powers of some of the other variables multiplied into an arbitrary function of the other dimensionless products. This arbitrary function may be transcendental to the worst degree; there is absolutely no restriction on it, but its arguments are dimensionless. This agrees with the result
