CHAPTER V

DIMENSIONAL CONSTANTS AND THE NUMBER OF FUNDAMENTAL UNITS

^^The^^ essential result which we have obtained in the \(\Pi\) theorem is in the restriction which it places on the number of arguments of the arbitrary function. The fewer the arguments, the more restricted the function, and the greater our information about the answer. Thus if the problem is such that there are four variables, and three fundamental kinds of unit, our analysis shows that there is only one dimensionless product, which we can determine, and that some function of this product is zero. This is equivalent to saying, in this special case, that the product itself is some constant, and we have complete information as to the nature of the solution, except for the numerical value of the constant. This was the nature of the solution which we found for the pendulum problem. If it had not been for the dimensional analysis, any conceivable relation between the four arguments might have been possible, and we should have had absolutely no information about the solution. Similarly, if there are two more variables than fundamental kind of quantity, there will be two dimensionless products. The solution is an arbitrary function of these two products put equal to zero, which may be solved for one of the products as a function of the other. This was the case with the heat transfer problem already treated. It certainly gives more information to know that the solution is of this form than merely to know that there is some function of the five variables which vanishes, which was all that we could say before we applied our analysis.

It is to our advantage, evidently, that the number of arguments which are to be connected by the functional relation should be as small as possible. Now the variables which enter the functional relation to which our analysis has been applied comprise all the variables which can change in numerical magnitude under the conditions of the problem. These variables are of two kinds. First are the
