+ physical variables, which are the measures of certain physical quantities, and which may change in magnitude over the domain to which our result is to apply. The numbers measuring these physical quantities may also change when the size of the fundamental units changes. In the second place, there may be other arguments of the nature of coefficients in the equation which do not change in numerical magnitude when the physical system alone changes, but which change in magnitude when the size of the fundamental measuring units changes. It is these which we have called dimensional constants. Now in any actual case we are interested only in the physical problem, and are interested in finding a relation between the physically variable quantities. The dimensional constants are to be regarded as an evil, to be tolerated only if they make possible more information about the physical variables.

We thus see that the \(\Pi\) theorem applies to the aggregate of physical variables and dimensional constants, whereas we are interested primarily in the physical variables alone. If the number of dimensional constants is so great that the number of arguments of the arbitrary function allowed by the \(\Pi\) theorem is equal to or greater than the number of physical variables alone, then we are no better off after applying our \(\Pi\) theorem than before. Now we have already seen that in the worst possible case the number of dimensional constants cannot exceed the number of physical variables, for any empirical equation can be made complete by the introduction of a dimensional constant with each physical variable. Furthermore, it is almost always true that the number of physical variables is equal to or greater than the number of fundamental units. Hence, if the number of dimensional constants is equal the number of physical variables, the number of dimensionless products is greater than or at most equal to the number of physical variables. In the general case, therefore, the \(\Pi\) theorem gives no new information. Hence it is of the utmost importance to keep down to the minimum the number of dimensional constants used in the equation.

When, therefore, shall we expect dimensional constants, and in any particular problem how shall we find what they are, and what are their dimensional formulas? The answer to this question is closely related to the answer to the question of how we shall choose the list of physical quantities between which we are to search for a relation. We have seen that it does not do to merely ask ourselves "Does the result depend on this or that physical quantity?" for we
