+ have seen in one problem that although the result certainly does "depend" on the action of the atomic forces, yet we do not have to consider the atomic forces in our analysis, and they do not enter the functional relation.

To answer the question of what variables to include demands a background of a great deal of physical experience. If we are to treat a certain problem by the methods of mechanics we must have enough background to be assured that the problem is a problem in mechanics, and involves essentially no elements that are not treatable by the ordinary equations of mechanics. We must know that certain aspects of the problem can be neglected, and that certain others alone are essential as far as certain features of behavior go. No one would say that in any problem of mechanics the atomic forces are not essential, but our experience shows that they combine into certain complexes, which may be sufficiently characterized by an analysis which does not go down to the ultimate component parts, and that the results of our analysis, which disregards many even essential aspects of the situation, have validity under certain conditions whose restrictions are not irksome. The experience involved in judgments of this sort reaches so far back that we know almost by instinct whether a problem is suitable for mechanical treatment or not. And if the problem is capable of mechanical treatment, we know, by the very definition of what we mean by a mechanical system, what the equations are which the motion of the component parts of the system conform to, and what the form of the equations is. In the same way, we know by instinct whether a system is a thermodynamic system, or an electrical system, or a chemical system, and in each case, because we know what we mean when we say that a phenomenon is of such or such a nature, we know what are the laws which govern the variations of the system, and the elements which must be considered in formulating the relations between the parts. But a very wide background of experience, extending over many generations, was necessary before we could say that this particular group of phenomena is mechanical or electrical, or, in general, that the phenomenon is physical.

Now my point of view is essentially that precisely the same experience which is demanded to enable us to say whether a system is mechanical or electrical is the experience which is demanded in order to enable us to make a dimensional analysis. This experience will in the first place inform us what physical variables to include
