+ in our list, and will in the second place tell us what dimensional constants are demanded in any particular problem.

Let us for the present forget what we know of dimensional analysis and imagine ourselves approaching a new problem. In the first place we decide in the light of the experience of all the ages what the nature of the problem is. Suppose that we decide that it is mechanical. Then we know that the motion of the system is governed by the laws of mechanics, and we know what these laws are. We write down certain equations of motion of the system. We are careful to include all the equations of motion, so that the system of equations by which we have described the relations between the parts of the system has a unique solution. Then we are convinced, because of our past experience, that we have essentially represented all the elements of the situation, that our equations correspond to the reality at least as far as certain aspects of the phenomenon go, and the solution of the equations will correctly represent the behavior of the system which we have thus analyzed. We are not disappointed. The fact that our predictions turn out to be verified means merely that we have become masters of a certain group of natural phenomena.

Now the astute observer (Fourier\(^{1}\) was the first astute observer) notices that the equations by which the relation of the component parts of the system is analyzed are expressed in such a general form that they remain true when the size of the fundamental units is changed. For instance, the equation stating that the force acting on a particular part of our mechanical system is equal to the mass of that part times its acceleration remains true however the size of the fundamental units is changed, because in every system of units which we use for mechanical purposes, the unit of force is defined so that force has this relation to mass and acceleration. Every one of the fundamental equations of motion is in the same way a complete equation. The final solution is obtained from the equations of motion by a purely mathematical process, which has no relation to the size of the fundamental units. It follows, therefore, in general, that the final result will also be complete, in the sense that the equation expressing the final result is a complete equation.

Dimensional analysis may, therefore, be applied to the results which we obtain by solving the equations of motion. (We use equations of motion in a general sense, applying to thermodynamic and electrical as well as mechanical systems.) Now the arguments of the function which we finally obtain by solving the equations of motion
