+ can obviously be only those quantities which we put into the original equations of motion, for the mathematical operations can introduce no new arguments.

*In particular, the dimensional constants which enter the final relation are those, and those only, which we had to use in writing down the equations of motion. This is the entire essence of the question of dimensional constants.*

With regard to the dimensional formulas of dimensional constants, we may merely appeal to experience with the observation that all such constants are of the form of products of powers of the fundamental quantities. But it is evident on reflection, that any law of nature can be expressed in a form in which the dimensional formulas of the constants are of this type, by the device, already adopted, of introducing dimensional constants as factors with the measured quantities in such a way as to make the equation complete. We will hereafter assume that the equations of motion (which are merely expressions of the laws of nature governing phenomena) are thrown into such a form that the dimensional constants are of this type; this is seen to involve no real restriction.

It appears, therefore, that *dimensional analysis is essentially of the nature of an analysis of an analysis.* We must know enough about the situation to know what the general nature of the problem is, and what the elements are which would be introduced in writing down the equations determining the motion (in the general sense) of the system. Then, knowing the nature of the elements, we can obtain certain information about the necessary properties of any relations which can be deduced by mathematical manipulations with the elements. In so far as our knowledge of the underlying laws of nature is adequate we may have confidence in the result, but the result can have no validity not pertaining to the equations of motion, and is in no way different from all our other knowledge. The result is approximate, as the laws of motion are approximate, a restriction which is imposed by the very nature of knowledge itself.

The man applying dimensional analysis is not to ask himself "On what quantities does the result depend?" for this question gets nowhere, and is not pertinent. Instead we are to imagine ourselves as writing out the equations of motion at least in sufficient detail to be able to enumerate the elements which enter them. It is not necessary to actually write down the equations, still less to solve them.
