+ Dimensional analysis then gives certain information about the necessary character of the results. It is here of course that the advantage of the method lies, for the results are applicable to systems so complicated that it would not be possible to write the equations of motion in detail.

It is to be especially noticed that the results of dimensional analysis cannot be applied to any system whose fundamental laws have not yet been formulated in a form independent of the size of the fundamental units. For instance, dimensional analysis would certainly not apply to most of the results of biological measurements, although such results may perfectly well have entire physical validity as descriptions of the phenomena. It would seem that at present biological phenomena can be described in complete equations only with the aid of as many dimensional constants as there are physical variables. In this case, we have seen, dimensional analysis has no information to give. In a certain sense, the mastery of a certain group of natural phenomena and their formulation into laws may be said to be coextensive with the discovery of a restricted group of dimensional constants adequate to coördinate all the phenomena.

Let us apply this view of the nature of dimensional constants to the problem which we have already considered of the electromagnetic mass of a spherical distribution of electricity. This is evidently a problem in electrodynamics, and must be solved by the use of the field equations. These field equations consist of certain mathematical operators operating on certain combinations of the electric and magnetic forces and the velocity of light. In this particular problem we want to solve the equations in such a form as to get the electromagnetic mass; this is the integral throughout space of a constant times the energy density, which in turn is given by the distribution of the forces, which are determined by the distribution of the charge. Hence if there is a relation of the form which we suspect, the forces will eliminate from the final result. There is, however, no reason to think that the characteristic constant "\(c\)" of the equations will also eliminate from the result, and we must therefore seek for a relation between the total charge, the mass, the radius, and the constant of the field equations, which is the velocity of light. This relation we have already found, and checked against the results of a detailed solution of the field equations applied to this particular problem.
