We have seen that dimensional constants are going to enter the final result only in so far as they enter the equations of motion. Now a dimensional constant in an equation of motion is an expression of a physical relation which is so universal as to be characteristic of all the phenomena embraced in the particular group which we are considering. Such a universal physical relation may be treated in two ways. We may leave the dimensional constant in the equations as an explicit statement of the relation, as is done in the field equations of electrodynamics, or we may define our fundamental units with this relation in view, thus obtaining a system of units in which the dimensional constant has disappeared but in which the number of units which may be regarded as fundamental has been restricted in such a way that all units belonging to the system automatically bear the experimental relation to each other. The system of units so obtained is of value only in treating that group of phenomena to which the law in question applies. Thus it is a result of experience that the mass times the acceleration of a body is proportional to the force acting upon it. In this statement of the experimental facts there is no restriction whatever upon the units of mass, or length, or time, or force. The factor of proportionality will change in numerical magnitude whenever any one of the four fundamental units is changed in size. But now, instead of being bothered by a continually changing factor of proportionality, we may arbitrarily say that this factor shall be unity in all systems which we will consider, and we will bring this result about by defining the unit of force in our new system to be such that the force acting on a body is equal to the mass times the acceleration. We have in this way obtained a system of units adapted to dealing with all those physical systems in which the laws of motion involve a statement of the physical relation between force, mass, and acceleration, but if the physical system should be such that this relation is not involved in the motion of the system, then we would be unduly restricting ourselves by using the mechanical system of units.

These considerations as to the possible systems of units answer the question previously raised, as in the fourth problem of the introduction, for example, as to the number of kinds of units which we shall take as fundamental. The answer depends entirely upon the particular problem, and will involve the physical relations which are necessary to a complete expression of the motion of the parts. In any ordinary problem of dynamics, for example, the relation
