CHAPTER VI

EXAMPLES ILLUSTRATIVE OF DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS

^^Let^^ us in the first place recapitulate the results of the preceding chapter. Before undertaking a dimensional analysis we are to imagine ourselves as making an analysis to the extent of deciding the nature of the problem, and enumerating the physical variables which would enter the equations of motion (in the general sense) and also the dimensional coefficients required in writing down the equations of motion. The dimensions of all these variables are then to be written in terms of the fundamental units. These fundamental units are to be chosen for each particular problem in such a way that their number is as large as possible without involving the introduction of compensating dimensional constants into the equations of motion. The dimensionless products of the variables are then to be formed in accordance with the \(\Pi\) theorem, choosing the products in such a way from the great variety possible that the variables in which we are particularly interested may stand conspicuously by themselves. Having formed the products, the \(\Pi\) theorem gives immediately the functional relation.

In the following illustrative examples we have particularly to consider the proper number of fundamental units, and the most convenient way of choosing the dimensionless products. The matter of dimensional constants we regard as clear.

As the first example we will take the first treated by Lord Rayleigh in *Nature*.\(^1\) Consider a wave advancing on deep water under the action of gravity. This is evidently a problem in hydrodynamics, which is merely mechanics applied to liquids. The equations of mechanics will therefore apply. Now the liquid when displaced from equilibrium is restored by the force of gravity. This will involve the density of the liquid and the intensity of gravity. Evidently these quantities will enter the equations of motion. No other properties of the liquid, such as the compressibility, will enter, because we know from a discussion of the equations of hydrodynamics that such
