The velocity of a gravity wave on deep water (the reason the depth did not enter the final result was because we postulated that the water was to be deep) is therefore proportional to the square root of the wave length and the intensity of gravity, or is proportional to the velocity acquired by a body falling freely under gravity through a distance equal to the wave length.

It is to be noticed that the density of the liquid has disappeared from the final result. This might have been anticipated; if the density is doubled the gravitational force is also doubled on every element, and the accelerations and therefore all the velocities are unaltered, because the doubled force is compensated by a doubled mass of every element.

Since the density disappears from the final result we have here a dimensionless product of \(v\), \(l\), and \(g\) only. This is, therefore, a dimensionless product of three variables, expressed in three fundamental units. This is in general not possible, but demands some special relation between the dimensional formulas of the variables. We can see in a moment by writing out the product in terms of unknown exponents, and then writing the algebraic equations which the exponents must satisfy, that the condition that a dimensionless product exist in a number of terms just equal to the number of fundamental units is that the determinant of the exponents in the dimensional formulas of the factors vanish. This is obviously not restricted to the case of three fundamental units, but applies to any number. Conversely the condition that a particular element shall enter as a factor into a dimensionless product with a number of other factors equal in number to the fundamental units, is that the determinant of the exponents of the other factors shall not be zero; otherwise the other factors by themselves form a dimensionless product into which the factor in which we are interested does not enter.

Consider now a second problem. An elastic pendulum is made by attaching to a weightless spring of elastic constant \(k\) a box of volume \(V\) which is filled with a liquid of density \(d\). The mass of the liquid in the box is acted upon by gravity, and we are required to find an expression for the time of oscillation. As before we make a list of the quantities and their dimensions.
