This solution is like the one obtained previously except for the presence of the gas constant, but since the gas constant in the new system of units is unity, the two solutions are identical, as they should be.

This procedure can obviously be followed in any problem whose solution involves the gas constant. Temperature may be either chosen as an independent unit, in which case the gas constant appears explicitly as a variable, or temperature may be so defined that the gas constant is always unity, and temperature has the dimensions of energy. The same procedure is not incorrect in problems not involving the gas constant in the solution. But if in this class of problem temperature is defined as equal to the kinetic energy of an atom (or more generally equal to the energy of a degree of freedom) and the gas constant is made equal to unity, the fundamental units are restricted with no compensating advantage, so that although the results are correct as far as temperature is proportional to the energy of a degree of freedom, they will not give so much information as might have been obtained by leaving the units less restricted.

It is obvious that these remarks apply immediately to the heat transfer problem of Rayleigh treated in the introductory chapter.

Many persons feel an intuitive uncertainty with regard to the dimensions to be assigned to temperature. This is perhaps because of the feeling that a dimensional formula is a statement of the physical nature of the quantity as contained in the definition. Now the absolute temperature, as we have used it above, is the thermodynamic absolute temperature, defined with relation to the second law of thermodynamics. It is difficult to see how such a complex of physical operations as is involved in the use of the second law (such as Kelvin first gave in his definition of absolute temperature) can be reproduced in a simple dimensional formula. It is, however, evident that measurements of energy, for example, are involved in an application of the second law, so that perhaps in some way the ordinary mechanical units ought to be involved in the dimensional formula. But we have seen that the dimensional formula is concerned only with an exceedingly restricted aspect of the way in which the various physical operations enter the definition, namely with the way in which the numerical measure of a quantity changes when the fundamental units change in magnitude. Now a little reflection shows that any such procedure as that of Lord Kelvin
