+ applied to the definition of absolute temperature through the use of the second law imposes on the number measuring a given concrete temperature no restriction whatever in terms of the units in which heat or energy, for example, are measured. The size of a degree of thermodynamic temperature may be fixed entirely arbitrarily so that there are any number of degrees between the freezing and the boiling points of water, for example, absolutely without reference to the size of any other unit. We are concerned in the dimensional formula with the definition in terms of the second law only in so far as this definition satisfies the principle of the absolute significance of relative magnitude, that is, the principle that the ratio of the measures of two concrete examples shall be independent of the size of the units. Now it is evident that the thermodynamic definition of absolute temperature does leave the ratio of any two concrete temperatures independent of the size of the units. The dimensional formula of temperature, therefore, need contain no other element, and temperature may be treated as having its own dimensions.

There is no necessity in using the absolute thermodynamic temperature. We might, for instance, define the number of degrees in a given temperature interval as the number of units of length which the kerosene in a certain capillary projecting from a certain bottle of kerosene moves when the bottle is brought from one temperature to another. The temperature so defined evidently satisfies the principle of the absolute significance of relative magnitude, for if the size of the unit of length measured along the capillary is cut in half, the number of degrees in every temperature interval is doubled. The advantage of the thermodynamic scale is one of simplicity; in the kerosene scale the behavior of a perfect gas could not be characterized in terms of a single constant, and the Fourier equations of heat conduction could not be written, except over a very narrow range, in terms of a single coefficient of thermal conductivity.

Besides the question of the dimensions of temperature, there is one other question connected with the application of dimensional analysis to problems in thermodynamics which is apt to be puzzling; this is the matter of the so-called logarithmic constants. In books on thermodynamics equations are very common which on first sight do not appear to be complete equations or to be dimensionally homogeneous. These equations often involve constants which cannot change in numerical magnitude by some *factor* when the size of the
