CHAPTER VII

APPLICATIONS OF DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS TO MODEL EXPERIMENTS. OTHER ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS

^^Hitherto^^ we have applied dimensional analysis to problems which could be solved in other ways, and therefore have been able to check our results. There are, however, in engineering practise a large number of problems so complicated that the exact solution is not obtainable. Under these conditions dimensional analysis enables us to obtain certain information about the form of the result which could be obtained in practise only by experiments with an impossibly wide variation of the arguments of the unknown function. In order to apply dimensional analysis we merely have to know what kind of a physical system it is that we are dealing with, and what the variables are which enter the equation; we do not even have to write the equations down explicitly, much less solve them. In many cases of this sort, the partial information given by dimensional analysis may be combined with measurements on only a part of the totality of physical systems covered by the analysis, so that together all the information needed is obtained with much less trouble and expense than would otherwise be possible. This method is coming to be of more and more importance in technical studies, and has recently received a considerable impetus from the necessities of airplane design. The method has received wide use at the National Physical Laboratory in England, and at the Bureau of Standards in this country, and has been described in numerous papers. At the Bureau of Standards Dr. Edgar Buckingham has been largely instrumental in putting the results of dimensional analysis into such a form that they may be easily applied, and in making a number of important applications.

The nature of the results obtainable by this method may be illustrated by a very simple example. Suppose that it is desired to construct a very large and expensive pendulum of accurately predetermined time of swing. Dimensional analysis shows that the time
