CHAPTER VIII

APPLICATIONS TO THEORETICAL PHYSICS

^^The^^ methods of dimensional analysis are worthy of playing a much more important part as a tool in theoretical investigation than has hitherto been realized. No investigator should allow himself to proceed to the detailed solution of a problem until he has made a dimensional analysis of the nature of the solution which will be obtained, and convinced himself by appeal to experiment that the points of view embodied in the underlying equations are sound.

Probably one difficulty that has been particularly troublesome in theoretical applications has been the matter of dimensional constants; it is in just such theoretical investigations that dimensional constants are most likely to appear, and with no clear conception of the nature of a dimensional constant or when to expect its appearance, hesitancy is natural in applying the method. But after the discussion of the preceding pages, the matter of dimensional constants should now be readily handled in any special problem.

The indeterminateness of the numerical factors of proportionality is often also felt to be a disadvantage of the dimensional method, but in many theoretical investigations it is often possible to obtain approximate information about the numerical order of magnitude of the results. Our considerations with regard to dimensional analysis show that any numerical coefficients in the final result are the result of mathematical operations performed on the original equations of motion (in the general sense) of the system. Now it is a result of general observation that such mathematical operations usually do not introduce any very large numerical factors, or any very small ones. Any very large or small numbers in our equations almost always are the result of the substitution of the numerical value of some physical quantity, such as the number of atoms in a cubic centimeter, or the electrostatic charge on the electron, or the velocity of light. Accordingly, if the analysis is carried through with all the physical quantities kept in literal form, we may expect that the numerical coefficients will not be large or small.

This observation may be used conversely. Suppose that we suspect
