+ Jeans.\(^3\) The paper of Jeans is also interesting because he uses a system of electrical units in which the dielectric constant of empty space is introduced explicitly. It is easy to see on a little examination that he would have obtained the same result with a system of units in which the dielectric constant of empty space is defined as unity.

Let us now consider a cavity with walls which have absolutely no specific properties of their own, but are perfect reflectors of any incident radiation. Inside the cavity is a rarefied gas composed of electrons. If the gas is rarefied enough we know from such considerations as those given by Richardson in considering thermionic emission that the electrons function like a perfect gas, the effect of the space distribution of electrostatic charge being negligible in comparison with the forces due to collisions as gas particles. The electron gas in the cavity is to be maintained at a temperature \(\theta\). The electrons are acted on by two sets of forces; the collisional forces with the other electrons, which are of the nature of the forces between atoms in ordinary kinetic theory, and the radiational field in the ether. Since the electrons are continually being accelerated, they are continually radiating, and they are also continually absorbing energy from the radiational field of the ether. The system must eventually come to equilibrium with a certain energy density in the ether, the electrons possessing at the same time the kinetic energy appropriate to gas atoms at the temperature of the enclosure. The detailed solution of the problem obviously involves a most complicated piece of statistical analysis, but a dimensional analysis gives much information about the form of the result.

In solving this problem we shall have to use the field equations of electrodynamics, so that the velocity of light will be a dimensional constant in the result. The charge and the mass of the electron must be considered, the absolute temperature, and the gas constant, because this determines the kinetic energy of motion of the electrons as a function of temperature. The number of electrons per \(\text{cm}^3\) does not enter, because we know from kinetic theory that the mean velocity of the electrons is independent of their number. The second law of thermodynamics also shows that the energy density in the enclosure is a function of the temperature, and not of the density of the electron gas.

Our formulation of the problem is now as follows:
