+ physics we consider the determination of the so-called absolute systems of units.

The units in ordinary use are ones whose absolute size is fixed in various arbitrary ways, although the relations between the different sorts of units may have a logical ring. Thus the unit of length, the centimeter, was originally defined as bearing a certain relation to a quadrant of the earth's circumference, and the unit of mass is the mass of a quantity of water occupying the unit volume. There is something entirely arbitrary in selecting the earth and water as the particular substances which are to fix the size of the units.

We have also met in the course of our many examples dimensional constants. These constants usually are the expression of some proportionality factor which enters into the expression of a law of nature empirically discovered. Such dimensional constants are the constant of gravitation, the velocity of light, the quantum, the constant of Stefan's law, etc. Now the numerical magnitude of the dimensional constants depends on the size of the fundamental units in a way fixed by the dimensional formulas. By varying the size of the fundamental units, we may vary in any way that we please the numerical magnitude of the dimensional constant. In particular, by assigning the proper magnitudes to the fundamental units we might make the numerical magnitudes of certain dimensional constants equal to unity. Now the dimensional constants are usually the expression of some *universal* law of nature. If the fundamental units are so chosen in size that the dimensional constants have the value unity, then we have determined the size of the units by reference to universal phenomena instead of by reference to such restricted phenomena as the density of water at atmospheric pressure at some fixed temperature, for instance, and the units to that extent are more significant.

There is no reason why one should be restricted to dimensional constants of universal occurrence in fixing the size of the units, but any phenomenon of universal occurrence may be used. Thus the units may be so chosen that the charge on the electron is unity.

Any system of units fixed in this way by reference to phenomena or relationships of universal occurrence and significance may be called an absolute system of units. The first system of absolute units was given by Planck\(^6\) in his book on heat radiation. He connected the particular system which he gave with the quantum, and it might appear from Planck's treatment that before the discovery of the
