+ that the new degree must be equal to \(2.37 \times 10^{32}\) ordinary Centigrade degrees.

In the wildest speculations of the astrophysicists no such temperature has ever been suggested, yet would Professor Eddington maintain that this temperature must be the key to some fundamental cosmic phenomenon?

It must now be evident that it is possible to get up systems of absolute units in a great number of ways, depending on the universal constants or phenomena whose numerical values it is desired to simplify. With any particular selection of constants, the method in general is the same as that in the particular case above. In general there will be four fundamental kinds of unit, if we want to restrict ourselves to the electrostatic system of measuring electrical charges, and define the magnitude of the charge in such a way that the force between two charges is equal to their product divided by the square of the distance between them, or if we do not restrict ourselves to the electrostatic system, there may be five fundamental kinds of quantity. There seems to be nothing essential in the number five, which merely arises because we usually find it convenient to use the mechanical system of units in which the constant of proportionality between force and the product of mass and acceleration is always kept fixed at unity. The convenience of this system is perhaps more obvious in the case of mechanical phenomena, because of the universality of their occurrence. But if temperature effects were as universal and as familiar to us, we would also insist that we always deal only with that system of units in which the gas constant has the fixed value unity.

Having, therefore, fixed the number of fundamental units which we deem convenient, and having chosen the numerical constants whose values we wish to simplify, we proceed as above. It is evident that it will in general be necessary to assign as many constants as there are fundamental units, for otherwise there will not be enough equations to give the unknowns. Thus above, we fixed four constants, gravitational, velocity of light, quantum, and gas constant, and we had four fundamental kinds of units. Now it is important to notice that four algebraic equations in four unknowns do not always have a solution, but the coefficients must satisfy a certain condition. This condition is, when applied to the dimensional formulas into which the unknowns enter, that the determinant of the exponents must not vanish. In general, a four-rowed determinant
