Canto Three

	That sun which first warmed my breast with love
	had uncovered for me, by proof and disproof,
	the sweet face of beautiful truth;

	and I, to confess myself corrected
	and certain, lifted my head to speak
	as far up as was fitting;

	but a vision appeared which held me
	so tightly to itself, to be looked at,
	that I forgot what I had meant to confess.

	As, through clear polished glass,
	or through clean still water
	not so deep that the bottom is lost,

	the outlines of our faces come back
	so faint that a pearl on a white forehead
	does not come less strongly to our eyes,

	so I saw a number of faces ready to speak;
	so that I fell into the opposite mistake
	to Narcissus, who loved his reflection in the spring.

	As soon as I noticed them,
	taking them for reflected likenesses,
	I turned my eyes to see whose they were;

	and I saw nothing, and turned them forward again
	straight into the light of my sweet guide,
	who was burning, smiling, in her holy eyes.

	"Do not wonder that I smile,"
	she said to me, "at your childish thought,
	since your foot does not yet trust itself on the truth,

	but turns you, as usual, back towards nothing.
	These are real beings that you see,
	set here because they fell short of a vow.

	So speak with them and listen and believe;
	for the true light that satisfies them
	does not let them turn their feet away from itself."

	And I turned to the shade who seemed keenest
	to talk, and began,
	like a man whom too much wanting bewilders:

	"Oh well-created spirit, who in the rays
	of eternal life feel the sweetness
	which, untasted, is never understood,

	it would be a grace to me if you would content me
	with your name and with what has become of you."
	At which she, ready, and with laughing eyes:

	"Our charity does not shut its doors
	on a just wish, any more than that charity does
	which wants its whole court to be like itself.

	I was in the world a virgin sister;
	and if your mind looks well at itself,
	my being more beautiful will not hide me from you,

	but you will know again that I am Piccarda,
	who, set here with these other blessed ones,
	am blessed in the slowest sphere, the moon's.

	Our affections, which are kindled only
	in the pleasure of the Holy Spirit,
	are glad to be formed by his order.

	And this lot, which seems so far down,
	is given us because our vows were neglected
	and left empty in some corner."

	At which I to her: "In your marvellous faces
	something divine shines which I cannot name,
	and which changes you from what you first were,

	so I was not quick to remember;
	but now what you say helps me,
	so that making you out again is easier.

	But tell me: you who are happy here,
	do you long for a higher place,
	to see more and to make yourselves dearer?"

	With the other shades she first smiled a little;
	then she answered me so gladly
	that she seemed to burn in the first fire of love:

	"Brother, the power of charity quiets our will
	and makes us want only
	what we have, and thirst for nothing else.

	If we longed to be higher up,
	our longings would be out of tune
	with the will of him who assigns us here,

	and you will see that has no place in these circles,
	if being in love is a necessity here
	and if you look well at what love is.

	No: it is the very shape of this blessed life
	to keep ourselves inside the will of God,
	so that all our wills are made one will;

	so that, as we are set from threshold to threshold
	through this kingdom, it pleases the whole kingdom
	as it pleases the king, who draws us into his will.

	And in his will is our peace:
	it is that sea to which everything moves
	that it creates and that nature makes."

	It was clear to me then how everywhere
	in heaven is paradise, even if the grace
	of the highest good does not rain there in one way.

	But as it happens, if one food fills us
	and the appetite for another is still there,
	that we ask for that one and give thanks for this,

	so I did, with my gesture and with my words,
	to learn from her what the web was
	she had begun to weave and never finished.

	"A perfect life and great merit set a lady
	higher in heaven," she said, "Saint Clare, by whose rule
	women take the habit and the veil down in your world,

	so that till death they may wake and sleep
	beside that bridegroom who accepts every vow
	which charity shapes to his own pleasure.

	To follow her I ran from the world
	while I was still a girl, and shut myself in her habit
	and promised to keep to the way of her order.

	Then men used more to evil than to good
	tore me away from the sweet cloister:
	God knows what my life was after that.

	And this other splendour that shows itself to you
	on my right, and that kindles
	with all the light of our sphere,

	understands about herself what I say about myself.
	She was a sister, and in the same way
	the shadow of the holy veil was taken off her head.

	But when she too was turned back to the world
	against her will and against good custom,
	she was never loosed from the veil of the heart.

	This is the light of the great Constance,
	who by the second of the storm-winds out of Swabia
	gave birth to the third of those emperors, and the last."

	So she spoke to me, and then began to sing
	"Ave, Maria," and singing vanished
	as something heavy does through deep water.

	My sight, which followed her as far
	as it could, when it had lost her
	turned back to the mark of its greater longing,

	and gave itself wholly to Beatrice;
	but she flashed so in my gaze
	that at first my eyes could not bear it;

	and that made me slower in asking.
