Canto Eleven

	Oh senseless care of mortals,
	how faulty are the syllogisms
	that make you beat your wings downward!

	One was going after law and another after aphorisms,
	one following the priesthood,
	and one to reign by force or by sophistries,

	one to rob and one to public business,
	one wearing himself out wrapped in the pleasure
	of the flesh, and one giving himself to idleness,

	while I, loosed from all these things,
	was up in heaven with Beatrice,
	welcomed so gloriously.

	When each of them had gone back to the point
	of the circle where he had been before,
	he stopped, like a candle in a candlestick.

	And I heard, inside that light
	which had spoken to me first, a beginning,
	smiling, and growing purer as it spoke:

	"As I shine again with his ray,
	so, looking into the eternal light,
	I learn the reasons your thoughts come from.

	You are in doubt, and you want my speech
	sorted out again in language so open and so plain
	that it lies flat to your understanding,

	where I said before, 'where they fatten well',
	and where I said, 'no second ever rose';
	and here one must distinguish carefully.

	The providence that governs the world
	with that counsel in which every created sight
	is beaten before it can reach the bottom,

	so that the bride of him who with loud cries
	married her with his blessed blood
	should go towards her beloved

	sure in herself and also more faithful to him,
	ordained two princes in her favour,
	to be a guide to her on this side and on that.

	The one was all seraphic in his burning;
	the other was on earth, for his wisdom,
	a splendour of cherubic light.

	I shall speak of the one, because in praising
	either of them one speaks of both,
	whichever a man takes, for their works were to one end.

	Between the Tupino and the water that comes down
	from the hill chosen by the blessed Ubaldo,
	a fertile slope hangs from a high mountain,

	from which Perugia feels cold and heat
	through the Porta Sole; and behind it Nocera
	and Gualdo weep under a heavy yoke.

	On this slope, where it breaks
	most of its steepness, a sun was born to the world,
	as this one is sometimes born from the Ganges.

	So whoever speaks of that place
	should not say Ascesi, which would fall short,
	but the East, if he wants to name it properly.

	He was not yet far from his rising
	when he began to make the earth feel
	some comfort from his great power;

	for while still a young man he ran into war
	with his father for the sake of such a lady,
	to whom, as to death, nobody unlocks the door of pleasure;

	and before his spiritual court,
	and in his father's presence, he was joined to her;
	then from day to day he loved her more strongly.

	She, robbed of her first husband,
	stood despised and dark for eleven hundred years
	and more, uninvited, until he came;

	nor did it help her that men heard how the one
	who terrified the whole world found her unafraid
	with Amyclas at the sound of his own voice;

	nor did it help to have been constant and fierce,
	so that, while Mary stayed below,
	she wept with Christ upon the cross.

	But so that I do not go on too darkly,
	take Francis and Poverty now
	for these two lovers in my spread-out speech.

	Their harmony and their glad faces,
	the love and the wonder and the sweet looking,
	made men's thoughts turn holy;

	so much that the venerable Bernard
	first took off his shoes, and ran after such peace,
	and running, thought himself slow.

	Oh unknown riches! oh fruitful good!
	Giles takes off his shoes, Sylvester takes off his shoes,
	after the bridegroom, the bride pleases them so.

	Then that father and that master goes off
	with his lady and with the household
	which was already tying on the humble cord.

	And no baseness of heart weighed his eyes down
	for being the son of Pietro Bernardone,
	nor for looking astonishingly despicable;

	but royally he opened his hard purpose
	to Innocent, and had from him
	the first seal on his order.

	When the poor people had grown
	behind this man, whose marvellous life
	would be better sung in the glory of heaven,

	the holy will of this chief shepherd
	was crowned a second time by the Eternal Breath
	through Honorius.

	And then, out of thirst for martyrdom,
	when he had preached Christ and those who followed him
	in the proud presence of the Sultan,

	and finding the people too unripe
	for conversion, and so as not to stay for nothing,
	he came back to the fruit of the Italian meadow;

	on the harsh rock between the Tiber and the Arno
	he took from Christ the last seal,
	which his limbs carried for two years.

	When it pleased the one who allotted him
	so much good to draw him up to the reward
	he had earned by making himself small,

	he commended his dearest lady to his brothers,
	as to his rightful heirs,
	and ordered them to love her faithfully;

	and out of her lap his glorious soul
	chose to set off, going back to its own kingdom,
	and it wanted no other bier for its body.

	Think now what sort of man he was who was
	a worthy colleague in keeping Peter's boat
	on a straight course in the high sea;

	and this was our patriarch;
	so that you can see that whoever follows him
	as he commands is loading good merchandise.

	But his flock has grown greedy for new food,
	so that they cannot help
	scattering over different pastures;

	and the further his sheep go from him,
	wandering and remote,
	the emptier of milk they come back to the fold.

	There are certainly some of them who fear the loss
	and keep close to the shepherd; but they are so few
	that little cloth would make their cloaks.

	Now, if my words have not been faint,
	if your hearing has been attentive,
	if you call back to mind what has been said,

	your wish will be partly satisfied,
	because you will see the plant that is being chipped away,
	and you will see the correction the words mean:

	'where they fatten well, if they do not stray'."
