Canto Fifteen

	A kindly will, into which a love that breathes
	rightly always dissolves,
	as greed dissolves into a crooked one,

	put silence on that sweet lyre,
	and quieted the holy strings
	that the right hand of heaven slackens and draws.

	How could those spirits be deaf
	to just prayers, when they agreed to fall silent
	on purpose to give me the wish to pray to them?

	It is right that a man should grieve without end
	who, for love of a thing that does not last
	eternally, strips himself of that love.

	As, through the calm and clear evening sky,
	a sudden fire runs now and then,
	moving eyes that had been steady,

	and seems a star changing its place,
	except that from the quarter where it is kindled
	nothing is lost, and it lasts only a moment:

	so, from the arm that stretches to the right,
	a star ran to the foot of that cross
	out of the constellation shining there;

	and the gem did not leave its ribbon,
	but ran along the radial band,
	so that it looked like fire behind alabaster.

	Just so lovingly did the shade of Anchises come forward,
	if Virgil, our greatest poet, deserves belief,
	when in Elysium he made out his son Aeneas.

	"O sanguis meus, o superinfusa
	gratïa Deï, sicut tibi cui
	bis unquam celi ianüa reclusa?" (O my blood, o grace of God poured out from above; to whom, as to you, was heaven's gate ever opened twice?)

	So that light spoke, in Latin; and I attended to him;
	then I turned my face back to my lady,
	and I was astonished on the one side and on the other,

	for such a laughter was burning inside her eyes
	that I thought I had touched with mine the bottom
	of my glory and of my paradise.

	Then the spirit, a joy to hear and to see,
	added to his beginning things
	I did not understand, so deeply did he speak;

	nor did he hide himself from me by choice,
	but by necessity, because his thought
	went up above the reach of mortals.

	And when the bow of his burning affection
	had been so unbent that his speech came down
	towards the mark of our understanding,

	the first thing I understood was this:
	"Blessed be you, Three and One,
	who are so courteous to my descendant!"

	And he went on: "A long and welcome hunger,
	which I got from reading in the great book
	of God's foreknowledge, where no page is ever altered,

	you have satisfied for me, my son, inside this light
	in which I speak to you, by the favour of the lady
	who gave you wings for the high flight.

	You believe that your thought flows to me
	from God, who is first, just as five and six
	follow from one, once one is known;

	and so you do not ask me who I am
	nor why I seem to you more full of gladness
	than any other in this joyful crowd.

	You believe the truth; for the small and the great
	of this life gaze into that mirror
	in which your thought is spread out before you have thought it;

	but so that the holy love in which I keep watch
	with everlasting sight, and which makes me thirsty
	with sweet longing, may be filled up better,

	let your voice, sure and bold and glad,
	sound out the will, sound out the desire,
	to which my answer is already decreed."

	I turned to Beatrice, and she heard me
	before I spoke, and smiled a sign at me
	that made my wanting grow wings.

	Then I began like this: "Love and understanding,
	as soon as God, in whom all is equal, appeared to you,
	became of one weight in each of you,

	because the sun which lit you and burned you
	is so equal in its heat and in its light
	that all comparisons fall short.

	But in mortals the will and the means to carry it out,
	for a reason that is plain to you,
	have wings of unequal length;

	so that I, who am mortal, feel that unevenness
	in myself, and so I can give thanks for this fatherly
	welcome with my heart alone, and not with words.

	I do beg you, living topaz
	who set this precious jewel with your gem,
	to satisfy me with your name."

	"O my branch, in whom I took pleasure
	even while I was only waiting for you, I was your root":
	that was how he began his answer.

	Then he said to me: "The man your family
	takes its name from, who for a hundred years and more
	has gone round the first terrace of the mountain of Purgatory, among the proud,

	was my son and your great-grandfather:
	it is only right that you should shorten his long
	labour with the works you do.

	Florence, inside the old circle of walls
	from which she still hears the bells for terce and nones,
	stood at peace, sober and modest.

	She had no chain and no coronet,
	no embroidered gowns, no girdle
	more to be looked at than the woman.

	A daughter's birth did not yet frighten her father,
	for the time of marriage and the dowry
	did not run past the measure on either side.

	There were no great houses standing empty;
	Sardanapalus, the king of luxury, had not yet come there
	to show what can be done in a bedroom.

	Your hill of Uccellatoio had not yet outdone
	Monte Mario at Rome for the view of palaces; and as Florence has outdone Rome
	on the way up, so she will outdo her on the way down.

	I saw Bellincion Berti go about belted
	with leather and bone, and his wife come from the mirror
	with her face unpainted;

	and I saw the men of the Nerli and of the Vecchio
	content with plain skins,
	and their wives at the spindle and the flax.

	Oh lucky women! Each of them was sure
	of being buried in her own city, and none was yet
	left alone in bed while her husband traded in France.

	One kept watch, minding the cradle,
	and, comforting, used the baby-talk
	that first delights fathers and mothers;

	another, drawing the wool off the distaff,
	told her household stories
	of the Trojans, and of Fiesole, and of Rome.

	A loose woman like Cianghella, or a crook like Lapo Salterello,
	would have been thought as great a wonder then
	as a Cincinnatus or a Cornelia would be now.

	To such a restful, such a beautiful
	life of citizens, to such a trustworthy
	citizenship, to such a sweet lodging,

	Mary gave me, when my mother called on her in the cries of childbirth;
	and in your ancient Baptistery
	I became at once a Christian and Cacciaguida.

	Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;
	my wife came to me from the valley of the Po,
	and your surname was made from that.

	Afterwards I followed the Emperor Conrad;
	and he girded me with his knighthood,
	I came so far into his favour by doing well.

	I followed him on crusade against the wickedness
	of that religion whose people hold the Holy Land that is yours by right,
	through the fault of the popes.

	There I was set free from the deceiving world
	by that foul people, who killed me;
	the world whose love befouls so many souls;

	and I came from martyrdom to this peace."
