Canto Twenty-One

	My eyes were already fixed again on my lady's
	face, and my mind with them,
	and it had been taken off every other purpose.

	And she was not smiling; but she began to me:
	"If I smiled, you would become
	what Semele became when she was turned to ashes:

	for my beauty, which is kindled more
	on the stairs of the eternal palace
	the higher one goes, as you have seen,

	shines so, if it is not tempered,
	that your mortal power, at its blaze,
	would be a branch a thunderbolt splits.

	We have been lifted to the seventh splendour,
	which under the breast of the burning Lion
	is now sending its power down here mixed with his.

	Set your mind behind your eyes,
	and make mirrors of them for the figure
	which will show itself to you in this mirror."

	Whoever knew what pasture my sight had
	in that blessed face
	when I changed over to another care

	would know how welcome it was to me
	to obey my heavenly escort,
	weighing the one side against the other.

	Inside the crystal that carries, as it rings
	the world, the name of its dear leader
	under whom all wickedness lay dead,

	I saw, of the colour of gold with a ray shining through it,
	a ladder set up so far
	that my sight did not follow it.

	I saw so many splendours coming down
	the rungs too that I thought every light
	that shows in the sky had been poured out from there.

	And as, by their natural habit,
	jackdaws move off together at the beginning of the day
	to warm their cold feathers;

	then some go away and do not come back,
	others turn round to where they set out from,
	and others stay, wheeling;

	such a way of it seemed to me to be there
	in that sparkling which came in a body,
	as soon as it struck on a particular rung.

	And the one that held itself nearest to us
	grew so bright that I said in my thinking:
	'I see clearly the love you are signalling to me.

	But she from whom I look for the how and the when
	of speaking and of keeping quiet is not moving;
	so, against my longing, I do well not to ask.'

	At which she, who was seeing my silence
	in the seeing of him who sees everything,
	said to me: "Loose your warm longing."

	And I began: "My own deserving
	does not make me worthy of your answer;
	but for her sake who lets me ask,

	blessed life, who keep yourself hidden
	inside your own gladness, make known to me
	the cause that has set you so near me;

	and say why the sweet symphony of paradise
	falls silent in this wheel,
	when it sounds so devoutly below through the others."

	"Your hearing is mortal, as your sight is,"
	it answered me; "so there is no singing here,
	for the same reason that Beatrice did not smile.

	I came down so far by the rungs of the holy stair
	only to make a festival for you
	with my speech and with the light that cloaks me;

	nor did more love make me quicker,
	for as much love and more is burning up there,
	as the flaming shows you.

	But the high charity which makes us servants,
	prompt to the counsel that governs the world,
	casts the lots here, as you can see."

	"I see clearly, holy lamp," I said,
	"how free love in this court
	is enough to follow the eternal providence;

	but this is what seems hard to me to make out:
	why you alone among your companions
	were predestined to this office."

	I had not come to the last word
	before the light made a centre of its own middle,
	turning like a fast millstone;

	then the love that was inside it answered:
	"Divine light points itself upon me,
	getting through this light I am wombed in,

	and its power, joined with my seeing,
	lifts me so far above myself that I see
	the highest essence which it is milked from.

	From that comes the gladness I flame with,
	because I match the brightness of my flame
	to the clearness of my sight.

	But that soul in heaven which is clearest,
	that seraph who has his eye most fixed on God,
	could not satisfy your question,

	because what you ask goes so far into
	the abyss of the eternal decree
	that it is cut off from every created sight.

	And when you go back to the mortal world,
	report this, so that it may not presume
	to move its feet any further towards such a goal.

	The mind, which shines here, smokes down there;
	so consider how it can do down below
	what it cannot do even when heaven takes it up."

	His words laid such a rule on me
	that I left the question and drew back
	to asking him humbly who he had been.

	"Between the two shores of Italy, rocks rise,
	not very far from your own country,
	so high that the thunder sounds well below them,

	and they make a hump which is called Catria,
	beneath which a hermitage is consecrated
	that used to be given to worship alone."

	So the third speech began to me again;
	and then, going on, it said: "There
	I made myself so steady in the service of God

	that with nothing but food dressed in olive oil
	I got lightly through heat and frost,
	content in contemplative thoughts.

	That cloister used to yield fruitfully
	to these heavens; and now it has been made empty,
	so that it must soon be shown up.

	In that place I was Peter Damian,
	and I was Peter the Sinner in the house
	of Our Lady on the Adriatic shore.

	Little mortal life was left to me
	when I was called and dragged to that hat
	which only passes from bad to worse.

	Cephas came, and the great vessel
	of the Holy Spirit came, thin and barefoot,
	taking their food at whatever lodging there was.

	Now the modern shepherds want somebody
	to prop them up on this side and on that, and to lead them,
	they are so heavy, and somebody to hold up their trains behind.

	They cover their palfreys with their cloaks,
	so that two beasts go under one skin:
	oh patience, that bear so much!"

	At this voice I saw more little flames
	come down from rung to rung and wheel,
	and every wheeling made them more beautiful.

	They came round this one and stopped,
	and gave a cry of so high a sound
	that nothing here could be like it;

	nor did I understand it, the thunder so beat me.
