Canto Twenty-Eight

	After the lady who makes a paradise of my mind
	had opened the truth to me
	against the present life of wretched mortals,

	as a man who is lit from behind by a candle flame
	sees it in a mirror
	before he has it in sight or in mind,

	and turns round to see whether the glass
	is telling him the truth, and sees that it agrees
	with the flame as a song does with its measure,

	so my memory remembers that I did,
	looking into the beautiful eyes
	out of which Love made the cord to take me with.

	And when I turned round, and my eyes were touched
	by what appears in that heaven
	whenever one looks well into its wheeling,

	I saw a point that was shining out a light
	so sharp that the sight it burns
	has to shut itself against the fierce keenness;

	and the star that looks smallest from earth
	would look as big as the moon if it were set beside that point
	as one star is set beside another.

	Perhaps as far off as a halo seems
	from the light that paints it, when the vapour
	that carries it is at its thickest,

	a circle of fire was wheeling round the point
	so fast that it would have beaten
	the motion that girdles the world most quickly;

	and this one was girdled by another,
	and that by a third, and the third by a fourth,
	the fourth by a fifth, and then the fifth by a sixth.

	Above them came the seventh, already so wide
	that the rainbow, Juno's messenger, would be too narrow,
	even if it were a whole circle, to hold it.

	So the eighth and the ninth; and each of them
	moved more slowly the further it was
	in its number from the one;

	and the ring whose flame was purest
	was the one nearest the pure spark,
	because, I think, it shares most in its truth.

	My lady, who saw me hanging in a hard
	uncertainty, said: "On that point
	the heavens and all nature depend.

	Look at the circle that is joined most closely to it;
	and know that its moving is so fast
	because of the kindled love that pricks it."

	And I to her: "If the world were arranged
	in the order I see in those wheels,
	what has been set before me would have satisfied me;

	but in the world we see with our senses
	the heavens become more godlike
	the further they are from the centre, the earth;

	So, if my longing is to come to an end
	in this marvellous and angelic temple
	which has only love and light for its boundary,

	I still need to hear why the copy
	and the pattern do not go the same way,
	for by myself I think about it in vain."

	"If your fingers are not enough
	for such a knot, it is no wonder:
	it has been made so hard by nobody trying it!"

	So my lady; then she said: "Take
	what I shall tell you, if you want to be satisfied;
	and sharpen your wits round it.

	The heavens you can see are wide or narrow
	according to how much of the divine power
	spreads through all their parts.

	Greater goodness means to do greater good;
	a greater body holds greater good,
	if its parts are equally perfect.

	So the outermost heaven, which sweeps the whole
	of the rest of the universe along with it,
	answers to the innermost ring here, which loves most and knows most:

	so that if you measure by
	the power, and not by the size
	of the angels who look like rings to you,

	you will see a marvellous correspondence,
	greater to more and lesser to less,
	in each heaven, with its own intelligence."

	As the dome of the air is left
	shining and clear when the north wind
	blows from its gentler side,

	so that the mist which was clouding it before
	is purged and dissolved, and the sky laughs
	with the beauties of every one of its quarters,

	so I became when my lady
	provided me with her clear answer,
	and the truth was seen like a star in the sky.

	And when her words had stopped,
	the circles sparkled exactly the way
	boiling iron throws off sparks.

	Every spark followed its own fire;
	and there were so many that their number
	runs into more thousands than the grains on the chessboard, doubled square by square.

	I heard 'Hosanna' sung from choir to choir
	to the fixed point which holds them in the places
	where they have always been, and always will hold them.

	And she who saw the doubting thoughts in my mind
	said: "The first circles
	have shown you Seraphim and Cherubim.

	They follow their bonds so fast
	in order to be like the point as far as they can;
	and they can as far as they are high in seeing.

	The other loves that go round them
	are called Thrones, because God's judgments rest on them,
	and they complete the first group of three;

	and you must know that all of them have delight
	in proportion as their sight goes deep
	into the truth in which every understanding is quieted.

	From this one can see how being blessed
	is founded on the act of seeing,
	not on the act of loving, which comes after it;

	and the measure of the seeing is merit,
	which grace and a good will bring to birth:
	so it goes on from rank to rank.

	The next three orders, which bud like this
	in this everlasting spring
	that no autumn ever strips,

	sing 'Hosanna' perpetually, like birds in spring,
	with three melodies, which sound in the three
	orders of gladness that make its three levels.

	In that group are the other godlike orders:
	first Dominations, and then Virtues;
	the third order is the Powers.

	Then, in the last two dancing rings but one,
	Principalities and Archangels wheel;
	the last is all of Angels at their play.

	These orders all gaze upward,
	and downward they so prevail that towards God
	they are all drawn, and they all draw.

	And Dionysius set himself to contemplate
	these orders with such longing
	that he named them and divided them as I have.

	But Pope Gregory afterwards disagreed with him;
	so that, as soon as he opened his eyes
	in this heaven, he laughed at himself.

	And if a mortal on earth set out so secret
	a truth, do not let it astonish you:
	Paul, who had seen it up here, revealed it to him,

	along with much else that is true about these wheelings."
