Canto Twenty-Nine

	When the sun and the moon, Latona's two children,
	one in the Ram and one in the Scales,
	stand on opposite horizons at the same moment,

	then, for as long as it takes from that instant
	when the sky holds them balanced until each
	crosses into the other hemisphere and the balance is broken,

	just so long did Beatrice keep silent,
	her face painted with smiling, gazing
	steadily at the point that had overcome me.

	Then she began: "I tell you, and I do not ask you,
	what you want to hear, because I have seen it
	there where every where and every when is centred.

	Not to gain any good for himself,
	which cannot be, but so that his splendour
	could say 'I am' by shining out,

	the eternal love opened into new loves
	in his own eternity, outside time,
	outside every other bound, as it pleased him.

	Nor did he lie idle before that;
	for God's moving over these waters
	had no before and no after.

	Form and matter, joined together and each by itself,
	came out into being with no flaw in them,
	like three arrows from a three-stringed bow.

	And as a ray shines in glass, in amber
	or in crystal, in such a way that there is no interval
	between its coming and its being all there,

	so the threefold work of their Lord
	shone out into its own being all together,
	with no distinction of beginnings.

	Order was created along with them, and the ranking
	of all created things; and the angels, pure form, pure act,
	were the summit of that world;

	pure matter, mere possibility, held the lowest part;
	in the middle, matter and form were bound together
	with such a knot that it is never untied.

	Jerome wrote for you of a long stretch
	of centuries during which the angels were created
	before the rest of the world was made;

	but this truth is written in many places
	by the writers of the Holy Spirit,
	and you will notice it if you look well;

	and reason too sees something of it,
	for it would not grant that the angels who move the heavens
	could be so long without heavens to move.

	Now you know where and when these loves
	were created, and how: so that already
	three burnings are put out in your longing.

	Nor could a man count to twenty
	as quickly as a part of the angels fell,
	and shook the ground of your world.

	The rest stayed, and began this art
	which you are watching, with such delight
	that they never leave off circling.

	The beginning of the fall was the accursed
	pride of Lucifer, whom you saw
	held down at the bottom of Hell by all the weight of the world.

	Those you see here were modest
	in acknowledging that they came from the goodness
	which had made them ready for such understanding;

	so their sight was exalted
	by grace that lights, together with their own merit,
	and they have a full and settled will;

	and I do not want you to doubt, but to be sure,
	that receiving grace is a thing deserved,
	according as the affection is open to it.

	From now on you can contemplate a great deal
	about this assembly by yourself, if my words
	have been gathered in, with no other help.

	But because it is taught on earth in your schools
	that the angelic nature is such
	that it understands and remembers and wills,

	I shall say more, so that you may see pure
	the truth which is confused down there,
	being read equivocally like that.

	These angels, from the time they were made glad
	by the face of God, have never turned their sight
	from it, and nothing is hidden from that face:

	so their seeing is not interrupted
	by a new object, and so they have no need
	to remember by way of a divided thought;

	so that down there men are dreaming with their eyes open,
	some believing what they teach and some not;
	but in the second kind there is more fault and more shame.

	You do not go down one path
	in your philosophizing: so much are you carried away
	by the love of showing off, and by thinking about it!

	And even that is borne up here
	with less indignation than when the divine Scripture
	is put second, or is twisted.

	Nobody there thinks how much blood it cost
	to sow it in the world, and how pleasing
	the man is who keeps humbly close to it.

	Everyone strains to make a show, and makes up
	inventions of his own; and those are what the preachers
	run through, and the Gospel is left unmentioned.

	One says that the moon turned back
	at the passion of Christ and put itself in the way,
	so that the sun's light did not reach the earth;

	and he lies, for the light hid itself
	of its own accord: so that eclipse was seen
	by the Spaniards and the Indians as much as by the Jews.

	Florence has not as many men called Lapo and Bindo
	as there are fables of this kind shouted
	from the pulpit here and there in a single year:

	so that the sheep, who know nothing,
	come home from pasture fed on wind,
	and not seeing the harm does not excuse them.

	Christ did not say to his first company:
	'Go, and preach idle talk to the world';
	but he gave them a true foundation;

	and that alone sounded in their mouths,
	so much so that in fighting to kindle the faith
	they made shield and lance of the Gospel.

	Now men go to preach with jokes
	and with clowning, and so long as there is a good laugh,
	the hood puffs up and nothing more is asked.

	But such a bird nests in the tip of that hood, the devil,
	that if the crowd could see it, they would see
	what the pardons they are trusting in are worth:

	the pardon by which so much folly has grown on earth
	that people will run after any promise,
	without the proof of any witness at all.

	The friars of Saint Anthony fatten their pigs on this,
	and a good many others who are bigger pigs themselves,
	paying for it in coin that was never stamped, in worthless pardons.

	But since we have digressed a long way, turn
	your eyes back now to the straight road,
	so that the way may be shortened with the time.

	This angelic nature climbs so far
	in number that there never was mortal speech
	or thought that reached so far;

	and if you look at what is revealed
	through the prophet Daniel, you will see that no fixed number
	can be found inside his thousands of thousands.

	The first light, which shines through all of it,
	is received in it in as many ways
	as there are splendours for it to pair itself with.

	And so, since the affection follows on
	the act that conceives, the sweetness of loving
	burns and cools differently in it.

	See now the height and the breadth
	of the eternal worth, since it has made
	so many mirrors for itself to break itself in,

	remaining one in itself as it was before."
