Canto Thirty

	Perhaps six thousand miles away from us
	it is blazing noon, while here the earth's shadow
	is already sinking almost level with the horizon,

	when the middle of the sky, high above us,
	begins to change, so that here and there a star
	fades from sight all the way down to where we stand;

	and as the dawn, the brightest handmaid of the sun,
	comes on, the sky shuts its stars away one by one,
	down to the most beautiful of them.

	In just the same way the triumph that plays
	always about the point which overcame me,
	and seems enclosed by what it encloses,

	was put out little by little to my seeing:
	so that seeing nothing, and love, forced me
	to turn back with my eyes to Beatrice.

	If everything that has been said of her
	up to here were gathered into one praise,
	it would be too little to serve this turn.

	The beauty I saw goes beyond all measure,
	not only beyond us; and I truly believe
	that only her maker takes in the whole of it.

	At this pass I admit myself beaten
	more than any comic or tragic poet
	was ever overcome by a point of his subject:

	for, like the sun in eyes that tremble most,
	so the remembering of that sweet smile
	takes my mind away from my own self.

	From the first day I saw her face
	in this life, until this sight,
	the following of her in my song has not been cut off;

	but now my following after her beauty
	must give up, as a poet, as every artist
	must give up at the limit of his art.

	So I leave her as she is, for a greater trumpet
	than mine to announce; mine is bringing
	its hard subject to an end.

	with the act and the voice of a ready leader
	she began again: "We have come out
	of the largest of the spheres into the heaven that is pure light:

	light of the mind, full of love;
	love of the true good, full of gladness;
	gladness that goes beyond every sweetness.

	Here you will see both companies of paradise, the angels and the saved,
	and the saved in the very bodies
	that you will see them wear at the last judgment."

	Like sudden lightning that scatters
	the power of sight, so that the eye cannot see
	even the most solid things in front of it,

	so a living light shone all round me
	and left me swathed in such a veil
	of its own blaze that nothing appeared to me.

	"The love that quiets this heaven
	always welcomes into itself with such a greeting,
	to make the candle ready for its flame."

	No sooner had these few words
	come inside me than I understood
	that I was rising above my own powers;

	and I was kindled again with a new sight
	such that no light is so pure
	that my eyes could not have borne it;

	and I saw light in the form of a river,
	tawny with brightness, between two banks
	painted with a marvellous spring.

	Out of that stream came living sparks
	and settled on every side into the flowers,
	like rubies which gold sets round;

	then, as if made drunk by the scents,
	they plunged back into the marvellous whirlpool,
	and as one went in, another came out.

	"The high longing that inflames and urges you now
	to have knowledge of what you see
	pleases me the more the more it swells;

	but you must drink of this water
	before so great a thirst in you can be satisfied":
	so the sun of my eyes said to me.

	And she added: "The river and the topazes
	which go in and come out, and the laughter of the grasses,
	are shadowy prefaces of their own truth.

	It is not that these things are unripe in themselves;
	the fault is on your side,
	because you do not have sight so high yet."

	No baby ever flung its face
	towards the milk so suddenly, when it wakes
	much later than its habit,

	as I did, to make still better mirrors
	of my eyes, bending down to the water
	that flows there so that men may be made better by it;

	and as soon as the eaves of my eyelids
	had drunk of it, it seemed to me
	to have turned from its length into a round.

	Then, like people who have been under masks
	and look different from before, once they take off
	the borrowed likeness they were hidden in,

	so the flowers and the sparks changed
	before me into a greater festival,
	so that I saw both courts of heaven made plain.

	O splendour of God, by which I saw
	the high triumph of the true kingdom,
	give me the power to say how I saw it!

	There is a light up there that makes the Creator
	visible to every creature
	whose peace is only in seeing him.

	It spreads out in the shape of a circle,
	so far that its circumference
	would be too wide a girdle for the sun.

	The whole of it is made of a ray
	reflected from the top of the outermost moving heaven,
	which takes its life and its power from that ray.

	And as a hillside mirrors itself in the water
	at its foot, as if to see itself adorned
	when it is rich with green and with little flowers,

	so, standing over the light, round and round,
	I saw mirrored in more than a thousand tiers
	all of us who have made our way back up there.

	And if the lowest rank gathers into itself
	so great a light, how wide this rose must be
	in its outermost petals!

	My sight was not lost in the breadth
	or in the height of it, but took in the whole
	quantity and quality of that gladness.

	There, near and far neither add nor take away:
	for where God governs with nothing in between,
	the laws of nature count for nothing.

	Into the yellow of the everlasting rose,
	which spreads out rank by rank and breathes
	a scent of praise to the sun that is always spring,

	Beatrice drew me, like a man who is silent
	and wants to speak, and said: "See
	how great the gathering of the white robes is!

	See how wide our city sweeps;
	see our seats so full
	that few people more are wanted here.

	And in that great chair on which you are keeping your eyes
	because of the crown already set above it,
	before you sup at this wedding,

	there will sit the soul of the noble Henry,
	the emperor Henry the Seventh, who will come
	to set Italy straight before she is ready for it.

	The blind greed which bewitches you
	has made you like the baby
	who dies of hunger and drives the nurse away.

	And the pope of that day, Clement, will be such a man
	that openly and secretly
	he will not go one road with Henry.

	But God will bear with him
	in the holy office only a short while, for he will be thrust
	down into Hell where Simon Magus is, as he deserves,

	and will push his predecessor Boniface, the man of Anagni, further down."
