Canto Thirty-One

	So in the form of a white rose
	the holy soldiery showed itself to me
	which Christ made his bride with his own blood;

	but the other soldiery, which flying sees and sings
	the glory of him who makes it fall in love
	and the goodness that made it so great,

	like a swarm of bees which settles into the flowers
	one moment and the next goes back
	to where its work is turned to sweetness,

	was coming down into the great flower
	which is adorned with so many petals, and rising again
	to where its love has its everlasting home.

	Their faces were all of living flame,
	and their wings of gold, and the rest so white
	that no snow reaches that limit.

	When they came down into the flower, they handed
	from bench to bench the peace and the ardour
	they had gained by fanning their sides.

	Nor did so great a flying multitude,
	coming between the height and the flower,
	get in the way of the sight or of the splendour:

	for the divine light gets through the universe
	according as it is deserved,
	so that nothing can stand in its way.

	This kingdom, safe and full of gladness,
	crowded with old people and new,
	had its sight and its love all on one mark.

	O threefold light which, sparkling in a single
	star to their sight, satisfies them so!
	Look down here at our storm!

	If the barbarians, coming from the region
	that is covered every day by Helice,
	wheeling with the son she dotes on,

	were stupefied at seeing Rome
	and her towering work, when the Lateran
	rose above all mortal things,

	then I, who had come to the divine
	from the human, to the eternal from time,
	and out of Florence to a people just and sound —

	with what astonishment must I have been filled!
	Between that and my gladness I was truly glad
	not to hear and to stay dumb.

	And like a pilgrim who is refreshed
	as he looks about the church he vowed to visit,
	and already hopes to tell what it is like,

	so, walking through the living light,
	I led my eyes along the ranks,
	now up, now down, and now round about again.

	I saw faces persuading to charity,
	set off by another's light and by their own smiling,
	and gestures graced with every decency.

	My gaze had already taken in
	the general shape of paradise
	without having fixed itself anywhere in particular;

	and I was turning round with my wanting rekindled
	to ask my lady about things
	my mind was hanging over.

	I meant one thing, and another answered me:
	I thought to see Beatrice, and I saw an old man
	dressed like the people in their glory.

	A kindly gladness was spread
	over his eyes and his cheeks, in a loving manner
	such as suits a tender father.

	And "Where is she?" I said at once.
	At which he: "Beatrice moved me from my place
	to bring your longing to its end;

	and if you look up into the third ring
	from the highest rank, you will see her again
	on the throne her merits allotted her."

	Without answering, I lifted my eyes
	and saw her making a crown for herself
	by reflecting back the eternal rays.

	No mortal eye, however far down it goes
	into the sea, is as far from the region
	where the thunder sounds highest,

	as my sight was from Beatrice there;
	but it made no difference to me, because her image
	came down to me with nothing mixed in between.

	"O lady in whom my hope has its strength,
	and who bore, for my salvation,
	to leave your footprints in hell,

	of all the things I have seen
	I acknowledge the grace and the power
	as coming from your might and from your goodness.

	You have drawn me from slavery into freedom
	by all those roads, by all those ways
	you had the power to use to do it.

	Keep your great gift in me,
	so that my soul, which you have made whole,
	may come loose from my body pleasing to you."

	So I prayed; and she, far off
	as she seemed, smiled and looked at me;
	then she turned back to the eternal spring.

	And the holy old man said: "So that you may finish
	your journey perfectly — which is what prayer
	and holy love have sent me for —

	fly with your eyes about this garden;
	for seeing it will make your sight fitter
	for climbing along the divine ray.

	And the Queen of heaven, for whom I am all
	on fire with love, will grant us every grace,
	because I am her faithful Bernard."

	Like a man who comes, perhaps from Croatia,
	to see our Veronica, and cannot be satisfied
	because of his long-standing hunger,

	but says in his thinking, while it is shown:
	'My Lord Jesus Christ, God in truth,
	was your face really like this?';

	such was I, gazing at the living charity
	of the man who in this world,
	by contemplation, tasted that peace.

	"Son of grace, this joyful being,"
	he began, "will not be known to you
	if you keep your eyes down here at the bottom;

	but look at the circles out to the furthest,
	until you see the Queen sitting there
	to whom this kingdom is subject and devoted."

	I lifted my eyes; and as in the morning
	the eastern part of the horizon
	beats the part where the sun goes down,

	so, going as it were with my eyes from a valley
	to a mountain, I saw a part on the far edge
	beat all the rest of that front with its light.

	And as, at the place where we look for the pole
	that Phaethon steered so badly, the light is most
	on fire, and grows less on this side and on that,

	so that peaceful oriflamme
	was most alive in the middle, and on every side
	the flame slackened in the same measure;

	and at that middle, with their wings spread,
	I saw more than a thousand angels making festival,
	each one distinct in brightness and in skill.

	I saw, at their games and at their songs,
	a beauty smiling which was gladness
	in the eyes of all the other saints;

	and if I had as much wealth in speaking
	as I have in imagining, I would not dare
	to attempt the least part of her delight.

	Bernard, when he saw my eyes fixed
	and attentive on the heat he was warm with,
	turned his own to her with such affection

	that he made mine more burning to gaze.
