Chapter 1: Rhetoric and Dialectic

Rhetoric is the counterpart of dialectic: the partner that answers it, as the second half of a choral song answers the first. By dialectic I mean the art of argument by question and answer. The two belong together because both deal with matters that everyone is, in a way, able to know about, and that belong to no one special science. That is why everyone has some share of both. Up to a point, all of us try to test an argument and to stand up for one, to defend ourselves and to accuse others.

Most people do these things either at random or by a knack they have picked up through practice. But since they can be done both ways, it is clear that they could also be done by method. For we can look into the reason why some people succeed through practice and others succeed by luck, and everyone would agree that looking into the reason why something works is the business of an art.

Now, the people who have written handbooks on the art of speaking have supplied almost no part of it. Proofs (the means of persuasion) are the only thing in it that belongs to the art; everything else is an extra. Yet these writers say nothing about the enthymeme, the argument of rhetoric, a kind of syllogism, which is the very body of proof. Instead they spend nearly all their effort on things that lie outside the subject.

Slander, pity, anger and the other emotions of that kind have nothing to do with the facts of the case; they are aimed at the juror, who in an Athenian court was judge and jury at once. So if every trial were conducted the way trials are now conducted in some cities, and especially in the well-governed ones, these writers would have nothing left to say.

For all people either think that the laws ought to forbid this sort of thing, or actually have such laws and forbid speaking outside the subject, as the ancient court of the Areopagus in Athens does. And they are right to think so. You should not warp the juror by stirring him up to anger or envy or pity. That would be like bending the ruler you are about to measure with.

Further, it is obvious that a person on one side of a dispute has no business except to show that the fact in question is so or is not so, that it happened or did not happen. Whether the matter is important or trivial, just or unjust, is a question the juror has to decide for himself, wherever the lawgiver has not already settled it; it is not something he should be taught by the people arguing in front of him.

Above all, then, it is right that laws which have been properly made should themselves settle everything they possibly can, and should leave as little as possible to the people who judge. There are three reasons. First, it is easier to find one man, or a few, with good sense and the ability to make laws and give judgements than to find many. Second, laws are made after long thought, but judgements are given on the spot, so it is hard for those who judge to decide well what is just and what is in the public interest. Third, and most important of all, the lawgiver's judgement is not about a particular case: it is about the future and about cases in general. The member of the assembly and the juror, by contrast, are deciding about things that are here in front of them and definite, and with those things love and hatred and their own private interest are often bound up. The result is that they can no longer see the truth clearly enough, and their own pleasure or pain casts a shadow over their judgement.

So on everything else, as we say, the judge should be given the final word on as little as possible. But whether something happened or did not happen, will happen or will not happen, is or is not so, must be left to those who judge, because the lawgiver cannot possibly foresee these things.

If this is right, it is clear that anyone who lays down rules on the other matters, such as what the introduction of a speech ought to contain, or the statement of the facts, or each of the other parts, is making an art out of what lies outside the subject. In all those rules their only concern is how to put the judge into a certain frame of mind. About the proofs the art itself supplies they have nothing to show, and those proofs are exactly what make a person good at enthymemes.

That is why, although the method is the same for speeches to the assembly and for speeches in the courts, and although political speaking is a finer thing and more worthy of a citizen than speaking about private dealings between one person and another, these writers say nothing about political speaking, and every one of them tries to make an art of pleading in court. The reason is that in a speech to the assembly it pays less to talk about things outside the subject, and political speaking gives less room for trickery than pleading in court does, because it concerns everyone. In the assembly the person judging is judging his own affairs, so the speaker who gives advice needs only to show that things are as he says. In the courts that is not enough, and it pays to win the listener over. There the decision is about other people's affairs, so the jurors, thinking of their own pleasure and listening to be gratified, simply hand the case to whichever side pleases them; they are not really judging at all. That is why, as I said before, in many places the law forbids speaking outside the subject in court, while in the assembly the people judging take care of this well enough themselves.

It is clear, then, that the method of the art is concerned with proofs. A proof is a kind of demonstration, since we are most fully persuaded of something when we think it has been demonstrated. The demonstration that belongs to rhetoric is the enthymeme, and this is, broadly speaking, the most powerful of all the proofs. And the enthymeme is a kind of syllogism, a chain of reasoning from premises. Now, it is the business of dialectic, either the whole of it or one of its parts, to study every kind of syllogism alike. So it is plain that the person best able to see what a syllogism is made from and how it is put together will also be the best at enthymemes, once he has learned in addition what matters the enthymeme deals with and how it differs from the syllogisms of logic. For it is the same ability that sees the truth and sees what looks like the truth. And human beings are, in any case, well enough made for the truth, and most of the time they reach it. That is why someone who has a good eye for the truth will also have a good eye for what people generally believe.

So it is clear that the other writers make an art out of what lies outside the subject, and clear too why they have leaned so heavily towards pleading in court.

Rhetoric is useful, for several reasons. First, what is true and what is just are by nature stronger than their opposites. So if verdicts go the wrong way, the true and the just must have been beaten through the fault of the people speaking for them, and that deserves blame. Second, there are some audiences we could not easily persuade even if we had the most exact knowledge of a subject, and spoke from it. A speech that follows knowledge is teaching, and teaching these people is impossible. We have to build our proofs and arguments out of ideas that everyone shares, as I said in the Topics, my book on dialectic, when I was discussing how to talk with ordinary people. Third, we must be able to argue persuasively for either side of a question, just as we can in syllogisms. This is not so that we may actually do both, since we must not persuade people of what is wrong, but so that we understand how the case really stands, and so that when someone else uses arguments unfairly we are able to take them apart ourselves. None of the other arts draws conclusions on both sides of a question; only dialectic and rhetoric do that, since both are equally at home with either side. The facts they deal with, however, are not equally balanced: what is true and what is better are, broadly speaking, always by nature easier to reason for and more persuasive. Last, it would be strange if it were a disgrace to be unable to defend yourself with your body, but not a disgrace to be unable to defend yourself with speech, when speech is more distinctively human than the use of the body.

Someone may object that a person who uses this power of speech unjustly could do great harm. But that is true of every good thing except virtue, and most of all of the most useful things, such as strength, health, wealth and generalship. Used justly, these can do the greatest good; used unjustly, the greatest harm.

It is clear, then, that rhetoric is not confined to any one definite class of subjects but, like dialectic, ranges over all of them, and that it is useful. It is clear also that its task is not to persuade, but to see, in each case, the means of persuasion that the case offers. The same is true of all the other arts. It is not the task of medicine to make a patient healthy, but to bring him as far towards health as he can go, since even people who can never get well can still be treated well. It is clear, besides, that the same art sees both what is persuasive and what only seems persuasive, just as in dialectic the same art sees both a real syllogism and one that only seems to be a syllogism. What makes a man a sophist is not his ability but his choice: he chooses to use arguments he knows are false. There is one difference, though. In rhetoric, one man is called a speaker because of his knowledge and another because of his choice, and both get the same name. In dialectic, a man is a sophist because of his choice, but a dialectician because of his ability, not his choice.

Now let us try to talk about the method itself: how, and from what materials, we shall be able to reach the goals we have set. So let us go back, as it were, to the beginning, define rhetoric again, and then say what remains.
