Chapter 10: Wrongdoing and Its Motives

The next thing to discuss is accusation and defence: how many premises, and of what kinds, we should build our syllogisms from when we accuse someone or defend ourselves in court.

We need to grasp three things. First, for what purposes people do wrong, and how many such purposes there are. Second, what state of mind people are in when they do it. Third, what sort of people they wrong, and what condition those victims are in.

So let us first define what doing wrong is, and then take these questions in order.

Let doing wrong be defined as harming someone deliberately and against the law. Law is of two kinds: particular and common. By particular law I mean the written law under which each city governs itself; by common law I mean the unwritten rules that seem to be agreed on everywhere, among all peoples. People act deliberately when they know what they are doing and are not forced to do it. Not everything done knowingly is done by choice; but everything done by choice is done knowingly, since no one is ignorant of what he chooses.

What makes people choose to do harm and to do bad things against the law is vice, and lack of self-control. If someone has a vice, one or several, then it is in the matter his vice concerns that he is also unjust. The mean man is unjust about money; the self-indulgent man about the pleasures of the body; the soft man about his comfort; the coward about danger, since fear makes him abandon the comrades who are sharing the danger with him. The ambitious man does wrong for the sake of honour, the hot-tempered man out of anger, the man who must always win for the sake of victory, the bitter man for the sake of revenge. The fool does wrong because he is mistaken about what is just and what is unjust, and the shameless man because he does not care what people think of him. And the same goes for each of the others, each in the matter his own failing concerns.

All this is clear enough, partly from what has been said about the virtues and partly from what will be said later about the emotions. What remains is to say for what purposes people do wrong, in what state of mind, and to whom.

First, then, let us set out what people are after, and what they are trying to escape, when they set about doing wrong. It is obvious why this matters. The accuser has to look at how many of these motives, and which ones, are present in his opponent, since these are the things everyone is after when he wrongs his neighbours. The defendant has to look at which of them, and how many, are not present in him.

Now, everything that anyone does is done either not because of himself or because of himself. Of the things not done because of himself, some are done by chance and some by necessity; and of those done by necessity, some are done by force and some by nature. So everything people do not do because of themselves is done by chance, by nature or by force. Of the things they do because of themselves, the things they themselves are the cause of, some are done by habit and some from desire in the broad sense, from wanting something; and of these, some come from a reasoned wanting and some from an unreasoned one.

A wish is a reasoned wanting of something good, since no one wishes for a thing unless he thinks it is good. The unreasoned wantings are anger and appetite. So everything people do must be done for one of seven causes: chance, nature, force, habit, reasoning, anger and appetite.

To divide people's actions further, by their age, or by their settled dispositions, or anything of that kind, is wasted effort. If the young happen to be quick to anger or full of appetites, it is not because they are young that they act as they do, but because of anger and appetite. Nor do people act because of wealth or poverty. It happens that the poor want money because they lack it, and that the rich want pleasures they do not need because they can afford them; but in their case too they will act not because of wealth or poverty but because of appetite. In the same way the just and the unjust, and all the others who are said to act according to their dispositions, will act for these same causes: either from reasoning or from emotion. The difference is that some act from good characters and good emotions, and others from the opposite.

It is true, all the same, that certain dispositions tend to be followed by certain results, and other dispositions by others. Perhaps from the very start the self-controlled man, because he is self-controlled, has good opinions and good appetites about pleasant things, and the self-indulgent man has the opposite ones about those same things.

So we should leave divisions of that kind aside, and look instead at which qualities usually go along with which. Whether a man is fair or dark, tall or short, no particular result is laid down to follow. But whether he is young or old, just or unjust, does make a difference. In general, anything that happens to people and makes their characters differ will count: whether a man thinks himself rich or poor, for instance, will make some difference, and so will whether he is lucky or unlucky. We shall come to these things later, in the second book. For now, let us first deal with what remains here.

Things that come about by chance are those whose cause cannot be pinned down, that happen for no purpose, and that happen neither always, nor usually, nor in any regular way. The definition of chance makes this clear.

Things that come about by nature are those whose cause lies in the things themselves and works in a regular way, since they turn out the same way either always or usually. As for things that happen against nature, there is no need to go into fine detail about whether they happen according to some kind of nature or from some other cause. It would seem, though, that chance too is the cause of things like these.

Things come about by force when they are done by the people themselves who do them, but against their own appetite or their own reasoning.

Things come about by habit when people do them because they have often done them before.

Things are done from reasoning when they seem to be to our advantage, on the basis of the goods we have already described, either as an end in themselves or as a means to an end, and when they are done because they are to our advantage. That last condition matters, since even self-indulgent people sometimes do things that are to their advantage, but they do them not for the advantage but for the pleasure. Things are done from passion and anger when they are acts of revenge.

Revenge and punishment are different. Punishment is for the sake of the one who suffers it; revenge is for the sake of the one who inflicts it, so that he may get his satisfaction.

What anger is will become clear when we discuss the emotions. Things are done from appetite when they seem pleasant. What is familiar, and what we have grown used to, counts among pleasant things, since people do many things with pleasure that are not naturally pleasant, once they have grown used to doing them.

To sum up, then: everything that people do because of themselves either is good or seems good, or is pleasant or seems pleasant. And since what they do because of themselves they do willingly, and what they do not do because of themselves they do unwillingly, everything people do willingly will be either good or apparently good, or pleasant or apparently pleasant. For I count among good things the getting rid of what is bad or seems bad, and the exchange of a greater evil for a lesser one, since these are in a way worth choosing. In the same way I count among pleasant things the getting rid of what is painful or seems painful, and the exchange of a greater pain for a lesser one. So we must get a grasp of what things are to our advantage and what things are pleasant, how many of them there are and of what kinds.

What is to our advantage has already been discussed, in the account of political speech. Let us now discuss what is pleasant. And we should consider our definitions good enough, on each point, if they are neither unclear nor more exact than the subject needs.
