Chapter 11: Pleasure

Let us take it as settled that pleasure is a kind of movement of the soul: a settling down, sudden and felt, into its own natural state. Pain is the opposite.

If that is what pleasure is, then clearly whatever produces the state just described is pleasant, and whatever destroys it, or produces the opposite settling, is painful.

It follows that, as a rule, it must be pleasant to move towards one's natural state, and most of all when the things that happen in keeping with that nature have got their own nature back again after being disturbed. Habits are pleasant too. What has become habitual has by now become almost natural, since habit is something like nature. "Often" is not far from "always": nature belongs to what happens always, habit to what happens often.

What is not forced on us is pleasant too, since force is against nature. That is why what we are compelled to do is painful, and why it was rightly said, by the poet Evenus of Paros,

	Everything we are forced to do is a misery by nature.

Taking pains, working hard and straining at a task are painful for the same reason: these things are compulsion and force, unless we have grown used to them, and then it is habit that makes them pleasant. Their opposites are pleasant. So taking it easy, freedom from toil, carelessness, games, rest and sleep all count among pleasant things, because none of them is done under compulsion.

Anything we have an appetite for is pleasant, since appetite is a wanting of what is pleasant. Some appetites are unreasoned and some go with reason. By unreasoned I mean those we feel without having formed any opinion about the thing. These are the ones called natural, such as the appetites that come through the body: the appetite for food, which is thirst and hunger, with a particular appetite for each particular kind of food; the appetites to do with taste and sex and, in general, touch; and those to do with pleasant smells, with hearing and with sight. The appetites that go with reason are those we feel because we have been persuaded. There are many things we want to see or to get because we have heard about them and been persuaded that they are pleasant.

Now, feeling pleasure lies in perceiving some feeling, and imagination is a kind of weakened perception. So a person who remembers something, or hopes for something, will always have with him an image of what he remembers or hopes for. If so, it is clear that people who remember and people who hope also feel pleasure, since they too are perceiving something.

It follows that everything pleasant must lie either in perceiving what is present, or in remembering what is past, or in hoping for what is to come. We perceive the present, remember the past and hope for the future.

The things that are pleasant to remember are not only those that were pleasant at the time, when they were happening, but also some that were not pleasant then, if what came after them was fine and good. Hence the line from Euripides' Andromeda,

	Yes, it is sweet, once safe, to remember one's troubles,

and the words of Eumaeus the swineherd to Odysseus in Homer,

	For even in his sufferings, later, a man takes pleasure,
	remembering them, if he has suffered much and done much.

The reason is that it is pleasant, too, to be free of something bad. The things we hope for are pleasant when it seems that having them will give us great delight or great benefit, and benefit without pain. In general, whatever delights us when it is present will, as a rule, delight us also when we hope for it or remember it. That is why even being angry is pleasant, as Homer made Achilles say of his rage, that it is

	far sweeter than honey dripping from the comb.

For no one gets angry with someone he plainly cannot hope to be revenged on, and people are not angry, or less angry, with those far more powerful than themselves. Anger carries the hope of revenge, and that hope is the sweetness.

Some pleasure also goes along with most of our appetites. People enjoy a certain pleasure either in remembering how they got what they wanted or in hoping that they will get it. People in a fever, for instance, tormented by thirst, enjoy remembering how they drank and hoping that they will drink again.

Lovers, too, always enjoy talking or writing or making something about the person they love, because in all such things they remember, and they feel as if they were perceiving the one they love. This is how love begins for everyone: when they not only enjoy the loved one's company but, remembering him while he is away, love him, and feel the pain of his not being there. In the same way a kind of pleasure comes even in grief and mourning.

The pain is at his being gone, but the pleasure is in remembering him and, as it were, seeing him, what he used to do and what he was like. So it was well said, by Homer of the mourners,

	So he spoke, and stirred in them all the longing to weep.

Revenge is pleasant too. Where failing to get something is painful, getting it is pleasant; and angry people are pained beyond measure when they do not get their revenge, and delighted when they hope to.

Winning is pleasant, not only to people who love to win but to everyone, because it gives an image of being superior, and that is something everyone has an appetite for, some mildly and some fiercely.

Since winning is pleasant, games of combat and games of argument must be pleasant too, since people often win in them; and so must knucklebones, ball games, dice and draughts. It is the same with serious sports. Some become pleasant once we are used to them; others are pleasant at once, such as hunting with hounds and every kind of chase. Where there is a contest there is also victory. That is why pleading in court and disputing are pleasant to people who are practised at them and good at them.

Honour and a good reputation are among the most pleasant things of all, because each of us gets the image of being the sort of person a good man is, and all the more when the people saying so are people he believes to be telling the truth. Such people are those close at hand rather than those far off; friends and fellow citizens rather than strangers; people alive now rather than people not yet born; the sensible rather than the foolish; and the many rather than the few. These are more likely to be telling the truth than their opposites. For if we look down on someone a great deal, as we do on children or animals, we do not care in the least about his respect or his opinion of us, at least not for the sake of the opinion itself; if we care at all, it is for some other reason.

A friend is one of the pleasant things too. Loving is pleasant, since no one is a lover of wine unless he enjoys wine. And being loved is pleasant, since here too a person gets the image that there is good in him, which is something everyone who can perceive it has an appetite for. Being loved means being cherished for your own sake.

Being admired is pleasant, for the same reason as being honoured. Flattery and the flatterer are pleasant too, since the flatterer looks like an admirer and looks like a friend.

Doing the same things often is pleasant, since what is familiar, as we said, is pleasant.

Change is pleasant too, since change is a move towards nature: the same thing all the time produces too much of our settled condition. Hence the line from Euripides' Orestes,

	Change in everything is sweet.

It is for this reason, too, that things we meet only now and then are pleasant, whether people or things: there is a change from what we have now, and at the same time what comes only now and then is rare.

Learning and wondering are, as a rule, pleasant. In wondering there is the desire to learn, so what makes us wonder is something we desire; and in learning, the mind is settling into its natural state.

Doing good and receiving good are among pleasant things. To receive good is to get what we want; to do good is to have enough, and more than enough. Both of these are things people are after. And because doing good is pleasant, people find it pleasant to set their neighbours on their feet again, and to make up what is lacking in things that are unfinished.

Since learning and wondering are pleasant, things of the following kind must be pleasant too: works of imitation, such as painting, sculpture and poetry, and everything that is a good imitation of something, even if the thing imitated is not pleasant in itself. What we enjoy is not the thing, but the reasoning that says "this is that", so that we find ourselves learning something.

Sudden reversals of fortune, and narrow escapes from danger, are pleasant too, since all these make us wonder.

And since what is natural is pleasant, and things that are akin are natural to one another, things that are akin and alike are, as a rule, pleasant to one another: man to man, horse to horse, young to young. This is where the proverbs come from: "age delights in its own age", "like always to like", "beast knows beast", "jackdaw to jackdaw", which is our "birds of a feather", and all the others like them.

Since whatever is like and akin to oneself is always pleasant, and since each person stands in this relation to himself above all, everyone must be a lover of himself, some more and some less. All these likenesses and kinships belong to a man most of all in relation to himself. And since everyone loves himself, everyone must find pleasure in what is his own, such as his own deeds and his own words. That is why people are, as a rule, fond of flatterers, of lovers, of honour, and of their children, since their children are their own work. And it is pleasant to finish what is unfinished, for then it becomes our own work.

And since ruling is the most pleasant thing of all, it is also pleasant to be thought wise, since good sense is the quality that fits a man to rule, and wisdom is knowledge of many things that make us wonder. Again, since most people love honour, it must also be pleasant to find fault with one's neighbours, and to be in charge of them.

It is pleasant, too, to spend one's time on whatever one seems to be best at, as the poet Euripides says in his Antiope: a man presses eagerly towards it,

	giving the greatest part of every day to that
	in which he happens to be at his very best.

In the same way, since play and every kind of relaxation are pleasant, and laughter is pleasant, it follows that laughable things must be pleasant too: laughable people, laughable words and laughable deeds. The laughable has been treated separately, in my Poetics. That is enough about what is pleasant. What is painful will be obvious from the opposites of these things.
