Chapter 15: Proofs Outside the Art

Next after what we have just discussed, we should run briefly through the proofs that are called proofs outside the art: the ones the speaker does not invent but finds already there. They belong especially to speeches in the courts.

There are five of them: laws, witnesses, contracts, evidence given under torture, and oaths.

Let us speak first about laws, and about how to use them when urging a course of action or warning against one, and when accusing or defending.

Clearly, if the written law is against our case, we must appeal to the common law, and to what is fairer and more just.

We must say that the juror's oath, to judge "to the best of my judgement", means exactly this: that he will not follow the written laws to the letter in every case.

We must say that fairness always stays the same and never changes, and neither does the common law, since it is the law of nature, while the written laws change often. That is the point of the lines in Sophocles' Antigone, where Antigone defends herself by saying that she buried her brother against Creon's law, but not against the unwritten law. She says of the unwritten law that it is not of now or yesterday, and then, a few lines further on, that she would not break it:

	For this is not a thing of now or yesterday, but always ...
	So I was not going to break these laws for fear of any man.

We must say that justice is something real and useful, not something that merely seems so; and so the written law, in a case like this, is not really law, because it does not do the work a law is for. We must say that the judge is like an assayer who tests silver coins, and that his job is to tell counterfeit justice from the true.

We must say that it is the mark of a better man to follow the unwritten law and to abide by it, rather than the written.

We must look to see whether the law contradicts another law that is well thought of, or even contradicts itself. For instance, sometimes one law says that any agreement people make shall be binding, while another forbids making agreements that go against the law.

If the law is ambiguous, we must turn it this way and that, see which way of taking it fits what is just or what is useful, and then use that meaning.

If the circumstances for which the law was made no longer exist, but the law still does, we must try to make this clear, and fight the law on that ground.

But if the written law is on our side, we must say that the juror's oath "to the best of my judgement" is not there so that he can judge against the law. It is there so that he does not break his oath if he happens not to know what the law says. We must say that no one chooses what is good in general, but only what is good for himself. We must say that there is no difference between having no law and not using the law you have. We must say that in the other arts it does not pay to try to outsmart the doctor, since a doctor's mistake does less harm than growing used to disobeying the one in charge. And we must say that trying to be wiser than the laws is exactly what the most admired laws forbid. So much for laws.

As for witnesses, there are two kinds, the ancient and the recent. Of the recent, some share the risk of the trial and others stand outside it. By ancient witnesses I mean the poets, and any other well-known people whose judgements are on public record. For example, the Athenians used Homer as a witness in their quarrel over the island of Salamis, pointing to the lines in the Iliad where Ajax brings his ships from Salamis and stations them beside the Athenians. The people of Tenedos recently used Periander of Corinth as a witness against the people of Sigeum. And Cleophon, in his attack on Critias, used the verses of Solon to show that the family had been an insolent one from long ago; otherwise, he argued, Solon would never have written:

	Tell red-haired Critias to listen to his father.

Witnesses of this kind speak about the past. About the future, the interpreters of oracles are witnesses too. So Themistocles, when the oracle told the Athenians to trust in a wooden wall, took it as evidence that they must fight at sea, the wooden wall being their ships. Proverbs, too, as I have said, count as evidence. If someone is advising you not to make a friend of an old man, the proverb bears him out:

	Never do a good turn to an old man.

And if he is advising you to do away with the sons of men whose fathers you have already killed:

	A fool is he who kills the father and leaves the sons alive.

Recent witnesses are the well-known people who have given a judgement on some question, since their judgements are useful to anyone arguing about the same things. For example, Eubulus, prosecuting the general Chares in the courts, used what Plato, probably the comic poet, had said against Archibius: that it had become common in the city for people to admit openly that they were wicked.

Then there are the witnesses who share the risk of the trial, since they can be prosecuted themselves if they are thought to be lying. Witnesses like these can only testify about whether a thing happened or not, whether a thing is so or not. They are not witnesses about what kind of act it was, for example whether it was just or unjust, useful or harmful. On those questions witnesses from outside the case are more to be trusted, and the ancient witnesses most of all, since they cannot be bribed.

Here are the arguments to make about testimony. If you have no witnesses, you can say that the jurors must judge from what is likely, and that this is what "to the best of my judgement" means. You can say that what is likely cannot be bribed to deceive, and that what is likely can never be convicted of giving false evidence. If you have witnesses and your opponent has none, you can say that what is likely cannot be put on trial for what it says, and that there would be no need for evidence at all if it were enough to look into the matter by argument.

Some testimony is about ourselves and some about our opponent; some is about the facts and some about character. So it is clear that we need never be short of useful testimony. If we have none about the facts, either agreeing with our own side or going against our opponent, we can at least have testimony about character, showing that we are decent people or that our opponent is a bad one.

Everything else about a witness, whether he is a friend of ours, an enemy, or neither, whether he is well thought of, badly thought of, or neither, and all the other differences of this kind, must be argued from the same lines of argument we use for enthymemes.

As for contracts, argument is useful to the extent of making them seem more or less important, and more or less to be trusted. If they are on our side, we must make them trustworthy and binding; if they are on our opponent's side, the opposite.

To make a contract seem trustworthy or untrustworthy, the method is exactly the same as for witnesses, since a contract is just as trustworthy as the people whose names are written on it or who have it in their keeping. If it is agreed that the contract exists, and it is in our favour, we must build it up. A contract, we can say, is a private law, a law for one particular case. Contracts do not give the law its force; it is the laws that give force to contracts made in keeping with them. And in general the law is itself a kind of contract, so that anyone who refuses to trust a contract, or sets it aside, is setting aside the laws.

Besides, most business between people, and all of it that is entered into willingly, is done by contract; so if contracts lose their force, people can no longer deal with one another at all. The other arguments that fit here are easy to see.

If the contract is against us and on our opponent's side, then first of all the arguments that suit are the ones we would use to fight a law that was against us. It would be strange, we can say, if we thought we need not obey laws that were badly made, where the lawmakers had gone wrong, but thought we had no choice but to obey contracts.

Next, we can say that the juror is the umpire of what is just, so he should not be looking at what the contract says, but at what is more just.

We can say that justice cannot be twisted by trickery or by force, because it is part of nature, whereas contracts are often made by people who have been tricked or forced. Besides this, we must look to see whether the contract goes against any law, written or common; and among written laws, whether it goes against our own or those of another city. Then we must see whether it goes against other contracts, made later or earlier. Either the later ones are binding and the earlier ones void, or the earlier ones were right and the later ones were a trick; we can argue it whichever way is useful. We must also look at what is in the jurors' interest, in case the contract somehow works against them, and at all the other things of this kind, which are just as easy to see.

Evidence under torture is a kind of testimony. At Athens it meant the evidence of slaves, which the courts would take only when it had been got from them by torture. It seems to carry conviction because a kind of force is applied. Here too it is not hard to say what can be said. If the evidence is on our side, we can make much of it, saying that this is the only true kind of testimony. If it goes against us and is on our opponent's side, we can demolish it by telling the truth about every kind of evidence under torture: that people under force tell lies just as readily as the truth. Some hold out and refuse to tell the truth; others readily tell lies against someone else, thinking they will be let off sooner. We should be able to point to cases of this sort that have really happened and that the jurors know about. We should say that evidence under torture is not true. For many people who are thick-witted, with skins as tough as stone, and strong in spirit, bear up nobly under the force, while cowards and cautious people speak out boldly against others before they have even seen the instruments. So there is nothing to be trusted in evidence under torture.

As for oaths, we can divide them four ways. In an Athenian lawsuit one side could challenge the other to settle the point by an oath: he offered the oath, and the other side either took it or refused it. So a man either offers an oath and takes one, or does neither, or does one and not the other; and in that last case, either he offers but does not take, or he takes but does not offer. Besides these, there is the question of whether an oath has already been sworn, either by him or by his opponent.

If you do not offer the oath, you can say that people swear falsely without a second thought; that once your opponent has sworn he will not pay back the money, whereas if he does not swear you think the jurors will find against him; and that the risk you run with the jurors is the better one, since you trust them and not him.

If you do not take the oath, you can say that an oath is a thing people take for money; that if you were a scoundrel you would have sworn at once, since it is better to be a scoundrel for something than for nothing; that by swearing you would win, and by not swearing you will not; so your refusal comes from virtue, not from fear of swearing falsely. And the saying of the philosopher Xenophanes fits here: that this challenge is not a fair one when an impious man puts it to a pious one, but is like a strong man challenging a weak one to hit or be hit.

If you take the oath, you can say that you trust yourself and not your opponent. And you can turn Xenophanes' saying round: the fair way is for the impious man to offer the oath and the pious man to swear it. And you can say it would be outrageous for you to refuse to swear yourself about matters on which you ask the jurors to swear before they give judgement.

If you offer the oath, you can say that it is a pious thing to be willing to leave the matter to the gods; that your opponent has no need of other judges, since you are giving the decision to him and his side; and that it is absurd for them to refuse to swear about matters on which they ask others to swear.

Since it is clear how to argue each of these on its own, it is also clear how to argue them in pairs: for instance, if you are willing to take the oath but not to offer it, or to offer it but not to take it, or to take it and offer it both, or to do neither. These positions are bound to be made up from the ones already described, so the arguments too will be made up from the arguments already given.

If you yourself have sworn an earlier oath that contradicts the present one, you can say that it was not false swearing. Doing wrong is something done willingly, and swearing falsely is doing wrong, but what is done under force or through being tricked is not done willingly. This is the place, then, to draw the conclusion that false swearing is a matter of the mind and not of the mouth. But if it is your opponent who has sworn an oath that contradicts his present one, you can say that a man who does not stand by what he has sworn overturns everything, since that is exactly why the jurors swear an oath before they apply the laws. "They ask you to stand by the oath you swore as jurors," you can say, "but they do not stand by their own." And there is all the rest that a speaker might say to make the point bigger.

So much, then, for the proofs outside the art.
