Chapter 1: Character and Emotion

These, then, are the materials we must draw on when we urge people to do something or to hold back from it, when we praise and when we blame, and when we accuse and defend; and these are the beliefs and premises that are useful for building proofs (the means of persuasion) in each of those cases. For these are what enthymemes are about and what they are made from, taking each kind of speech, so to speak, on its own.

But rhetoric exists for the sake of a judgement. People judge the advice they are given in the assembly, and a trial is itself a judgement. So the speaker must not only look to the argument, to make it prove its point and win belief. He must also present himself as a certain kind of person, and put the one who judges into a certain frame of mind.

It makes a great difference to persuasion, most of all in political speech and next in the courts, that the speaker should seem to be a certain kind of person, and that his hearers should suppose him to be disposed in a certain way towards them; and, besides this, that they themselves should happen to be disposed in a certain way.

How the speaker seems is more useful in political speech; how the hearer is disposed matters more in the courts. For things do not look the same to people who love and to people who hate, or to people who are angry and to people who are calm. They look either entirely different or different in size. When a man feels friendly towards the person he is judging, he thinks that person has done no wrong, or only a small one; when he hates him, he thinks the opposite. And when a man wants something and is hopeful about it, then if what is coming would be pleasant, it seems to him both that it will happen and that it will be good; to a man who feels nothing, or who is out of sorts, it seems the opposite.

There are three reasons why speakers themselves are believed, because apart from demonstrations there are exactly three things that make us trust anyone. They are good sense, virtue and goodwill. When speakers go wrong in what they say or in the advice they give, it is through lacking all three of these, or one of them.

Either through lack of sense they form wrong opinions; or they form right opinions but, being bad men, do not say what they think; or they are sensible and decent but do not wish their hearers well, so that it is possible for them not to give the best advice even though they know what it is. There is no fourth possibility. It follows that a speaker who seems to have all three will be believed by those who hear him.

How a speaker can be made to seem sensible and good must be worked out from what we said when we classified the virtues, since a man would use the same means to make himself seem that kind of person as he would use to make someone else seem so. Goodwill and friendship we must discuss when we come to the emotions.

The emotions are those feelings that change people so that they judge differently, and that bring pain and pleasure with them: anger, pity, fear and all the others of that kind, together with their opposites.

For each emotion we must divide the subject into three. Take anger: we must ask what state people are in when they are angry, whom they usually get angry with, and over what kind of things. If we had one or two of these but not all three, it would be impossible to rouse anger in anyone; and the same goes for the other emotions. So, just as we set out the premises for the subjects we discussed before, let us do the same for these, and divide each of them in the way I have described.
