Chapter 2: Anger

Let us define anger as a desire, accompanied by pain, for apparent revenge for an apparent slight: a slight against oneself or against someone who belongs to one, when the slight was uncalled for.

If that is what anger is, then three things follow. First, the angry man is always angry with some particular person, with Cleon, say, and not with mankind in general. Second, he is angry because that person has done something, or was about to do something, to him or to one of his own. Third, every anger is followed by a certain pleasure, the pleasure that comes from the hope of revenge. For it is pleasant to think that you will get what you are aiming at, and nobody aims at things that look impossible for him to get, whereas the angry man aims at what he can get. That is why Homer put it well when he said of rage that it is

	much sweeter than honey as it trickles down,
	and swells up in the hearts of men.

A kind of pleasure goes with anger, both for this reason and because the angry man lingers over his revenge in his mind; and the picture that rises before him at those moments gives him pleasure, as the pictures in dreams do.

A slight is an opinion put into action about something that seems to be worth nothing. We think that bad things and good things are worth taking seriously, and so are things that lead towards them; but things that amount to nothing, or very little, we regard as worth nothing. There are three kinds of slight: contempt, spite and insolence.

The man who feels contempt slights, because people feel contempt for whatever they think is worth nothing, and it is things worth nothing that they slight. The spiteful man, too, is plainly slighting. Spite is getting in the way of what someone else wants, not in order to gain something for yourself but in order that he should not gain it. Since the spiteful man is not doing it to gain anything for himself, he is slighting the other. It is clear that he does not suppose the other can harm him, for then he would be afraid of him and would not slight him; nor that the other could do him any good worth mentioning, for then he would be thinking about how to become his friend.

The insolent man slights too. Insolence is doing and saying things that bring shame on the person who suffers them, not in order to get anything for yourself beyond what has been done, but for the pleasure of it. People who pay back an injury are not being insolent; they are taking revenge.

The reason insolence gives pleasure to the insolent is that they think that by treating others badly they show themselves all the more superior. That is why the young and the rich are insolent: they think insolence proves their superiority. Dishonour is part of insolence, and a man who dishonours another slights him, since what is worth nothing has no value at all, whether as a good or as a bad. That is why Achilles, in his anger, says of Agamemnon,

	He has dishonoured me: he has taken my prize and keeps it,

and, complaining that Agamemnon has treated him

	like some drifter with no honour to his name,

as though these were the reasons he is angry. People think they have a right to be treated with great regard by those who are beneath them in birth, in power, in virtue, and in general in anything in which they themselves stand far above others: the rich man above the poor man in money, the good speaker above the man who cannot speak, the ruler above the ruled, and the man who thinks himself fit to rule above the man he thinks fit only to be ruled. That is why Homer says,

	Great is the rage of kings whom Zeus has nurtured,

and, as the prophet Calchas warns Achilles about Agamemnon,

	even afterwards he keeps his grudge.

For kings resent a slight because of the rank they stand at.

They also think they have a right to be treated well by certain people: those they have done good to, or are doing good to, whether they did it themselves or someone did it for them or one of their own people did it; and those they want, or once wanted, to do good to.

From all this it is now clear what state people are in when they get angry, whom they get angry with, and over what sort of things. They themselves get angry when they are in pain, because someone in pain is longing for something. So if anyone thwarts them in anything, whether directly, as when someone stops a thirsty man from drinking, or not directly, since that seems to come to the same thing; if anyone works against them, or fails to work with them, or bothers them in any other way while they are in that state, they get angry with all such people.

That is why the sick, the poor, men at war, people in love, the thirsty, and in a word anyone who wants something and is not getting it, are quick to anger and easily provoked. They are angriest with people who make light of their present trouble: the sick man with those who make light of his illness, the poor man with those who make light of his poverty, the man at war with those who make light of the war, the lover with those who make light of his love, and so on with the rest. And failing that, they are angry with anyone who slights them in anything else at all, because the feeling each of them already has paves the way for his anger. Again, a man is angry if he happens to have been expecting the opposite of what he gets.

For something far from what you expected hurts more, just as something far from what you expected delights you more, if it turns out to be what you wanted. From this it is also clear which seasons, times, moods and ages are easily moved to anger, and where and when; and the more people are in these conditions, the more easily they are moved.

Those, then, are the states in which people are easily roused to anger. As for whom they get angry with: they get angry with those who laugh at them, mock them and make fun of them, because that is insolence. And with those who harm them in the kinds of ways that are signs of insolence. Such harms must be neither in return for something nor of any use to the people who do them, because then they are taken to come from insolence.

They get angry with those who speak badly of, or show contempt for, the things they themselves care about most. For instance, people who take pride in philosophy get angry if anyone runs down philosophy, and people who take pride in their looks get angry if anyone runs down their looks; and so on with everything else.

They get far angrier over these things if they suspect that they do not really have the quality in question, either not at all, or not in any strength, or not so that other people think they have it. When they feel quite sure that they excel in whatever they are being mocked for, they do not care.

They get angrier with friends than with people who are not their friends, because they think it is more fitting to be treated well by friends than not.

They get angry with people who used to honour them and pay attention to them, if these people stop behaving towards them in that way. For they think such people now hold them in contempt, since otherwise they would still be doing it.

They get angry with those who do not return a kindness, or do not return as much as they received. And with those who work against them, if these people are beneath them. For all such people seem to show contempt: the first as though they were dealing with their inferiors, the second as though being opposed by inferiors did not count.

They get angrier still if the slight comes from people who count for nothing. For we assumed that anger at a slight is felt towards those who have no business slighting us, and those beneath us have no business doing it.

With friends, they get angry if the friends do not speak well of them or treat them well, and angrier still if the friends do the opposite; and also if the friends do not notice when they need something, as Plexippus is angry with his nephew Meleager in Antiphon's tragedy. For not noticing is a sign of a slight: we do not miss what goes on with the people we care about.

They get angry with those who are glad at their misfortunes, or in general are cheerful while they are having bad luck, since this is a sign either of an enemy or of someone who slights them. And with those who do not care if they cause them pain, which is why people get angry with those who bring bad news.

They get angry with those who listen to talk about their failings, or who watch those failings, because such people are like those who slight them, or like enemies.

For friends share each other's pain, and everyone is pained to see his own failings. Further, they get angry with those who slight them in front of five kinds of people: their rivals, the people they admire, the people they want to be admired by, the people they feel shame before, and the people who feel shame before them. If anyone slights them in front of these, they get angrier.

They get angry with those who slight people whom it would be shameful for them not to stand up for: parents, children, wives, those in their charge. And with those who do not repay a favour, because this slight goes against what is fitting.

And with those who answer them with irony when they are speaking in earnest;

for irony shows contempt. And with those who do good to others but not to them, because this too shows contempt: not to think a man worthy of what they think everyone else worthy of.

Forgetting also causes anger, even forgetting names, trivial as that is. For forgetting, too, seems to be a sign of a slight: it comes from not caring, and not caring is a kind of slight.

We have now said, all at once, whom people get angry with, what state they are in, and over what sort of things. It is clear that the speaker will need to use his speech to put his hearers into the state of mind of people who are angry, and to show that his opponents are guilty of the things that make people angry, and are the kind of people that people are angry with.
