Chapter 5: Fear and Confidence

What things people fear, whom they fear, and in what state of mind they fear them, will become clear as follows. Let us define fear as a kind of pain or disturbance that comes from picturing some evil in the future that could destroy us or cause us pain. For people do not fear every evil. Nobody is afraid, for instance, of becoming unjust or slow-witted. They fear only the evils that can bring great pain or destruction, and even those only if they seem not far off but close by, so near that they are about to happen. Things that are very far away people do not much fear. Everyone knows that he is going to die, but because death is not near, nobody gives it a thought.

If that is what fear is, then the things that must be fearful are the things that seem to have great power to destroy us, or to do us harms that lead to great pain. That is why even the signs of such things are fearful: they make the fearful thing itself seem near. For that is what danger is: the coming near of something fearful.

Here are such signs. First, the enmity and anger of people who are able to do something to us. For it is clear that they both want to and are able to, so that they are close to doing it.

Next, injustice that has power behind it. For the unjust man is unjust by choice, and so the wish is already there.

Next, virtue that has been treated with insolence and has power behind it. For it is clear that virtue, whenever it is treated with insolence, always chooses to hit back, and now it is able to.

Next, fear felt by people who are able to do something to us. For a man like that, too, must be getting ready to act.

Next, since most people are rather bad than good, are slaves to gain, and are cowards in danger, it is generally a fearful thing to be at someone else's mercy. So if you have done something terrible, the people who share your secret are to be feared: they may give you away, or leave you in the lurch.

Next, people who are able to do wrong are to be feared by those who can be wronged, since as a rule people do wrong whenever they can. People who have been wronged, or who think they are being wronged, are to be feared too, because they are always watching for their chance. So are people who have done wrong, if they have power, because they are afraid of being paid back in kind,

and we assumed at the start that this sort of thing is fearful. So too are our rivals for the same things, wherever both sides cannot have them at once, because people are always at war with rivals like that.

Next, people who are feared by those stronger than ourselves. For if they could harm those stronger people, they could harm us all the more. And, for the same reason, the people whom those stronger than ourselves are afraid of.

Next, people who have brought down those stronger than themselves, and people who are attacking those weaker than themselves: either they are fearful already, or they will be once they have grown stronger. And among the people we have wronged, or our enemies or rivals, it is not the hot-tempered and outspoken who are to be feared, but the calm, the ironical and the cunning. With them you cannot tell whether they are about to strike, so you can never be sure that they are far from it.

Every fearful thing is more fearful when, once a mistake has been made, it cannot be put right: either it is altogether impossible, or putting it right is no longer in our hands but in our opponents'. Fearful things are more fearful, too, when there is no help to be had, or no easy help. To put it simply, fearful things are the things that move us to pity when they happen, or are about to happen, to other people.

These, then, are pretty well the chief things that are fearful and that people fear. Now let us say in what state of mind people themselves feel fear.

If fear goes with the expectation of suffering something destructive, then it is clear that nobody is afraid who thinks that nothing could happen to him. He does not fear things he does not think could happen to him, nor people he does not think could do them to him, nor at times when he does not think they could happen. So it must be the people who think something could happen to them who feel fear: fear of those particular people, over those particular things, and at those particular times.

Two kinds of people do not think anything could happen to them. The first are those who are, or seem to be, enjoying great good fortune. That is why they are insolent, contemptuous and rash; and what makes them so is wealth, strength, plenty of friends and power. The second are those who think they have already suffered every terrible thing there is, and have gone cold towards the future, like men already fastened to the plank to be put to death. For fear to be felt, some hope of being saved must remain underneath, something they are still struggling for. Here is a sign of it: fear makes people deliberate, and nobody deliberates about things that are past all hope.

So when it is better that your hearers should be afraid, you must put them in the state of mind of people to whom something could happen. Tell them that people greater than they are have suffered, and so they could too. Show them people like themselves who are suffering or have suffered, and at the hands of people they never expected it from, in ways they never expected, and at times they never expected.

Now that it is clear what fear is, what things are fearful, and in what state of mind each kind of person is afraid, it is also clear from all this what confidence is, what things people feel confident about, and in what state of mind they feel confident. For confidence is the opposite of fear, and what gives confidence is the opposite of what is fearful. So confidence is hope, together with a picture in the mind, that the things that will save us are close by, and that the fearful things are either not there at all or far away.

These things, then, give confidence: terrible things that are far off, and things that will save us that are near; the chance of putting things right, and help, whether plentiful or great or both; not having been wronged and not having done wrong; having no rivals at all, or none with any power, or rivals with power who are our friends, or who have done us good or had good from us; and having more people whose interests are the same as ours, or stronger people, or both.

As for the state of mind: people are confident if they think they have often succeeded and have not come to harm, or if they have often walked into danger and got away. For there are two ways in which people come to feel that nothing can touch them: either they have never been tested, or they have help to hand. So in dangers at sea, both the man who has never been in a storm and the man whose experience gives him the means to deal with one feel confident about what is coming.

People are also confident when a thing is not fearful to their equals, nor to those beneath them, nor to those they think they are better than.

And they think they are better than those they have beaten, whether they beat those men themselves, or men stronger than them, or their equals. They are also confident if they think they have more, and greater, of the advantages that make those who have them fearful: plenty of money, strength of body, of friends, of land and of the means of making war, either all of them or the most important. And they are confident if they have wronged nobody, or not many, or not the people they are afraid of;

and, in general, if things stand well between them and the gods, in the signs and oracles as well as in everything else. For anger gives confidence; and it is being wronged, not doing wrong, that makes people angry; and the gods are supposed to help those who have been wronged.

Last, people are confident when, as they set about something, they think they will suffer nothing, either now or later, or that they will succeed. So much, then, for what is fearful and what gives confidence.
