Chapter 7: Kindness

Whom people feel kindly towards, for what, and in what state of mind, will be clear once we have defined kindness.

Let us say, then, that kindness, the quality in virtue of which someone is said to be kind, is helping someone who needs help, not in return for anything, and not so that the helper should get something out of it, but so that the other person should. The kindness is great if the person helped is in great need, or needs great and difficult things, or needs them at a moment like that; or if the helper is the only one, or the first, or the one who helps most.

By needs I mean wants, and above all the wants that bring pain when they go unsatisfied. Appetites are like this, love, for instance; and so are the wants that come with bodily suffering and with danger, for the man in danger wants something, and so does the man in pain. That is why people who stand by someone in poverty or in exile earn gratitude even if the help they give is small, because the need is so great and the moment so pressing: like the man who gave someone a mat in the Lyceum, the gymnasium outside Athens.

So the help must meet, above all, those very needs; failing that, needs as great or greater.

Since it is now clear to whom kindness is shown, for what, and in what state of mind, it is clear that this is what the speaker must work from. He must show that the one side is, or has been, in pain and need of this kind, and that the other has done, or is doing, some such service in a need of this kind.

It is also clear how it is possible to take away the kindness and make people ungrateful. You can say that the helpers are helping, or helped, for their own sake, and that, as we said, is not kindness. Or that it happened by chance, or that they were forced into it. Or that they were paying back, not giving, whether they knew it or not; for either way it was something in return for something, and so, in this case too, it would not be kindness.

And you should look at it under all the categories, the headings under which anything can be considered. For a kindness is a kindness because it is this particular thing, or this much, or of this sort, or at this time, or in this place. It is a sign against them, too, if they would not do us a smaller service; and if they have done the same, or as much, or more, for our enemies, since then it is clear that what they did for us was not for our sake either. Or if what they gave was worthless and they knew it, since nobody admits that he needs worthless things.
