Chapter 8: Pity

So much for doing a kindness and failing to show gratitude. Now let us say what things are pitiable, whom people pity, and in what state of mind they themselves feel pity.

Let us define pity as a kind of pain at an evil that we see, a destructive or painful evil, falling on someone who does not deserve it: the kind of evil that we might expect to suffer ourselves, or that someone who belongs to us might, and at a moment when it seems close. For it is clear that the man who is going to feel pity must be the sort of person who thinks that he himself, or someone who belongs to him, could suffer some evil, and an evil of the kind named in the definition, or like it, or near it.

That is why people who are utterly ruined do not feel pity: they think nothing more can happen to them, because it has all happened already. Nor do people who think themselves supremely happy; they are insolent instead. For if they think they have every good thing, then clearly they think they have this one too, that nothing bad can happen to them, since that too is one of the good things.

The people inclined to think that something could happen to them are these. Those who have already suffered and come through it. Older people, both because of their good sense and because of their experience. The weak. Those who are rather on the timid side. And the educated, because they reason well about what is likely.

Also people who have parents, or children, or wives, because these are part of themselves, and are the kind of people who could suffer the evils we have spoken of.

Also people who are not in one of the emotions of courage, such as anger or confidence, since these take no account of what is going to happen; nor in an insolent frame of mind, since such people, too, take no account of the chance of suffering anything. It is the people in between who pity. Nor again must they be terribly afraid, since people who are panic-stricken do not feel pity: they are taken up with what is happening to themselves.

People feel pity, too, if they think that there are some decent people in the world, because the man who thinks there is nobody decent will think that everyone deserves what he gets. And in general, a man feels pity when he is in a frame of mind to remember that things like this have happened to him or to one of his own, or to expect that they may happen to him or to one of his own.

So much for the state of mind in which people feel pity. What they pity is clear from the definition. All painful and distressing things that destroy are pitiable, and all that ruin; and all evils of any size that are caused by bad luck.

The distressing and destructive things are deaths, beatings and injuries to the body, ill treatment, old age, sickness and lack of food.

The evils caused by bad luck are having no friends, or few friends (which is why it is pitiable to be torn away from your friends and companions), ugliness, weakness, being crippled; and some evil coming from the very place where you had every right to expect something good;

and this happening again and again; and good fortune coming only after the suffering is over, as when the gifts from the King of Persia were sent down to Diopithes after he was already dead; and either never having had anything good happen at all, or, when it has happened, not being able to enjoy it.

These, then, and things like them are what people pity.

Whom do people pity? First, people they know, as long as they are not too closely connected with them. For those who are, they feel about as they would about themselves if they were about to suffer. That is why, so the story goes, Amasis, king of Egypt, did not weep when his son was led away to be put to death, but did weep over a friend reduced to begging. The second was pitiable, the first was terrible; and the terrible is something different from the pitiable. It drives pity out, and often works in favour of the opposite feeling.

For people no longer feel pity when the terrible thing is close to themselves. Next, people pity those who are like them in age, in character, in habits, in rank and in family, because in all these cases it seems more likely that the same thing could happen to them as well. For in general here too we may take it that whatever people fear for themselves, they pity when it happens to others.

Since sufferings are pitiable when they seem close, while people either do not pity at all, or do not pity as much, things that happened ten thousand years ago or will happen ten thousand years from now, since they neither expect the one nor remember the other, it follows that those who add to the effect with gesture, voice, dress and delivery in general are more pitiable. They make the evil seem close by setting it before our eyes, either as about to happen or as having happened.

And things that have just happened, or are about to happen soon, are more pitiable for the same reason.

For this reason too the signs of suffering are pitiable, such as the clothes of those who have suffered, and everything of that sort; and the actions and words and everything else of people who are in the midst of suffering, people who are dying, for instance. And most pitiable of all is when good men are in such straits. For all these things make pity greater because they make the suffering seem close; and because the man seems not to deserve it, and the suffering appears before our very eyes.
