Chapter 19: The Possible, the Past and the Future

Let us begin with the possible and the impossible. If one of a pair of opposites can exist or come about, then it would seem that the other one can too. For instance, if a man can be cured, he can also fall ill, because the same capacity covers both of a pair of opposites, in so far as they are opposites. And if one of two similar things is possible, so is the other.

If the harder of two things is possible, so is the easier.

If it is possible for a thing to be made good and beautiful, then it is possible for it to be made at all, since it is harder to build a beautiful house than to build a house.

If the beginning of a thing can come about, so can the end, because nothing impossible ever comes about, or even begins to come about. For instance, it could never happen that the diagonal of a square is measured exactly by its side, and it could never even begin to happen. And where the end is possible, so is the beginning, since everything comes about from a beginning.

If what comes later, whether in its nature or in the order in which things come into being, can come about, then so can what comes earlier. For instance, if a man can come into being, so can a child, since the child comes first. And if a child can come into being, so can a man, since the child is the beginning of the man.

Things that people love or want by nature are possible, because as a rule nobody loves or wants the impossible.

Things that sciences and arts are about can exist and come about.

So can anything that has the starting point of its coming about in people we could force or persuade to act; and those are the people we are stronger than, or masters of, or friends of.

If the parts are possible, so is the whole; and if the whole is possible, so, as a rule, are the parts. If the front piece, the toe-cap and the upper of a shoe can be made, then shoes can be made; and if shoes can be made, so can the front piece, the toe-cap and the upper.

If the whole class of a thing is among the things that can be made, so is the particular kind; and if the particular kind can be made, so can the class. For instance, if a ship can be built, so can a trireme, the Greek warship; and if a trireme can be built, so can a ship.

If one of two things that are naturally paired with each other is possible, so is the other. For instance, if the double is possible, so is the half; and if the half is possible, so is the double.

If a thing can be done without art or preparation, then all the more can it be done with art and with care. That is the source of the lines by Agathon, the tragic poet:

	What's more, some things we have to do by art,
	while others come to us by force and chance.

If a thing is possible for people who are worse, or weaker, or less intelligent, then it is all the more possible for people who are the opposite. Isocrates said as much: it would be a terrible thing if Euthynus had managed to learn something that he himself could not work out on his own.

As for the impossible, it is clear that the arguments for it come from the opposites of the ones we have just given.

Whether a thing has happened in the past is to be looked at in the following ways.

First, if what is naturally less likely to happen has happened, then what is more likely will have happened too. And if what usually comes afterwards has happened, then what comes before it has happened as well. For instance, if a man has forgotten something, then at some time he must have learned it.

If a man was able to do something and wanted to, he has done it, because everybody does what he wants to do when he is able to, since there is nothing in his way.

Again, a man has done a thing if he wanted to and nothing outside him prevented it; or if he was able to and was angry; or if he was able to and had an appetite for it. As a rule, people do the things they want whenever they can: bad people through lack of self-control, and decent people because what they want is decent.

If something was about to happen, it has probably been done, since it is likely that a man who was about to do something went on to do it.

A thing has happened if everything that naturally comes before it, or that is done for its sake, has happened. For instance, if there has been lightning, there has been thunder too; and if a man has attempted a thing, he has also done it. Again, if everything that naturally comes after a thing, or for whose sake it is done, has happened, then the earlier thing, and the thing done for its sake, have happened too. For instance, if it has thundered, there has been lightning; and if a man has done a thing, he has attempted it.

Of all these connections, some hold by necessity and some only as a rule. As for arguing that a thing has not happened, it is obvious that the arguments come from the opposites of the ones we have given.

About the future, it is clear that the same arguments apply. What we are able to do and want to do will happen; and things that appetite, anger and reasoning urge on us, when we have the power as well, will also happen once we are set on doing them or about to do them, since as a rule what is about to happen is more likely to happen than what is not.

A thing will happen if the things that naturally come before it have already happened. For instance, if the sky is clouding over, it is likely to rain.

And if something has been done for the sake of something else, it is likely that the other thing will come about as well. For instance, if a foundation has been laid, a house is likely to follow.

As for how big or small things are, which is greater and which is less, and greatness and smallness in general, all that is clear from what we have already said. We discussed the size of goods, and the greater and the less in general, when we were dealing with political speeches. Now, in each of the three kinds of speech, the end put before it is a good: what is advantageous, what is noble, or what is just. So it is plain that every speaker must take the material for making things bigger, which is called amplification, from those discussions.

To go looking beyond that for greatness and superiority in the abstract is to waste words, because for practical purposes the particular facts count for more than general statements.

That is enough, then, about the possible and the impossible, about whether a thing has happened or has not, and whether it will happen or will not, and also about how big or small things are.
