Chapter 20: Examples

We have discussed the proofs that belong to each kind of speech on its own. What remains is to speak of the proofs that are common to them all. These common proofs are of two general kinds, the example and the enthymeme; the maxim, after all, is a part of an enthymeme.

Let us take the example first, since the example is like induction, and induction is where knowledge begins.

There are two kinds of example. One consists in telling of things that have really happened before; the other in making something up yourself. The made-up kind divides again into the comparison and the fable, like the fables of Aesop and the Libyan fables, the animal stories that came out of Africa.

Here is the kind that tells of real events. Suppose someone said that we must prepare against the Great King of Persia and not let him get control of Egypt. After all, Darius, in the past, did not cross over into Greece until he had taken Egypt, but once he had taken it he crossed. And again Xerxes did not make his attempt until he had taken Egypt, but once he had taken it he crossed. So this king too, if he takes Egypt, will cross over, and therefore we must not let him.

The comparison is the kind of thing Socrates used to say. Suppose someone argued that public officials should not be chosen by lot. It would be just like choosing athletes by lot, sending not the men who are able to compete but the ones whose names happen to come up; or like choosing by lot which of the sailors on board is to steer the ship, as though it ought to be the man the lot falls on and not the man who knows how.

The fable is the kind of story Stesichorus, the poet, told about Phalaris, or Aesop told in defence of a popular leader.

The people of Himera, in Sicily, had chosen Phalaris as their general with absolute powers and were about to give him a bodyguard. Stesichorus argued with them at length, and then told them a fable. A horse, he said, had a meadow all to himself. Then a stag came along and began ruining the pasture. The horse wanted to take revenge on the stag, and asked a man whether he could help him punish it. The man said he could, if the horse would take a bit in his mouth and let the man climb on his back, holding javelins. The horse agreed, and the man got on; and instead of getting his revenge, the horse found himself the man's slave. "So you too," Stesichorus said, "take care that in your wish to take revenge on your enemies you do not end up like the horse. You already have the bit in your mouth, since you have chosen a general with absolute powers. If you give him a bodyguard and let him climb on your back, you will be the slaves of Phalaris from that moment on."

Aesop, speaking in the assembly at Samos in defence of a popular leader who was on trial for his life, told this story. A fox was crossing a river when she was swept into a gully. She could not get out, and for a long time she was in a bad way, with a crowd of dog-ticks clinging to her. A hedgehog came wandering by, saw her, felt sorry for her, and asked whether he should pull the ticks off. She would not let him. When he asked her why not, she said: "These ones are full of me already and are drawing very little blood. If you take them off, others will come along hungry and drink up the blood I have left." "So it is with you, men of Samos," Aesop said. "This man will do you no more harm, because he is rich. But if you put him to death, others will come who are poor, and they will steal from you and spend what you have left."

Fables are good for speeches to the assembly, and they have this advantage: it is hard to find real events that are similar to the case in hand, but fables are easier. You have to make them up, as you do comparisons, and all you need is to be able to see the likeness between things, which is easier if you have studied philosophy.

So the lessons of fables are easier to come by; but for political advice the lessons of real events are more useful, because as a rule what is going to happen is like what has happened already.

If you have no enthymemes, you should use examples as your demonstration, since they will produce conviction. If you do have enthymemes, you should use examples as evidence, bringing them in after the enthymemes as a kind of summing up. Put first, they look like induction, and induction does not suit speeches except in a very few cases. Put after, they look like evidence from witnesses, and a witness is persuasive everywhere. That is also why, if you put them first, you must give a lot of them, whereas if you put them after, even one is enough: a single good witness is useful.

So much, then, for how many kinds of example there are, and how and when they should be used.
