Chapter 21: Maxims

As for the use of maxims, it will be easiest to see what subjects they suit, on what occasions, and in whose mouth, once we have said what a maxim is.

A maxim is a statement. It is not, however, a statement about a particular person or thing, such as what sort of man Iphicrates was, but a general one. Nor is it about everything general, such as that the straight is the opposite of the crooked, but only about the things that human actions are concerned with, and about what ought to be chosen or avoided when we act. Now the enthymeme is, more or less, the syllogism that deals with exactly these things. So maxims are the conclusions or the starting premises of enthymemes, with the reasoning taken away. Take these lines from Euripides' Medea:

	No man who has been born with any sense
	should have his children taught to be too clever.

That is a maxim. Add the cause, the reason why, and the whole thing becomes an enthymeme, as Medea goes on to do:

	For quite apart from being called idle,
	they earn the hatred and envy of their fellow citizens.

Again, take the line from Euripides' Stheneboea,

	There is no man who is happy in everything;

or the line

	There is no man alive who is truly free.

This last is a maxim; but together with the line that follows it in Euripides, it is an enthymeme:

	For he is the slave of money or of chance.

If a maxim is what we have said, there must be four kinds of maxim. A maxim either comes with a reason attached, a supporting addition, or it does not; and each of these divides in two.

Maxims that say something surprising or disputed need proof. Those that say nothing surprising need no reason attached. Among these, some need no reason because the point is known already, like the line, from Simonides or Epicharmus,

	For a man, to be healthy is the best of all, as I see it

(since that is what most people think). Others are clear the moment they are spoken, to anyone who stops to look at them, like the line from Euripides' Trojan Women,

	No one is a lover who does not love for ever.

Of the maxims that come with a reason attached, some are part of an enthymeme, like the one we began with,

	No man who has been born with any sense;

others have the character of an enthymeme without being part of one, and these are the ones most admired. They are the maxims in which the reason for what is said shows through, as in

	Do not keep your anger immortal, since you are mortal.

To say that one should not keep one's anger for ever is the maxim; the added words "since you are mortal" give the reason why. It is the same with the line, said to be by Epicharmus,

	A mortal should think mortal thoughts, not immortal ones.

It is clear, then, from what we have said, how many kinds of maxim there are, and what each kind suits. On a matter that is disputed or surprising, a maxim should not be used without its reason. Either you put the reason first and then use the conclusion as a maxim, as if someone were to say: "For my part, since a man ought neither to be envied nor to be idle, I say that children ought not to be educated." Or you state the maxim first and add the reason after it. On matters that are not surprising but are not obvious either, you should add the reason, as compactly as you can.

In such cases short, sharp Spartan sayings and riddling sayings fit well. An example is what Stesichorus said to the people of Locri: that they ought not to be insolent, or their cicadas would have to sing from the ground. He meant that an invader would cut down their trees.

Maxims suit older men, and suit subjects a man knows from experience. For someone who is not old enough to be using maxims is as unbecoming as telling tales; and to use them about things you have no experience of is foolish and shows a lack of education. There is a good enough sign of this: country people are the greatest coiners of maxims, and the readiest to hand out their opinions.

To state in general terms what is not really general fits best when you are complaining bitterly or making a thing sound as bad as possible; and then either at the start or once you have proved your point.

You should use even well-worn, commonplace maxims, if they are useful. Because they are common, they seem to be right, as though everybody agreed with them. For instance, a general urging his men into danger without having first made the sacrifices to see whether the omens are good can say, with Hector in the Iliad,

	The one best omen is to fight for your country;

and if they are fewer than the enemy,

	The War God is on both sides alike;

and if he is urging them to kill the enemy's children even though they have done no wrong,

	A fool is he who kills the father and leaves the sons alive.

Some proverbs are maxims too. An example is the proverb "an Athenian for a neighbour", meaning a restless, meddling one.

You should also use maxims that go against the well-known sayings, by which I mean such sayings as "Know yourself" and "Nothing in excess". Do this when it will make your character look better, or when the maxim is spoken with emotion. An example of speaking with emotion would be a man in a rage saying: "It is not true that a man should know himself. At any rate, if this man had known himself, he would never have thought himself fit to be a general." Your character will look better if you say that we ought not to love people, as the saying goes, as though we were going to hate them one day, but should rather hate them as though we were going to love them.

Your choice, what you mean to do, should be made clear by your very words; and if it is not, you should add the reason. For instance, you could put it this way: "We ought to love, not as the saying goes, but as though we were going to love for ever, since the other way is the way of a man who plots against his friends." Or you could put it like this: "I do not like the saying. A true friend should love as though he were going to love for ever." Or again: "Nor do I like 'Nothing in excess', because the wicked, at least, we ought to hate to excess."

Maxims give a speech great help, for two reasons. One is the unsophistication of the listeners. They are delighted when a speaker, speaking in general terms, hits on the opinions they already hold about their own particular case. What I mean will be clear from what follows, and so will the way to hunt for maxims. A maxim, as we have said, is a general statement, and listeners are delighted to hear stated in general terms something they had already assumed about their own particular case. For instance, a man who happens to have bad neighbours or bad children will welcome it when someone says that nothing is more of a trial than neighbours, or that nothing is more foolish than having children. So the speaker must guess what sort of thing his listeners have already assumed, and then speak in general terms about just those things.

That is one use of maxims. There is another, and a greater one: they give a speech character. A speech has character when it makes the speaker's choice clear. All maxims do this, because the man who speaks a maxim is making a general statement about what is to be chosen; so if the maxims are good ones, they make the speaker seem a man of good character too.

So much, then, for the maxim: what it is, how many kinds of it there are, how it should be used, and what good it does.
