Chapter 1: Style and Delivery

There are three things a treatment of speaking has to deal with. The first is where the proofs (the means of persuasion) are to come from; the second is style; the third is how the parts of a speech ought to be arranged. The proofs have been dealt with already. We have said how many there are, namely three; what they are; and why there are only three. For everyone who is persuaded is persuaded in one of three ways: because the people judging have been put into some state of feeling themselves, or because they take the speakers to be people of a certain character, or because something has been demonstrated. We have also said where enthymemes are to be found, since some of them come from the special kinds of argument that belong to one subject, and others from the general lines of argument.

The next thing to speak about is style. It is not enough to have the right things to say; you must also say them in the right way, and this does a great deal to make a speech seem to be of a certain kind.

The first question we looked into was, naturally enough, the one that comes first by nature: what gives the facts themselves their power to persuade. The second is how to set those facts out in words, which is style. The third is delivery. Of the three it has the greatest power, and yet nobody has so far taken it up. Even in tragedy and in the recital of epic poems it came in late, because at first the poets acted their own tragedies, and the reciters of epic were at first the poets themselves, so nobody needed to be taught how to perform. It is clear, then, that there is something of this kind in rhetoric just as there is in poetry, and Glaucon of Teos, among others, has written about it where poetry is concerned.

Delivery lies in the voice: how it should be used for each emotion. When should it be loud, when soft, when in between? How should its pitch be used, high, low or middle? And what rhythms suit each subject? For there are three things that people who study delivery pay attention to: volume, pitch and rhythm. The people who handle these well carry off nearly all the prizes in the dramatic contests. And just as in the theatre the actors now count for more than the poets, so it is in the contests of public life, in the courts and the assembly, because of the poor quality of our citizens.

No art of delivery has yet been put together, since even the study of style was late in coming forward. And delivery is thought to be a vulgar business, and rightly so, if you look at it properly. But since the whole study of rhetoric is concerned with how things seem to people, we have to pay attention to delivery, not because it is right, but because it cannot be helped. What is right is that a speech should aim at nothing beyond neither hurting the listener nor charming him. It is only fair to fight the case on the facts alone, so that everything besides the demonstration is beside the point. All the same, as I have said, delivery has great power, because of the poor quality of the listener.

Style, at any rate, does have a small necessary place in every kind of teaching, since it does make some difference to how clear a thing is whether you say it this way or that. But the difference is not so very great. All these things are show, and are aimed at the listener. That is why nobody teaches geometry like this.

When an art of delivery does arrive, it will do the same for speaking as the art of acting does for the stage. A few writers have tried to say a little about it, such as Thrasymachus in his book on appeals to pity. Being good at delivery is a gift of nature and has less to do with art, but style is a matter of art. That is why people who are good at style win prizes in their turn, just as speakers who are good at delivery do; for speeches written to be read get their force more from their style than from their thinking.

It was the poets who first set the study of style going, as was natural. Words are imitations of things, and the voice, which of all our parts is the best at imitating, was there to hand. That is how the arts of reciting epic and of acting, and others besides, came into being.

The poets seemed to have won their fame by their style, even though what they said was simple-minded. So the first prose style was a poetic one, like that of Gorgias, the Sicilian teacher of rhetoric; and even now most uneducated people think that speakers of this kind talk most beautifully. They do not. The style of prose is one thing and the style of poetry another. What has happened proves it, for not even the people who write tragedies use the old manner any longer. They moved from the long trochaic line to the iambic, because the iambic is of all metres the most like ordinary speech; and in the same way they have dropped all the words that are out of the way of ordinary conversation, the words the early poets used to decorate their lines with and that the writers of hexameter verse still use today. So it is ridiculous to imitate people who no longer write that way themselves.

It is clear, then, that we need not go into every question about style in detail, but only into those that concern the kind of style we are discussing, the style of prose. The other kind, the style of poetry, has been dealt with in my Poetics.
