Chapter 15: Answering Prejudice

As for prejudice, the slander that a speaker has to clear away, one line of argument is to use whatever might dispel an ugly suspicion. It makes no difference whether anyone has actually voiced the suspicion or not, so this is a general rule.

Another line of argument is to meet the points in dispute head on. You can say that the thing did not happen; or that it did no harm, or at least no harm to this man; or that it was not as serious as they say; or that it was not unjust, or not very unjust; or that it was not disgraceful, or not of any real size. These are the things a dispute is about. Iphicrates, the general, answered Nausicrates this way: he admitted that he had done what Nausicrates said he had done, and that he had done him harm, but denied that he had done him wrong. Or, if you did do wrong, you can set something against it: it was harmful, yes, but it was noble; it was painful, but it was useful; or something else of the kind.

Another line of argument is to say that it was a mistake, or bad luck, or something you could not help. Sophocles, for instance, said that he trembled, not, as the man slandering him claimed, so as to seem an old man, but because he could not help it: it was not by his own choice that he was eighty years old. You can also set one motive against another. You can say that you did not mean to do harm but meant to do something else; that you did not do what you are slandered for; that the harm simply happened. "It would be right to hate me, if I had acted in order to bring this about."

Another, if the man slandering you has been involved in a charge of the same kind, now or before, whether he himself or someone close to him.

Another, if the charge would also take in other people whom everyone agrees are not open to it. For example, if the argument is that so-and-so is an adulterer because he is well groomed, then so-and-so, a man of spotless name who is well groomed too, must be one as well.

Another, if the accuser, or someone else, has slandered other people before; or if other people, without anyone slandering them, were suspected just as you are now, and have been shown to be innocent.

Another is to slander the slanderer in return. For it would be absurd if a man who cannot himself be trusted were to have his words trusted.

Another, if a judgement has already been given on the matter. Euripides did this against Hygiaenon in a case about an exchange of property, the Athenian procedure by which a man called on to pay for a public service could challenge a richer man either to pay for it himself or to swap estates with him. Hygiaenon accused Euripides of impiety, as the man who had written a line recommending perjury, the line Hippolytus speaks in his play:

	My tongue has sworn, but my mind has taken no oath.

Euripides said that Hygiaenon was doing wrong in dragging into the law courts judgements that belonged to the contest at the festival of Dionysus. He had already given an account of his words there, before the judges of the theatre, or would give one there, if Hygiaenon wanted to accuse him.

Another is to attack slander itself: to show how great an evil it is, because it makes people judge on other issues than the real ones, and because it shows no confidence in the facts of the case.

One line of argument common to both sides is to point to tokens, small facts that seem to show something. So in Sophocles' play Teucer, Odysseus argues that Teucer is kin to Priam, the king of Troy, since Teucer's mother Hesione was Priam's sister: a token, he suggests, that Teucer is a traitor. Teucer answers with tokens of his own: his father, Telamon, was Priam's enemy, and he himself did not denounce the Greek spies when they were in Troy.

Another, for the slanderer: to praise some small thing at great length and then to blame some great thing in a few words; or to put forward many good things about his opponent, and then blame the one thing that bears on the case. People who do this are the most skilful of speakers and the most unjust, for they try to do harm by means of good things, mixing them in with the bad.

One thing common to the slanderer and to the man clearing himself: since the same act may have been done for more than one reason, the slanderer must be malicious and take it in the worse sense, and the man clearing himself must take it in the better. For example, when Diomedes chose Odysseus as his companion for the night raid on the Trojan camp, one side can say that he did so because he thought Odysseus the best of men; the other can say no, it was because Odysseus was the only man who would never be his rival, since he was worthless.
