Chapter 17: Proofs

The proofs (the means of persuasion) should demonstrate. And since there are four points on which a case can be disputed, the demonstration should be aimed at whichever point is in dispute. If the dispute is over whether the thing happened at all, then at the trial that above all is what you must prove. If it is over whether the act did any harm, prove that. And the same if the claim is that it was not as serious as alleged, or that it was done justly: each of these is disputed just as the question whether it happened is disputed.

Do not forget that only in this last kind of dispute, over whether the thing happened, must one of the two parties be a scoundrel. Ignorance cannot be the cause here, as it could be if people were disputing what is just. If one man says "You hit me" and the other says "I did not," one of them knows he is lying. So on this point it is worth spending time, but not on the others.

In ceremonial speeches, for the most part, amplification should be used to show that the actions were noble and useful. The facts themselves have to be taken on trust. Speakers seldom bring proofs of them, and only if they are hard to believe or if someone else is given the credit for them.

In political speeches a speaker may dispute that a thing will happen at all. Or he may grant that what his opponent urges will happen, but argue that it will not be just, or not advantageous, or not as important as claimed. You should also watch whether your opponent says anything false about matters outside the subject. Those falsehoods look like sure signs that he is lying about the rest as well.

Examples suit political speeches best, and enthymemes suit courtroom speeches best. Political speaking is about the future, so its examples must be drawn from what has already happened. Courtroom speaking is about whether things are so or are not so, and there demonstration and necessity have more place, because what is past has a kind of necessity: it cannot now be undone.

Do not deliver your enthymemes one after another in a row, but mix them in with other things. Otherwise they spoil one another. There is a limit to how many you should use. As Menelaus says to young Pisistratus in Homer:

	Friend, since you have said as many things as a sensible man would say,

and notice that he says "as many things," not "such things." The limit he sets is one of amount.

And do not look for enthymemes about everything. If you do, you will be doing what some philosophers do: they reason their way to conclusions that are better known, and easier to believe, than the premises they start from.

When you are rousing emotion, do not use an enthymeme. Either it will knock the emotion out, or it will be wasted. Movements that happen at the same time knock each other out, and either wipe each other away or make each other weak. Nor, when you are giving the speech character, should you look for an enthymeme at the same moment, because a demonstration contains neither character nor choice.

Maxims, on the other hand, should be used both in the narrative and in the proofs, because they show character. For example: "I gave it to him, and I knew all the while that one should not trust." Or, to rouse emotion: "And I do not regret it, though I was wronged. The profit is his, but justice is mine."

Speaking in the assembly is harder than speaking in the courts, and naturally so, because it is about the future. The courts deal with what has happened, which even prophets can know, as Epimenides of Crete, the seer called in to purify Athens of a curse, used to say. He did not prophesy about the future, but about things that had happened and were hidden. Besides, in the courts the law is the starting point on which everything is built, and once you have a starting point it is easier to find a demonstration. Political speaking also gives little room to linger over things like attacks on your opponent, talk about yourself, or rousing emotion. Of all kinds of speaking it gives least room for these, unless the speaker leaves the subject. So when you are stuck for something to say, you must do what the speakers at Athens do, and Isocrates among them: even while giving advice, he accuses somebody. He accuses the Spartans, for instance, in his Panegyricus, and Chares, the Athenian general, in his speech on the alliance.

In ceremonial speeches you should vary the speech with passages of praise worked in along the way, as Isocrates does, who is always bringing somebody in. This is what Gorgias meant when he said he never ran out of things to say. If he is talking about Achilles, he praises Peleus, Achilles' father; then Aeacus, his grandfather; then the god, Zeus, who fathered Aeacus. In the same way, if he is talking about courage, he says that it does this and that, or that it is of such and such a kind.

If you have demonstrations, then, you should speak both so as to show character and so as to demonstrate. If you have no enthymemes, speak so as to show character alone. And in any case it suits a decent man better to show himself good than to show his argument exact.

Of enthymemes, the ones that refute are more popular than the ones that prove. When a refutation is made, it is clearer that a conclusion has been reached, because opposites are easier to recognise when they are set side by side.

Answering your opponent is not a separate kind of proof. It is part of the proofs to demolish some of his arguments by raising an objection and others by a counter-syllogism. In a political speech and in a courtroom speech alike, if you speak first you should state your own proofs first, and afterwards meet the arguments on the other side, taking them apart and tearing them down in advance. But if the arguments against you are many and various, deal with them first. That is what Callistratus did in the Messenian assembly: he first disposed of what his opponents were going to say, and only then made his own case.

If you speak second, you should first speak against your opponent's speech, taking it apart and reasoning against it, especially if it has been well received. The mind will not accept a man who has been slandered beforehand, and in just the same way it will not accept a speech if the opponent is thought to have spoken well. So you must make room in the listener for the speech you are about to give, and you will do that by demolishing the other one. Fight first against all of his arguments, or against the most important ones, or the ones that have gone down well, or the ones easiest to refute, and only then make your own case believable. So Hecuba, in Euripides' Trojan Women, answering Helen, who has blamed her own flight to Troy on the contest of beauty between three goddesses, begins:

	First I will fight as the goddesses' ally,
	for I do not believe that Hera

In these lines she has seized first on the silliest of Helen's arguments: that goddesses would ever have held such a contest.

So much, then, for proofs. As for character: sometimes talking about yourself brings on envy, or looks long-winded, or invites contradiction, and talking about someone else looks abusive or boorish. So you should have someone else do the talking. Isocrates does this in the Philippus and in the Antidosis, where he puts praise of his own writings into the mouths of friends. Archilochus uses the same device for blame. He was the poet whose engagement to a girl was broken off by her father, Lycambes, and in his iambic poem he has the father himself speak about his daughter:

	Nothing in the world is past expecting, nothing can be sworn impossible,

and he has Charon the carpenter speak in the iambic poem that begins

	Not for me the wealth of Gyges,

Gyges being the Lydian king famous for his gold. And so Sophocles has Haemon, defending Antigone to his father, Creon, speak as though he were only repeating what others were saying.

You should also sometimes turn your enthymemes into maxims. For instance: "Sensible people should make peace while they are doing well, because that is how they will gain the most." Put as an enthymeme, this would be: "If we ought to make peace when peace is most useful and most to our advantage, then we ought to make peace while we are doing well."
