Chapter 18: Questioning

As for questioning your opponent, there are four good moments for it. The best moment of all is when he has already said one thing, so that by asking just one more question you bring out an absurdity. Pericles, for instance, questioned Lampon, the seer, about the rites of initiation in the worship of the Saviour goddess. Lampon said that nobody who had not been initiated could be told about them. Pericles asked him whether he knew the rites himself, and when Lampon said he did, Pericles asked, "And how can that be, when you have not been initiated?" One answer had already been given, and one more question turned it into nonsense.

The second moment is when one of your two premises is obvious, and it is clear that your opponent will grant the other if you ask him. Once you have asked for that one premise and got it, you should not go on to ask about the obvious one as well; you should state the conclusion yourself. That is what Socrates did at his trial. Meletus was accusing him of not believing in the gods, but he had also said that Socrates spoke of a certain divine something, the inner divine sign Socrates claimed would warn him. So Socrates asked him whether spirits were not either children of the gods or in some way divine. Meletus said yes. "Is there anyone, then," Socrates said, "who believes that the children of the gods exist, but not the gods?"

The third moment is when you are about to show that your opponent is contradicting himself, or saying something against all common belief.

The fourth is when he has no way to meet your question except by an answer that sounds like a sophist's dodge. If he answers "It is and it is not," or "Some are and some are not," or "In one way yes and in another way no," the listeners jeer at him for being stuck.

At any other time, do not try it. If he raises an objection, you will look as though you have been beaten. You cannot ask a long string of questions, because the listener is too weak to follow them. That is also why enthymemes should be packed as tightly as possible.

When you are the one answering, meet an ambiguous question by drawing the distinction in words, and not too briefly. Where a question seems to be leading you into contradicting yourself, give the answer that clears it up in your very first reply, before your opponent can ask the next question or draw his conclusion. It is not hard to see in advance where his argument is going. This, and the ways of answering, are made clear in my Topics.

And if your opponent puts his conclusion to you in the form of a question, give the reason along with your answer. When Sophocles, the poet, was asked by Pisander whether he had agreed, like the other members of the board of special commissioners, to set up the oligarchy of the Four Hundred, he said that he had. "What?" said Pisander. "Did it not seem to you a wicked thing?" Sophocles said it did. "So you did this wicked thing?" "Yes," said Sophocles, "because there was nothing better to do." Or take the Spartan who was being called to account at the end of his year as ephor, one of the city's chief magistrates. He was asked whether he thought his fellow ephors had been justly put to death, and he said yes. "But did you not pass the same measures as they did?" He said yes. "Then would it not be just for you to be put to death as well?" "Certainly not," he said. "They did it because they had taken money. I did not; I did it because I believed in it."

That is why you should not ask any further question after the conclusion, nor put the conclusion itself as a question, unless the truth is overwhelmingly on your side. Otherwise, as these two answers show, the man you are questioning simply gives his reason and slips free.

As for jokes: they seem to have some use in debate, and Gorgias said, rightly, that you should spoil your opponents' seriousness with laughter and their laughter with seriousness. How many kinds of jokes there are I have set out in my Poetics. Some of them suit a free man and others do not, so the speaker should choose the kind that suits him. Irony suits a free man better than buffoonery. The man who uses irony makes the joke for his own sake, to amuse himself; the buffoon makes it for someone else's, to amuse the crowd.
