Book XIV

(Part 2 of 2)

When the envoy had come back with word that the Aetolian arms were refused them, the Rutulians waged the prepared war without those forces, and much blood was spilled on both sides. Look — Turnus bears the greedy torches against the pine-built ships, and those the waves had spared now dread the fire. And now the flame was burning the pitch and wax and the rest of the fuel, and climbing the tall mast to the sails, and the benches of the curved ships smoked, when the holy Mother of the Gods, remembering these pines were cut on the heights of Ida, filled the air with the clash of struck cymbals and the sound of the blown boxwood pipe, and, borne through the yielding air by her tamed lions, said: "In vain, Turnus, you hurl the flames with sacrilegious hand: I will save them, and the devouring fire shall not, with my leave, burn parts and limbs of my own groves." As the goddess spoke, it thundered, and after the thunder heavy showers fell with bounding hail; the sons of Astraeus stir the air and the swelling sea with sudden clashes and rush to battle. The kindly Mother, using the force of one of them, snapped the hempen cables of the Phrygian fleet, and carries the ships headlong, and sinks them beneath the sea. Their wood softened and changed to flesh, the curved sterns become the features of a head, the oars taper into fingers and swimming feet, the side stays what it was before, and the keel laid beneath the middle of the ship changes to serve as a spine; the cordage becomes soft hair, the yards become arms; their color is blue, as before; and, as sea-Naiads, with their maiden sports they stir the very waves they once dreaded, and, born on the harsh mountains, they haunt the flowing sea, untouched by their origin. Yet, not forgetting how many dangers they often bore on the deep, they often put a hand under tossed ships — unless one carried Greeks. Still keeping in mind the Phrygian disaster, they hated the Greeks; and with glad faces they looked on the wreck of the ship of Neritos, and with pleasure saw the ship of Alcinous harden on the breakers and stone grow over the wood.

There was a hope that, the fleet made living as sea-nymphs, the Rutulian might give up the war in fear at the marvel; but he holds on, and each side has its own gods, and — what is like the gods — they have courage; and now they seek not a dowry-kingdom, nor a father-in-law's scepter, nor you, maiden Lavinia, but only to win, and wage war for shame of stopping. At last Venus sees her son's arms victorious, and Turnus falls; Ardea falls, called mighty while Turnus lived. After the barbarous fire took it and the roofs sank in the warm ash, a bird, then known for the first time, flew up from the middle of the heap and beat the ashes with its wings. Its cry, its leanness, its pallor, all that befits a captured city — even the city's name — stayed in the bird; and Ardea itself is mourned by the beating of its wings.

And now the valor of Aeneas had forced all the gods, and Juno herself, to end their old wrath; when, the power of rising Iulus well founded, the hero, son of Cytherea, was ripe for heaven. Venus had appealed to the gods above, and, hanging round her father's neck, said: "Father, never unkind to me at any time, be gentlest now, I pray, and grant my Aeneas, who from my blood made you a grandfather, a godhead — even the lowest kind — so long as you grant some! It is enough to have seen the joyless realm once, once to have crossed the Stygian streams." The gods agreed; nor did the royal wife keep her face unmoved, but nodded assent with a calmed look. Then the father said, "You are worthy of the gift of heaven, both you who ask and he for whom you ask: take, daughter, what you wish." He spoke; she rejoices and thanks her father, and, borne by her yoked doves through the light air, comes to the Laurentine shore, where Numicius, hidden in reeds, winds to the neighboring sea with his river waters. Him she bids to wash from Aeneas whatever is subject to death, and carry it beneath the sea in his silent course. The horned river does Venus's bidding, and with his waters washes away from Aeneas whatever was mortal, and sprinkled him; his best part remained. His mother anointed the cleansed body with divine perfume, touched his face with ambrosia mixed with sweet nectar, and made him a god, whom the people of Quirinus call Indiges, and received with temple and altars.

From then Alba and the Latin state were under Ascanius of the two names; Silvius followed him; sprung of him, Latinus took back the old name with the scepter; famous Alba came after Latinus; from him was Epytus; after him Capetus and Capys — but Capys was first; Tiberinus took the kingdom after them, and, drowned in the Etruscan river's waters, gave his name to the water; of him were born Remulus and fierce Acrota. Remulus, the elder, an imitator of the lightning, died by a lightning-stroke. Acrota, more moderate than his brother, handed the scepter to brave Aventinus, who lies buried on the same hill he ruled, and gave the hill his name; and now Proca held the height of the Palatine race.

Under this king lived Pomona, than whom no Hamadryad of Latium tended her gardens more skillfully, nor was any keener on the fruit of the trees; from that she takes her name. She cares not for woods or streams, but loves the country and the boughs that bear thriving fruit; her hand is not weighed with a javelin, but with a curved pruning-knife, with which now she checks the too-lush growth and reins in the branches straying every way, now slits the bark and sets in a graft and gives sap to a stranger nursling; nor does she let them feel thirst, but waters the curling fibers of the drinking root with running streams. This is her love, this her pursuit; and no desire has she for love. Yet, fearing the force of the country folk, she shuts her orchard within, and forbids and flees the approach of men. What did the Satyrs, a young crew apt at the dance, not do — and the Pans with pine-wreathed horns, and Silvanus ever younger than his years, and the god who scares thieves with pruning-hook or groin — to win her? But Vertumnus surpassed even these in love, and was no luckier than they. O how often, in the guise of a hardy reaper, he carried ears of corn in a basket, and was the very picture of a reaper! Often, his temples bound with fresh hay, he could seem to have turned the mown grass; often he carried a goad in his sturdy hand, so you would swear he had just unyoked the weary oxen; given a pruning-knife, he was a woodman and a vine-pruner; he put on a ladder — you would think he meant to pick fruit; he was a soldier with a sword, a fisher with a rod taken up; in short, by many shapes he often found his way in, to enjoy the sight of her beauty.

He too, his temples wreathed with a colored kerchief, leaning on a staff, white hair set about his brow, took on the shape of an old woman, entered the well-kept gardens, admired the fruit, and said, "So much the better off are you!" and gave her, thus praised, a few kisses, such as no real old woman ever gave; and, stooping, sat on a clod, looking up at the boughs bent under the weight of autumn. There was an elm opposite, splendid with shining grapes; when he had praised it, with the vine joined to it, he said: "But if that trunk stood single, without the vine, it would have nothing to seek it for but its leaves; and this vine, which finds rest joined to the elm, if it were not wedded to it, would lie flat on the ground. Yet you are not moved by the example of this tree; you flee marriage and do not care to be joined. Would that you wished it! Helen would not be courted by more suitors, nor she who stirred the Lapiths' battles, nor the wife of over-slow Ulysses. Even now, when you flee and turn from those who court you, a thousand men desire you, and demigods and gods, and whatever powers hold the Alban hills. But if you are wise, if you would make a good match and hear an old woman — who loves you more than all of them, more than you believe — reject a common match, and choose Vertumnus for your bed! And take me as his surety: he is not better known to himself than to me; he does not roam wandering over the whole world, he haunts only these places; nor, like most of your suitors, does he love the one he has just seen: you will be his first and last flame, and to you alone he devotes his years. Add that he is young, has the natural gift of grace, will shape himself neatly into any form, and will become whatever he is bidden, though you bid him be everything. And what of this — you love the same things: he is the first to have the fruit that is your delight, and holds your gifts in his glad hand! But now he longs neither for fruit plucked from the tree, nor the herbs the garden grows with their sweet juices, nor anything but you. Pity his passion, and believe that he who woos you is here in person, pleading with my lips. And fear the avenging gods, and the Idalian goddess who hates hard hearts, and the vengeful anger of the goddess of Rhamnus! And, that you may fear them the more — for old age has let me know many things — I will tell you a story famous through all Cyprus, by which you may easily be bent and softened.

Iphis, born of a humble family, had seen the noble Anaxarete, sprung from the line of ancient Teucer — had seen her, and felt the fire in all his bones; and, struggling long, when he could not conquer his madness by reason, he came a suppliant to her doors. Now he confessed his wretched love to her nurse and begged her, by the hopes she placed in her charge, not to be hard to him; now, flattering each of her many servants, he sought their favor with an anxious voice. Often he gave his words to be carried on coaxing tablets; sometimes he hung garlands wet with the dew of his tears on the doorposts, and laid his soft side on the hard threshold, and reproached the cruel bolt. She, deafer than the sea rising when the Kids are setting, harder than the iron the Norican fire refines, and than the rock still held by its living root, scorns and laughs at him, and to her cruel deeds she adds proud words, and robs the lover even of hope. Iphis, unable to bear the torments of long grief, endured them no longer, and before her doors spoke these last words: "You win, Anaxarete, and you will have no more annoyance from me: prepare your glad triumph, call on Paean, and crown yourself with shining laurel! For you win, and I die willingly; rejoice, woman of iron! At least you will be forced to praise something in me, some point in which I please you, and you will confess my merit. Yet remember that my love for you ended no sooner than my life, and that at one moment I lose a twofold light. Nor will report come to you as the messenger of my death: I myself will come, doubt not, and be seen in person, that you may feed your cruel eyes on my lifeless body. But if you gods above see the deeds of mortals, remember me — my tongue can pray no more — and make me spoken of in the long ages, and give to fame the time you have taken from my life." He spoke, and, lifting his swimming eyes and pale arms to the doorposts he had so often decked with wreaths, when he had tied a noose's cord to the top of the doors, he said, "Do these garlands please you, cruel, unfeeling woman?" and put his head in — but even then turned toward her — and hung, a hapless burden, by his strangled throat. The door, struck by the motion of his quivering feet, seemed to give a sound as of one groaning much, and, flying open, betrayed the deed; the servants cried out, and, having lifted him in vain — for his father was dead — carried him to his mother's house. She took him into her lap, and, embracing her son's cold limbs, when she had said the words natural to wretched mothers and done the deeds of wretched mothers, led the tearful funeral through the middle of the city and carried the ghastly limbs on the bier to be burned. By chance her house was near the road where the mournful procession passed, and the sound of wailing came to the ears of hard Anaxarete, whom now an avenging god pursued. Moved, though, she said, "Let us watch this pitiful funeral," and went up to a high room with wide windows; and scarcely had she well seen Iphis laid on the bier when her eyes stiffened, and, a pallor coming on, the warm blood fled her body; and trying to step back she stuck fast, trying to turn her face away she could not, and little by little the stone, long since in her hard breast, took over her limbs. And, that you not think this a fiction, Salamis still keeps the statue in the maiden's shape, and has a temple too under the name of Venus the Watcher. Remembering this, O nymph of mine, lay aside your long disdain and join yourself to one who loves you: so may no spring cold nip your budding fruit, nor rough winds strike off the blossoms!"

When the god, fit for every shape, had said this in vain, he returned to his young form and took off the old woman's garb, and appeared to her such as when the brightest image of the sun overcomes the facing clouds and shines out with nothing to block it; and he made ready force — but force was not needed, and the nymph was caught by the god's beauty and felt an answering wound.

Next the soldiery of wicked Amulius held sway over Ausonia; and by his grandsons' aid aged Numitor won back the kingdom he had lost; and on the festival of Pales the walls of the City were founded. Tatius and the Sabine fathers wage war, and, the way to the citadel laid open, Tarpeia by just retribution lost her life, the arms heaped on her. Then the men of Cures, like silent wolves, hushed their voices with their lips and fell on the bodies overcome by sleep, and made for the gates that the son of Ilia had shut with a strong bolt. But Juno, daughter of Saturn, opened one herself, and made no sound at the turning hinge; Venus alone felt that the bars of the gate had fallen, and would have shut it, but that a god may never undo another god's act. The Ausonian Naiads held a spot near the temple of Janus, dripping with a cold spring; of these she begs help. Nor did the nymphs resist the goddess's just request, and gave vent to the springs and streams of their fountain; yet the way to the open temple of Janus was not yet blocked, nor had the water closed the road. They set pale sulphur beneath the plenteous spring and kindled the hollow channels with smoking pitch. By these and other means the heat pierced to the depths of the spring; and you, waters, that so lately dared to rival the cold of the Alps, now yield not to the flames themselves! The two posts smoked with the flaming spray, and the gate, promised in vain to the fierce Sabines, was blocked by the new-made fountain, until the warlike soldiers could arm; and when Romulus had led them out, and the Roman ground was covered with Sabine bodies and with its own, and the wicked sword had mixed the son-in-law's blood with the father-in-law's gore, they agreed to end the war in peace, not to fight it out with the sword, and that Tatius should share the throne.

Tatius was dead, and you, Romulus, were giving laws in common to both peoples, when Mars, his helmet laid aside, addressed the father of gods and men: "The time has come, father — since the Roman state stands on a great foundation and no longer hangs on one guardian — to pay the reward promised to me and to your deserving grandson, and, taking him from earth, to set him in heaven. You once said to me, with the council of the gods present — for I remember, and marked the loving words in a mindful heart — 'There will be one whom you will raise to the blue of heaven.' Let the sum of your words be made good!" The all-powerful god nodded, hid the air in thick clouds, and terrified the City with thunder and lightning. Mars knew this was the signal given him for the promised removal; and, leaning on his lance, he fearlessly mounted behind his steeds, laden on the blood-stained pole, cracked the lash, and, gliding down the steep air, stood on the top of the wooded Palatine, and took away the son of Ilia as he was giving royal laws to his own Quirites: his mortal body dissolved through the thin air, as a leaden bullet shot from a wide sling melts in mid-sky; a beautiful form came on, worthier of the high couches of heaven — the shape of Quirinus in his royal robe.

His wife mourned him as lost, when royal Juno bade Iris go down to Hersilia along her curving path and give the bereft woman her commands: "O matron, chief glory of the Latin and the Sabine race, most worthy to have been the wife of so great a man, and now of Quirinus, stop your weeping; and, if you wish to see your husband, follow me to the grove that greens on the hill of Quirinus and shades the temple of the Roman king." Iris obeyed, and, gliding to earth along her painted bow, spoke to Hersilia the bidden words; she, scarcely lifting her eyes with a modest face, said, "O goddess — for I cannot say who you are, yet it is clear you are a goddess — lead me, oh lead me, and show me my husband's face! If the Fates grant me but once to see it, I will confess I have looked on heaven." Without delay she climbed the hill of Romulus with the daughter of Thaumas; there a star fell from the sky to the earth, and, kindled by its light, Hersilia's hair went up with the star into the air. Her the founder of the Roman city caught in his well-known hands, and, with her body, changed her old name, and called her Hora — the goddess who now is joined with Quirinus.
