Chapter III: Planning a Win in Middle-Game Play

I shall now give a few winning positions taken from my own games. I have selected those that I believe can be considered as *types*, i.e. positions that may easily occur again in a somewhat similar form. A knowledge of such positions is of great help; in fact, one cannot know too many. It often may help the player to find, with little effort, the right move, which he might not be able to find at all without such knowledge.

17. Attacking Without the Aid of Knights

[Figure bw]

Example 43.—It is Black's move, and as he is a Kt and P behind he must win quickly, if at all. He plays:

	1. ........ Q R - Kt 1 !
	2. R - B 2

If, Q × Q, R × P ch; K - R 1, B - Q 4 and mate follows in a few moves.

	2. ........ R × P ch
	3. K - B 1 B - B 5 ch
	4. Kt × B R - Kt 8 mate

[Figure bx]

Example 44.—Black's last move was P - K 6, played with the object of stopping what he thought was White's threat, viz.: R - Q R 5, to which he would have answered Q - B 5 ch and drawn the game by perpetual check. White, however, has a more forceful move, and he mates in three moves as follows:

	1. R × P ch Q × R
	2. R - Q R 5 Black moves
	3. White mates

[Figure by]

Example 45.—White has a beautiful position, but still he had better gain some material, if he can, before Black consolidates his defensive position. He therefore plays:

	1. R × Kt ! P × R
	2. B × P ch K - K 2

If Kt × B; R × Kt and Black would be helpless.

	3. Q - R 7 ch K - K 1
	4. Q × Kt ch K - Q 2
	5. Q - R 7 ch Q - K 2
	6. B - B 8 Q × Q
	7. R × Q ch K - K 1
	8. R × R Resigns

In these few examples the attacking has been done by Rooks and Bishops in combination with the Queen. There have been no Knights to take part in the attack. We shall now give some examples in which the Knights play a prominent part as an attacking force.

* * *

18. Attacking with Knights as a Prominent Force

[Figure bz]

Example 46.—White is two Pawns behind. He must therefore press on his attack. The game continues:

	1. Kt (B 5) × Kt P Kt - B 4

Evidently an error which made the winning easier for White, as he simply took the Rook with the Knight and kept up the attack. Black should have played: 1 ... Kt × Kt. Then would have followed: 2 Kt - B 6 ch, K - Kt 3; 3 Kt × B, P - B 3 (best); 4 P - K 5, K - B 2; 5 Kt × P, R - K 2; 6 Kt - K 4, and Black should lose.

Footnote: Full score and notes are given in My Chess Career, by J. R. Capablanca (Game No. 11).

[Figure ca]

Example 47.—The student should carefully examine the position, as the sacrifice of the Bishop in similar situations is typical, and the chance for it is of frequent occurrence in actual play. The game continues:

	1. B × P ch K × B
	2. Kt - Kt 5 ch K - Kt 3

Best. If 2...K - R 3; 3 Kt × P ch wins the Queen, and if 2...K - Kt 1; 3 Q - R 5, with an irresistible attack.

	3. Q - Kt 4 P - B 4
	4. Q - Kt 3 K - R 3

White finally won.

Footnote: This position is elaborated under Example 50.

* * *

19. Winning by Indirect Attack

We have so far given positions where the attacks were of a violent nature and directed against the King's position. Very often, however, in the middle-game attacks are made against a position or against pieces, or even Pawns.

*The winning of a Pawn among good players of even strength often means the winning of the game.*

Hence the study of such positions is of great importance. We give below two positions in which the attack aims at the gain of a mere Pawn as a means of ultimately winning the game.

[Figure cb]

Example 48.—Black is a Pawn behind, and there is no violent direct attack against White's King. Black's pieces, however, are very well placed and free to act, and by co-ordinating the action of all his pieces he is soon able not only to regain the Pawn but to obtain the better game. The student should carefully consider this position and the subsequent moves. It is a very good example of proper co-ordination in the management of forces. The game continues:

	1. ........ R - R 1
	2. P - Q R 4

White's best move was P - Q Kt 3, when would follow Kt × B; 3 Q × Kt, R - R 6 and Black would ultimately win the Q R P, always keeping a slight advantage in position. The text move makes matters easier.

	2. ........ Kt × B
	3. Q × Kt Q - B 5
	4. K R - Q 1 K R - Kt 1

Black could have regained the Pawn by playing B × Kt, but he sees that there is more to be had, and therefore increases the pressure against White's Queen side. He now threatens, among other things, R × Kt P.

	5. Q - K 3 R - Kt 5

Threatening to win the exchange by B - Q 5.

	6. Q - Kt 5 B - Q 5 ch
	7. K - R 1 Q R - Kt 1

This threatens to win the Kt, and thus forces White to give up the exchange.

	8. R × B Q × R
	9. R - Q 1 Q - B 5

Now Black will recover his Pawn.

[Figure cc]

Example 49.—An examination of this position will show that Black's main weakness lies in the exposed position of his King, and in the fact that his Q R has not yet come into the game. Indeed, if it were Black's move, we might conclude that he would have the better game, on account of having three Pawns to two on the Queen's side, and his Bishop commanding the long diagonal.

It is, however, White's move, and he has two courses to choose from. The obvious move, B - B 4, might be good enough, since after 1 B - B 4, Q R - Q 1; 2 P - Q Kt 4 would make it difficult for Black. But there is another move which completely upsets Black's position and wins a Pawn, besides obtaining the better position. That move is Kt - Q 4 ! The game continues as follows:

	1. Kt - Q 4 ! P × Kt
	2. R × B Kt - Kt 5

There is nothing better, as White threatened B - B 4.

	3. B - B 4 ch K - R 1
	4. R - K 6 P - Q 6
	5. R × P

And White, with the better position, is a Pawn ahead.

These positions have been given with the idea of acquainting the student with different types of combinations. I hope they will also help to develop his imagination, a very necessary quality in a good player. The student should note, in all these middle-game positions, that—

*once the opportunity is offered, all the pieces are thrown into action "en masse" when necessary;* and that *all the pieces smoothly co-ordinate their action with machine-like precision.*

That, at least, is what the ideal middle-game play should be, if it is not so altogether in these examples.

* * *
