On Joys and Passions

My brother, if you have a virtue, and it is your own virtue, then you have it in common with no one.

Of course, you want to call it by name and caress it; you want to tug its ear and have some fun with it.

And look! Now you have its name in common with the people, and you have become people and herd with your virtue!

You would do better to say: “Unspeakable and nameless is what makes the torment and the sweetness of my soul, and is the hunger of my very bowels as well.”

Let your virtue be too high for the familiarity of names: and if you must speak of it, do not be ashamed to stammer about it.

So speak and stammer: “This is *my* good, this I love, this pleases me wholly, this alone is how I want the good.

I do not want it as a god’s law; I do not want it as a human statute or a human necessity: let it be no signpost for me to over-earths and paradises.

It is an earthly virtue that I love: there is little prudence in it, and least of all the reason of everyone.

But this bird built its nest with me: that is why I love it and hold it to my heart — now let it sit with me on its golden eggs.”

That is how you should stammer and praise your virtue.

Once you had passions and called them evil. But now you have only your virtues: they grew out of your passions.

You laid your highest goal on the heart of these passions: then they became your virtues and your passions of joy.

And whether you came from the race of the hot-tempered, or of the lustful, or of the fanatics of faith, or of the vengeful:

in the end all your passions became virtues, and all your devils angels.

Once you had wild dogs in your cellar: but in the end they turned into birds and lovely singers.

Out of your poisons you brewed your balm; you milked your cow, Gloom — now you drink the sweet milk of her udder.

And from now on nothing evil grows out of you anymore, except the evil that grows out of the struggle among your virtues.

My brother, if you are lucky, you have one virtue and no more: then you go over the bridge more easily.

It is a distinction to have many virtues, but a hard lot; and many a man has gone into the desert and killed himself because he was tired of being the battle and the battlefield of virtues.

My brother, are war and battle evil? But this evil is necessary; necessary are the envy and the mistrust and the slander among your virtues.

Look how each of your virtues craves the highest: it wants your whole spirit, so that it may be *its* herald; it wants your whole strength in wrath, hatred, and love.

Each virtue is jealous of the others, and jealousy is a terrible thing. Even virtues can perish of jealousy.

Whoever is ringed by the flame of jealousy will at last, like the scorpion, turn the poisoned sting against himself.

Ah, my brother, have you never yet seen a virtue slander and stab itself?

Man is something that must be overcome: and that is why you should love your virtues — for you will perish of them. —

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
