On the Preachers of Death

There are preachers of death: and the earth is full of those to whom turning away from life must be preached.

The earth is full of the superfluous; life is spoiled by the many-too-many. May they be lured out of this life with “eternal life”!

“The yellow ones”: that is what the preachers of death are called, or “the black ones.” But I want to show them to you in other colors too.

There are the terrible ones, who carry the beast of prey around inside themselves and have no choice but lusts or tearing their own flesh. And even their lusts are a tearing of their own flesh.

They have not even become human beings yet, these terrible ones: let them preach turning away from life, and depart this life themselves!

There are the consumptives of the soul: they are hardly born before they begin to die, and they long for doctrines of weariness and renunciation.

They would gladly be dead, and we ought to approve of their will! Let us beware of waking these dead and of damaging these living coffins!

They meet a sick man or an old man or a corpse; and at once they say: “Life is refuted!”

But only they are refuted, they and their eye, which sees only the one face of existence.

Wrapped in thick melancholy, and eager for the little accidents that bring death: that is how they wait, clenching their teeth.

Or else: they reach for candy and mock their own childishness as they do it: they cling to the straw of their life and mock themselves for still clinging to a straw.

Their wisdom goes: “A fool, whoever stays alive — but such fools are we! And that is exactly the most foolish thing about life!” —

“Life is only suffering” — so say others, and they do not lie: then see to it that *you* stop! Then see to it that the life that is only suffering stops!

And let the teaching of your virtue be this: “You shall kill yourself! You shall steal yourself away!” —

“Lust is sin” — so say some of those who preach death — “let us step aside and father no children!”

“Giving birth is hard” — say others — “why give birth anymore? One only gives birth to the unhappy!” And they too are preachers of death.

“Pity is needed” — so say the third kind. “Take what I have! Take what I am! The less life will bind me!”

If they were pitying to the core, they would spoil life for their neighbors. To be wicked — that would be their true goodness.

But they want to get free of life: what do they care that they bind others even tighter with their chains and their gifts! —

And you too, for whom life is frantic work and unrest: are you not very tired of life? Are you not very ripe for the sermon of death?

All of you who love frantic work and what is fast, new, and strange — you can hardly bear yourselves; your hard work is flight, and the will to forget yourselves.

If you believed more in life, you would throw yourselves away less on the moment. But you do not have enough in you for waiting — not even for laziness!

Everywhere the voice of those who preach death rings out: and the earth is full of those to whom death must be preached.

Or “eternal life”: it is all the same to me — as long as they depart quickly!

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
