On War and Warriors

We do not want to be spared by our best enemies, nor by those we love to the core. So let me tell you the truth!

My brothers in war! I love you to the core; I am and have always been one of your kind. And I am also your best enemy. So let me tell you the truth!

I know about the hatred and envy in your hearts. You are not great enough not to know hatred and envy. Then be great enough not to be ashamed of them!

And if you cannot be saints of knowledge, then at least be its warriors for me. They are the companions and forerunners of such holiness.

I see many soldiers: if only I saw many warriors! “Uni-form,” they call what they wear: may what they hide beneath it not be uni-form!

You should be the kind whose eye is always searching for an enemy — for *your* enemy. And with some of you there is hatred at first sight.

You should seek your enemy, you should wage your war, and wage it for your thoughts! And if your thought is defeated, your honesty should still cry out in triumph over that!

You should love peace as a means to new wars. And the short peace more than the long.

I do not counsel you to work, but to fight. I do not counsel you to peace, but to victory. Let your work be a fight, let your peace be a victory!

One can be silent and sit still only when one has bow and arrow: otherwise one chatters and squabbles. Let your peace be a victory!

You say it is the good cause that hallows even war? I tell you: it is the good war that hallows every cause.

War and courage have done more great things than love of the neighbor. Not your pity but your bravery has so far saved the unfortunate.

What is good? you ask. To be brave is good. Let the little girls say: “Being good is whatever is pretty and touching at the same time.”

They call you heartless: but your heart is genuine, and I love the shyness of your warmth. You are ashamed of your flood tide, and others are ashamed of their ebb.

You are ugly? Well then, my brothers! Then wrap the sublime around you, the mantle of the ugly!

And when your soul grows great, it grows arrogant, and in your sublimity there is malice. I know you.

In malice the arrogant man meets the weakling. But they misunderstand each other. I know you.

You may have only enemies who are to be hated, not enemies to be despised. You must be proud of your enemy: then your enemy’s successes are your successes too.

Rebellion — that is the nobility of the slave. Let your nobility be obedience! Let your very commanding be an obeying!

To a good warrior “you shall” sounds more pleasant than “I will.” And everything you hold dear, you should first let yourselves be commanded to.

Let your love of life be love of your highest hope: and let your highest hope be the highest thought of life!

But your highest thought you should let me command you — and it goes: man is something that must be overcome.

So live your life of obedience and of war! What does long life matter! What warrior wants to be spared!

I do not spare you, I love you to the core, my brothers in war! —

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
