On the Friend

“There is always one too many around me” — so thinks the hermit. “Always one times one — in the long run that makes two!”

I and Me are always too deep in conversation: how could it be endured if there were no friend?

For the hermit the friend is always the third: the third is the cork that keeps the conversation of the two from sinking into the depths.

Ah, there are too many depths for all hermits. That is why they long so for a friend and for his height.

Our faith in others betrays what we would like to have faith in, in ourselves. Our longing for a friend is our betrayer.

And often with love one only wants to leap over envy. And often one attacks and makes oneself an enemy, to hide that one can be attacked.

“At least be my enemy!” — so speaks true reverence, which does not dare to ask for friendship.

If you want to have a friend, you must also be willing to wage war for him: and to wage war, you must *be able* to be an enemy.

You should honor even the enemy in your friend. Can you step right up close to your friend without stepping over to his side?

In your friend you should have your best enemy. You should be closest to him with your heart when you resist him.

You want to wear no clothes in front of your friend? It is supposed to honor your friend that you give yourself to him just as you are? But he wishes you to the devil for it!

Whoever hides nothing of himself gives offense: that is how much reason you have to fear nakedness! Yes, if you were gods, then you might be ashamed of your clothes!

You cannot dress yourself up beautifully enough for your friend: for you are to be an arrow for him, and a longing for the overman.

Have you ever watched your friend asleep — to find out what he looks like? What else is the face of your friend? It is your own face, in a rough and imperfect mirror.

Have you ever watched your friend asleep? Were you not frightened that your friend looks like that? Oh, my friend, man is something that must be overcome.

In guessing and in keeping silent the friend should be a master: you must not want to see everything. Your dream should tell you what your friend does when he is awake.

Let your pity be a guessing: so that you first know whether your friend wants pity. Perhaps what he loves in you is the unbroken eye and the gaze of eternity.

Let your pity for your friend hide under a hard shell; you should break a tooth on it. That way it will have its delicacy and its sweetness.

Are you pure air and solitude and bread and medicine to your friend? Many a man cannot loosen his own chains, and yet he is his friend’s redeemer.

Are you a slave? Then you cannot be a friend. Are you a tyrant? Then you cannot have friends.

For all too long a slave and a tyrant were hidden in woman. That is why woman is not yet capable of friendship: she knows only love.

In woman’s love there is injustice and blindness toward everything she does not love. And even in woman’s knowing love there is still always ambush and lightning and night beside the light.

Woman is not yet capable of friendship: women are still cats, and birds. Or, at best, cows.

Woman is not yet capable of friendship. But tell me, you men, which of you is capable of friendship?

Oh, your poverty, you men, and the stinginess of your souls! As much as you give your friend, I will give even to my enemy, and will not have grown any poorer by it.

There is comradeship: may there be friendship!

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
