On Love of the Neighbor

You crowd around your neighbor and have fine words for it. But I tell you: your love of the neighbor is your bad love of yourselves.

You flee to your neighbor to get away from yourselves, and you would like to make a virtue of it: but I see through your “selflessness”.

The “you” is older than the “I”; the “you” has been declared holy, but not yet the “I”: so man crowds toward his neighbor.

Do I advise love of the neighbor? I would sooner advise flight from the neighbor and love of the farthest!

Higher than love of the neighbor is love of the farthest and of the future; higher still than love of human beings is love of things and of ghosts.

This ghost that runs on ahead of you, my brother, is more beautiful than you; why do you not give it your flesh and your bones? But you are afraid, and you run to your neighbor.

You cannot stand yourselves, and you do not love yourselves enough: so now you want to seduce your neighbor into loving you, and gild yourselves with his mistake.

I wish you could not stand all sorts of neighbors and the people next door to them; then you would have to create your friend and his overflowing heart out of yourselves.

You invite a witness when you want to speak well of yourselves; and when you have seduced him into thinking well of you, you think well of yourselves.

It is not only the one who speaks against what he knows who lies, but even more the one who speaks against what he does not know. And that is how you speak of yourselves when you go into company, and you deceive your neighbor with yourselves.

This is what the fool says: “Mixing with people ruins the character, especially if you have none.”

The one goes to his neighbor because he is looking for himself, and the other because he would like to lose himself. Your bad love of yourselves makes your solitude a prison.

It is the more distant ones who pay for your love of the neighbor; and as soon as there are five of you together, a sixth must always die.

I do not love your festivals either: I found too many actors there, and even the spectators often behaved like actors.

I do not teach you the neighbor, but the friend. Let the friend be the festival of the earth to you, and a foretaste of the overman.

I teach you the friend and his overfull heart. But you must know how to be a sponge, if you want to be loved by overfull hearts.

I teach you the friend in whom the world stands complete, a bowl of the good — the creating friend, who always has a complete world to give away.

And as the world rolled apart for him, so it rolls together again for him in rings, as the becoming of good through evil, as the becoming of purposes out of chance.

Let the future and the farthest be the cause of your today: in your friend you shall love the overman as your cause.

My brothers, I do not advise love of the neighbor: I advise love of the farthest.

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
