On the Way of the Creator

Do you want to go into isolation, my brother? Do you want to seek the way to yourself? Wait a little longer, and listen to me.

“Whoever seeks easily gets lost himself. All isolation is guilt”: so says the herd. And you belonged to the herd for a long time.

The voice of the herd will still ring in you too. And when you say, “I no longer share one conscience with you,” it will be a lament and a pain.

Look, this pain itself was born of that one conscience: and the last glimmer of that conscience still glows on your gloom.

But you want to go the way of your gloom, which is the way to yourself? Then show me your right and your strength for it!

Are you a new strength and a new right? A first movement? A wheel rolling out of itself? Can you also compel stars to revolve around you?

Ah, there is so much lusting after the heights! There are so many convulsions of the ambitious! Show me that you are not one of the lustful and the ambitious!

Ah, there are so many great thoughts that do no more than a bellows: they puff things up and make them emptier.

You call yourself free? I want to hear your ruling thought, and not that you have escaped from a yoke.

Are you one who was *allowed* to escape a yoke? There is many a man who threw away his last value when he threw away his servitude.

Free from what? What does Zarathustra care about that! But your eye should tell me clearly: free *for what*?

Can you give yourself your own evil and your own good, and hang your will over yourself like a law? Can you be your own judge, and the avenger of your law?

It is a terrible thing to be alone with the judge and avenger of your own law. That is how a star is flung out into empty space and into the icy breath of being alone.

Today you still suffer from the many, you single one: today you still have all your courage, and your hopes.

But one day solitude will make you weary, one day your pride will bow and your courage gnash its teeth. One day you will cry out: “I am alone!”

One day you will no longer see your heights, and see your lowness all too near; your very sublimity will frighten you like a ghost. One day you will cry out: “Everything is false!”

There are feelings that want to kill the solitary one; if they do not succeed, well, then they themselves must die! But are you capable of that — of being a murderer?

Do you know yet, my brother, the word “contempt”? And the torment of your justice, to be just to those who despise you?

You force many to change their minds about you; they hold that hard against you. You came near them and yet went on past: that they will never forgive you.

You go up beyond them: but the higher you climb, the smaller you look to the eye of envy. But the one who flies is hated most of all.

“How could you be just to me!” — you must say — “I choose your injustice as the share allotted to me.”

They throw injustice and dirt at the solitary one: but, my brother, if you want to be a star, you must shine on them no less for that!

And beware of the good and the just! They like to crucify those who invent their own virtue for themselves — they hate the solitary one.

Beware of holy simplicity too! Everything that is not simple is unholy to it; it also likes to play with fire — the fire of the stake.

And beware too of the fits of your love! The solitary one is too quick to hold out his hand to whoever he meets.

There are people to whom you must not give your hand, but only your paw: and I want your paw to have claws as well.

But the worst enemy you can meet will always be yourself; you yourself lie in wait for yourself in caves and forests.

Solitary one, you are going the way to yourself! And your way leads past yourself, and past your seven devils!

You will be a heretic to yourself, and a witch and a soothsayer and a fool and a doubter and an unholy one and a villain.

You must be willing to burn yourself up in your own flame: how could you become new, if you had not first become ashes!

Solitary one, you are going the way of the creator: you want to create a god for yourself out of your seven devils!

Solitary one, you are going the way of the lover: you love yourself, and that is why you despise yourself, as only lovers despise.

The lover wants to create, because he despises! What does he know of love who did not have to despise precisely what he loved!

Go into your isolation with your love and with your creating, my brother; and only late will justice come limping after you.

Go into your isolation with my tears, my brother. I love the one who wants to create beyond himself, and so perishes. —

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
