On the Adder’s Bite

One day Zarathustra had fallen asleep under a fig tree, because it was hot, and he had laid his arms over his face. Then an adder came and bit him in the neck, so that Zarathustra cried out in pain. When he had taken his arm from his face, he looked at the serpent: and it recognized the eyes of Zarathustra, writhed awkwardly, and tried to get away. “Not so,” said Zarathustra; “you have not yet accepted my thanks! You woke me in time; my way is still long.” “Your way is short now,” said the adder sadly; “my poison kills.” Zarathustra smiled. “When did a dragon ever die of a serpent’s poison?” he said. “But take your poison back! You are not rich enough to give it to me as a gift.” Then the adder fell on his neck once more and licked his wound.

When Zarathustra told this story to his disciples one day, they asked: “And what, oh Zarathustra, is the moral of your story?” Zarathustra answered them like this:

The good and the just call me the destroyer of morals: my story is immoral. —

But if you have an enemy, do not repay him evil with good: for that would put him to shame. Instead, prove that he has done you some good.

And rather be angry than put anyone to shame! And when you are cursed, I do not like it when you want to bless in return. Better to join in the cursing a little!

And if a great wrong has been done to you, then quickly do five little wrongs on top of it! It is a horrible sight, the one who is weighed down by the wrong alone.

Did you know this already? A wrong shared is half a right. And the one who can bear the wrong should take it on himself!

A little revenge is more human than no revenge at all. And if the punishment is not also a right and an honor for the one who transgresses, then I do not like your punishing either.

It is nobler to put yourself in the wrong than to insist on being right, especially when you are right. Only, you must be rich enough for it.

I do not like your cold justice; and out of the eye of your judges there always looks at me the executioner and his cold steel.

Tell me, where is the justice to be found that is love with seeing eyes?

Then invent for me the love that bears not only all punishment but also all guilt!

Then invent for me the justice that acquits everyone, except the one who judges!

Do you want to hear this too? In the one who wants to be just down to the ground, even the lie becomes a kindness to mankind.

But how could I want to be just down to the ground! How can I give each his own! Let this be enough for me: I give each my own.

Finally, my brothers, beware of doing wrong to any hermit! How could a hermit forget! How could he repay!

A hermit is like a deep well. It is easy to throw a stone into it; but once it has sunk to the bottom, tell me, who will bring it out again?

Beware of insulting the hermit! But if you have done it, well then, kill him too!

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
