On Free Death

Many die too late, and some die too early. The teaching still sounds strange: “Die at the right time!”

Die at the right time: that is what Zarathustra teaches.

Of course, if someone never lives at the right time, how could he ever die at the right time? If only he had never been born! — That is my advice to the superfluous.

But even the superfluous still make a great show of their dying, and even the hollowest nut still wants to be cracked.

Everyone takes dying seriously: but death is not yet a festival. People have not yet learned how to consecrate the most beautiful festivals.

I show you the death that fulfills, which becomes a spur and a pledge to the living.

The one who fulfills his life dies his death victorious, surrounded by people who hope and people who pledge.

That is how one should learn to die; and there should be no festival at which such a dying man does not consecrate the oaths of the living!

To die like that is best; but the second best is to die in battle and squander a great soul.

But hateful alike to the fighter and to the victor is your grinning death, which creeps up like a thief — and yet comes as master.

I praise to you my death, the free death, which comes to me because *I* will it.

And when will I will it? — Whoever has a goal and an heir wants death at the right time for the goal and the heir.

And out of reverence for the goal and the heir he will hang no more withered wreaths in the sanctuary of life.

Truly, I do not want to be like the rope-makers: they draw out their thread longer and longer, and all the while they themselves keep walking backward.

Many a man also grows too old for his truths and his victories; a toothless mouth no longer has the right to every truth.

And everyone who wants fame must take leave of honor in good time, and practice the difficult art of knowing, at the right time, how to — go.

You must stop letting yourself be eaten when you taste best: that is something known by those who want to be loved for a long time.

There are sour apples, of course, whose lot is to wait until the last day of autumn: and they become ripe, yellow, and wrinkled all at once.

In some the heart grows old first, and in others the spirit. And some are gray-haired in their youth: but young late stays young long.

For many a man, life turns out badly: a poison worm eats its way into his heart. Then let him see to it that his dying turns out all the better.

Many a man never grows sweet; he is already rotting in summer. It is cowardice that holds him fast to his branch.

Far too many live, and far too long they hang on their branches. If only a storm would come and shake all this rotten and worm-eaten stuff from the tree!

If only preachers of *quick* death would come! Those would be the right storms for me, the right shakers of the trees of life! But I hear only slow death preached, and patience with everything “earthly”.

Ah, you preach patience with the earthly? It is this earthly that has too much patience with you, you blasphemers!

Truly, that Hebrew died too early whom the preachers of slow death honor: and it has been the doom of many since then that he died too early.

He knew only tears as yet, and the melancholy of the Hebrew, together with the hatred of the good and the just — the Hebrew Jesus: and then the longing for death came over him.

If only he had stayed in the wilderness, far from the good and the just! Perhaps he would have learned to live and learned to love the earth — and to laugh as well!

Believe me, my brothers! He died too early; he himself would have taken back his teaching if he had lived to my age! He was noble enough to take it back!

But he was still unripe. Unripe is the young man’s love, and unripe, too, is his hatred of man and earth. His heart and the wings of his spirit are still tethered and heavy.

But in the grown man there is more of the child than in the youth, and less melancholy: he understands death and life better.

Free for death and free in death, a holy No-sayer when it is no longer time for Yes: that is how he understands death and life.

That your dying may be no blasphemy against man and earth, my friends: that is what I ask of the honey of your soul.

In your dying your spirit and your virtue should still glow, like a sunset glow around the earth: or else your dying has turned out badly.

That is how I want to die myself, so that you, my friends, will love the earth more for my sake; and I want to become earth again, so that I may have rest in her who bore me.

Truly, Zarathustra had a goal, he threw his ball: now you, my friends, are the heirs of my goal, to you I throw the golden ball.

More than anything I love to see you, my friends, throwing the golden ball! And so I linger a little while longer on the earth: forgive me the lingering!

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
