On the Blessed Isles

The figs are falling from the trees, they are good and sweet; and as they fall, their red skins split. I am a north wind to ripe figs.

So, like figs, these teachings fall to you, my friends: now drink their juice and their sweet flesh! It is autumn all around, and clear sky, and afternoon.

Look, what fullness there is around us! And out of this overflow it is beautiful to gaze out at distant seas.

Once people said God when they gazed out at distant seas; but now I have taught you to say: overman.

God is a conjecture; but I want your conjecturing to reach no further than your creating will.

Could you *create* a god? — Then do not speak to me of any gods! But you could well create the overman.

Not you yourselves, perhaps, my brothers! But you could re-create yourselves into fathers and forefathers of the overman: and let this be your best creating! —

God is a conjecture: but I want your conjecturing to be bounded by what can be thought.

Could you *think* a god? — But let this be what the will to truth means to you: that everything be transformed into what is humanly thinkable, humanly visible, humanly feelable! You shall think your own senses through to the end!

And what you have called the world, that must first be created by you: your reason, your image, your will, your love shall itself become it! And truly, for your bliss, you seekers of knowledge!

And how would you bear life without this hope, you seekers of knowledge? You could not have been born into the incomprehensible, nor into the irrational.

But to open my heart to you completely, my friends: *if* there were gods, how could I bear not to be a god! *Therefore* there are no gods.

I drew the conclusion, it is true; but now it draws me. —

God is a conjecture: but who could drink all the torment of this conjecture without dying? Shall the creator be robbed of his faith, and the eagle of his soaring in eagle-distances?

God is a thought that makes everything straight crooked, and everything that stands spin. What? Time would be gone, and everything that passes away only a lie?

To think this is a whirling and a dizziness to human bones, and a vomiting to the stomach besides: truly, I call it the spinning sickness, to conjecture such a thing.

I call it evil and hostile to man: all this teaching of the One and the Full and the Unmoved and the Sated and the Imperishable!

Everything imperishable — that is only a parable! And the poets lie too much. —

But the best parables should speak of time and becoming: they should be a praise and a justification of everything that passes away!

Creating — that is the great redemption from suffering, and what makes life light. But for the creator to come to be, suffering itself is needed, and much transformation.

Yes, there must be much bitter dying in your life, you creators! So you are advocates and justifiers of everything that passes away.

For the creator to be himself the child that is newly born, he must also want to be the one who gives birth, and the pain of the one who gives birth.

Truly, I have gone my way through a hundred souls, and through a hundred cradles and birth pangs. I have taken many a farewell already; I know the heartbreaking last hours.

But so my creating will wills it, my fate. Or, to tell you more honestly: it is just such a fate that — my will wills.

Everything in me that feels suffers and is in prisons: but my willing always comes to me as my liberator and bringer of joy.

Willing liberates: that is the true teaching about will and freedom — so Zarathustra teaches it to you.

No-longer-willing and no-longer-esteeming and no-longer-creating! ah, may this great weariness always stay far from me!

In knowing, too, I feel only my will’s joy in begetting and becoming; and if there is innocence in my knowledge, this happens because the will to beget is in it.

This will lured me away from God and gods; what would there be to create, after all, if there were — gods!

But to man it drives me again and again, my ardent will to create; so it drives the hammer to the stone.

Ah, you human beings, an image sleeps for me in the stone, the image of my images! Ah, that it has to sleep in the hardest, ugliest stone!

Now my hammer rages cruelly against its prison. Pieces fly from the stone like dust: what do I care?

I want to finish it: for a shadow came to me — the stillest and lightest of all things once came to me!

The beauty of the overman came to me as a shadow. Ah, my brothers! What do they still matter to me — the gods! —

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
