On the Pitying

My friends, a mocking word has reached your friend: “Just look at Zarathustra! Does he not walk among us as if among animals?”

But it is better said like this: “The seeker of knowledge walks among human beings *as* among animals.”

To the seeker of knowledge, however, man himself is called: the animal with red cheeks.

How did that happen to him? Is it not because he has had to be ashamed too often?

Oh my friends! So speaks the seeker of knowledge: shame, shame, shame — that is the history of man!

And that is why the noble man commands himself not to put others to shame: he commands himself to feel shame before everyone who suffers.

Truly, I do not like them, the merciful, who are blessed in their pity: they are too lacking in shame.

If I must be pitying, I still do not want to be called so; and if I am, then preferably from a distance.

I also like to cover my head and run away before I am recognized: and I bid you do the same, my friends!

May my fate always lead those who do not suffer across my path, like you, and those with whom I *may* share hope and meal and honey!

Truly, I have done this and that for those who suffer: but I always seemed to myself to be doing something better when I learned to enjoy myself better.

For as long as there have been human beings, man has enjoyed himself too little: that alone, my brothers, is our original sin!

And if we learn to enjoy ourselves better, that is the best way to unlearn hurting others and thinking up hurts.

That is why I wash the hand that helped the sufferer; that is why I wipe off my soul as well.

For I was ashamed to have seen the sufferer suffering, ashamed for the sake of his shame; and when I helped him, I trespassed harshly on his pride.

Great obligations do not make people grateful, but vengeful; and if the small kindness is not forgotten, it turns into a gnawing worm.

“Be reluctant to accept! Honor someone by accepting!” — that is my advice to those who have nothing to give away.

But I am a giver: I give gladly, as a friend to friends. But strangers and the poor may pick the fruit from my tree themselves: that puts them less to shame.

But beggars ought to be done away with altogether! Truly, it is annoying to give to them, and annoying not to give to them.

And the same goes for sinners and bad consciences! Believe me, my friends: the bites of conscience teach people to bite.

But the worst thing of all is small thoughts. Truly, better to have done evil than to have thought small!

Of course you say: “Our pleasure in small acts of malice spares us many a great evil deed.” But here one should not want to be sparing.

The evil deed is like a boil: it itches and scratches and breaks out — it speaks honestly.

“Look, I am sickness” — so speaks the evil deed; that is its honesty.

But the small thought is like a fungus: it creeps and crouches and wants to be nowhere — until the whole body is rotten and withered with little fungi.

But to the one who is possessed by a devil I whisper this word into his ear: “Better still, raise your devil up big! For you too there is still a way to greatness!” —

Ah, my brothers! We know a little too much about everyone! And many a person becomes transparent to us, but that is still far from meaning we can pass through him.

It is hard to live with human beings, because keeping silent is so hard.

And it is not to the one who repels us that we are most unjust, but to the one who does not concern us at all.

But if you have a friend who suffers, be a resting place for his suffering, but a hard bed, as it were, a camp bed: that is how you will serve him best.

And if a friend does you wrong, say: “I forgive you what you did to me; but that you did it to *yourself* — how could I forgive that!”

So speaks all great love: it overcomes even forgiveness and pity.

One should keep a firm hold on one’s heart; for if one lets it go, how soon the head goes running off too!

Ah, where in the world have greater follies happened than among the pitying? And what in the world has caused more suffering than the follies of the pitying?

Woe to all lovers who do not yet have a height that is above their pity!

Thus spoke the devil to me once: “Even God has his hell: it is his love of man.”

And recently I heard him say this word: “God is dead; God died of his pity for man.” —

So be warned against pity: *from there* a heavy cloud is still coming to mankind! Truly, I know how to read the signs of the weather!

But mark this word too: all great love is above all its pity: for it wants — to create what it loves!

“I offer myself to my love, and my neighbor as myself” — that is how all creators speak.

But all creators are hard. —

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
