On Poets

“Since I have come to know the body better,” Zarathustra said to one of his disciples, “spirit has been spirit to me only in a manner of speaking; and all that is ‘imperishable’ — that too is only a parable.”

“I heard you say that once before,” answered the disciple, “and that time you added: ‘But the poets lie too much.’ Why did you say that the poets lie too much?”

“Why?” said Zarathustra. “You ask why? I am not one of those who may be asked for their why.

Is my experience from yesterday, then? It is a long time since I experienced the reasons for my opinions.

Would I not have to be a barrel of memory if I wanted to keep my reasons with me as well?

It is already too much for me to keep my opinions themselves; and many a bird flies away.

And now and then I also find a creature that has strayed into my dovecote, one that is strange to me and trembles when I lay my hand on it.

But what was it Zarathustra once said to you? That the poets lie too much? — But Zarathustra too is a poet.

Do you believe, then, that he spoke the truth there? Why do you believe it?”

The disciple answered: “I believe in Zarathustra.” But Zarathustra shook his head and smiled.

Faith does not make me blessed, he said, least of all faith in me.

But suppose that someone said in all seriousness that the poets lie too much: he is right — *we* lie too much.

We also know too little and are bad learners: so we simply have to lie.

And which of us poets has not doctored his wine? Many a poisonous hodgepodge has been brewed in our cellars, many an indescribable thing has been done there.

And because we know little, we take a heartfelt liking to the poor in spirit, especially when they are young women!

And we are even greedy for the things that little old women tell each other in the evenings. That is what we ourselves call the Eternal-Feminine in us.

And as if there were a special secret way into knowledge that is *blocked up* for those who learn something: so we believe in the people and their “wisdom.”

But this is what all poets believe: that whoever lies in the grass or on lonely slopes and pricks up his ears learns something of the things that are between heaven and earth.

And when tender stirrings come over them, the poets always think that nature herself is in love with them:

And that she creeps up to their ear to whisper secrets into it, and loving flatteries: and they puff themselves up and boast of it before all mortals!

Ah, there are so many things between heaven and earth that only the poets have let themselves dream of!

And especially *above* heaven: for all gods are poets’ parables, poets’ pilferings!

Truly, we are always drawn upward — that is, to the realm of the clouds: on these we set our motley stuffed dolls and then call them gods and overmen: —

For they are just light enough for those chairs! — all these gods and overmen.

Ah, how tired I am of all the inadequate that insists on being an event! Ah, how tired I am of the poets!

When Zarathustra spoke like this, his disciple was angry with him, but kept silent. And Zarathustra kept silent too; and his eye had turned inward, as if it were gazing into far distances. At last he sighed and drew a breath.

I am of today and of the past, he said then; but there is something in me that is of tomorrow and the day after tomorrow and of someday.

I grew tired of the poets, the old and the new: to me they are all surface, and shallow seas.

They did not think far enough into the depth: that is why their feeling did not sink to the bottom.

A little lust and a little boredom: that has been the best of their thinking so far.

All their harp-jingle-jangle is to me the breath and flitting of ghosts; what have they ever known of the fervor of tones! —

Nor are they clean enough for me: they all muddy their waters so that they may seem deep.

And they like to present themselves as reconcilers by it: but to me they remain go-betweens and mixers, and half-and-halfs, and unclean! —

Ah, I did cast my net into their seas and wanted to catch good fish; but every time I pulled up the head of some old god.

So the sea gave the hungry man a stone. And they themselves may well come from the sea.

Certainly, one finds pearls in them: all the more do they themselves resemble hard shellfish. And instead of a soul I have often found salted slime in them.

They have learned from the sea its vanity as well: is the sea not the peacock of peacocks?

Even before the ugliest of all buffaloes it spreads out its tail, and it never tires of its lace fan of silver and silk.

The buffalo looks on defiantly, near to the sand in his soul, nearer still to the thicket, but nearest of all to the swamp.

What does he care for beauty and sea and the finery of peacocks! This parable I speak to the poets.

Truly, their spirit itself is the peacock of peacocks and a sea of vanity!

The poet’s spirit wants spectators: even if they should be buffaloes! —

But I grew tired of this spirit: and I see the time coming when it will grow tired of itself.

I have already seen the poets transformed, and their gaze turned against themselves.

I saw penitents of the spirit coming: they grew out of the poets.

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
