On Great Events

There is an island in the sea — not far from Zarathustra’s Blessed Isles — on which a fire-mountain is always smoking. The people say of it, and the little old women among the people say it most of all, that it has been set like a boulder before the gate of the underworld: but that through the fire-mountain itself runs the narrow path leading down to this gate of the underworld.

Now at the time when Zarathustra was staying on the Blessed Isles, it happened that a ship dropped anchor at the island where the smoking mountain stands; and its crew went ashore to shoot rabbits. Toward the hour of noon, however, when the captain and his men were together again, they suddenly saw a man coming toward them through the air, and a voice said clearly: “It is time! It is high time!” But when the figure was nearest to them — it flew past quickly, like a shadow, in the direction where the fire-mountain lay — they recognized, to their utter dismay, that it was Zarathustra; for all of them had seen him before, except the captain himself, and they loved him as the people love: with love and awe together in equal parts.

“Look at that!” said the old helmsman. “There goes Zarathustra to hell!” —

At about the same time as these sailors landed on the fire island, a rumor went around that Zarathustra had disappeared; and when his friends were asked, they told how he had gone aboard a ship by night, without saying where he meant to travel.

So there was unrest; but after three days the sailors’ story was added to this unrest — and now all the people said that the devil had taken Zarathustra. His disciples laughed at this talk, it is true; and one of them even said: “I would sooner believe that Zarathustra has taken the devil.” But at the bottom of their souls they were all full of worry and longing: so their joy was great when, on the fifth day, Zarathustra appeared among them.

And this is the story of Zarathustra’s conversation with the fire-dog.

The earth, he said, has a skin; and this skin has diseases. One of these diseases, for example, is called: “man.”

And another of these diseases is called “fire-dog”: about *him* people have told each other many lies, and let themselves be told many lies.

To get to the bottom of this secret I went over the sea: and I have seen the truth naked — truly! barefoot up to the neck.

Now I know what the fire-dog is all about; and likewise all the devils of eruption and overthrow, which not only little old women are afraid of.

Come out, fire-dog, out of your depths! I cried. And confess how deep those depths are! Where does it come from, this stuff you snort up?

You drink plentifully at the sea: your oversalted eloquence gives that away! In truth, for a dog of the depths, you take your nourishment too much from the surface!

At most I take you for the ventriloquist of the earth: and whenever I heard the devils of overthrow and eruption speak, I found them just like you: salty, lying, and shallow.

You know how to roar and how to darken things with ash! You are the best of bigmouths, and you have learned more than enough of the art of bringing mud to the boil.

Wherever you are, there must always be mud close by, and much that is spongy, cavernous, squeezed in: it wants to get out into freedom.

“Freedom” is what you all like best to roar: but I have unlearned my belief in “great events” as soon as there is much roaring and smoke around them.

And just believe me, friend Hell-Racket! The greatest events — they are not our loudest hours, but our stillest.

The world revolves not around the inventors of new noise, but around the inventors of new values; it revolves *inaudibly*.

And just admit it! Very little had ever happened when your noise and smoke cleared away. What does it matter that a city became a mummy, and a statue lies in the mud!

And I say this word as well to the overthrowers of statues. It is surely the greatest folly to throw salt into the sea and statues into the mud.

The statue lay in the mud of your contempt: but that is just its law, that out of contempt life and living beauty grow back in it!

Now it rises again with more godlike features, seductive in its suffering; and truly! it will yet thank you for overthrowing it, you overthrowers!

But this advice I give to kings and churches and to everything that is weak with age and weak in virtue — just let yourselves be overthrown! So that you may come back to life, and so that virtue may come back to you! —

So I spoke before the fire-dog: then he interrupted me sullenly and asked: “Church? What is that, then?”

Church? I answered. That is a kind of state, and the most deceitful kind. But be quiet, you hypocrite dog! You surely know your own kind best already!

Like you yourself, the state is a hypocrite dog; like you, it likes to speak with smoke and roaring — to make people believe, like you, that it speaks from the belly of things.

For the state wants, at all costs, to be the most important animal on earth; and people believe it, too. —

When I had said this, the fire-dog behaved as if out of his mind with envy. “What?” he screamed. “The most important animal on earth? And people believe it, too?” And so much steam and such horrible voices came out of his throat that I thought he would choke with rage and envy.

At last he grew quieter, and his panting eased off; but as soon as he was quiet, I said, laughing:

“You are angry, fire-dog: so I am right about you!

And so that I may stay right, hear now about another fire-dog: he really does speak from the heart of the earth.

His breath breathes gold and golden rain: that is what his heart wants. What are ash and smoke and hot slime to him any more!

Laughter flutters out of him like a many-colored cloud; he has no liking for your gurgling and spitting and the gripes of your bowels!

But the gold and the laughter — those he takes from the heart of the earth: for, just so you know, — the heart of the earth is made of gold.”

When the fire-dog heard this, he could no longer stand to listen to me. Ashamed, he drew in his tail, said “Woof! Woof!” in a small, meek voice, and crawled down into his cave. —

So Zarathustra told it. But his disciples hardly listened to him: so great was their eagerness to tell him about the sailors, the rabbits, and the flying man.

“What am I to make of this!” said Zarathustra. “Am I a ghost, then?

But it must have been my shadow. You have probably heard something already about the wanderer and his shadow?

But this much is certain: I must keep it on a shorter leash — or else it will ruin my reputation yet.”

And once again Zarathustra shook his head and wondered. “What am I to make of this!” he said once more.

“Why, then, did the ghost cry: ‘It is time! It is high time!’

High time — *for what*?” —

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
