On Redemption

When Zarathustra was crossing the great bridge one day, the cripples and beggars surrounded him, and a hunchback spoke to him like this:

“Look, Zarathustra! The people too are learning from you and coming to believe in your teaching: but for them to believe you completely, one more thing is needed — first you still have to convince us cripples! Here you have a fine selection, and truly, an opportunity with more than one handle to grab it by! You can heal the blind and make the lame walk; and from the one who has too much behind him you could surely take a little off as well: — that, I think, would be the right way to make the cripples believe in Zarathustra!”

But Zarathustra answered the one who had spoken like this: “If you take away the hunchback’s hump, you take away his spirit — so the people teach. And if you give the blind man his eyes, he sees too many bad things on earth: so that he curses the one who healed him. But whoever makes the lame man walk does him the greatest harm: for no sooner can he walk than his vices run away with him — so the people teach about cripples. And why should Zarathustra not learn from the people too, when the people learn from Zarathustra?

But it is the least thing to me, since I have been among people, to see: ‘This one is missing an eye, and that one an ear, and a third one his leg, and there are others who have lost their tongue or their nose or their head.’

I see, and have seen, worse things, and many things so hideous that I would not want to speak of every one of them, and of some I would not even want to keep silent: I mean people who lack everything, except that they have too much of one thing — people who are nothing more than a big eye, or a big mouth, or a big belly, or something else big, — inverse cripples is what I call such people.

And when I came out of my solitude and crossed this bridge for the first time, I did not trust my eyes, and looked, and looked again, and said at last: ‘That is an ear! An ear as big as a man!’ I looked more closely still: and in fact, under the ear something else was moving, something wretchedly small and poor and puny. And truly, the enormous ear sat on a thin little stalk, — but the stalk was a human being! Anyone who held a glass to his eye could even make out a little envious face; and also a bloated little soul dangling from the stalk. But the people told me that the big ear was not only a human being, but a great human being, a genius. But I have never believed the people when they talked about great human beings — and I kept my belief that it was an inverse cripple, who had too little of everything and too much of one thing.”

When Zarathustra had spoken like this to the hunchback, and to those whose mouthpiece and advocate he was, he turned to his disciples in deep displeasure and said:

“Truly, my friends, I walk among people as among the fragments and limbs of human beings!

This is what is terrible to my eye, that I find man shattered and scattered as if over a field of battle and of butchery.

And if my eye flees from the now to the past: it always finds the same thing: fragments and limbs and dreadful accidents — but no human beings!

The now and the past on earth — ah! my friends — that is what *I* find most unbearable; and I would not know how to live, if I were not also a seer of what must come.

A seer, one who wills, a creator, a future itself and a bridge to the future — and ah, also, as it were, a cripple at this bridge: all of that is Zarathustra.

And you too have often asked yourselves: ‘Who is Zarathustra to us? What shall we call him?’ And like me, you gave yourselves questions for answers.

Is he one who promises? Or one who fulfills? A conqueror? Or an heir? An autumn? Or a plowshare? A doctor? Or one who has recovered?

Is he a poet? Or a truthful man? A liberator? Or a tamer? A good man? Or an evil one?

I walk among people as among the fragments of the future: that future which I see.

And this is all my composing and striving: that I compose into one and gather together what is fragment and riddle and dreadful accident.

And how could I bear to be a man, if man were not also a poet and a guesser of riddles and the redeemer of accident!

To redeem those who are past, and to recreate every ‘It was’ into a ‘So I willed it!’ — that alone would I call redemption!

Will — that is the name of the liberator and bringer of joy: so I taught you, my friends! But now learn this as well: the will itself is still a prisoner.

Willing liberates: but what is the name of the thing that still puts even the liberator in chains?

‘It was’: that is the name of the will’s gnashing of teeth and loneliest gloom. Powerless against what has been done — it is an evil spectator of everything past.

The will cannot will backward; that it cannot break time and time’s greed, — that is the will’s loneliest gloom.

Willing liberates: what does willing itself devise, to get free of its gloom and to mock its prison?

Ah, every prisoner becomes a fool! And the imprisoned will, too, redeems itself foolishly.

That time does not run backward, that is its fury; ‘That which was’ — that is the name of the stone it cannot roll.

And so it rolls stones out of fury and displeasure, and takes revenge on whatever does not feel fury and displeasure as it does.

So the will, the liberator, became a doer of harm: and on everything that can suffer it takes revenge for the fact that it cannot go back.

This, yes, this alone is *revenge* itself: the will’s ill will against time and its ‘It was.’

Truly, a great folly lives in our will; and it became a curse to everything human that this folly learned to be spirit!

The spirit of revenge: my friends, that has so far been mankind’s best reflection; and wherever there was suffering, there always had to be punishment.

‘Punishment,’ you see, is what revenge calls itself: with a lying word it fakes itself a good conscience.

And because there is suffering in the one who wills, since he cannot will backward, — therefore willing itself and all life were supposed to be — punishment!

And now cloud upon cloud rolled over the spirit: until at last madness preached: ‘Everything passes away, therefore everything deserves to pass away!’

‘And this is justice itself, that law of time, that it must devour its children’: so madness preached.

‘Things are ordered morally, according to justice and punishment. Oh, where is redemption from the flux of things and from the punishment called existence?’ So madness preached.

‘Can there be redemption, if there is an eternal justice? Ah, the stone “It was” cannot be rolled away: all punishments, too, must be eternal!’ So madness preached.

‘No deed can be annihilated: how could it be undone by punishment! This, this is what is eternal in the punishment called “existence,” that existence must also be, eternally, deed and guilt again and again!

Unless the will should at last redeem itself, and willing become not-willing — ’: but you know, my brothers, this fable-song of madness!

I led you away from these fable-songs when I taught you: ‘The will is a creator.’

Every ‘It was’ is a fragment, a riddle, a dreadful accident — until the creating will says to it: ‘But so I willed it!’

Until the creating will says to it: ‘But so I will it! So shall I will it!’

But has it ever spoken like this yet? And when will this happen? Has the will been unharnessed yet from its own folly?

Has the will become its own redeemer and bringer of joy yet? Has it unlearned the spirit of revenge and all gnashing of teeth?

And who has taught it reconciliation with time, and something higher than any reconciliation?

Something higher than any reconciliation the will must will, the will that is will to power —: but how does that happen to it? Who has taught it to will backward, too?”

— But at this point in his discourse it happened that Zarathustra suddenly stopped, looking exactly like someone who has been frightened to the utmost. With frightened eyes he looked at his disciples; his eye pierced their thoughts, and the thoughts behind their thoughts, as if with arrows. But after a little while he was laughing again, and said, soothed:

“It is hard to live with people, because keeping silent is so hard. Especially for a chatterbox.” —

Thus spoke Zarathustra. But the hunchback had listened to the conversation, covering his face as he did; but when he heard Zarathustra laugh, he looked up curiously and said slowly:

“But why does Zarathustra speak differently to us than to his disciples?”

Zarathustra answered: “What is so surprising about that! With hunchbacks one may well speak crookedly!”

“Good,” said the hunchback. “And with pupils one may well tell tales out of school.

But why does Zarathustra speak differently to his pupils — than to himself?” —
