On Human Prudence

Not the height: the slope is what is terrible!

The slope, where the gaze plunges *down* and the hand reaches *up*. There the heart grows dizzy before its double will.

Ah, friends, can you guess my heart’s double will as well?

This, this is *my* slope and my danger, that my gaze plunges toward the heights, and that my hand would like to hold on and brace itself — against the depths!

My will clings to man, with chains I bind myself to man, because I am being torn upward toward the overman: for that is where my other will wants to go.

And *for this* I live blind among people, as though I did not know them: so that my hand may not wholly lose its faith in something solid.

I do not know you people: this darkness and comfort is often spread around me.

I sit at the gateway for every rogue and ask: who wants to deceive me?

This is my first human prudence, that I let myself be deceived, so as not to be on my guard against deceivers.

Ah, if I were on my guard against man: how could man be an anchor for my ball! Too easily I would be torn up and away!

This providence stands over my fate: that I must have no foresight.

And whoever does not want to die of thirst among people must learn to drink from every glass; and whoever wants to stay clean among people must know how to wash even with dirty water.

And so I often spoke to myself for comfort: “Well then! Up, then! Old heart! A misfortune has miscarried for you: enjoy this as your — good fortune!”

But this is my other human prudence: I spare the *vain* more than the proud.

Is wounded vanity not the mother of all tragedies? But where pride is wounded, something better than pride may well grow.

For life to be good to watch, its play must be played well: but for that it needs good actors.

I have found all the vain to be good actors: they act, and they want people to enjoy watching them, — all their spirit is in this will.

They put on a show, they invent themselves; near them I love to watch life, — it cures me of melancholy.

That is why I spare the vain, because they are the doctors of my melancholy, and keep me attached to man as to a play.

And then: who can measure in the vain man the whole depth of his modesty! I am fond of him, and pity him for his modesty.

He wants to learn his faith in himself from you; he feeds on your glances, he eats praise out of your hands.

He believes even your lies, if you lie well about him: for in its depths his heart sighs: “What am *I*!”

And if the true virtue is the one that does not know about itself: well, the vain man does not know about his modesty! —

But this is my third human prudence, that I do not let your fearfulness spoil for me the sight of the evil.

I am blissful to see the wonders that the hot sun hatches: tigers and palm trees and rattlesnakes.

Among people, too, there is a fine brood of the hot sun, and much that is wonderful in the evil.

It is true that, just as your wisest did not seem so very wise to me: so too I found people’s wickedness falling short of its reputation.

And often I asked, shaking my head: Why go on rattling, you rattlesnakes?

Truly, there is a future even for evil! And the hottest south has not yet been discovered for man.

How many things are already called the worst wickedness that are only twelve feet wide and three months long! But someday greater dragons will come into the world.

For if the overman is not to lack his dragon, the over-dragon that is worthy of him: much hot sun must still blaze down on damp jungle!

Your wildcats must first have become tigers, and your poisonous toads crocodiles: for the good hunter shall have a good hunt!

And truly, you good and just! There is much in you to laugh at, and above all your fear of what has so far been called “devil”!

You are so foreign in your souls to what is great that the overman would be *frightening* to you in his goodness!

And you wise men and knowers, you would run from the sunburn of wisdom in which the overman joyfully bathes his nakedness!

You highest people my eye has met! This is my doubt about you and my secret laughter: I guess that you would call my overman — devil!

Ah, I grew tired of these highest and best: out of their “height” I longed to go up, out, away to the overman!

A horror came over me when I saw these best ones naked: then wings grew on me to float away into distant futures.

Into more distant futures, into more southern souths than any artist ever dreamed: there, where gods are ashamed of all clothes!

But I want to see *you* disguised, you neighbors and fellow men, and well dressed up, and vain, and dignified, as “the good and the just,” —

And I myself want to sit among you disguised, — so that I may *mistake* you and myself: for that is my last human prudence.

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
