On Involuntary Bliss

With such riddles and bitternesses in his heart Zarathustra crossed the sea. But when he was four days’ journey from the Blessed Isles and from his friends, he had overcome all his pain —: victorious and with firm feet he stood once more upon his fate. And then Zarathustra spoke like this to his exultant conscience:

“Alone I am again, and I want to be, alone with the pure sky and the open sea; and again it is afternoon around me.

It was in the afternoon that I once found my friends for the first time, and in the afternoon the second time as well: — at the hour when all light grows stiller.

For whatever happiness is still on its way between heaven and earth now seeks a bright soul to lodge in: *for happiness* all light has now grown stiller.

Oh afternoon of my life! Once *my* happiness too came down to the valley to seek a lodging for itself: and there it found these open, hospitable souls.

Oh afternoon of my life! What did I not give up to have one thing: this living plantation of my thoughts, and this morning light of my highest hope!

The creator once sought companions, and children of *his* hope: and look, it turned out that he could not find them, unless he first created them himself.

So I am in the midst of my work, going to my children and coming back from them: for the sake of his children Zarathustra must complete himself.

For at bottom one loves only one’s child and one’s work; and where there is great love of oneself, it is the sign of pregnancy: so I have found it.

My children are still green in their first spring, standing close together and shaken together by the winds, the trees of my garden and of my best soil.

And truly! Where such trees stand together, there *are* Blessed Isles!

But one day I want to dig them up and set each one apart by himself: so that he may learn solitude and defiance and caution.

Gnarled and bent and with a supple hardness, he shall then stand for me by the sea, a living lighthouse of unconquerable life.

There, where the storms plunge down into the sea, and the mountain’s trunk drinks water, each one shall one day keep his watches by day and by night, for *his* testing and knowing.

He shall be known and tested, to see whether he is of my kind and descent, — whether he is master of a long will, silent even when he speaks, and yielding in such a way that in giving he *takes*: —

— so that one day he may become my companion, a fellow creator and fellow celebrator of Zarathustra’s —: one who writes my will on my tablets, for the fuller completion of all things.

And for his sake and for the sake of those like him, I must complete *myself*: that is why I now turn aside from my happiness and offer myself to every misfortune — for *my* last testing and knowing.

And truly, it was time for me to go; and the wanderer’s shadow and the longest while and the stillest hour — they all urged me: ‘It is high time!’

The wind blew through my keyhole and said ‘Come!’ The door sprang slyly open for me and said ‘Go!’

But I lay chained to the love of my children: desire laid this snare for me, the desire for love, that I should become my children’s prey and lose myself to them.

Desiring — to me that already means: to have lost myself. I have you, my children! In this having, everything shall be certainty and nothing desire.

But the sun of my love lay brooding on me, Zarathustra was stewing in his own juice, — then shadows and doubts flew over me.

I was already longing for frost and winter: ‘oh, if only frost and winter would make me crack and crunch again!’ I sighed: — then icy mists rose out of me.

My past burst its graves, many a pain that had been buried alive woke up —: it had only been sleeping its fill, hidden in shrouds.

So everything called to me in signs: ‘It is time!’ — But I — did not hear: until at last my abyss stirred and my thought bit me.

Ah, abysmal thought, you who are *my* thought! When will I find the strength to hear you digging and no longer tremble?

My heart pounds right up into my throat when I hear you digging! Even your silence wants to strangle me, you abysmally silent one!

As yet I have never dared to call you *up*: it was enough that I — carried you with me! As yet I was not strong enough for the lion’s last exuberance and mischief.

Your heaviness was always terrible enough for me: but one day I shall yet find the strength and the lion’s voice that calls you up!

Once I have overcome myself in that, then I will overcome myself in what is greater still; and a *victory* shall be the seal of my completion! —

Meanwhile I still drift on uncertain seas; accident flatters me, smooth-tongued accident; I look forward and backward —, and still I see no end.

The hour of my last struggle has not yet come to me, — or is it coming to me just now? Truly, sea and life gaze at me all around with treacherous beauty!

Oh afternoon of my life! Oh happiness before evening! Oh harbor on the high seas! Oh peace in uncertainty! How I distrust you all!

Truly, I am distrustful of your treacherous beauty! I am like the lover who distrusts all-too-velvety smiles.

As he pushes his most beloved away ahead of him, tender even in his hardness, the jealous one —, so I push this blissful hour away ahead of me.

Away with you, you blissful hour! With you there came to me a bliss against my will! Willing, I stand here for my deepest pain: — you came at the wrong time!

Away with you, you blissful hour! Better to take lodging over there — with my children! Hurry! and bless them before evening with *my* happiness!

There, evening is already drawing near: the sun is sinking. Gone — my happiness! —”

Thus spoke Zarathustra. And he waited for his misfortune all night long: but he waited in vain. The night stayed bright and still, and happiness itself came nearer and nearer to him. But toward morning Zarathustra laughed to his heart and said mockingly: “Happiness runs after me. That comes from my not running after women. But happiness is a woman.”
