Before Sunrise

Oh heaven above me, you pure one! You deep one! You abyss of light! Gazing at you, I shudder with godlike desires.

To throw myself up into your height — that is *my* depth! To shelter myself in your purity — that is *my* innocence!

The god is veiled by his beauty: so you hide your stars. You do not speak: *so* you proclaim your wisdom to me.

Mute over the roaring sea you have risen for me today; your love and your shame speak revelation to my roaring soul.

That you came to me beautiful, veiled in your beauty, that you speak to me mutely, revealed in your wisdom:

Oh, how could I not guess all that is bashful in your soul! *Before* the sun you came to me, the loneliest of all.

We have been friends from the beginning: grief and grimness and ground we have in common; even the sun we have in common.

We do not speak to each other, because we know too much —: we are silent to each other, we smile our knowledge to each other.

Are you not the light to my fire? Do you not have the sister soul to my insight?

Together we learned everything; together we learned to climb above ourselves to ourselves, and to smile without a cloud: —

— to smile down without a cloud, out of bright eyes and from miles away, when under us compulsion and purpose and guilt steam like rain.

And when I wandered alone: for *what* did my soul hunger in the nights and on wrong paths? And when I climbed mountains, *whom* did I ever seek on the mountains, if not you?

And all my wandering and mountain climbing: it was only a necessity, and a help for the helpless: — my whole will wants only to *fly*, to fly up into *you*!

And whom did I hate more than drifting clouds, and everything that stains you? And I hated even my own hatred, because it stained you!

I bear a grudge against the drifting clouds, those creeping cats of prey: they take from you and me what we have in common — the vast, unbounded Yes-and-Amen-saying.

We bear a grudge against these go-betweens and mixers, the drifting clouds: these half-and-halfers, who have learned neither to bless nor to curse from the ground up.

I would rather sit in a tub under a closed heaven, rather sit in the abyss with no heaven at all, than see you, heaven of light, stained with drifting clouds!

And often I have longed to pin them down with jagged gold wires of lightning, so that, like the thunder, I could beat the kettledrum on their kettle-bellies: —

— an angry kettledrummer, because they rob me of your Yes! and Amen!, you heaven above me, you pure one! You bright one! You abyss of light! — because they rob you of *my* Yes! and Amen!

For I would rather have noise and thunder and the curses of storms than this cautious, doubting cat-calm; and among men too, what I hate most are all the pussyfooters and half-and-halfers and doubting, hesitating, drifting clouds.

And “whoever cannot bless shall *learn* to curse!” — this clear teaching fell to me out of a clear sky; this star still stands in my heaven even on black nights.

But I am one who blesses and a Yes-sayer, if only you are around me, you pure one! You bright one! You abyss of light! — then I carry my blessing Yes-saying even into every abyss.

I have become one who blesses and one who says Yes: and for that I wrestled long and was a wrestler, so that one day I might get my hands free for blessing.

But this is my blessing: to stand over each and every thing as its own heaven, as its round roof, its azure bell and eternal security: and blessed is the one who blesses like this!

For all things are baptized at the fountain of eternity and beyond good and evil; but good and evil themselves are only shadows in between, and damp glooms, and drifting clouds.

Truly, it is a blessing and not a blasphemy when I teach: “Over all things stands the heaven Accident, the heaven Innocence, the heaven Chance, the heaven Exuberance.”

“Of Chance” — that is the oldest title of nobility in the world; I gave it back to all things, I redeemed them from their serfdom under purpose.

This freedom and heavenly cheerfulness I set like an azure bell over all things, when I taught that over them and through them no “eternal will” — wills.

This exuberance and this folly I set in the place of that will, when I taught: “In everything one thing is impossible — rationality!”

A *little* reason, to be sure, a seed of wisdom scattered from star to star — this leaven is mixed into all things: for the sake of folly, wisdom is mixed into all things!

A little wisdom is possible, certainly; but this blessed security I found in all things: that they would rather — *dance* on the feet of accident.

Oh heaven above me, you pure one! You lofty one! This is what your purity now is to me: that there is no eternal reason-spider and no reason-spiderweb: —

— that you are a dance floor for me for divine accidents, that you are a table of the gods for me, for divine dice and dice players! —

But you are blushing? Did I say something unsayable? Did I blaspheme when I wanted to bless you?

Or is it the shame of being two together that made you blush? — Are you telling me to go and be silent, because now — the *day* is coming?

The world is deep —: and deeper than the day could ever comprehend. Not everything may have words in front of the day. But the day is coming: so let us part now!

Oh heaven above me, you bashful one! You glowing one! Oh you, my happiness before sunrise! The day is coming: so let us part now! —

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
