On Old and New Tablets
(Part 1 of 2)

I

Here I sit and wait, old broken tablets around me, and new tablets too, half written on. When will my hour come?

— the hour of my going down, my going under: for I want to go to mankind one more time.

That is what I am waiting for now: for first the signs must come to me that it is *my* hour, — namely, the laughing lion with the flock of doves.

In the meantime I talk to myself, as one who has time. No one tells me anything new: so I tell myself about myself. —

II

When I came to mankind, I found them sitting on an old conceit: all of them had long fancied that they knew what was good and evil for man.

All talk of virtue seemed to them an old, tired business; and whoever wanted to sleep well still talked about “good” and “evil” before going to bed.

I disturbed this sleepiness when I taught: what is good and evil, *no one knows yet*: — unless it is the creator!

— But he is the one who creates man’s goal and gives the earth its meaning and its future: only he *creates* it, *that* something is good and evil.

And I told them to overturn their old professors’ chairs, and wherever that old conceit had sat; I told them to laugh at their great masters of virtue and their saints and poets and world-redeemers.

I told them to laugh at their gloomy sages, and at whoever had ever sat on the tree of life like a black scarecrow, giving warnings.

I sat down beside their great avenue of tombs, and even among the carrion and the vultures — and I laughed at all their once-upon-a-time and its crumbling, decaying glory.

Truly, like preachers of repentance and fools, I raised a cry of wrath and outrage over all their great and small, — that their best is so very small! That their most evil is so very small! — so I laughed.

So my wise longing cried and laughed out of me, my longing that was born on mountains, a wild wisdom, truly! — my great longing with its roaring wings.

And often it swept me away, up and off and away, in the middle of my laughter: then I flew, shuddering, an arrow, through sun-drunk rapture:

— out into distant futures that no dream has seen yet, into hotter souths than any sculptor ever dreamed of: where gods, dancing, are ashamed of all clothes: —

— that I speak in parables, that is, and limp and stammer like the poets: and truly, I am ashamed that I must still be a poet! —

Where all becoming seemed to me the dancing of gods and the high spirits of gods, and the world set free and running wild and fleeing back to itself: —

— as an eternal fleeing from each other and seeking each other again of many gods, as the blissful contradicting of each other, hearing each other again, belonging to each other again, of many gods: —

Where all time seemed to me a blissful mockery of moments, where necessity was freedom itself, playing blissfully with the goad of freedom: —

Where I also found my old devil and archenemy again, the spirit of gravity, and everything he created: compulsion, statute, need and consequence and purpose and will and good and evil: —

For must there not be something that is danced *over*, danced away over? Must there not be — for the sake of the light ones, the lightest — moles and heavy dwarfs? —

III

It was there, too, that I picked up the word “overman” from the road, and that man is something that must be overcome,

— that man is a bridge and not a goal: counting himself blessed for his noon and his evening, as a way to new dawns:

— the Zarathustra-word of the great noon, and whatever else I hung up over man, like a purple second sunset.

Truly, I also let them see new stars, along with new nights; and over clouds and day and night I spread out laughter like a motley tent.

I taught them all *my* composing and striving: to compose into one and gather together what is fragment in man, and riddle and dreadful accident, —

— as a poet, a guesser of riddles, and the redeemer of accident, I taught them to work at creating the future, and to redeem, by creating, everything that *was*.

To redeem the past in man and to re-create every “It was,” until the will says: “But so I willed it! So shall I will it —”

— This I called redemption for them, this alone I taught them to call redemption. — —

Now I wait for *my* redemption, — to go to them for the last time.

For I want to go to mankind one more time: *down among* them I want to go under, and in dying I want to give them my richest gift!

I learned this from the sun when it goes down, the overrich one: then it pours gold into the sea out of its inexhaustible riches, —

— so that even the poorest fisherman rows with *golden* oars! For I saw this once, and as I watched I could not weep my fill of tears. —

Like the sun, Zarathustra too wants to go under: now he sits here and waits, old broken tablets around him, and new tablets too, — half written on.

IV

Look, here is a new tablet: but where are my brothers to carry it with me down into the valley and into hearts of flesh? —

So my great love of the farthest demands it: do not spare your neighbor! Man is something that must be overcome.

There are many ways and means of overcoming: see to that *yourself*! But only a jester thinks: “Man can also be *leaped over*.”

Overcome yourself even in your neighbor: and a right that you can seize for yourself, you shall not let anyone give you!

What you do, no one can do back to you. Look, there is no retribution.

Whoever cannot command himself shall obey. And many a man *can* command himself, but there is still much lacking before he also obeys himself!

V

This is what the kind of noble souls wants: they want to have nothing *for free*, least of all life.

Whoever is of the mob wants to live for free; but we others, to whom life gave itself, — we are always thinking about *what* we can best give *in return*!

And truly, it is a noble saying that says: “What life promises *us*, *we* want to keep — for life!”

One should not want to enjoy where one gives nothing to enjoy. And — one should not *want* to enjoy!

For enjoyment and innocence are the most bashful things of all: neither wants to be sought out. One should *have* them —, but one should rather *seek* out guilt and pain! —

VI

Oh my brothers, whoever is a firstborn is always sacrificed. And now we are firstborn.

We all bleed on secret altars of sacrifice, we all burn and roast in honor of old idols.

Our best is still young: that tempts old palates. Our flesh is tender, our hide is only a lambskin: — how could we not tempt old idol-priests!

*In ourselves* he still lives, the old idol-priest, who roasts our best for his feast. Ah, my brothers, how could the firstborn not be sacrifices!

But so our kind wills it; and I love those who do not want to preserve themselves. Those who go under I love with my whole love: for they go over. —

VII

To be true — few *can* do it! And whoever can still does not want to! But the ones who can do it least of all are the good.

Oh, these good ones! — Good people never speak the truth; for the spirit, to be good in this way is a sickness.

They give in, these good ones, they give themselves up, their heart repeats what it is told, their depths obey: but whoever obeys does not listen to himself!

Everything that the good call evil must come together for one truth to be born: oh my brothers, are you evil enough for *this* truth too?

The daring venture, the long mistrust, the cruel No, the weariness of it all, the cutting into living flesh — how seldom does *that* come together! But from such seed truth is begotten!

*Alongside* the bad conscience all *knowledge* has grown, until now! Break, break the old tablets, you seekers of knowledge!

VIII

When the water has planks over it, when footbridges and railings leap across the river: truly, then no one is believed who says: “Everything flows.”

Even the blockheads contradict him. “What?” say the blockheads, “everything flows? But the planks and railings are *over* the flowing water!”

“*Over* the flow everything is firm, all the values of things, the bridges, the concepts, all ‘good’ and ‘evil’: all of it is firm!” —

But when the hard winter comes, the tamer of the river-beast: then even the wittiest learn mistrust; and truly, then it is not only the blockheads who say: “Should not everything — *stand still*?”

“At bottom everything stands still” —, that is a proper winter teaching, a good thing for a barren time, a good comfort for hibernators and stove-squatters.

“At bottom everything stands still” —: but the thaw wind preaches *against* it!

The thaw wind, a bull that is no plowing bull, — a raging bull, a destroyer, who breaks the ice with angry horns! But ice — *breaks footbridges*!

Oh my brothers, *now* — is not everything *flowing*? Have not all the railings and footbridges fallen into the water? Who would still *hold on* to “good” and “evil”?

“Woe to us! Hail to us! The thaw wind is blowing!” — Preach this for me, oh my brothers, through all the streets!

IX

There is an old delusion, and it is called good and evil. Until now the wheel of this delusion has turned around soothsayers and astrologers.

Once, people believed in soothsayers and astrologers: and that is why they believed, “Everything is fate: you shall, because you must!”

Then again they distrusted all soothsayers and astrologers: and *that* is why they believed, “Everything is freedom: you can, because you will!”

Oh my brothers, about the stars and the future there has until now only been fancy, not knowledge: and *that* is why about good and evil there has until now only been fancy, not knowledge!

X

“You shall not rob! You shall not kill!” — such words were once called holy; before them people bowed their knees and their heads and took off their shoes.

But I ask you: where in the world have there ever been better robbers and killers than such holy words?

Is there not in all life itself — robbing and killing? And when such words were called holy, was not *truth* itself — killed by it?

Or was it a sermon of death, that called holy what contradicted all life and counseled against it? — Oh my brothers, break, break the old tablets!

XI

This is my pity for all that is past: that I see it is abandoned, —

— abandoned to the mercy, the spirit, the madness of every generation that comes and reinterprets everything that was as a bridge to itself!

A great despot could come, a cunning monster, who with his favor and his disfavor would force and squeeze all that is past, until it became a bridge for him, and an omen and a herald and a cockcrow.

But this is the other danger, and my other pity: — whoever is of the mob, his memory goes back as far as his grandfather, — but with his grandfather, time stops.

So all that is past is abandoned: for it could one day happen that the mob became master and drowned all time in shallow waters.

That is why, oh my brothers, a *new nobility* is needed, which is the adversary of all mob and all despotism and writes the word “noble” anew on new tablets.

For many noble ones are needed, and many kinds of noble ones, for there to be a nobility! Or, as I once said in a parable: “Precisely this is godliness, that there are gods, but no God!”

XII

Oh my brothers, I consecrate you and direct you to a new nobility: you shall become begetters and breeders and sowers of the future, —

— truly, not to a nobility that you could buy like shopkeepers, and with shopkeepers’ gold: for everything that has its price has little value.

From now on let your honor be not where you come from, but where you are going! Your will and your foot that wants to go out beyond yourselves, — let that be your new honor!

Truly, not that you have served a prince — what do princes matter anymore! — or became a bulwark for what stands, so that it would stand more firmly!

Not that your family became courtly at courts, and you learned to stand for long hours in shallow ponds, motley, like a flamingo.

— For being *able* to stand is a merit among courtiers; and all courtiers believe that the bliss after death includes — being *allowed* to sit! —

Nor that a spirit they call holy led your forefathers into promised lands, which *I* do not praise: for where the worst of all trees grew, the cross, — that land has nothing to praise! —

— and truly, wherever this “Holy Spirit” led its knights, on such crusades it was always goats and geese and cross-heads and cranks that ran *ahead*! —

Oh my brothers, your nobility shall not look backward, but *outward*! You shall be exiles from all fatherlands and forefatherlands!

You shall love your children’s land: let this love be your new nobility, — the undiscovered land, in the farthest sea! I tell your sails to search and search for it!

In your children you shall *make up* for being the children of your fathers: *so* you shall redeem all that is past! This new tablet I place over you!

XIII

“Why live? All is vanity! Living — that is threshing straw; living — that is burning oneself and still not getting warm.” —

Such antique chatter still counts as “wisdom”; but *because* it is old and smells musty, it is all the more honored. Even mold ennobles. —

Children may talk like that: they *shy away* from the fire because it burned them! There is much childishness in the old books of wisdom.

And whoever is always “threshing straw,” how should he be allowed to blaspheme against threshing! Such a fool ought to be muzzled!

People like that sit down at the table and bring nothing with them, not even a good hunger: — and then they blaspheme: “All is vanity!”

But eating and drinking well, oh my brothers, is truly no vain art! Break, break the tablets of the never-glad!

XIV

“To the pure all things are pure” — so say the people. But I tell you: to swine all things turn swinish!

That is why the fanatics and the head-hangers, whose hearts hang down as well, preach: “The world itself is a filthy monster.”

For all of these have unclean spirits; but most of all those who have no rest and no peace unless they see the world *from behind*, — the believers in worlds behind!

*To them* I say it to their faces, even though it does not sound pretty: the world is like man in this, that it has a behind, — *so much* is true!

There is a lot of filth in the world: *so much* is true! But that does not make the world itself a filthy monster!

There is wisdom in this, that much in the world smells bad: disgust itself creates wings, and powers that can divine where springs are hidden!

Even in the best there is still something disgusting; and the best is still something that must be overcome! —

Oh my brothers, there is much wisdom in this, that there is much filth in the world! —

XV

I heard pious believers in worlds behind say such sayings to their consciences; and truly, without malice or falseness, — although there is nothing in the world more false, nor more malicious.

“Just let the world be the world! Do not lift so much as one finger against it!”

“Let anyone who wants to choke and stab and cut and scrape the people: do not lift so much as one finger against it! That way they will learn to renounce the world.”

“And your own reason — you yourself shall throttle and choke it; for it is a reason of this world, — that way you yourself will learn to renounce the world.” —

— Break, break, oh my brothers, these old tablets of the pious! Unsay the sayings of the world-slanderers!

XVI

“Whoever learns much unlearns all violent desire” — that is what people whisper to each other today in all the dark alleys.

“Wisdom makes you tired, nothing is — worth it; you shall not covet!” — I found this new tablet hanging even in the open marketplaces.

Break, oh my brothers, break this *new* tablet too! The world-weary hung it up, and the preachers of death, and the jailers too: for look, it is also a sermon for serfdom! —

Because they learned badly, and not the best, and everything too early and everything too fast: because they *ate* badly, that is where that ruined stomach of theirs came from, —

— for their spirit is a ruined stomach: *it* advises death! For truly, my brothers, the spirit *is* a stomach!

Life is a fountain of joy: but for the one out of whom the ruined stomach speaks, the father of gloom, all springs are poisoned.

To know: that is *joy* for the lion-willed! But whoever has grown weary is himself only “willed,” and all the waves play with him.

And that is always the way of weak people: they lose themselves on their ways. And in the end their weariness even asks: “Why did we ever go on ways at all! All is the same!”

*To them* it sounds sweet in their ears when someone preaches: “Nothing is worth it! You shall not will!” But that is a sermon for serfdom.

Oh my brothers, Zarathustra comes as a fresh, blustering wind to all who are weary of the way; he will make many noses sneeze yet!

My free breath blows even through walls, and into prisons and imprisoned spirits!

Willing liberates: for willing is creating: so I teach. And you shall learn *only* in order to create!

And even learning you shall first *learn* from me, learning well! — Whoever has ears, let him hear!
