The Other Dance Song

I

“Into your eye I looked not long ago, oh life: I saw gold blinking in your night-eye — my heart stood still with this delight:

— I saw a golden boat blinking on mighty waters, a sinking, drinking, ever-again-winking golden rocking boat!

At my foot, my dance-mad foot, you cast a glance, a laughing, questioning, melting, rocking glance:

Only twice did you stir your rattle with your little hands — and already my foot was rocking in a frenzy to dance. —

My heels reared up, my toes listened to understand you: for the dancer carries his ear — in his toes!

I leaped toward you: you fled back from my leap; and the tongue of your fleeing, flying hair flicked out at me!

Away from you I leaped, and from your serpents: and there you stood already, half turned, your eye full of yearning.

With crooked glances — you teach me crooked ways; on crooked ways my foot learns — tricks!

I fear you near, I love you far; your flight lures me, your seeking stops me short: — I suffer, but what have I not gladly suffered for you!

You whose coldness kindles, whose hatred seduces, whose flight binds, whose mockery — moves:

— who would not hate you, you great binder, entwiner, temptress, seeker, finder! Who would not love you, you innocent, impatient, wind-swift, child-eyed sinner!

Where are you pulling me now, you paragon and runaway? And now you flee me again, you sweet wildcat and ingrate!

I dance after you, I follow you even on the faintest trace. Where are you? Give me your hand! Or just one finger!

Here are caves and thickets: we will go astray! — Stop! Stand still! Do you not see owls and bats whirring away?

You owl! You bat! Do you want to make a monkey of me? Where are we? It was from the dogs you learned this howling and yapping.

You bare your little white teeth at me so sweetly, your evil eyes leap out at me from your curly little mane!

This is a dance over stick and stone: I am the hunter — will you be my hound, or my chamois?

Now beside me! And quickly, you spiteful leaper! Now up! And over! — Woe! I myself have fallen in the leap!

Oh, see me lying here, you insolence, and begging for grace! Gladly would I walk with you — in some lovelier place!

— the paths of love through quiet, many-colored bushes! Or there along the lake: goldfish swim and dance there!

You are tired now? Over there are sheep and evening glows: is it not lovely to sleep while shepherds play their flutes?

You are so terribly tired? I will carry you there, just let your arms sink! And if you are thirsty — I might have something, but your mouth does not want to drink! —

— Oh, this cursed, nimble, supple serpent and slippery witch! Where have you gone? But on my face I feel two spots and red blotches from your hand!

Truly, I am tired of always being your sheepish shepherd! You witch, if till now I have sung to you, now *you* shall — scream for me!

To the beat of my whip you shall dance and scream for me! I did not forget the whip, did I? — No!” —

II

Then life answered me like this, and held her dainty ears shut as she did:

“Oh Zarathustra! Do not crack your whip so terribly! You know very well: noise murders thoughts — and just now such tender thoughts are coming to me.

We are both a real pair of good-for-nothings and evil-for-nothings. Beyond good and evil we found our island and our green meadow — we two alone! So we really must be good to each other!

And even if we do not love each other from the ground up — must people be cross with each other if they do not love each other from the ground up?

And that I am good to you, and often too good, you know that: and the ground for it is that I am jealous of your wisdom. Ah, that mad old fool of a wisdom!

If your wisdom ever ran away from you, ah! then my love would quickly run away from you too.” —

Then life looked thoughtfully behind her and around her and said softly: “Oh Zarathustra, you are not faithful enough to me!

You do not love me nearly as much as you say; I know you are thinking of leaving me soon.

There is an old, heavy, heavy booming bell: at night its booming carries all the way up to your cave: —

— when you hear this bell strike the hour at midnight, you think about it between one and twelve —

— you think about it, oh Zarathustra, I know it, that you want to leave me soon!” —

“Yes,” I answered, hesitating, “but you know this too —” And I said something into her ear, right in among her tangled, yellow, foolish shaggy locks.

You *know* that, oh Zarathustra? No one knows that. —

And we looked at each other and gazed at the green meadow, over which the cool evening was just then running, and we wept together. — But then life was dearer to me than all my wisdom had ever been. —

Thus spoke Zarathustra.

III

		One!
	Oh man, attend!
		Two!
	What does the deep midnight portend?
		Three!
	“I slept, I slept —,”
		Four!
	“From a deep dream I woke, at its end: —”
		Five!
	“The world is deep,”
		Six!
	“And deeper than the day could comprehend.”
		Seven!
	“Deep is its woe —,”
		Eight!
	“Joy — deeper still than misery:”
		Nine!
	“Woe says: Go!”
		Ten!
	“But all joy wants eternity —,”
		Eleven!
	“— wants deep, deep eternity!”
		Twelve!
