The Honey Sacrifice

— And again moons and years passed over Zarathustra’s soul, and he paid no heed to it; but his hair turned white. One day, as he sat on a stone in front of his cave and quietly gazed out — and from there one gazes out on the sea, and away over winding abysses — his animals walked thoughtfully around him and at last came and stood in front of him.

“Oh Zarathustra,” they said, “are you looking out for your happiness?” — “What does happiness matter!” he answered. “I have long since stopped striving for happiness; I strive for my work.” — “Oh Zarathustra,” the animals said again, “you say that as one who has more than enough of good things. Are you not lying in a sky-blue lake of happiness?” — “You jesting rascals,” answered Zarathustra, and smiled, “how well you chose your parable! But you also know that my happiness is heavy, and not like a flowing wave of water: it presses on me and will not leave me, and it behaves like molten pitch.” —

Then the animals walked thoughtfully around him again and then came and stood in front of him once more. “Oh Zarathustra,” they said, “so *that* is why you yourself keep getting yellower and darker, even though your hair wants to look white and flaxen? Just look, you are stuck sitting in your pitch!” — “What are you saying, my animals,” said Zarathustra, and laughed at it, “truly, I slandered it when I spoke of pitch. What is happening to me happens to all fruits that grow ripe. It is the *honey* in my veins that makes my blood thicker and my soul quieter as well.” — “So it will be, oh Zarathustra,” answered the animals, and pressed close to him; “but will you not climb a high mountain today? The air is clear, and today one can see more of the world than ever.” — “Yes, my animals,” he answered, “your advice is excellent and after my own heart: today I will climb a high mountain! But see to it that there is honey ready to hand for me up there, yellow, white, good, ice-fresh golden honey in the comb. For know this: up there I want to make the honey sacrifice.” —

But when Zarathustra was up on the summit, he sent home the animals that had come with him, and found that he was now alone: — then he laughed with his whole heart, looked around, and spoke like this:

That I spoke of sacrifices and honey sacrifices was only a trick of speech and, truly, a useful folly! Up here I may speak more freely than in front of hermits’ caves and hermits’ pets.

Why sacrifice! I squander what is given to me, I, a squanderer with a thousand hands: how could I still call that — sacrificing!

And when I asked for honey, I was only asking for bait, and sweet syrup and slime, which even grumbling bears and strange, sullen, wicked birds lick their tongues for:

— for the best bait, such as hunters and fishermen need. For if the world is like a dark forest full of beasts and a pleasure garden for all wild hunters, it seems to me even more, and more to my liking, a rich sea, deep as an abyss,

— a sea full of bright-colored fish and crabs, which might make even gods lust to become fishermen on it, and casters of nets: so rich is the world in strange things, great and small!

Especially the human world, the human sea: — it is into *that* sea that I now cast my golden fishing rod and say: Open up, you human abyss!

Open up and throw me your fish and your glittering crabs! With my best bait I will bait for myself today the strangest human fish!

— my happiness itself I cast out into all the wide distances, between sunrise, noon, and sunset, to see whether many human fish will not learn to tug and wriggle at my happiness.

Until, biting on my sharp hidden hooks, they have to come up to *my* height, the most colorful gudgeons of the abyss, up to the most malicious of all fishers of men.

For *that* is what I am, from the ground up and from the beginning: pulling, pulling in, pulling up, bringing up, a puller, a breeder, and a master of breeding, who once said to himself, and not for nothing: “Become who you are!”

So let men now come *up* to me: for I am still waiting for the signs that it is time for my going down; I myself do not yet go under, as I must, among men.

That is why I wait here, cunning and mocking, on high mountains, not an impatient one, not a patient one, but rather one who has even unlearned patience, — because he is no longer anyone’s “patient.”

For my destiny gives me time: has it forgotten me, perhaps? Or is it sitting in the shade behind a big stone, catching flies?

And truly, I am fond of it for this, my eternal destiny, that it does not hound me and hurry me, and leaves me time for pranks and malice: so that today I climbed this high mountain to go fishing.

Has any man ever caught fish on high mountains? And even if what I want and do up here is a folly: it is still better than if I grew solemn down below from waiting, and green and yellow —

— a strutting snorter of wrath from waiting, a holy howling storm from the mountains, an impatient one who shouts down into the valleys: “Listen, or I will whip you with the scourge of God!”

Not that I would bear a grudge against such angry men for it: they are good enough for me to laugh at! They have to be impatient, these big noise-drums, who will get their word in today or never!

But I and my destiny — we do not speak to Today, nor do we speak to Never: for speaking we have patience and time and more than time. For one day it must come, and it may not pass by.

What must come one day and may not pass by? Our great Hazar, that is, our great, distant human kingdom, the Zarathustra-kingdom of a thousand years —

How far off may such a “far off” be? What is that to me! But it stands no less firm for me on that account —, with both feet I stand secure on this ground,

— on an eternal ground, on hard primeval rock, on this highest, hardest, primeval mountain range, to which all winds come as to the weather divide, asking Where? and Where from? and Where to?

Laugh here, laugh, my bright and wholesome malice! From high mountains throw down your glittering, mocking laughter! With your glitter, bait for me the most beautiful human fish!

And whatever in all seas belongs to *me*, my in-and-for-myself in all things — fish *that* out for me, bring *that* up to me: that is what I am waiting for, I, the most malicious of all fishermen.

Out, out, my hook! In and down, bait of my happiness! Drip your sweetest dew, honey of my heart! Bite, my hook, into the belly of all black gloom!

Out, out, my eye! Oh, how many seas all around me, what dawning human futures! And above me — what rose-red stillness! What cloudless silence!
