The Cry of Distress

The next day Zarathustra was again sitting on his stone in front of the cave, while the animals roamed about out in the world to bring home new food — and new honey too: for Zarathustra had used up and squandered the old honey down to the last grain. But as he sat there in this way, with a stick in his hand, tracing the shadow of his figure on the ground, deep in thought and, truly! not about himself and his shadow — all at once he took fright and started: for beside his shadow he saw another shadow. And as he quickly looked around and stood up, look, there stood the soothsayer beside him, the same one he had once fed and given drink at his table, the proclaimer of the great weariness, who taught: “All is the same, nothing is worth it, the world is without meaning, knowledge chokes.” But his face had changed in the meantime; and when Zarathustra looked into his eyes, his heart took fright once again: so many evil proclamations and ash-gray lightnings passed over that face.

The soothsayer, who had perceived what was going on in Zarathustra’s soul, wiped his hand across his face, as if he wanted to wipe it away; and Zarathustra did the same. And when both of them had silently composed and strengthened themselves in this way, they gave each other their hands, as a sign that they wanted to recognize each other again.

“Welcome,” said Zarathustra, “you soothsayer of the great weariness; it shall not be for nothing that you were once my table companion and my guest. Eat and drink with me today as well, and forgive it if a contented old man sits at the table with you!” — “A contented old man?” answered the soothsayer, shaking his head. “But whoever you are or want to be, oh Zarathustra, you have been up here long enough — before long your boat will no longer sit high and dry!” — “Am I sitting high and dry, then?” asked Zarathustra, laughing. — “The waves around your mountain,” answered the soothsayer, “are rising and rising, the waves of great distress and gloom: soon they will lift your boat too and carry you away.” — At this Zarathustra was silent and wondered. — “Do you still hear nothing?” the soothsayer went on. “Is there not a rushing and roaring coming up from the depths?” — Zarathustra was silent again and listened: then he heard a long, long cry, which the abysses threw to one another and passed on, for none of them wanted to keep it: so evil did it sound.

“You evil proclaimer,” Zarathustra said at last, “that is a cry of distress, and the cry of a man; it may well come out of a black sea. But what is human distress to me! My last sin, which has been saved up for me — do you know what it is called?”

— “Pity!” answered the soothsayer from an overflowing heart, and raised both hands high. “Oh Zarathustra, I have come to tempt you to your last sin!” —

And hardly had these words been spoken when the cry rang out again, longer and more anxious than before, and already much nearer. “Do you hear? Do you hear, oh Zarathustra?” cried the soothsayer. “The cry is meant for you, it is calling you: come, come, come, it is time, it is high time!” —

At this Zarathustra was silent, confused and shaken; at last he asked, like one who hesitates within himself: “And who is it that is calling me there?”

“But you know already,” answered the soothsayer vehemently. “Why do you hide yourself? It is *the higher man* who is crying out for you!”

“The higher man?” cried Zarathustra, seized with horror. “What does *he* want? What does *he* want? The higher man! What does he want here?” — and his skin was covered with sweat.

But the soothsayer did not answer Zarathustra’s fear; he listened and listened toward the depths. But when it stayed quiet down there for a long time, he turned his gaze back and saw Zarathustra standing there trembling.

“Oh Zarathustra,” he began in a sad voice, “you do not stand there like one whose happiness makes his head spin: you will have to dance so that you do not fall over!

But even if you wanted to dance in front of me and leap all your side-leaps: no one shall be allowed to say to me: ‘Look, here dances the last happy man!’

Anyone who came up to this height looking for him would come in vain: caves he would find, no doubt, and caves behind caves, hiding places for those who hide, but no mine shafts of happiness, no treasure chambers, and no new golden veins of happiness.

Happiness — how could anyone find happiness among such buried ones and hermits! Must I still go looking for the last happiness on the Blessed Isles, far away among forgotten seas?

But all is the same, nothing is worth it, no seeking helps, and there are no Blessed Isles anymore either!” —

Thus sighed the soothsayer; but at his last sigh Zarathustra grew bright and sure again, like one who comes out of a deep gorge into the light. “No! No! Three times no!” he cried in a strong voice, and stroked his beard. “*That* I know better! There are still Blessed Isles! Be quiet about *that*, you sighing sack of sorrow!

Stop splashing about *that*, you rain cloud in the morning! Am I not standing here already, wet with your gloom and drenched like a dog?

Now I shake myself and run away from you, to get dry again: you must not wonder at that! Do I seem discourteous to you? But this is *my* court.

But as for your higher man: very well! I will look for him at once in those forests: *that* is where his cry came from. Perhaps some evil beast is pressing him hard there.

He is in *my* domain: here he shall come to no harm! And truly, there are many evil beasts around me.” —

With these words Zarathustra turned to go. Then the soothsayer said: “Oh Zarathustra, you are a rogue!

I know it already: you want to be rid of me! You would rather run into the forests and hunt down evil beasts!

But what good will it do you? In the evening you will have me back anyway; I will sit in your own cave, patient and heavy as a block of wood — and wait for you!”

“So be it!” Zarathustra called back as he went. “And what is mine in my cave belongs to you as well, my guest!

But if you should find any honey still in there, very well! Just lick it up, you grumbling bear, and sweeten your soul! For in the evening we both want to be in good spirits,

— in good spirits and glad that this day has come to an end! And you yourself shall dance to my songs as my dancing bear.

You do not believe it? You shake your head? Well then! Come on! Old bear! But I too — am a soothsayer.”

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
