Conversation with the Kings

I

Zarathustra had not yet been an hour on his way in his mountains and forests when all at once he saw a strange procession. Right on the path he meant to go down came two kings walking, adorned with crowns and purple sashes and as colorful as flamingos: they were driving a loaded donkey ahead of them. “What do these kings want in my kingdom?” Zarathustra said to his heart in astonishment, and quickly hid himself behind a bush. But when the kings came up close to him, he said, half aloud, like one who talks only to himself: “Strange! Strange! What rhyme or reason is there in that? Two kings I see — and only one donkey!”

Then the two kings stopped, smiled, looked toward the spot the voice had come from, and afterward looked each other in the face. “People like us think such things too, no doubt,” said the king on the right, “but we do not say them out loud.”

But the king on the left shrugged his shoulders and answered: “That may well be a goatherd. Or a hermit who has lived too long among rocks and trees. For no company at all also corrupts good manners.”

“Good manners?” the other king replied, sullen and bitter. “Then what is it we are running away from? Is it not ‘good manners’? Our ‘good society’?

Better, truly, to live among hermits and goatherds than with our gilded, false, overpainted mob, — even if it calls itself ‘good society,’

— even if it calls itself ‘nobility.’ But there everything is false and rotten, the blood first of all, thanks to old bad diseases and worse artists of healing.

The best and dearest to me today is still a healthy peasant, coarse, cunning, stubborn, enduring: that is the noblest kind today.

The peasant is the best today; and the peasant kind should be master! But it is the kingdom of the mob, — I will not be fooled anymore. And mob means: mishmash.

Mob-mishmash: in it everything is jumbled up with everything else, saint and scoundrel and squire and Jew and every beast out of Noah’s ark.

Good manners! Everything among us is false and rotten. No one knows how to revere anymore: it is precisely *that* we are running away from. They are sugary, pushy dogs; they gild palm leaves.

This disgust is choking me, that we kings ourselves have become false, draped and disguised in the old yellowed pomp of our grandfathers, show medals for the stupidest and the slyest and for anyone who haggles with power today!

We *are* not the first — and yet we have to *stand for* the first: we have finally grown sick and disgusted with this fraud.

We went out of the way of the rabble, of all these screamers and scribbling blowflies, the shopkeepers’ stench, the fidgeting of ambition, the foul breath —: ugh, to live among the rabble,

— ugh, to stand for the first among the rabble! Ah, disgust! Disgust! Disgust! What do we kings matter anymore!” —

“Your old sickness is attacking you,” said the king on the left at this, “disgust is attacking you, my poor brother. But you know that someone is listening to us.”

At once Zarathustra, who had opened his ears and eyes wide to this talk, rose from his hiding place, stepped up to the kings, and began:

“The one who is listening to you, who likes listening to you, you kings, is called Zarathustra.

I am Zarathustra, who once said: ‘What do kings matter anymore!’ Forgive me, I was glad when you said to each other: ‘What do we kings matter!’

But here is *my* kingdom and my dominion: what might you be looking for in my kingdom? But perhaps on your way you *found* what *I* am looking for: namely, the higher man.”

When the kings heard this, they beat their breasts and said with one voice: “We are found out!

With the sword of this word you cut through the thickest darkness of our hearts. You have uncovered our distress, for look! We are on our way to find the higher man —

— the man who is higher than we are, even though we are kings. To him we are bringing this donkey. For the highest man shall also be the highest lord on earth.

There is no harder misfortune in all human destiny than when the mighty of the earth are not also the first men. Then everything becomes false and crooked and monstrous.

And when they are even the last, and more beast than man: then the mob rises and rises in price, and at last even the mob-virtue says: ‘Look, I alone am virtue!’” —

What did I just hear? answered Zarathustra; what wisdom in kings! I am delighted, and, truly, I already feel the urge to make a rhyme on it: —

— even if it turns out to be a rhyme not fit for everyone’s ears. I unlearned long ago any consideration for long ears. Well then! Come on!

(But here it happened that the donkey too got a word in: and what it said, clearly and with ill will, was Yeah-aw.)

	Once — I think it was the Year of Grace One —
	The Sibyl spoke, quite drunk, though wine she had none:
	“Woe, now all goes wrong below!
	Decline! Decline! Never has the world sunk so low!
	Rome sank to whore and to a whorehouse too,
	Rome’s Caesar sank to beast, God himself — became a Jew!”

II

The kings feasted on these rhymes of Zarathustra’s; but the king on the right said: “Oh Zarathustra, how well we did to set out to see you!

For your enemies showed us your image in their mirror: there you looked out with the grimace of a devil, laughing scornfully, so that we were afraid of you.

But what good did it do! Again and again you stung us in ear and heart with your sayings. So at last we said: what does it matter what he looks like!

We must *hear* him, him who teaches: ‘You should love peace as a means to new wars, and the short peace more than the long!’

No one ever spoke such warlike words: ‘What is good? To be brave is good. It is the good war that hallows every cause.’

Oh Zarathustra, at such words the blood of our fathers stirred in our bodies: it was like spring speaking to old wine casks.

When the swords ran in and out among one another like red-spotted serpents, then our fathers grew fond of life; the sun of every peace seemed to them flat and lukewarm, and the long peace brought them shame.

How they sighed, our fathers, when they saw gleaming, dried-out swords hanging on the wall! Like those swords, they thirsted for war. For a sword wants to drink blood, and sparkles with desire.” —

— When the kings talked and chattered so eagerly about the happiness of their fathers, Zarathustra was overcome by no small desire to mock their eagerness: for plainly they were very peaceable kings that he saw before him, kings with old and refined faces. But he restrained himself. “Well then!” he said. “That way lies the road, there lies Zarathustra’s cave; and this day shall have a long evening! But now a cry of distress calls me hastily away from you.

It honors my cave if kings want to sit and wait in it: but, of course, you will have to wait a long time!

Well, well! What does it matter! Where does one learn to wait better today than at courts? And the whole virtue of kings that is left to them, — is it not called today: being *able* to wait?”

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
