The Magician

I

But when Zarathustra came around a rock, he saw, not far below him on the same path, a man who flung his limbs about like a raving madman and at last crashed face down to the ground. “Stop!” Zarathustra then said to his heart. “That one there must surely be the higher man; from him came that terrible cry of distress — I will see whether there is any help to give.” But when he ran up to the spot where the man lay on the ground, he found a trembling old man with staring eyes; and however hard Zarathustra tried to raise him up and set him back on his feet, it was no use. Nor did the unhappy man seem to notice that anyone was near him; rather, he kept looking around with heart-rending gestures, like someone forsaken and isolated by all the world. But at last, after much trembling, twitching, and curling-himself-up, he began to lament like this:

	Who warms me, who loves me still?
	Give me hot hands!
	Give me braziers for the heart!
	Stretched out, shuddering,
	Like someone half dead whose feet are being warmed —
	Shaken, ah! by unknown fevers,
	Trembling before sharp, icy arrows of frost,
	Hunted by you, thought!
	Unnamable! Veiled one! Horrifying one!
	You hunter behind the clouds!
	Struck down by your lightning,
	You mocking eye that looks at me out of the dark:
	— so I lie,
	Bend myself, writhe, tormented
	By all the eternal tortures,
	Hit
	By you, cruelest hunter,
	You unknown — god!

	Strike deeper,
	Strike once more!
	Stab and break this heart!
	Why this torturing
	With blunt-toothed arrows?
	Why do you look again,
	Not weary of human torment,
	With gloating eyes of godly lightning?
	You do not want to kill,
	Only torture, torture?
	Why — torture *me*,
	You gloating unknown god? —

	Haha! You are creeping closer?
	At such a midnight
	What do you want? Speak!
	You crowd me, press me —
	Ha! already far too close!
	Away! Away!
	You hear me breathing,
	You eavesdrop on my heart,
	You jealous one —
	But jealous of what?
	Away! Away! Why the ladder?
	Do *you want in*,
	Into my heart,
	To climb in, to climb into my most secret
	Thoughts?
	Shameless one! Unknown — thief!
	What do you want to steal for yourself,
	What do you want to overhear for yourself,
	What do you want to torture out of me,
	You torturer!
	You — hangman-god!
	Or shall I, like a dog,
	Roll over before you?
	Surrendering, beside myself with rapture,
	Wag — my love at you?

	In vain!
	Stab on,
	Cruelest goad! No,
	No dog — I am only your game,
	Cruelest hunter!
	Your proudest captive,
	You robber behind the clouds…
	Speak at last,
	What do you want, you highwayman, from *me*?
	You lightning-shrouded one! Unknown one! Speak,
	What do you *want*, unknown god? — —

	What?
	Ransom?
	How much ransom do you want?
	Ask much — so my pride advises!
	And keep it short — so my other pride advises!

	Haha!
	Me — you want? Me?
	Me — all of me?

	Haha!
	And you torture me, fool that you are,
	Torture my pride to pieces?
	Give me *love* — who warms me still?
	Who loves me still? — give me hot hands,
	Give me braziers for the heart,
	Give me, the most solitary one,
	Whom ice, ah! sevenfold ice
	Teaches to pine for enemies,
	For enemies, even,
	Give, yes, give up,
	Cruelest enemy,
	To me — *yourself*!…

	Gone!
	He has fled, himself,
	My last and only companion,
	My great enemy,
	My unknown one,
	My hangman-god!…

	— No!
	Come back,
	With all your tortures!
	To the last of all solitary ones
	Oh come back!
	All my streams of tears run
	Their course to you!

	And my heart’s last flame —
	For *you* it glows anew!
	Oh come back,
	My unknown god! My pain!
	My last happiness!

II

— But here Zarathustra could hold himself back no longer; he took his stick and struck at the lamenting man with all his strength. “Stop it!” he shouted at him, with furious laughter. “Stop it, you actor! You counterfeiter! You liar to the core! I know you well!

I will warm your legs for you, you wicked magician; I know very well how to make it hot — for the likes of you!”

— “Stop,” said the old man, and sprang up from the ground, “do not hit me anymore, oh Zarathustra! I only did it as a game!

Things like this are part of my art; I wanted to put you yourself to the test when I gave you this taste of it! And truly, you saw right through me!

But you too — gave me no small taste of yourself: you are *hard*, you wise Zarathustra! You strike hard with your ‘truths’; your cudgel forces out of me — *this* truth!”

— “Do not flatter,” answered Zarathustra, still worked up and scowling, “you actor to the core! You are false: what are you doing talking — about truth!

You peacock of peacocks, you sea of vanity, *what* were you playing before me, you wicked magician, in *whom* was I supposed to believe when you lamented like that?”

“The penitent of the spirit,” said the old man, “*him* — I was playing: you yourself once invented the phrase —

— the poet and magician who at last turns his spirit against himself, the transformed one who freezes to death on his own evil knowledge and conscience.

And just admit it: it took you a long time, oh Zarathustra, to see through my art and my lie! *You believed* in my distress when you held my head in both your hands —

— I heard you lament, ‘He was loved too little, loved too little!’ That I deceived you so far — my malice rejoiced at that inwardly.”

“You may have deceived subtler people than me,” said Zarathustra harshly. “I am not on guard against deceivers; I *must* be without caution: so my lot wills it.

But you — *must* deceive: that much I know of you! You must always mean two, three, four, and five things at once! Even what you confessed just now was not nearly true enough or false enough for me!

You wicked counterfeiter, how could you do anything else! You would put makeup even on your illness if you showed yourself naked to your doctor.

That is just how you made up your lie before me when you said, ‘I *only* did it as a game!’ There was *seriousness* in it too; you *are* something of a penitent of the spirit!

I can guess what you are: you became the enchanter of everyone, but against yourself you have no lie and no cunning left — you are disenchanted with yourself!

You have harvested disgust as your one truth. Not a word of yours is genuine anymore, except your mouth: that is, the disgust that sticks to your mouth.” —

— “Who are you, then!” the old magician cried at this, in a defiant voice. “Who dares speak like this to *me*, the greatest man alive today?” — and a green flash of lightning shot from his eye at Zarathustra. But the next moment he was transformed and said sadly:

“Oh Zarathustra, I am tired of it, my arts disgust me, I am not *great*, why do I pretend! But you know it well — I searched for greatness!

I wanted to play a great man, and I persuaded many: but this lie went beyond my strength. I am breaking on it.

Oh Zarathustra, everything about me is a lie; but that I am breaking — this breaking of mine is *genuine*!” —

“It honors you,” said Zarathustra darkly, looking down to one side, “it honors you that you searched for greatness, but it also gives you away. You are not great.

You wicked old magician, *this* is the best and most honest thing in you, the thing I honor in you: that you grew tired of yourself and said it out loud: ‘I am not great.’

*In this* I honor you as a penitent of the spirit: and even if only for a breath and a blink, for this one moment you were — genuine.

But tell me, what are you looking for here in *my* forests and rocks? And when you laid yourself across *my* path, what test did you want of me? —

— what were you tempting *me* with?” —

Thus spoke Zarathustra, and his eyes sparkled. The old magician was silent for a while; then he said: “Did I tempt you? I — am only seeking.

Oh Zarathustra, I am seeking someone genuine, upright, simple, of one meaning only, a man of all honesty, a vessel of wisdom, a saint of knowledge, a great man!

Do you not know it, then, oh Zarathustra? I am seeking Zarathustra.”

— And here a long silence arose between the two; but Zarathustra sank deep into himself, so that he closed his eyes. But then, coming back to the one he was talking with, he took the magician’s hand and spoke, full of courtesy and cunning:

“Well then! Up there the way leads on; there lies Zarathustra’s cave. In it you may seek whomever you would like to find.

And ask my animals for advice, my eagle and my serpent: they shall help you seek. But my cave is large.

I myself, of course — I have never yet seen a great man. For what is great, the eye of even the finest is coarse today. It is the kingdom of the mob.

Many a one have I already found who stretched and puffed himself up, and the people shouted: ‘Look there, a great man!’ But what good are all the bellows! In the end the wind comes out.

In the end a frog bursts that has puffed itself up too long: then the wind comes out. To stab a swollen man in the belly — that is what I call a fine pastime. Listen to that, you boys!

This today belongs to the mob: who still *knows* what is great and what is small! Who would have luck searching for greatness! Only a fool: fools have the luck.

You are searching for great men, you strange fool? Who *taught* you that? Is today the time for it? Oh you wicked seeker, why — are you tempting me?” —

Thus spoke Zarathustra, his heart comforted, and went on his way, laughing.
