The Last Supper

For at this point the soothsayer interrupted the welcome between Zarathustra and his guests: he pushed his way forward like someone with no time to lose, seized Zarathustra’s hand, and cried: “But Zarathustra!

One thing is more necessary than another, you say so yourself: well then, one thing is more necessary to *me* now than everything else.

A word at the right time: did you not invite me to a *meal*? And here are many who have come a long way. Surely you do not mean to fob us off with speeches?

Besides, all of you have already given me too much thought of freezing, drowning, suffocating, and other bodily emergencies: but nobody has given a thought to *my* emergency, namely starving —”

(Thus spoke the soothsayer; but when Zarathustra’s animals heard these words, they ran away in terror. For they saw that whatever they had brought home during the day would not be enough to stuff this one soothsayer.)

“Not to mention dying of thirst,” the soothsayer went on. “And although I hear water splashing here, like the speeches of wisdom, that is, abundantly and tirelessly: I — want *wine*!

Not everyone is a born water-drinker like Zarathustra. Nor is water any good for the tired and the withered: *we* deserve wine, — *that* alone gives sudden recovery and health on the spot!”

On this occasion, when the soothsayer was demanding wine, it happened that the king on the left, the silent one, got a word in for once too. “As for wine,” he said, “*we* have taken care of that, I and my brother, the king on the right: we have wine enough, — a whole donkey-load. So nothing is missing but bread.”

“Bread?” Zarathustra replied, and laughed as he said it. “Bread is the one thing hermits do not have. But man does not live by bread alone, but also by the meat of good lambs, of which I have two:

— *these* we should slaughter quickly and prepare with spice, with sage: that is how I love it. And there is no lack of roots and fruits either, good enough even for gourmets and fussy tasters; nor of nuts and other riddles to crack.

So in a little while we will make a good meal. But whoever wants to eat with us must also lend a hand, kings too. For at Zarathustra’s, even a king may be a cook.”

This proposal was after everyone’s heart: except that the voluntary beggar balked at meat and wine and spices.

“Now just listen to this glutton Zarathustra!” he said jokingly: “is that what people go into caves and high mountains for, to make meals like these?

Now of course I understand what he once taught us: ‘Praised be a little poverty!’ And why he wants to do away with beggars.”

“Be of good cheer,” Zarathustra answered him, “as I am. Keep to your custom, you excellent man, grind your grain, drink your water, praise your cooking: as long as it makes you cheerful!

I am a law only for my own, I am not a law for all. But whoever belongs to me must be strong of bone, and light of foot too, —

— glad for wars and feasts, no gloom-monger, no dreamy dawdler, ready for the hardest thing as for his feast, healthy and whole.

The best belongs to my own and to me; and if we are not given it, we take it: — the best food, the purest sky, the strongest thoughts, the most beautiful women!” —

Thus spoke Zarathustra; but the king on the right replied: “Strange! Did anyone ever hear such clever things from the mouth of a wise man?

And truly, that is the strangest thing about a wise man, when on top of everything he is also clever and no donkey.”

Thus spoke the king on the right, and wondered; but the donkey said Yeah-aw to his speech, with ill will. This, though, was the beginning of that long meal which is called “the Last Supper” in the history books. And at it nothing else was talked about but *the higher man*.
