The Song of Melancholy

I

When Zarathustra was giving these discourses, he stood near the entrance of his cave; but with the last words he slipped away from his guests and fled for a little while into the open air.

“Oh pure smells around me,” he cried, “oh blissful stillness around me! But where are my animals? Come here, come here, my eagle and my serpent!

Tell me, my animals: these higher men, all of them together — do they perhaps not *smell* good? Oh pure smells around me! Only now do I know and feel how much I love you, my animals.”

— And Zarathustra said once more: “I love you, my animals!” But the eagle and the serpent pressed close to him as he spoke these words, and looked up at him. In this way the three of them were quietly together, and sniffed and sipped the good air with one another. For the air out here was better than among the higher men.

II

But hardly had Zarathustra left his cave when the old magician got up, looked around slyly, and said: “He is out!

And already, you higher men — let me tickle you with this name of praise and flattery, just as he does — already my wicked spirit of deceit and magic is coming over me, my melancholy devil,

— who is an adversary of this Zarathustra from the ground up: forgive him for it! Now he wants to work magic before you, it is just *his* hour; in vain do I wrestle with this evil spirit.

To all of you, whatever honors you may give yourselves with words, whether you call yourselves ‘the free spirits’ or ‘the truthful’ or ‘the penitents of the spirit’ or ‘the unchained’ or ‘the great longers’ —

— to all of you who suffer *from the great disgust* as I do, for whom the old God has died and no new god yet lies in cradles and swaddling clothes — to all of you my evil spirit and magic-devil is well disposed.

I know you, you higher men, I know him — I know this fiend too, whom I love against my will, this Zarathustra: he himself often seems to me like a beautiful saint’s mask,

— like a new and wondrous masquerade, in which my evil spirit, the melancholy devil, takes pleasure: — I love Zarathustra, so it often seems to me, for the sake of my evil spirit. —

But already *he* is coming over me and forcing me, this spirit of melancholy, this devil of the evening twilight: and, truly, you higher men, he has a craving —

— just open your eyes! — he has a craving to come *naked*, whether male or female I do not know yet: but he is coming, he is forcing me, woe! Open your senses!

The day is dying away, evening now comes to all things, even to the best things; hear now, and see, you higher men, what devil, whether man or woman, this spirit of evening melancholy is!”

Thus spoke the old magician, looked around slyly, and then reached for his harp.

III

	When the air has cleared,
	When already the dew’s comfort
	Wells down onto the earth,
	Unseen, unheard as well:
	— For tender are the shoes
	The comforting dew wears, like all the gently comforting —:
	Do you remember then, do you remember, hot heart,
	How once you thirsted,
	For heavenly tears and the dripping of dew
	Thirsted, scorched and weary,
	While on yellow grassy paths
	Wicked evening glances of the sun
	Ran around you through black trees,
	Blinding, burning glances of the sun, gloating.

	“The suitor of *truth*? You?” — so they jeered —
	“No! Only a poet!
	An animal, a cunning, preying, creeping one,
	That has to lie,
	That knowingly, willingly has to lie:
	Lusting for prey,
	Masked in motley,
	Its own mask,
	Its own prey —
	*That* — the suitor of truth? No!
	Only a fool! Only a poet!
	Only speaking motley,
	Shrieking motley out of fool’s masks,
	Clambering about on lying bridges of words,
	On motley rainbows,
	Between false heavens
	And false earths,
	Roaming about, hovering about, —
	*Only* a fool! *Only* a poet! ...

	*That* — the suitor of truth?
	Not still, stiff, smooth, cold,
	Turned into an image,
	Into a pillar of God,
	Not set up before temples,
	A god’s doorkeeper:
	No! An enemy of such statues of truth,
	More at home in any wilderness than before temples,
	Full of a cat’s mischief,
	Leaping through every window,
	Whisk! into every accident,
	Sniffing toward every jungle,
	Sniffing with craving and longing,
	That you might run in jungles
	Among the motley-spotted beasts of prey,
	Sinfully healthy and motley and beautiful,
	With lusting lips,
	Blissfully mocking, blissfully hellish, blissfully bloodthirsty,
	Run preying, creeping, lying: ...

	Or, like the eagle, which long,
	Long stares fixedly into abysses,
	Into *its own* abysses: ...
	— Oh, how they coil down here,
	Downward, inward,
	Into ever deeper depths! —
	Then,
	Suddenly,
	On a straight track,
	In a blade-drawn attack,
	Swoop down on lambs,
	Headlong down, ravenous,
	Lusting for lambs,
	Grudging all lamb-souls,
	Grimly grudging all that looks
	Sheepish, lamb-eyed, curly-wooled,
	Gray, with lamb-and-sheep goodwill!

	So
	Eagle-like, panther-like
	Are the poet’s longings,
	Are *your* longings under a thousand masks,
	You fool! You poet!

	You who saw man
	As god as much as sheep —:
	To *tear apart* the god in man
	As much as the sheep in man,
	And, tearing, to *laugh* —

*That*, *that* is your bliss! A panther’s and an eagle’s bliss! A poet’s and a fool’s bliss!” —

	When the air has cleared,
	When already the moon’s sickle
	Creeps green between purple reds,
	And envious:
	— hostile to the day,
	With every step in secret
	Sickling at the hammocks of roses,
	Until they sink,
	Sink pale, down toward the night:

	So I myself once sank
	Out of my truth-madness,
	Out of my day-longings,
	Weary of day, sick from light,
	— sank downward, evenward, shadowward:
	By one single truth
	Burned and thirsty:
	— do you still remember, do you remember, hot heart,
	How you thirsted then? —
	That I should be banished
	From *all* truth,
	Only a fool! Only a poet!
