On Science

Thus sang the magician; and all who were gathered there went unawares, like birds, into the net of his cunning and melancholy lust. Only the conscientious one of the spirit had not been caught: he quickly snatched the harp away from the magician and cried: “Air! Let good air in! Let Zarathustra in! You are making this cave sultry and poisonous, you wicked old magician!

You seduce us, you false one, you subtle one, toward unknown desires and wildernesses. And woe when people like you start talking and making a fuss about *truth*!

Woe to all free spirits who are not on their guard against *such* magicians! Their freedom is finished: you teach and lure them back into prisons, —

— you old melancholy devil, out of your lament sounds a decoy whistle; you are like those who, by praising chastity, secretly invite us to lusts!”

Thus spoke the conscientious one; but the old magician looked around him, enjoyed his victory, and for its sake swallowed the annoyance the conscientious one had caused him. “Be quiet!” he said in a modest voice. “Good songs want to echo well; after good songs one should be silent for a long time.

That is what all these are doing, the higher men. But you have probably understood little of my song? There is little of a magic spirit in you.”

“You praise me,” replied the conscientious one, “by setting me apart from yourself; very well! But you others, what do I see? You are all still sitting there with lusting eyes —:

You free souls, where has your freedom gone! You almost seem to me like people who have long been watching wicked naked girls dancing: your souls are dancing themselves!

In you, you higher men, there must be more of what the magician calls his evil spirit of magic and deceit: — we must be different, I suppose.

And truly, we talked and thought together enough before Zarathustra came home to his cave for me to know: we *are* different.

We *seek* different things up here too, you and I. For I seek *more security*; that is why I came to Zarathustra. For he is still the firmest tower and will —

— today, when everything totters, when all the earth quakes. But you, when I see the eyes you make, it almost seems to me that you seek more *insecurity*,

— more shudders, more danger, more earthquake. You crave, it almost seems to me, forgive my presumption, you higher men —

— you crave the worst, most dangerous life, the one that frightens *me* most, the life of wild animals, forests, caves, steep mountains and gorges to lose your way in.

And it is not the ones who lead you *out of* danger that please you best, but the ones who lead you off all paths, the misleaders. But if such craving in you is *real*, it still seems to me *impossible*.

For fear — that is man’s original and fundamental feeling; from fear everything is explained, original sin and original virtue. Out of fear grew *my* virtue too, and it is called: science.

For the fear of wild animals — that was bred into man longest of all, including the animal he hides and fears inside himself: — Zarathustra calls it ‘the inner brute.’

Such long, old fear, refined at last, made spiritual, made intellectual — today, it seems to me, it is called: science.” —

Thus spoke the conscientious one; but Zarathustra, who was just then coming back into his cave and had heard and guessed the last speech, threw the conscientious one a handful of roses and laughed at his “truths.” “What!” he cried, “what did I just hear? Truly, it seems to me that you are a fool, or else I am one myself: and your ‘truth’ I will stand on its head in a flash.

For *fear* — is our exception. But courage and adventure and joy in the uncertain, in the unventured — *courage* seems to me man’s whole prehistory.

He envied the wildest, most courageous animals all their virtues and robbed them of them: only so did he become — man.

*This* courage, refined at last, made spiritual, made intellectual, this human courage with eagle’s wings and serpent’s shrewdness: *that*, it seems to me, is called today —”

“Zarathustra!” cried all who sat together there, as if from one mouth, and they broke into a great laughter; but it rose from them like a heavy cloud. The magician laughed too, and said shrewdly: “Well then! He is gone, my evil spirit!

And did I not warn you against him myself, when I said that he was a deceiver, a spirit of lies and deceit?

Especially when he shows himself naked. But what can *I* do about his tricks! Did *I* create him and the world?

Well then! Let us be good again, and in good spirits! And even though Zarathustra looks angry — just look at him! he is cross with me —:

— before night comes he will learn again to love me and praise me; he cannot live long without committing such follies.

*He* — loves his enemies: he understands this art best of anyone I have seen. But he takes revenge for it — on his friends!”

Thus spoke the old magician, and the higher men applauded him: so that Zarathustra went around and, with malice and love, shook hands with his friends — like someone who has something to make good and to apologize for to everyone. But when, as he did so, he came to the door of his cave, look, he was already craving the good air out there again, and his animals — and he wanted to slip outside.
