Among Daughters of the Desert

I

“Do not go away!” said the wanderer who called himself Zarathustra’s shadow, “stay with us, or the old, heavy gloom may fall upon us again.

That old magician has already treated us to the worst he has, and look, the good pious pope there has tears in his eyes and has set sail once more on the sea of melancholy.

These kings may still put on a good face in front of us: for *they* have learned that best of all of us today! But if they had no witnesses, I bet the evil game would start again with them too —

— the evil game of drifting clouds, of damp melancholy, of veiled skies, of stolen suns, of howling autumn winds,

— the evil game of our howling and our cries of distress: stay with us, oh Zarathustra! Here is much hidden misery that wants to speak, much evening, much cloud, much heavy air!

You fed us on strong man’s food and powerful sayings: do not let the soft, womanish spirits fall upon us again for dessert!

You alone make the air around you strong and clear! Did I ever find such good air anywhere on earth as with you in your cave?

And I have seen many lands; my nose has learned to test and appraise many kinds of air: but with you my nostrils taste their greatest delight!

Unless it be — unless it be —, oh, forgive an old memory! Forgive me an old after-dinner song that I once composed among daughters of the desert: —

— for with them there was the same good, bright, Eastern air; there I was farthest from cloudy, damp, melancholy Old Europe!

Back then I loved such Eastern girls and other blue kingdoms of heaven, over which no clouds and no thoughts hang.

You would not believe how prettily they sat there when they were not dancing, deep, but without thoughts, like little secrets, like beribboned riddles, like dessert nuts —

colorful and strange, truly! but without clouds: riddles that let themselves be guessed: for the love of such girls I made up an after-dinner psalm back then.”

Thus spoke the wanderer and shadow; and before anyone could answer him, he had already seized the old magician’s harp, crossed his legs, and looked around him, calm and wise: — but with his nostrils he drew in the air slowly and questioningly, like someone tasting new, foreign air in new lands. Then he began to sing with a kind of roar.

II

The desert grows: woe to him who harbors deserts!

	— Ha! Solemn!
	Solemn indeed!
	A worthy beginning!
	African-solemn!
	Worthy of a lion,
	Or of a moral howler monkey —
	— but nothing for you,
	You loveliest lady friends,
	At whose feet I,
	For the first time,
	A European, under palm trees,
	Am granted leave to sit. Selah.

	Wonderful, truly!
	Here I sit now,
	Near the desert and already
	So far from the desert again,
	And in no way yet deserted:
	That is, swallowed down
	By this smallest of oases —:
	— she had just opened, yawning,
	Her lovely jaws wide,
	The sweetest-smelling of all little mouths:
	And in I fell,
	Down, right through — among you,
	You loveliest lady friends! Selah.

	Hail, hail to that whale,
	If he made things so pleasant
	For his guest! — you understand
	My learned allusion?
	Hail to his belly,
	If it was
	So lovely an oasis-belly
	As this one: which, however, I call into doubt,
	— for I come, after all, from Europe,
	Which is more addicted to doubt than any
	Elderly little wife.
	May God make it better!
	Amen!

	Here I sit now,
	In this smallest of oases,
	Like a date,
	Brown, sweet through and through, oozing gold, lusting
	For a round girl’s mouth,
	But even more for girlish,
	Ice-cold, snow-white, sharp-edged
	Biting teeth: for it is after these
	That the heart of every burning date pants. Selah.

	Like the southern fruits just named,
	Like them, all too like them,
	I lie here, by little
	Winged beetles
	Danced around and played around,
	And likewise by still smaller,
	More foolish, more malicious
	Wishes and whims,
	Besieged by you,
	You mute, you foreboding
	Girl-cats,
	Dudu and Suleika,
	— *ensphinxed*, if I may cram into one word
	A great deal of feeling:
	(May God forgive me
	This sin against language!)
	— I sit here, sniffing the finest air,
	The air of paradise, truly,
	Bright, light air, striped with gold,
	As good an air as ever
	Fell down from the moon —
	Whether it was by accident,
	Or did it happen out of exuberance?
	As the old poets tell.
	But I, a doubter, call it
	Into doubt, for, after all, I come
	From Europe,
	Which is more addicted to doubt than any
	Elderly little wife.
	May God make it better!
	Amen!

	Drinking this loveliest air,
	With nostrils swelled like goblets,
	Without future, without memories,
	So I sit here, you
	Loveliest lady friends,
	And watch the palm tree,
	How she, like a dancing girl,
	Bows and bends and sways her hips,
	— one does it too, if one watches long!
	Like a dancing girl who, as it seems to me,
	Too long already, dangerously long,
	Has always, always stood on just one leg?
	— so that she forgot, as it seems to me,
	Her other little leg?
	In vain, at least,
	I searched for the missing twin jewel
	— that is, the other leg —
	In the holy vicinity
	Of her loveliest, daintiest
	Fanning and fluttering and flittering little skirt.
	Yes, if you, you beautiful lady friends,
	Will believe me entirely:
	She has lost it!
	It is gone!
	Gone forever!
	The other leg!
	Oh, what a pity about that lovely other leg!
	Where — might it linger now, and grieve, forsaken?
	The lonely leg?
	In fear, perhaps, of a
	Fierce, yellow, blond-maned
	Lion-monster? Or even, already,
	Gnawed off, nibbled away —
	Wretched, woe! woe! nibbled away! Selah.

	Oh, do not weep,
	Soft hearts!
	Do not weep, you
	Date-hearts! Milk-bosoms!
	You licorice-heart-
	Pouches!
	Weep no more,
	Pale Dudu!
	Be a man, Suleika! Courage! Courage!
	— Or should perhaps
	Something strengthening, heart-strengthening,
	Be in order here?
	An anointed saying?
	A solemn word of comfort? —

	Ha! Rise up, dignity!
	Virtue’s dignity! European dignity!
	Blow, blow again,
	Bellows of virtue!
	Ha!
	Roar once more,
	Roar morally!
	As a moral lion,
	Roar before the daughters of the desert!
	— For virtue’s howling,
	You loveliest of girls,
	Is more than anything
	European fervor, European ravenous hunger!
	And here I stand already,
	As a European,
	I can do no other, God help me!
	Amen!

The desert grows: woe to him who harbors deserts!
