The Donkey Festival

I

At this point in the litany, however, Zarathustra could no longer master himself; he himself cried Yeah-aw, louder even than the donkey, and leaped into the midst of his guests, who had gone mad.

“But what are you doing there, you children of men?” he cried, pulling the worshippers up from the ground. “Woe, if anyone but Zarathustra were watching you:

Everyone would judge that with your new faith you were the worst blasphemers or the most foolish of all little old women!

And you yourself, you old pope, how does it square with you yourself, that you worship a donkey here as God in this fashion?” —

“Oh Zarathustra,” answered the pope, “forgive me, but in the things of God I am even more enlightened than you. And that is only fair.

Better to worship God in this form than in no form at all! Think about this saying, my lofty friend: you will quickly guess that there is wisdom in such a saying.

He who said ‘God is a spirit’ — he took the greatest step and leap toward unbelief that has yet been taken on earth: such a word is not easily made good again on earth!

My old heart leaps and skips because there is still something on earth to worship. Forgive that, oh Zarathustra, to an old, pious pope’s heart! —”

— “And you,” said Zarathustra to the wanderer and shadow, “you call yourself a free spirit and fancy that you are one? And here you practice such idol-worship and priest-worship?

Truly, you practice something worse here than with your wicked brown girls, you wicked new believer!”

“Wicked enough,” answered the wanderer and shadow, “you are right: but what can I do about it! The old God lives again, oh Zarathustra, say what you like.

The ugliest man is to blame for everything: he has raised him up again. And if he says that he once killed him: *death* is always just a prejudice where gods are concerned.”

— “And you,” said Zarathustra, “you wicked old magician, what did you do! Who, in this free age, should believe in you from now on, if *you* believe in such donkey-god foolishness?

It was a stupidity, what you did; how could you, you shrewd one, do such a stupid thing!”

“Oh Zarathustra,” answered the shrewd magician, “you are right, it was a stupidity, — and it was hard enough for me, too.”

— “And you of all people,” said Zarathustra to the conscientious one of the spirit, “consider, and put your finger to your nose! Does nothing here go against your conscience? Is your spirit not too clean for this praying and the fumes of these praying brothers?”

“There is something to it,” answered the conscientious one, and put his finger to his nose, “there is something in this spectacle that even does my conscience good.

Perhaps I am not allowed to believe in God: but it is certain that God seems to me most believable in this form.

God is supposed to be eternal, according to the testimony of the most pious: whoever has so much time takes his time. As slowly and as stupidly as possible: *with that* someone of that kind can still go very far.

And whoever has too much spirit might well fall in love with stupidity and folly themselves. Think about yourself, oh Zarathustra!

You yourself — truly! even you might well become a donkey out of overflow and wisdom.

Does not a perfect sage like to walk the crookedest paths? Appearances teach it, oh Zarathustra, — *your* appearance!”

— “And you yourself, last of all,” said Zarathustra, and turned to the ugliest man, who was still lying on the ground, raising his arm up to the donkey (for he was giving it wine to drink). “Speak, you unspeakable one, what have you done there!

You seem to me transformed, your eye glows, the mantle of the sublime lies around your ugliness: *what* did you do?

Is it true, then, what those others say, that you raised him up again? And what for? Was he not killed off and done away with for good reason?

You yourself seem to me awakened: what did you do? what did *you* turn around? What made *you* turn and convert? Speak, you unspeakable one?”

“Oh Zarathustra,” answered the ugliest man, “you are a rogue!

Whether *He* is still alive, or alive again, or thoroughly dead, — which of us two knows that best? I am asking you.

But one thing I know, — I learned it from you yourself once, oh Zarathustra: whoever wants to kill most thoroughly *laughs*.

‘One kills not with anger but with laughter’ — so you once said. Oh Zarathustra, you hidden one, you destroyer without anger, you dangerous saint, — you are a rogue!”

II

Then it happened that Zarathustra, astonished at so many roguish answers, sprang back to the door of his cave and, turning to all his guests, cried out in a strong voice:

“Oh you rogues and fools, every one of you, you jesters! Why do you disguise and hide yourselves from me!

How each of your hearts was wriggling with delight and malice, because at last you had once again become like little children, that is, pious, —

— because at last you did again as children do, that is, prayed, folded your hands, and said ‘dear God’!

But now leave me *this* nursery, my own cave, where today all childishness is at home. Out here, cool off your hot childish exuberance and the noise of your hearts!

Of course: unless you become like little children, you will not enter *that* kingdom of heaven. (And Zarathustra pointed upward with his hands.)

But we do not want to enter the kingdom of heaven at all: we have become men, — so we want the kingdom of earth.”

III

And once more Zarathustra began to speak. “Oh my new friends,” he said, — “you strange ones, you higher men, how well I like you now, —

— since you became joyful again! Truly, you have all blossomed: it seems to me that such flowers as you need *new festivals*,

— a little brave nonsense, some divine service and donkey festival, some old joyful Zarathustra-fool, a rushing wind that blows your souls bright.

Do not forget this night and this donkey festival, you higher men! *That* you invented here with me, that I take as a good omen, — such things only convalescents invent!

And if you celebrate it again, this donkey festival, do it for love of yourselves, do it also for love of me! And in remembrance of *me*!”

Thus spoke Zarathustra.
