FEDERALIST No. 5

The Same Subject Continued (Concerning Dangers from Foreign Force and Influence)

For the Independent Journal. Saturday, November 10, 1787

JAY

To the People of the State of New York:

Queen Anne, in her letter of July 1, 1706, to the Scottish Parliament, made some observations on the importance of the union then being formed between England and Scotland that deserve our attention. I'll share an extract or two with the public: "A complete and perfect union will be the solid foundation of lasting peace. It will protect your religion, liberty, and property, and remove the hostilities among yourselves and the suspicions and disagreements between our two kingdoms. It will increase your strength, wealth, and trade; and by this union, the whole island -- joined in mutual loyalty and free from all fears of conflicting interests -- will be able to resist all its enemies." "We most earnestly urge you toward calmness and unanimity in this great and weighty matter, so that the union may be brought to a happy conclusion, as it is the only effective way to secure our present and future happiness and to defeat the plans of our shared enemies, who will no doubt use every effort to prevent or delay this union."

As I pointed out in the previous paper, weakness and division at home invite dangers from abroad, and nothing would do more to protect us from those dangers than union, strength, and good government within our own borders. This is a rich subject, and one that can't easily be exhausted.

The history of Great Britain is the one most of us know best, and it offers many useful lessons. We can learn from their experience without paying the price they paid. Although it seems like common sense that the people of an island nation should form one country, we find that for centuries they were divided into three, and that those three were almost constantly caught up in quarrels and wars with one another. Despite the fact that their true interest in relation to the continental nations of Europe was really the same, the schemes and policies and maneuvers of those nations kept their mutual suspicions constantly inflamed. For a long stretch of years, they were far more of a burden and a problem to each other than they were a help.

If the American people divided themselves into three or four nations, wouldn't the same thing happen? Wouldn't similar suspicions arise and be encouraged in the same way? Instead of being "joined in affection" and free from any fear of conflicting interests, envy and distrust would soon destroy confidence and goodwill. The narrow interests of each confederacy, rather than the broad interests of all America, would become the only focus of their policies and ambitions. And so, like most neighboring nations throughout history, they would always be either involved in disputes and war or living in constant fear of them.

Even the most optimistic supporters of three or four confederacies can't reasonably assume they would stay on equal footing in terms of strength for very long, even if it were possible to start them out that way. But even granting that it could be done -- what human plan could guarantee that such equality would last? Setting aside the local circumstances that naturally build up power in one region while holding it back in another, we'd also have to account for the effects of better leadership and management, which would likely set one government above the rest and destroy whatever balance of strength and standing they once had. We simply can't expect the same level of sound policy, good judgment, and foresight to be consistently maintained by each of these confederacies over many years.

Whenever it happened -- and it would happen, for one reason or another -- that one of these nations or confederacies rose significantly above its neighbors on the scale of political importance, those neighbors would immediately look at it with envy and fear. Both emotions would lead them to support, if not actively promote, anything that might reduce its importance, while holding back from any steps that could advance or even protect its prosperity. It wouldn't take long for that rising nation to notice these hostile attitudes. It would soon begin not only to lose trust in its neighbors but to develop equally unfriendly feelings toward them. Distrust naturally breeds distrust, and nothing destroys goodwill and neighborly relations more quickly than spiteful suspicions and unfair accusations, whether spoken or implied.

The North is generally the region of strength, and many local factors make it likely that the most northern of the proposed confederacies would, before long, be clearly more powerful than any of the others. The moment that became obvious, this "northern hive" would stir up the same ideas and anxieties in the southern parts of America that it once did in the southern parts of Europe. And it doesn't seem like a stretch to guess that its young swarms might often be tempted to gather honey in the greener fields and milder climates of their wealthier and more comfortable southern neighbors.

Anyone who studies the history of similar divisions and confederacies will find plenty of reason to expect that the ones being proposed would be neighbors in name only -- really just border states. They wouldn't love or trust one another. On the contrary, they'd be plagued by conflict, suspicion, and mutual harm. In short, they would put us in exactly the position that certain foreign nations would no doubt love to see us in: a threat only to each other.

From these observations, it's clear that those who assume offensive and defensive alliances could be formed among these confederacies -- alliances that would produce the kind of combined will, military coordination, and pooled resources needed to maintain a strong defense against foreign enemies -- are seriously mistaken.

When did the independent states that Britain and Spain were once divided into ever form such alliances or unite their forces against a foreign enemy? The proposed confederacies would be separate nations. Each would negotiate its own trade agreements with foreign countries through separate treaties. And since their products and goods would be different and suited to different markets, those treaties would be fundamentally different. Different trade interests would inevitably create different political interests, and therefore different degrees of attachment and connection to different foreign powers. So it might well happen -- and probably would -- that the foreign nation the southern confederacy was at war with would be the very one the northern confederacy most wanted to keep as a friend. An alliance that ran so directly against their immediate interests wouldn't be easy to form, and even if formed, it wouldn't be honored with real good faith.

In fact, it's far more likely that in America, just as in Europe, neighboring nations driven by opposing interests and unfriendly passions would frequently end up on different sides. Given our distance from Europe, it would be more natural for these confederacies to see each other as a greater threat than distant nations -- and therefore for each to seek protection from the others through foreign alliances rather than banding together against foreign dangers. And let's not forget how much easier it is to invite foreign fleets into our ports and foreign armies into our country than it is to persuade or force them to leave. How many conquests did the Romans and others make while posing as allies? And what changes did they impose on the governments of the nations they claimed to be protecting?

Let fair-minded people judge, then, whether dividing America into any number of independent nations would tend to protect us against the hostility and meddling of foreign powers.

PUBLIUS
