FEDERALIST No. 13

Advantage of the Union in Respect to Economy in Government

For the Independent Journal. Wednesday, November 28, 1787

HAMILTON

To the People of the State of New York:

Closely connected to the subject of revenue is the question of government spending. Money saved in one area can be put to good use in another, and that means less has to be pulled from the people's pockets. If the states are united under one government, there will be only one national payroll to support. If they're divided into several confederacies, there will be as many separate national payrolls to fund -- and each of them, when it comes to the major departments, would need to be just as large as what a single government covering the whole nation would require. The idea of splitting the states into thirteen completely independent countries is too extreme and too dangerous to attract many supporters. The people who speculate about breaking up the nation generally envision three confederacies: one made up of the four northern states, another of the four middle states, and a third of the five southern states. There probably wouldn't be more than that. Under this arrangement, each confederacy would cover a territory larger than the kingdom of Great Britain. No well-informed person would think that the affairs of such a confederacy could be properly managed by a government any less comprehensive in its institutions than the one proposed by the Convention. Once a nation reaches a certain size, it needs the same level of governmental energy and the same administrative structures as one that's much larger. This idea doesn't lend itself to exact proof, because there's no formula for calculating how much governmental power is needed to govern a given number of people. But when you consider that the island of Britain, roughly equal in size to each of these proposed confederacies, has about eight million people -- and when you think about how much authority is needed to direct the passions of such a large society toward the common good -- there's no reason to doubt that a similar amount of power would be enough to do the same job in a society far larger in population. Governmental power, when properly organized and applied, can extend its reach across a very large area. Through a smart system of local and regional offices, it can essentially reproduce itself in every part of a great nation.

The assumption that each confederacy the states would likely form would need a government just as comprehensive as the one proposed gets even stronger when you consider a more probable scenario than the three-confederacy option. If we look carefully at geography and trade, along with the habits and biases of the different states, we'd have to conclude that in the event of disunion, they'd most naturally divide into two groups. The four New England states, for all the reasons that create bonds of national sympathy and connection, would almost certainly unite. New York, given its position, would never be foolish enough to leave its flank exposed and unsupported against the weight of that confederacy. There are other obvious reasons that would pull New York in as well. New Jersey is too small to stand alone as a frontier state against this even more powerful combination, and there seem to be no obstacles to its joining either. Even Pennsylvania would have strong reasons to join the northern alliance. An active foreign trade based on her own shipping industry is her natural policy, and it matches the opinions and preferences of her citizens. The more southern states, for various reasons, may not be as interested in promoting shipping. They might prefer a system that gives all nations unlimited freedom to be both the buyers and the shippers of their goods. Pennsylvania may not want to tie her interests to a southern arrangement so contrary to her own policy. Since she'd be a border state no matter what, she might decide it's safer to have her exposed side face the weaker power of the South rather than the stronger power of the North. That would give her the best chance of avoiding the fate of becoming America's version of Flanders -- that is, the constant battleground between rival powers. Whatever Pennsylvania decides, if the northern confederacy includes New Jersey, there's no realistic chance of more than one confederacy forming south of that state.

Nothing can be more obvious than this: the thirteen states together can support a national government more easily than half of them, or a third, or any smaller number. This point should carry enormous weight in answering the objection to the proposed plan that's based on cost. That objection, however, falls apart completely once you look at it closely.

Think about it. If you add up the cost of multiple government payrolls, plus the border guards who would inevitably be needed to police illegal trade between the different confederacies (personnel that the demands of revenue would unavoidably produce over time), plus the military establishments that would inevitably result from the suspicions and conflicts between the several nations the states would become -- it becomes perfectly clear that separation would be just as damaging to the economy as it would be to the peace, the commerce, the revenue, and the liberty of every part of the country.

PUBLIUS
