FEDERALIST No. 22

The Same Subject Continued (Other Defects of the Present Confederation)

HAMILTON

To the People of the State of New York:

In addition to the defects I've already listed in our current federal system, there are others just as important that together make it completely unfit for managing the affairs of the Union.

Everyone agrees that the lack of power to regulate commerce is one of them. The usefulness of such a power was discussed earlier in these papers, and given how universally recognized this problem is, little needs to be added here. It's obvious, even on the most basic examination, that there's nothing — whether in terms of trade or finances — that more urgently demands federal oversight. This gap has already prevented us from forming beneficial treaties with foreign powers and has created friction between the states. No nation that understands how our political system works would be foolish enough to make agreements with the United States that grant us any meaningful advantages, knowing that the Union's commitments could be violated by any of its members at any time — and knowing from experience that they could enjoy every benefit they wanted in our markets without giving us anything in return beyond whatever suited their short-term convenience. It's no surprise, then, that Mr. Jenkinson, when introducing a bill in the House of Commons to regulate temporary trade between Britain and America, prefaced it by declaring that similar provisions in earlier bills had served every purpose for British commerce, and that it would be wise to stick with this approach until it became clear whether the American government was likely to develop any real stability. [1]

Several states have tried, through their own separate prohibitions, restrictions, and trade barriers, to influence Britain's behavior on this front. But the lack of coordination — caused by the lack of a central authority and by the conflicting, incompatible policies of different states — has defeated every such attempt so far and will continue to do so as long as these obstacles to unified action persist.

The intrusive and hostile trade regulations some states have adopted, contrary to the true spirit of the Union, have in various cases given other states legitimate grounds for resentment and complaint. It's fair to worry that examples like these, if not checked by national authority, would multiply and spread until they became serious sources of hostility and conflict — not to mention harmful barriers to commerce between different parts of the Confederacy. "The commerce of the German empire [2] is constantly hampered by the many duties that the various princes and states impose on goods passing through their territories, which render the fine rivers and navigable waterways that Germany is so fortunately blessed with nearly useless." While the character of the American people might never allow things to get quite that bad here, we can reasonably expect that the escalating conflicts between state regulations would eventually lead citizens of each state to be treated by the others as little better than foreigners and strangers.

The power to raise armies, under the most straightforward reading of the Articles of Confederation, is really just the power to request quotas of men from the states. During the recent war, this system proved full of obstacles to an effective and affordable defense. It created a bidding war between states — a kind of auction for soldiers. To fill the quotas required of them, states outbid each other until enlistment bounties grew to enormous and unsustainable levels. The hope of even higher bonuses gave potential soldiers an incentive to delay enlisting and discouraged them from signing up for any substantial length of time. The result: slow and inadequate recruitment during the most critical moments of our struggle; short enlistments at unprecedented cost; constant turnover in the troops, which wrecked their discipline and repeatedly left public safety hanging by a thread with a disbanded army. The result was also those oppressive methods of conscription that were resorted to on several occasions — measures that nothing but the passion for liberty would have made the people willing to endure.

This method of raising troops is no friendlier to efficiency and strength than it is to a fair distribution of the burden. States near the fighting, driven by self-preservation, made efforts to fill their quotas that even exceeded their abilities, while those far from the danger were mostly as neglectful as the others were diligent. The immediate sting of this inequality couldn't be eased, as with money contributions, by the hope of a future settlement of accounts. States that didn't pay their share of money could at least be charged for their shortfalls, but there was no way to calculate the shortfalls in manpower. We shouldn't feel too bad about losing that hope, though, when we consider how little chance there is that the most delinquent states will ever be able to make up for their financial failures. The system of quotas and requisitions, whether applied to men or money, is in every respect a system of weakness for the Union and of inequality and injustice among its members.

The equal voting power of all states is another objectionable feature of the Confederation. Every concept of proportionality and every principle of fair representation condemns a system that gives Rhode Island the same weight as Massachusetts, Connecticut, or New York — and Delaware the same voice in national decisions as Pennsylvania, Virginia, or North Carolina. In practice, this contradicts the fundamental principle of republican government: that the will of the majority should prevail. Clever arguments might claim that sovereign states are equal and that a majority of state votes equals a majority of confederated America. But this kind of logical sleight-of-hand will never overcome the plain demands of justice and common sense. It's possible for a majority of states to represent only a small minority of the American people. [3] Two-thirds of the people of America couldn't be persuaded for long, based on artificial distinctions and fancy logic, to let their interests be managed and controlled by the remaining one-third. The larger states would eventually rebel against taking their orders from the smaller ones. To accept such a diminished role in the political system wouldn't just mean being indifferent to power — it would mean giving up on the very idea of equality. It's neither reasonable to expect the first nor fair to demand the second. The smaller states, considering how much their safety and wellbeing depend on the Union, should be willing to give up a claim that, if not abandoned, would prove fatal to the Union's survival.

It might be argued that the most important resolutions require not seven but nine states — two-thirds of the total — and that nine states would always represent a majority of the Union. But this doesn't fix the fundamental problem of equal votes for states of vastly different sizes and populations. And the inference isn't even factually accurate: we can list nine states that contain less than a majority of the people. [4] It's constitutionally possible for those nine states to cast the deciding vote. Besides, there are matters of considerable importance that can be decided by a bare majority, and there are other matters where it's debatable whether seven votes are enough — which, if interpreted that way, would extend this rule to issues of the highest importance. On top of that, the number of states is likely to grow, with no provision for a proportional increase in the voting ratio.

But that's not all: what looks like a remedy at first glance is actually a poison. Giving a minority a veto over the majority — which is always the case when more than a simple majority is required for a decision — tends to let the smaller group override the larger one. Congress, because of the frequent absence of a few states, has often been in the same situation as the old Polish parliament, where a single vote could bring all proceedings to a halt. A sixtieth of the Union — roughly the proportion represented by Delaware and Rhode Island — has on several occasions been able to completely block the nation's business. This is one of those refinements that works the exact opposite of how it's supposed to work in theory. The requirement of unanimity (or something close to it) in public bodies has been based on the idea that it would promote security. But what it actually does is paralyze the government, destroy its effectiveness, and hand over control to the whims, schemes, or corruption of an insignificant, disruptive, or dishonest faction — replacing the orderly deliberations and decisions of a responsible majority. In national emergencies — exactly when the quality of government matters most — there's typically a need for action. The public's business has to move forward one way or another. If a stubborn minority can overrule the majority on the best course of action, the majority, in order to get anything done at all, has to cave to the minority's demands. The will of the smaller group ends up dictating to the larger one and setting the tone for national policy. The results: endless delays, constant backroom dealing and scheming, pathetic compromises of the public good. And yet, in such a system, we should actually count ourselves lucky when compromises can be reached — because sometimes issues simply can't be compromised on, and then government action must be either harmfully delayed or fatally defeated. The government is often left paralyzed by the impossibility of getting enough votes. Its position must always seem weak, and sometimes borders on anarchy.

It's not hard to see that this kind of system opens the door wider to foreign corruption and domestic faction than one that simply lets the majority decide — even though the opposite has been assumed. The mistake comes from not paying enough attention to the damage that can be done by blocking government action at critical moments. When the Constitution requires a large supermajority for any national action, we tend to feel safe because nothing improper is likely to be done. But we forget how much good can be prevented, and how much harm can result, from the power to block necessary action and keep things stuck in a bad situation.

Imagine, for example, that we were fighting a war alongside one foreign nation against another. Suppose our situation demanded peace, but our ally's interests or ambitions pushed them to continue the war for reasons that would justify us in negotiating a separate peace. In that scenario, our ally would obviously find it much easier — through bribes and back-channel dealings — to prevent our government from making peace when two-thirds of the votes were required, versus when a simple majority would do the job. In the first case, he'd need to corrupt fewer people; in the second, more. By the same logic, an enemy nation could much more easily throw our deliberations into chaos and undermine our war effort. And in trade matters, we'd face similar disadvantages. A nation we had a trade agreement with could far more easily prevent us from forming a deal with their commercial rival — even if that deal would be enormously beneficial to us.

These dangers shouldn't be dismissed as imaginary. One of the weaknesses of republics — among their many strengths — is that they're too vulnerable to foreign corruption. A hereditary monarch, while often willing to sacrifice his subjects to his ambition, has such a personal stake in the government and the nation's prestige that it's hard for a foreign power to offer him enough to make betraying his country worthwhile. History has accordingly produced few examples of this kind of royal treachery, though it's seen plenty of every other kind.

In republics, people who are elevated from the general public by the votes of their fellow citizens to positions of great prominence and power may find rewards for betraying their trust that — to anyone not guided by exceptional virtue — seem to outweigh their personal stake in the common good and override their sense of duty. That's why history gives us so many depressing examples of foreign corruption in republican governments. How much this contributed to the downfall of the ancient republics has already been discussed. It's well known that representatives of the United Provinces of the Netherlands were, on various occasions, bribed by agents of neighboring kingdoms. The Earl of Chesterfield, if I remember correctly, suggested in a letter to his own government that his success in an important negotiation depended on securing a military commission for one of those representatives. And in Sweden, political parties were alternately bought off by France and England in such a brazen and notorious manner that it disgusted the entire nation — and was a major reason why the most constitutionally limited monarch in Europe, in a single day, without riots, violence, or opposition, became one of the most absolute and unchecked rulers on the continent.

One final defect crowns all the others in the Confederation and still needs to be mentioned: the lack of a judicial branch. Laws are dead letters without courts to interpret and define their true meaning and application. The treaties of the United States, to have any force at all, must be treated as part of the law of the land. Their real meaning, as it affects individuals, must — like all other laws — be determined through judicial decisions. To produce consistency in these decisions, they need to be appealed, as a last resort, to one supreme court. And this court must be established under the same authority that creates the treaties themselves. Both of these elements are essential. If each state has its own court of final appeal, there could be as many different final rulings on the same legal question as there are courts. People's legal opinions vary endlessly. We often see not just different courts but judges on the same court disagreeing with each other. To avoid the chaos that would inevitably result from contradictory rulings by a collection of independent courts, every nation has found it necessary to establish one supreme court above the rest — one with general oversight authority and the power to settle and declare, as a final ruling, a uniform standard of justice.

This is even more necessary when the structure of government is compound — where the laws of the whole are at risk of being contradicted by the laws of the parts. In such cases, if local courts have the power of final judgment, besides the disagreements that naturally arise from differences of opinion, there's a lot to fear from the bias of local perspectives and prejudices, and from interference by local regulations. Whenever such interference occurred, there'd be reason to expect that local laws would be favored over national laws — because nothing is more natural for people in office than to show special loyalty to the authority that gave them their positions.

Under the current Constitution, the treaties of the United States are vulnerable to violations by thirteen different state legislatures and as many different courts of final jurisdiction, all operating under the authority of those legislatures. The trust, the reputation, and the peace of the entire Union are constantly at the mercy of the prejudices, passions, and self-interest of every member state. Can foreign nations be expected to respect or trust such a government? Will the people of America continue to stake their honor, their happiness, and their safety on such a shaky foundation?

In this review of the Confederation, I've limited myself to highlighting its most significant defects, passing over those flaws in its details that have rendered much of the power it was supposed to have essentially useless. It must be obvious by now to all thoughtful people who can set aside their preconceptions that this is a system so fundamentally flawed and unsound that it can't be fixed with amendments — only by a complete overhaul of its core design.

The organization of Congress itself is entirely unsuited for exercising the powers that need to be given to the Union. A single legislative body might be an adequate home for the limited — really, shackled — powers that have been given to the federal government until now. But it would violate every principle of good government to entrust it with the additional powers that even the more moderate and reasonable opponents of the proposed Constitution admit should belong to the United States. If the proposed plan isn't adopted, and if the need for Union manages to survive the ambitious schemes of those who dream of personal glory from its breakup, what would probably happen is this: we'd end up trying to pile additional powers onto Congress as it's currently structured. Either the machine, because of the inherent weakness of its design, would crumble to pieces despite our misguided efforts to prop it up — or, through gradual increases in its power and authority as necessity demanded, we'd end up concentrating all the most important powers of government in a single body, saddling future generations with one of the most terrible forms of government that human foolishness has ever devised. In that way, we'd create the very tyranny that opponents of the new Constitution either genuinely fear or pretend to want to prevent.

It has contributed significantly to the weaknesses of the current federal system that it was never ratified by the people. Resting on nothing stronger than the consent of state legislatures, it has been subject to frequent and complicated challenges to the legitimacy of its powers and has, in some cases, given rise to the outrageous doctrine that state legislatures have the right to repeal it. Since it owes its ratification to state law, people have argued that the same authority could repeal the law that ratified it. However outrageous it may be to claim that a party to an agreement has the right to unilaterally revoke that agreement, the doctrine has had serious defenders. The mere possibility of this kind of challenge proves the necessity of building our national government on a deeper foundation than the mere approval of delegated authorities. The foundation of the American republic ought to rest on the solid basis of the consent of the people. The streams of national power ought to flow directly from that pure, original fountain of all legitimate authority.

PUBLIUS

[1] This, as nearly as I can recall, was the substance of his speech when introducing the most recent bill.

[2] Encyclopedia, article "Empire."

[3] New Hampshire, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Delaware, Georgia, South Carolina, and Maryland are a majority of the states, but they contain less than one-third of the population.

[4] Add New York and Connecticut to those seven states, and they still represent less than a majority of the population.
