FEDERALIST No. 60

The Same Subject Continued (Concerning the Power of Congress to Regulate the Election of Members)

From The Independent Journal. Saturday, February 23, 1788

HAMILTON

To the People of the State of New York:

We've seen that an uncontrollable power over elections for the federal government couldn't, without serious risk, be left to the state legislatures. Let's now look at the danger on the other side -- that is, from giving the ultimate right to regulate its own elections to the Union itself. Nobody claims this right would ever be used to shut any state out of its share of representation. Everyone's interest in that regard would be everyone's security. But it's alleged that this power might be used to promote the election of some favored class of people by limiting where elections are held to particular districts, making it impossible for ordinary citizens to participate in the vote. Of all the far-fetched scenarios, this is the most far-fetched. On one hand, no rational calculation of probabilities would lead us to imagine that the kind of attitude such violent and extraordinary behavior would imply could ever find its way into the national government. On the other hand, we can say with certainty that if such a corrupt spirit ever did gain entry, it would show itself in a completely different and far more decisive form.

The unlikelihood of such an attempt can be satisfactorily demonstrated by this single observation: it could never be made without causing an immediate revolt by the great body of the people, led and directed by the state governments. It's not hard to imagine that this fundamental right of freedom might, in certain turbulent and divided times, be violated against a particular class of citizens by a powerful and overbearing majority. But the idea that such a basic privilege, in a country this advanced and enlightened, could be attacked to the detriment of the great mass of the people, as a deliberate policy of the government, without sparking a popular revolution -- that's simply inconceivable and unbelievable.

Beyond this general point, there are more specific reasons that rule out any worry on this subject. The different elements making up the national government, and even more so the different ways they'll be brought into action across its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to any coordinated scheme involving elections. There's enough diversity in property, character, customs, and habits among the people of different parts of the Union to produce a real diversity of attitudes in their representatives toward the different ranks and classes of society. And while close interaction under the same government will gradually make some of these differences smaller, there are causes -- both physical and cultural -- that will, to a greater or lesser degree, permanently sustain different tendencies in this respect. But the factor most likely to have the greatest influence will be the different ways the various parts of the government are assembled. The House of Representatives is to be elected directly by the people. The Senate is to be chosen by the state legislatures. The President is to be selected by electors chosen for that purpose by the people. There would be very little chance of a shared interest uniting these different branches in a preference for any particular class of voters.

As for the Senate, it's impossible that any regulation of "time and manner" -- which is all that's proposed to be placed under the national government's authority regarding that body -- could affect the spirit guiding the choice of its members. The collective judgment of the state legislatures can never be influenced by external factors of that kind. This consideration alone should be enough to convince us that the feared discrimination would never be attempted. What incentive would the Senate have to participate in a preference that wouldn't include itself? And what would be the point of establishing such a preference for one branch of the legislature if it couldn't be extended to the other? The composition of one branch would, in that case, counteract the other. And we can't assume that such a scheme would affect Senate appointments unless we also assume the state legislatures would voluntarily cooperate with it. If we make that assumption, then it becomes irrelevant where the power in question is placed -- in the states' hands or the Union's.

But what would be the actual target of this arbitrary favoritism in the national government? Would it discriminate between different industries, or between different kinds of property, or between different levels of wealth? Would it favor the agricultural interest, or the financial interest, or the commercial interest, or the manufacturing interest? Or, to use the fashionable language of the Constitution's opponents, would it engineer the rise of "the wealthy and the well-born" while excluding and degrading the rest of society?

If this favoritism were exercised in favor of those involved in any particular industry or type of property, I think it will be readily admitted that the main contest would be between landowners and merchants. And I don't hesitate to say that it's infinitely less likely that either of them could gain dominance in the national government than that one or the other would dominate any particular state's government. The conclusion follows: a policy giving an unfair advantage to either group is far less to be feared from the national government than from the states.

The various states are devoted to agriculture and commerce in different degrees. In most, if not all of them, agriculture dominates. In a few, commerce almost rivals it, and in most it has a considerable share of influence. In proportion to which one dominates, it will be reflected in the national representation. And precisely because this representation will come from a wider variety of interests, in much more varied proportions than can be found in any single state, it will be far less likely to strongly favor either one than any single state's representation would.

In a country consisting mainly of farmers, where the principle of equal representation holds, the agricultural interest must, on the whole, dominate the government. As long as this interest prevails in most state legislatures, it will maintain a corresponding dominance in the national Senate, which will generally be a faithful reflection of the majorities in those bodies. It therefore can't be assumed that the Senate would ever sacrifice agricultural interests to the commercial class. In applying this general point specifically to the Senate -- a point suggested by the country's situation -- I'm guided by the fact that those who zealously defend state power can't, by their own logic, suspect that state legislatures would be swayed from their duty by outside influence. But in reality, the same situation would have the same effect on the initial makeup of the federal House of Representatives as well: an improper bias toward the commercial class is just as unlikely from this quarter as from the other.

Perhaps to give the objection some support regardless, someone might ask: isn't there a danger of the opposite bias -- that the national government might try to secure a monopoly of federal positions for the agricultural class? Since this possibility is unlikely to alarm those who would actually be hurt by it, a lengthy answer to this question isn't needed. It will be enough to note, first, that for reasons explained elsewhere, a strong preference for any group is less likely to prevail in the Union's government than in any individual state's. Second, there would be no temptation to violate the Constitution in favor of the agricultural class, because that class would, in the natural course of things, enjoy as much dominance as it could wish for. And third, people accustomed to studying the sources of public prosperity on a large scale must be too well aware of commerce's value to be willing to inflict such a deep wound on it as would result from completely excluding those who best understand its interests from any role in managing them. The importance of commerce -- from a revenue perspective alone -- must effectively protect it against the hostility of a body that would constantly be reminded of its value by the pressing demands of public necessity.

I've kept this discussion brief regarding the probability of favoritism based on different types of industry and property, because, as far as I understand the critics, they have a different kind of discrimination in mind. They seem to envision, as the beneficiaries of the favoritism they're trying to alarm us about, those they call "the wealthy and the well-born." These people, it seems, are to be raised to an odious position of privilege over the rest of their fellow citizens. At one point, we're told their elevation will be an inevitable result of making the representative body too small. At another point, it's supposed to happen by depriving ordinary people of the chance to exercise their right to vote in choosing that body.

But on what principle would the discrimination in voting locations be made in order to achieve this imagined favoritism? Are "the wealthy and the well-born," as they're called, confined to particular spots in the various states? Have they, by some miraculous instinct or foresight, staked out a common neighborhood in each state? Are they only found in cities and towns? Or are they, on the contrary, scattered across the countryside wherever chance or ambition happened to place them or their ancestors? If the latter is the case -- as every informed person knows it is[1] -- isn't it obvious that a policy of restricting election locations to particular districts would undermine its own goal just as surely as it would be objectionable on every other ground? The truth is, there's no way to guarantee the rich the favoritism that's feared except by setting property qualifications for either voters or candidates. But this is not part of the power to be given to the national government. Its authority would be expressly limited to regulating the times, the places, and the manner of elections. The qualifications for who may vote or be voted for, as has been noted on other occasions, are defined and fixed in the Constitution and can't be changed by the legislature.

But let's suppose, for the sake of argument, that the scheme described might work. And let's also assume that all the scruples that a sense of duty or a fear of the experiment's dangers might inspire were overcome in the hearts of the national leaders. I still believe it will hardly be suggested that they could ever hope to carry out such an enterprise without the help of a military force strong enough to crush the resistance of the great body of the people. The impossibility of such a force existing has been discussed and demonstrated in other parts of these papers. But to show the absurdity of the objection we're considering in the strongest possible light, let's concede for a moment that such a force might exist, and that the national government actually had it at its disposal. What would follow? If a government had the desire to invade the essential rights of the people and the means to act on that desire, is it really plausible that they'd waste their time on the ridiculous project of rigging election laws to favor some preferred class? Wouldn't they be more likely to pursue something that served their own immediate power? Wouldn't they rather boldly choose to make themselves permanent rulers through one decisive act of seizure, rather than relying on precarious tricks that, despite every precaution, might end in their dismissal, disgrace, and ruin? Wouldn't they fear that citizens -- who are no less fierce than they are conscious of their rights -- would flock from the far corners of their states to the polling places to overthrow their tyrants and replace them with leaders who would avenge the violated dignity of the people?

PUBLIUS

[1] This is especially true in the Southern states and in this state.
