FEDERALIST No. 71

The Duration in Office of the Executive

HAMILTON

To the People of the State of New York:

I've already mentioned that the second ingredient of a strong executive is how long the president serves in office. This relates to two things: first, the personal firmness of the president in using his constitutional powers; and second, the stability of the policies adopted during his administration. On the first point, it should be obvious that the longer someone holds office, the more likely they are to develop that kind of firmness. It's a basic principle of human nature that people care about what they have in proportion to how secure their hold on it is. We're less attached to what we hold on a temporary or uncertain basis than to what we enjoy with a stable, reliable claim -- and naturally, we're willing to risk more for the latter than for the former. This applies just as much to a political office or position of trust as it does to any piece of personal property. The takeaway is this: a president who knows he *must* leave office very soon won't feel invested enough to risk serious criticism or trouble by exercising his powers independently, or by standing up to the bad moods -- however temporary -- of a large segment of the public or even of a dominant faction in the legislature. And if the situation is that he *might* be able to stay on if he wins re-election, and if he wants to stay on, then his desires and his fears would work together even more powerfully to corrupt his integrity or undermine his courage. Either way, weakness and indecision would define the office.

Some people would actually prefer a president who's a pushover -- someone who bends to whatever the prevailing mood is, whether in the public at large or in the legislature. But people who think this way have a very shallow understanding of both the purposes of government and the real means of promoting public happiness. The republican principle demands that the well-considered judgment of the community should guide the conduct of those they've entrusted with managing their affairs. But it doesn't require blind obedience to every sudden gust of passion, or to every passing impulse the people might feel thanks to the schemes of those who flatter their prejudices in order to betray their interests. It's a fair observation that the people generally *intend* the public good. This even applies to their mistakes. But their own good sense would reject the flatterer who claimed they always *reason correctly* about the *means* of promoting it. They know from experience that they sometimes get it wrong. And the wonder is that they get it wrong as rarely as they do, given that they're constantly besieged by the tricks of parasites and sycophants, by the traps set by the ambitious, the greedy, and the desperate, by the schemes of people who have their trust more than they deserve it, and of those who seek to gain that trust rather than earn it. When situations arise where the people's true interests conflict with their current desires, it's the duty of their appointed leaders -- the guardians of those interests -- to resist the temporary delusion, to give the people time and space for calmer, more careful reflection. History offers examples where this kind of leadership has saved the people from the very worst consequences of their own mistakes, and has earned lasting gratitude for the leaders who had the courage and integrity to serve them at the risk of their displeasure.

But however much we might insist that the president should defer to the people's wishes, we can't reasonably demand the same deference to the moods of the legislature. The legislature may sometimes be at odds with the people, and at other times the people may have no strong opinion either way. In either case, it's clearly desirable for the president to be in a position where he dares to act on his own judgment with vigor and decisiveness.

The same principle that justifies separating the branches of power also tells us that this separation should be designed to make each branch independent of the others. What's the point of separating the executive and judicial branches from the legislative branch if both the executive and the judiciary are set up to be completely at the mercy of the legislature? Such a separation would be purely on paper, incapable of achieving the goals it was created for. There's a difference between being subordinate to the laws and being dependent on the legislature. The first is consistent with good government; the second violates its fundamental principles. Whatever the formal structure of a constitution, if one branch controls the others, it effectively unites all power in the same hands. The tendency of legislative power to absorb everything else has been fully demonstrated with examples in earlier papers. In purely republican governments, this tendency is almost impossible to resist. The people's representatives in a popular assembly sometimes seem to imagine that *they are* the people themselves, and they show signs of impatience and outrage at the slightest opposition from any other branch -- as if the exercise of legitimate authority by the executive or judiciary were a violation of their privileges and an insult to their dignity. They often try to impose domineering control over the other branches. And since they usually have the people on their side, they always act with such force that it becomes very difficult for the other parts of government to maintain the constitutional balance.

Someone might ask: how does a short term in office affect the president's independence from the legislature, unless one has the power to appoint or remove the other? One answer comes from the principle I've already discussed -- that people naturally take little interest in a short-lived advantage and have little motivation to put themselves at risk for it. Another answer, perhaps more obvious if not more conclusive, comes from the legislature's influence over the people, which could be used to prevent the re-election of a president who, by standing up to some corrupt scheme of the legislature's, had made himself a target of its resentment.

It might also be asked whether a four-year term would actually achieve these goals, and if not, whether a shorter term -- which would at least offer more security against ambitious power grabs -- might be preferable to a longer term that was still too short to inspire the firmness and independence we're looking for.

I can't claim that a four-year term, or any fixed term, would perfectly achieve the goal. But it would contribute to it significantly enough to have a real impact on the spirit and character of the government. Between the beginning and end of such a term, there would always be a substantial period when the prospect of leaving office would be far enough away not to improperly influence the conduct of a president with a reasonable amount of courage. During that time, he could reasonably expect to have enough opportunity to demonstrate to the public the wisdom of his chosen course of action. Admittedly, as he approached the moment when a new election would deliver the public's verdict on his performance, his confidence -- and with it his firmness -- would likely decline. But both would draw support from the opportunities his time in office had given him to establish himself in the respect and goodwill of his constituents. He could then take calculated risks in proportion to the evidence he'd given of his wisdom and integrity, and to the respect and loyalty he'd earned from his fellow citizens. On one hand, a four-year term will contribute enough to the president's firmness to make it a very valuable part of the overall design. On the other hand, it's not long enough to justify any alarm about threats to public liberty. If the British House of Commons, starting from the humblest beginnings -- from the *mere power of agreeing or disagreeing to a new tax* -- managed through rapid advances to reduce the powers of the crown and the privileges of the nobility to limits they considered compatible with free government, while raising themselves to an equal branch of the legislature; if they were able, in one instance, to abolish both the monarchy and the aristocracy and overturn every established institution in both Church and State; if they were able, on a recent occasion, to make the king tremble at the prospect of a reform [1] they had attempted -- then what on earth would there be to fear from an elected president serving a four-year term with the limited powers of a President of the United States? What danger is there, except that he might not be up to the task the Constitution assigns him? I'll only add this: if his term is short enough to raise doubts about his firmness, those doubts are inconsistent with any fear of his overreach.

PUBLIUS

[1] This refers to Mr. Fox's India Bill, which passed the House of Commons but was rejected by the House of Lords, reportedly to the complete satisfaction of the people.
