FEDERALIST No. 74

The Command of the Military and Naval Forces, and the Pardoning Power of the Executive

HAMILTON

To the People of the State of New York:

The President of the United States is to be "commander-in-chief of the army and navy of the United States, and of the militia of the several States when called into the actual service of the United States." This provision is so obviously sensible, and so consistent with the precedents set by state constitutions generally, that little needs to be said to explain or defend it. Even those states that have, in other respects, paired the chief executive with a council have mostly concentrated military authority in the executive alone. Of all government responsibilities, the conduct of war most demands the qualities that come from having power exercised by a single person. The conduct of war means the direction of the nation's combined military strength, and the power to direct and deploy that strength is a standard and essential part of what executive authority means.

"The President may require the opinion, in writing, of the principal officer in each of the executive departments, upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices." I consider this a mere redundancy in the plan, since the right it provides would naturally follow from the office itself.

The president is also authorized to grant "reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, except in cases of impeachment." Both humanity and good policy agree that the power to pardon should be as free from restrictions and complications as possible. Every country's criminal code is necessarily severe enough that without ready access to exceptions for cases of unfortunate guilt, justice would wear a face too harsh and cruel. Since the sense of responsibility is always strongest when it's undivided, it follows that a single person would be most responsive to the considerations that might argue for softening the severity of the law, and least likely to give in to considerations designed to shield someone who genuinely deserves punishment. The knowledge that a fellow human being's fate depended on his decision alone would naturally inspire carefulness and caution. At the same time, the fear of being accused of weakness or of looking the other way would produce equal caution, though of a different kind. On the other hand, since people generally draw confidence from numbers, a group might encourage each other in acts of harshness, and might be less sensitive to the risk of being suspected of granting unwise or politically motivated clemency. For these reasons, one person is a better dispenser of the government's mercy than a committee.

The wisdom of giving the president the pardoning power has, if I'm not mistaken, only been challenged with respect to the crime of treason. The argument has been made that pardons for treason should require the approval of one or both chambers of Congress. I won't deny that there are strong reasons for requiring congressional involvement in this particular case. Since treason is a crime aimed at the very existence of the society, once the law has established the offender's guilt, there seems to be a natural logic in referring the question of mercy to the legislature's judgment. And this seems especially appropriate given that we can't entirely rule out the possibility that the president himself might be complicit. But there are also strong objections to such a plan. There's no question that a single person of good judgment and common sense is better equipped, in delicate situations, to weigh the arguments for and against reducing a punishment than any large group could be. It deserves special attention that treason will often be connected with uprisings that involve a large portion of the community -- as recently happened in Massachusetts [during Shays' Rebellion]. In every such case, we'd expect to see the people's representatives infected with the same spirit that gave rise to the crime in the first place. And when political parties are fairly evenly matched, the secret sympathy of the condemned person's friends and supporters, taking advantage of the good nature and weakness of others, might frequently grant immunity where making an example was necessary. On the other hand, when the uprising had been fueled by causes that inflamed the resentments of the majority party, they might often prove stubborn and merciless when sound policy called for restraint and mercy. But the strongest argument for giving the president the pardoning power in cases of treason is this: during insurrections or rebellions, there are often critical moments when a well-timed offer of pardon to the rebels could restore peace -- and if that moment is allowed to pass, it may never come again. The slow process of convening Congress, or one of its chambers, to get approval for such a measure would frequently mean missing the golden opportunity. The loss of a week, a day, an hour can sometimes be fatal. If someone objects that the president could be given temporary discretionary power for such emergencies, the answer is, first, that it's questionable whether such power could be delegated by law under a limited constitution, and second, that it would generally be unwise to take any step in advance that might signal the prospect of amnesty. Such an unusual move would likely be interpreted as a sign of timidity or weakness, and would tend to embolden the guilty.

PUBLIUS
