Section One: The Letter, and the Club That Congratulated a Revolution

Dear Sir,

You are good enough to ask me again, and with some insistence, for my thoughts on the recent proceedings in France. I will not let you imagine that I think my opinions valuable enough to want to be asked for them. They are of too little consequence for me to be very anxious either to give them or to withhold them. It was out of regard for you, and for you only, that I hesitated when you first asked to have them. In the first letter I had the honour of writing to you, which I am at last sending, I wrote neither for nor on behalf of any set of men, and I shall not do so in this one either. My errors, if I have made any, are my own. My reputation alone has to answer for them.

You will see from the long letter I have sent you that although I heartily wish France may be animated by a spirit of rational liberty, and although I think you are bound, by any honest statecraft, to provide a permanent body for that spirit to live in and an effective instrument for it to act through, I have the misfortune to entertain grave doubts about several important points in your recent proceedings.

When you last wrote, you supposed I might be counted among those who approve of certain proceedings in France, because of the solemn public seal of approval those proceedings have received from two clubs of gentlemen in London, called the Constitutional Society and the Revolution Society.

I do have the honour of belonging to more than one club in which the constitution of this kingdom and the principles of the glorious Revolution of 1688 are held in high reverence, and I count myself among the most forward in my zeal for maintaining that constitution and those principles in their utmost purity and vigour. It is because I do that I think it necessary there should be no mistake. Those who cultivate the memory of our Revolution, and those who are attached to the constitution of this kingdom, will take good care how they are mixed up with people who, on the pretext of zeal for the Revolution and the constitution, too often wander from their true principles, and are ready on every occasion to depart from the firm but cautious and deliberate spirit that produced the one and presides over the other. Before I go on to answer the more substantial particulars in your letter, let me give you what information I have been able to get about the two clubs that have thought fit, as bodies, to interfere in the affairs of France — first assuring you that I am not, and never have been, a member of either.

The first, which calls itself the Constitutional Society, or the Society for Constitutional Information, or something of that kind, has been going, I believe, for seven or eight years. Its purpose appears to be charitable, and so far laudable: it was intended to circulate, at the members' expense, a great many books that few other people would go to the expense of buying, and which might otherwise sit in the booksellers' hands to the great loss of a useful body of men. Whether the books so charitably circulated were ever as charitably read is more than I know. Possibly several of them have been exported to France and, like goods for which there is no demand here, may have found a market with you. I have heard a great deal of talk about the light to be drawn from books sent over from here. What improvement they may have undergone on the voyage — some liquors, they say, are the better for crossing the sea — I cannot tell; but I have never heard a man of common judgment, or with the least degree of information, say a word in praise of most of the publications that society circulates, and nobody except some of themselves has ever thought their proceedings of any serious consequence.

Your National Assembly seems to hold much the same opinion of this poor charitable club as I do. As a nation you reserved your whole stock of eloquent acknowledgments for the Revolution Society, when their fellows in the Constitutional Society were in fairness entitled to some share of it. Since you have singled out the Revolution Society as the great object of your national thanks and praise, you will think me excusable for making its recent conduct the subject of my remarks. The National Assembly of France has given these gentlemen importance by adopting them, and they return the favour by acting as a committee in England for spreading the principles of the National Assembly. From now on we must regard them as a kind of privileged persons, as no inconsiderable members of the diplomatic body. This is one of the revolutions that have given splendour to obscurity and distinction to merit nobody had noticed. Until very lately I do not recall ever hearing of this club. I am quite sure it never occupied a moment of my thoughts, nor, I believe, of anybody's outside their own set. I find on inquiry that on the anniversary of the Revolution of 1688 a club of Dissenters — of what denomination I do not know — have long had the custom of hearing a sermon in one of their meeting houses, and afterwards spending the day cheerfully at the tavern, as other clubs do. But I never heard that any public measure or political system, much less the merits of the constitution of a foreign nation, had ever been the subject of a formal proceeding at their festivities, until, to my inexpressible surprise, I found them in a sort of public capacity, sending a congratulatory address that gave an authoritative sanction to the proceedings of the National Assembly in France.

In the club's older principles and conduct, so far at least as they were ever declared, I see nothing I could take exception to. I think it very likely that for some purpose new members may have joined them, and that some truly Christian politicians, who love to dispense benefits but are careful to hide the hand that distributes the dole, may have made them the instruments of their pious designs. Whatever I may have reason to suspect about private management, I shall state nothing as certain except what is public.

For my own part, I should be sorry to be thought concerned, directly or indirectly, in their proceedings. I certainly take my full share, along with the rest of the world, in my private and individual capacity, in theorising about what has been done, or is being done, on the public stage anywhere, ancient or modern — in the republic of Rome or the republic of Paris. But having no general apostolic mission, being the citizen of a particular state, and being bound to a considerable degree by its public will, I should think it at the least improper and irregular for me to open a formal public correspondence with the actual government of a foreign nation without the express authority of the government I live under.

I should be still more unwilling to enter into such a correspondence under anything like an ambiguous description, which to many people unfamiliar with our usages might make the address I had joined in look like the act of persons in some sort of chartered capacity, recognised by the laws of this kingdom and authorised to speak the mind of some part of it. It is because of the ambiguity and uncertainty of unauthorised general descriptions, and of the deceit that can be practised under them — and not from mere formality — that the House of Commons would reject the most cringing petition on the most trifling subject if it came signed in the manner for which you have thrown open the folding doors of your presence chamber, ushering it into your National Assembly with as much ceremony and parade, and as great a bustle of applause, as if you had been visited by the whole representative majesty of the English nation. If what this society thought fit to send out had been a piece of argument, it would have mattered little whose argument it was. It would be neither more nor less convincing for the party it came from. But this is only a vote and a resolution. It stands solely on authority, and in this case on the mere authority of individuals, few of whom appear. Their signatures ought, in my opinion, to have been attached to their document. The world would then have the means of knowing how many they are, who they are, and what their opinions may be worth, judging by their personal abilities, their knowledge, their experience, or their standing and authority in this state. To me, who am only a plain man, the proceeding looks a little too refined and too ingenious. It has too much the air of a political stratagem, adopted in order to give, under a high-sounding name, an importance to this club's public declarations which, when the matter came to be closely inspected, they did not altogether deserve. It is a policy with very much the complexion of a fraud.

I flatter myself that I love a manly, moral, regulated liberty as well as any gentleman of that society, whoever he may be; and perhaps I have given as good proofs of my attachment to that cause in the whole course of my public life. I think I begrudge liberty to other nations as little as they do. But I cannot come forward and give praise or blame to anything concerning human actions and human affairs on a bare view of the object, stripped of every relation, in all the nakedness and solitude of metaphysical abstraction. Circumstances — which with some gentlemen count for nothing — are what in reality give every political principle its distinguishing colour and its particular effect. Circumstances are what make every civil and political scheme beneficial or harmful to mankind. Speaking abstractly, government is a good thing, and so is liberty; and yet could I in common sense have congratulated France ten years ago on her enjoyment of a government — for she had a government then — without inquiring what the nature of that government was, or how it was administered? Can I now congratulate the same nation on its freedom? Am I seriously to congratulate a madman who has escaped from the protective restraint and wholesome darkness of his cell on his restoration to the enjoyment of light and liberty, merely because liberty in the abstract may be classed among the blessings of mankind? Am I to congratulate a highwayman and murderer who has broken out of prison on the recovery of his natural rights? That would be to play out all over again the scene of the criminals condemned to the galleys and their heroic deliverer, the metaphysical Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance.

When I see the spirit of liberty in action, I see a strong principle at work; and for a while that is all I can possibly know about it. The wild gas has plainly broken loose. But we ought to suspend our judgment until the first effervescence has subsided a little, until the liquid has cleared, and until we can see something deeper than the agitation of a troubled and frothy surface. Before I venture to congratulate men publicly on a blessing, I must be tolerably sure they have really received one. Flattery corrupts the receiver and the giver alike, and adulation does the people no more good than it does kings. I should therefore hold back my congratulations on the new liberty of France until I was told how it had been combined with government, with public force, with the discipline and obedience of armies, with the collection of an effective and well-distributed revenue, with morality and religion, with solidity and property, with peace and order, with civil and social manners. All of these are good things too, in their way; and without them liberty is not a benefit while it lasts, and is unlikely to last long. The effect of liberty on individuals is that they may do as they please; we ought to see what it will please them to do before we risk congratulations that may soon have to be turned into complaints. Prudence would say as much in the case of separate, isolated private men. But liberty, when men act in bodies, is _power_. Considering people, before they declare themselves, will watch what use is made of _power_ — and particularly of so trying a thing as _new_ power in _new_ hands, whose principles, tempers and dispositions they have little or no experience of, and in situations where those who appear to be most active on the scene may possibly not be the real movers.

All these considerations, however, were beneath the transcendent dignity of the Revolution Society. While I remained in the country, from where I had the honour of writing to you, I had only an imperfect idea of what they had been doing. On coming to town I sent for an account of their proceedings, published by their own authority, containing a sermon by Dr Price along with letters from the Duc de La Rochefoucauld and the Archbishop of Aix and several other documents. The whole publication, with its manifest design of connecting the affairs of France with those of England by drawing us into an imitation of the conduct of the National Assembly, gave me a considerable degree of uneasiness. The effect of that conduct on the power, credit, prosperity and tranquillity of France was becoming more evident every day. The shape of the constitution to be settled for their future government was becoming clearer. We are now in a position to make out with tolerable exactness the true nature of the thing we are being held up to imitate. If the prudence of reserve and decorum dictates silence in some circumstances, in others a prudence of a higher order may justify us in speaking our minds. The beginnings of confusion here in England are feeble enough at present; but in your country we have seen an infancy still more feeble growing by the minute into a strength that can heap mountains on mountains and make war on Heaven itself. Whenever the neighbour's house is on fire, it cannot be amiss for the engines to play a little on our own. Better to be despised for being too anxious than ruined by being too confident.

Concerned chiefly for the peace of my own country, but by no means unconcerned for yours, I want to set out at greater length what was at first intended only for your private satisfaction. I shall still keep your affairs in view and go on addressing myself to you. Allowing myself the freedom of writing a letter, I shall throw out my thoughts and express my feelings just as they arise in my mind, with very little attention to formal method. I begin with the proceedings of the Revolution Society, but I shall not confine myself to them. How could I? It looks to me as though I were in a great crisis, not of the affairs of France alone, but of all Europe, and perhaps of more than Europe. Taking all the circumstances together, the French Revolution is the most astonishing thing that has yet happened in the world. In many instances the most wonderful things are brought about by the most absurd and ridiculous means, in the most ridiculous ways, and apparently by the most contemptible instruments. Everything seems out of nature in this strange chaos of levity and ferocity, of every sort of crime jumbled together with every sort of folly. Watching this monstrous tragicomic scene, the most opposite passions necessarily follow one another in the mind, and sometimes mix: contempt and indignation by turns, laughter and tears by turns, scorn and horror by turns.

It cannot be denied, however, that to some people this strange scene appeared in quite another light. In them it inspired nothing but exultation and rapture. They saw in what has been done in France nothing but a firm and temperate exercise of freedom, so consistent on the whole with morality and with piety as to deserve not only the secular applause of dashing Machiavellian politicians but to make it a fit subject for all the devout outpourings of sacred eloquence.
