Section Three: The Right to Cashier a King for Misconduct

The second claim of the Revolution Society is "a right of cashiering their governors for _misconduct_". Perhaps our ancestors' fear of setting a precedent for "cashiering for misconduct" is why the declaration of the act that implied King James's abdication was, if it had any fault, rather too guarded and too circumstantial. But all this guarding, and all this piling up of circumstances, serves to show the spirit of caution that prevailed in the national councils at a moment when men irritated by oppression, and elated by a triumph over it, are apt to give themselves up to violent and extreme courses. It shows how anxious the great men who directed affairs at that great event were to make the Revolution the parent of a settlement and not the nursery of future revolutions.

Footnote: "That King James the Second, having endeavored _to subvert the Constitution_ of the kingdom, by breaking the _original contract_ between king and people, and, by the advice of Jesuits and other wicked persons, having violated the _fundamental_ laws, and _having withdrawn himself out of the kingdom_, hath _abdicated_ the government, and the throne is thereby _vacant_."

No government could stand for a moment if it could be blown down by anything as loose and indefinite as an opinion of "_misconduct_". The men who led at the Revolution grounded their virtual abdication of King James on no such light and uncertain principle. They charged him with nothing less than a design, confirmed by a multitude of illegal overt acts, to _subvert the Protestant Church and State_ and their _fundamental_, unquestionable laws and liberties; they charged him with having broken the _original contract_ between king and people. This was more than _misconduct_. A grave and overruling necessity obliged them to take the step they took, and they took it with infinite reluctance, as under the most rigorous of all laws. Their trust for preserving the constitution in future was not placed in future revolutions. The grand policy behind all their regulations was to make it almost impossible for any future sovereign to force the estates of the kingdom to resort to those violent remedies again. They left the crown what in the eye and estimation of law it had always been: perfectly irresponsible. And in order to lighten the crown still further, they loaded responsibility onto ministers of state. By the statute of the 1st of King William, session 2, called "_the act for declaring the rights and liberties of the subject, and for settling the succession of the crown_", they enacted that ministers should serve the crown on the terms of that declaration. Soon afterwards they secured the _frequent meetings of Parliament_, by which the whole government would be under the constant inspection and active control of the popular representatives and of the great men of the kingdom. In the next great constitutional act, that of the 12th and 13th of King William, for the further limitation of the crown and for _better_ securing the rights and liberties of the subject, they provided "that no pardon under the great seal of England should be pleadable to an impeachment by the Commons in Parliament". The rule laid down for government in the Declaration of Right, the constant inspection of Parliament, and the practical claim of impeachment they thought an infinitely better security, not only for their constitutional liberty but against the vices of an administration, than reserving a right so difficult in practice, so uncertain in its outcome, and often so mischievous in its consequences, as this "cashiering of their governors".

Dr Price in his sermon very properly condemns the practice of addressing kings in grossly flattering terms. Instead of that fulsome style, he proposes that His Majesty should be told, on occasions of congratulation, that "he is to consider himself as more properly the servant than the sovereign of his people". As a compliment, this new form of address does not seem very soothing. Those who are servants in name as well as in fact do not like to be reminded of their situation, their duty and their obligations. The slave in the old play tells his master, "_Hæc commemoratio est quasi exprobratio_" — to be reminded of a favour is as good as to be reproached with it. It is not pleasant as a compliment; it is not wholesome as instruction. And after all, if the king were to bring himself to echo this new kind of address, to adopt it in so many words, and even to take the title Servant of the People as his royal style, I cannot imagine how either he or we would be much the better for it. I have seen very high-handed letters signed "Your most obedient, humble servant". The proudest domination ever endured on earth took a title of even greater humility than the one now proposed for sovereigns by the Apostle of Liberty. Kings and nations were trampled under the foot of a man calling himself "The Servant of Servants", and orders for deposing sovereigns were sealed with the signet of "The Fisherman".

Footnote: Pp. 23, 23, 24.

I should have thought all this no more than a sort of flippant, empty talk, in which, as in a stale vapour, several people let the spirit of liberty evaporate — if it were not plainly in support of the idea, and part of the scheme, of "cashiering kings for misconduct". Seen in that light it deserves some remark.

Kings are undoubtedly the servants of the people in one sense, because their power has no other rational end than the general advantage. But it is not true that they are servants in the ordinary sense, at least under our constitution: the essence of a servant's position is to obey somebody else's commands and to be removable at pleasure. The king of Great Britain obeys nobody. All other persons, individually and collectively, are under him and owe him a legal obedience. The law, which knows neither how to flatter nor how to insult, calls this high magistrate not our servant, as this humble divine calls him, but "_our sovereign lord the king_"; and we for our part have learned to speak only the original language of the law, and not the confused jargon of their Babylonian pulpits.

Since he is not to obey us, but we are to obey the law in him, our constitution has made no provision of any kind for making him, as a servant, responsible in any degree. Our constitution knows nothing of a magistrate like the _Justicia_ of Aragon, nor of any legally appointed court, nor of any legally settled process, for subjecting the king to the responsibility that belongs to all servants. In this he is no different from the Commons and the Lords, who in their several public capacities can never be called to account for their conduct — although the Revolution Society chooses to assert, in direct opposition to one of the wisest and most beautiful parts of our constitution, that "a king is no more than the first servant of the public, created by it, _and responsible to it_".

Our ancestors at the Revolution would have deserved their fame for wisdom very ill if they had found no security for their freedom except in making their government feeble in its operation and precarious in its tenure — if they had been able to contrive no better remedy against arbitrary power than civil confusion. Let these gentlemen state who this _representative_ public is to whom they will say the king, as a servant, is responsible. It will then be time enough for me to produce the positive statute law that says he is not.

The ceremony of cashiering kings, which these gentlemen talk about so easily, can rarely if ever be performed without force. It then becomes a case of war and not of constitution. Laws are ordered to hold their tongues among weapons, and tribunals fall to the ground along with the peace they can no longer uphold. The Revolution of 1688 was obtained by a just war, in the only case in which any war, and much more a civil war, can be just: "_Justa bella quibus_ NECESSARIA" — those wars are just which are necessary. The question of dethroning a king, or, if these gentlemen prefer the phrase, of "cashiering" him, will always be, as it always has been, an extraordinary question of state and wholly outside the law: a question, like every other question of state, of dispositions and of means and of probable consequences, rather than of positive rights. As it was not made for common abuses, so it is not to be debated by common minds. The theoretical line of demarcation, where obedience ought to end and resistance must begin, is faint, obscure and not easily defined. It is not a single act or a single event that determines it. Governments must be abused and deranged indeed before it can even be thought of, and the prospect of the future must be as bad as the experience of the past. When things are in that lamentable condition, the nature of the disease indicates the remedy to those whom nature has qualified to administer, in extremities, this critical, ambiguous, bitter medicine to a diseased state. Times and occasions and provocations will teach their own lessons. The wise will decide from the gravity of the case; the irritable from their sensitivity to oppression; the high-minded from disdain and indignation at abusive power in unworthy hands; the brave and bold from love of honourable danger in a generous cause. But with or without right, a revolution will be the very last resort of the thinking and the good.
