Section Six: Who the Men of the National Assembly Actually Are

This unforced choice, this fond preference for evil, would seem perfectly unaccountable if we did not consider what the National Assembly is made of — I do not mean its formal constitution, objectionable enough as that now stands, but the materials it is largely composed of, which matter ten thousand times more than all the formalities in the world. If we knew nothing of this assembly but its title and its function, no colours could paint anything more venerable to the imagination. Seen in that light, the mind of an inquirer, overawed by so solemn an image as the virtue and wisdom of a whole people gathered into one focus, would pause and hesitate before condemning things even of the very worst appearance. Instead of blameable they would seem merely mysterious. But no name, no power, no function, no artificial institution whatever can make the men who compose any system of authority anything other than God and nature and education and their habits of life have made them. The people have no capacities beyond these to give. Virtue and wisdom may be what they aim at in their choice, but their choice confers neither on the men they lay their ordaining hands upon. They have no undertaking from nature and no promise from revelation for any such powers.

After I had read through the list of the persons and descriptions elected to the _Tiers État_, nothing they afterwards did could seem astonishing. Among them, it is true, I saw some men of known rank and some of shining talents; but not one man of any practical experience in government was to be found. The best of them were only men of theory. But whatever the distinguished few may have been, it is the substance and mass of a body that gives it its character and must in the end determine its direction. In all bodies, those who mean to lead must also, to a considerable degree, follow. They have to fit their proposals to the taste and the talent and the disposition of the men they wish to conduct. So if an assembly is viciously or feebly composed in a very large part of it, nothing but such a supreme degree of virtue as very rarely appears in the world — and which for that reason cannot be counted on — will prevent the men of talent scattered through it from becoming merely the expert instruments of absurd projects. If, as is more likely, instead of that unusual degree of virtue they are driven by sinister ambition and a lust for showy glory, then the feeble part of the assembly, which they conform to at first, becomes in its turn the dupe and the instrument of their designs. In this political trade the leaders will have to bow to the ignorance of their followers, and the followers to become subservient to the worst designs of their leaders.

To secure any degree of sobriety in the proposals made by the leaders of a public assembly, they ought to respect, and perhaps to some degree to fear, the men they are conducting. To be led in any way but blindly, the followers must be qualified, if not to be actors, at least to be judges — and judges of natural weight and authority. Nothing can secure a steady and moderate conduct in such assemblies but that the body of them should be respectably composed in point of station in life, of permanent property, of education, and of the habits that enlarge and liberalise the understanding.

In the calling of the States-General of France, the first thing that struck me was a great departure from the ancient course. I found the representation of the third estate composed of six hundred persons. They were equal in number to the representatives of both the other orders together. If the orders were to act separately, the number would not, beyond the question of expense, matter much. But once it became clear that the three orders were to be melted down into one, the policy and the necessary effect of this numerous representation became obvious. A very small desertion from either of the other two orders must throw the power of both into the hands of the third. In fact, the whole power of the state was soon resolved into that body. What it was made of therefore became infinitely more important.

Judge my surprise, Sir, when I found that a very large proportion of the Assembly — a majority, I believe, of the members who actually attended — consisted of practitioners of the law. And not of distinguished judges, who had given their country pledges of their learning, prudence and integrity; not of leading advocates, the glory of the bar; not of renowned university professors; but for far the greater part, as with such numbers it had to be, of the inferior, unlearned, mechanical, merely instrumental members of the profession. There were distinguished exceptions, but the general composition was of obscure provincial advocates, of stewards of petty local jurisdictions, country attorneys, notaries, and the whole train of the ministers of municipal litigation, the stirrers-up and conductors of the petty war of village vexation. From the moment I read the list I saw distinctly, and very nearly as it has turned out, everything that was to follow.

The degree of esteem in which any profession is held becomes the measure of the esteem in which its members hold themselves. Whatever the personal merits of many individual lawyers may have been — and in many they were undoubtedly very considerable — in that military kingdom no part of the profession had been much regarded except the very highest, who often joined great family splendour to their professional offices and were invested with great power and authority. Those were certainly highly respected, and with no small degree of awe. The next rank was not much esteemed, and the mechanical part of the profession stood in very low repute.

Whenever supreme authority is vested in a body composed like this, it must plainly produce the consequences of supreme authority placed in the hands of men not brought up in the habit of respecting themselves, who had no previous fortune of character at stake, and who could not be expected to bear with moderation, or to manage with discretion, a power that they themselves must be more surprised than anyone to find in their hands. Who could flatter himself that these men, snatched suddenly and as if by enchantment out of the humblest rank of subordination, would not be intoxicated by a greatness they had not been prepared for? Who could imagine that men habitually meddling, daring, subtle, busy, of litigious dispositions and restless minds, would fall easily back into their old condition of obscure squabbling and laborious, low, unprofitable trickery? Who could doubt that, at any cost to a state they understood nothing about, they must pursue their private interests, which they understood only too well? This was not an event that depended on chance or contingency. It was inevitable; it was necessary; it was planted in the nature of things. They must _join_ in — if their capacity did not allow them to _lead_ — any project that could procure them a _litigious constitution_, and lay open to them the innumerable lucrative jobs that follow in the train of all great convulsions and revolutions in a state, and particularly of all great and violent transfers of property. Was it to be expected that they would attend to the stability of property, when their own livelihood had always depended on whatever made property questionable, ambiguous and insecure? Their objects would grow larger with their elevation; but their disposition, their habits and their way of accomplishing their designs must stay the same.

Well, but these men were to be tempered and restrained by other sorts of men, of soberer minds and larger understandings. Were they to be overawed, then, by the pre-eminent authority and solemn dignity of a handful of country bumpkins who have seats in that assembly, some of whom are said to be unable to read and write — and by no greater a number of tradesmen who, though somewhat better instructed and more conspicuous in the order of society, had never known anything beyond their counting house? No. Both these sorts were far better formed to be overborne and swayed by the intrigues and artifices of lawyers than to be a counterweight to them. With so dangerous a disproportion, the whole must inevitably be governed by them.

To the faculty of law was joined a fairly considerable proportion of the faculty of medicine. That faculty had not, any more than the law, enjoyed its proper esteem in France. Its members must therefore have the qualities of men not accustomed to feelings of dignity. But supposing they had ranked as they ought to do, and as with us they actually do, the bedsides of the sick are not the academies for forming statesmen and legislators. Then came the dealers in stocks and funds, who must be eager at any cost to change their imaginary paper wealth for the more solid substance of land. To these were joined men of other descriptions, from whom as little knowledge of or attention to the interests of a great state was to be expected, and as little regard for the stability of any institution — men formed to be instruments, not controls. Such, in general, was the composition of the _Tiers État_ in the National Assembly, in which hardly the slightest trace was to be seen of what we call the natural landed interest of the country.

We know that the British House of Commons, without shutting its doors to merit in any class, is, by the sure operation of adequate causes, filled with everything illustrious in rank, in descent, in inherited and in acquired wealth, in cultivated talent, and in military, civil, naval and political distinction, that the country can supply. But supposing — what can hardly be supposed as a case at all — that the House of Commons were composed in the same way as the _Tiers État_ in France: would this dominion of pettifogging be borne with patience, or even imagined without horror? God forbid that I should insinuate anything derogatory to a profession that is another priesthood, administering the rites of sacred justice. But while I revere men in the functions that belong to them, and would do as much as one man can to prevent their being excluded from any, I cannot flatter them by giving the lie to nature. They are good and useful in the mixture; they must be mischievous if they preponderate so far as to become virtually the whole. Their very excellence in their own particular functions may be far from a qualification for others. It cannot escape notice that when men are too much confined to professional and technical habits, and become as it were ingrained by constant employment in that narrow circle, they are disabled rather than qualified for anything depending on a knowledge of mankind, on experience in mixed affairs, on a comprehensive and connected view of the various, complicated, external and internal interests that go to form that many-sided thing called a state.

After all, even if the House of Commons were of a wholly professional and technical composition, what is the power of the House of Commons — circumscribed and hemmed in by the immovable barriers of laws, usages and positive rules of doctrine and practice, counterpoised by the House of Lords, and existing at every moment at the discretion of the crown to continue, prorogue or dissolve us? The power of the House of Commons, direct and indirect, is indeed great, and long may it be able to preserve its greatness and the spirit that belongs to true greatness in full. And it will do so as long as it can keep the breakers of law in India from becoming the makers of law for England. But the power of the House of Commons, at its least diminished, is a drop of water in the ocean compared with the power residing in a settled majority of your National Assembly. Since the destruction of the orders, that assembly has no fundamental law, no strict convention, no respected usage to restrain it. Instead of finding themselves obliged to conform to a fixed constitution, they have the power to make a constitution that will conform to their designs. Nothing in heaven or on earth can serve as a check on them. What must be the heads, the hearts, the dispositions of men who are qualified — or who dare — not merely to make laws under a fixed constitution, but at one heat to strike out an entirely new constitution for a great kingdom, and in every part of it, from the monarch on the throne down to the vestry of a parish? But

"Fools rush in where angels fear to tread."

In such a state of unbounded power, for undefined and indefinable purposes, the evil of a moral and almost physical unfitness of the man for the function must be the greatest we can conceive happening in the management of human affairs.

Having considered the composition of the third estate as it originally stood, I looked at the representatives of the clergy. There too it appeared that quite as little regard had been paid, in the principles of their election, to the general security of property or to the fitness of the deputies for their public purposes. That election was so contrived as to send a very large proportion of mere country curates to the great and arduous work of remodelling a state: men who had never seen the state so much as in a picture; men who knew nothing of the world beyond the bounds of an obscure village; who, sunk in hopeless poverty, could regard all property, secular or ecclesiastical, with no eye but envy; among whom there must be many who for the smallest hope of the meanest share in the plunder would readily join any attempt on a body of wealth in which they could scarcely expect any share except in a general scramble. Instead of balancing the power of the active pettifoggers in the other assembly, these curates must necessarily become the active helpers, or at best the passive instruments, of the very men who had habitually guided them in their petty village concerns. Nor could they be the most conscientious of their kind, who, presuming on their inadequate understanding, could intrigue for a trust that took them away from their natural relation to their flocks and their natural sphere of action, to undertake the regeneration of kingdoms. This preponderating weight, added to the force of the body of pettifoggers in the _Tiers État_, completed that momentum of ignorance, rashness, presumption and lust for plunder that nothing has been able to resist.

To observant men it must have been clear from the beginning that the majority of the third estate, joined with such a deputation from the clergy as I have described, would, while it pursued the destruction of the nobility, inevitably become subservient to the worst designs of individuals in that class. In the spoil and humiliation of their own order those individuals would have a sure fund to pay their new followers with. Squandering away the things that made their fellows happy would be no sacrifice to them at all. Turbulent, discontented men of quality, in proportion as they are puffed up with personal pride and arrogance, generally despise their own order. One of the first symptoms they show of a selfish and mischievous ambition is a profligate disregard for a dignity they share with others. To be attached to the subdivision, to love the little platoon we belong to in society, is the first principle — the germ, as it were — of public affection. It is the first link in the chain by which we go on to a love of our country and of mankind. The interest of that portion of the social arrangement is a trust in the hands of everyone who composes it; and as none but bad men would justify abusing it, none but traitors would barter it away for their own personal advantage.

In the time of our civil troubles in England there were several people — I do not know whether you have any such in your Assembly in France — like the Earl of Holland of that day, who by themselves or their families had brought odium on the throne by its prodigal dispensation of favours to them, and who afterwards joined the rebellions that arose out of the discontents they had themselves caused: men who helped to subvert the very throne to which some of them owed their existence and others all the power they used to ruin their benefactor. If any bounds are set to the rapacious demands of that sort of person, or if others are allowed to share in the objects they would monopolise, revenge and envy soon fill up the craving void left in their avarice. Bewildered by the complication of their diseased passions, their reason is disturbed; their views become vast and confused, inexplicable to others and uncertain to themselves. On every side they find their unprincipled ambition running up against limits in any fixed order of things; but in the fog and haze of confusion everything is enlarged and appears to have no limit at all.

When men of rank sacrifice every idea of dignity to an ambition with no distinct object, and work with low instruments for low ends, the whole composition becomes low and base. Does not something like this appear in France now? Does it not produce something ignoble and inglorious — a kind of meanness in all the prevailing policy, a tendency in everything that is done to lower, along with individuals, all the dignity and importance of the state? Other revolutions have been conducted by men who, while they attempted or affected changes in the commonwealth, sanctified their ambition by raising the dignity of the people whose peace they disturbed. They had long views. They aimed at ruling their country, not at destroying it. They were men of great civil and great military talents, and if they were the terror of their age they were also its ornament. They were not like Jew brokers contending with one another over who could best patch up, with fraudulent circulation and depreciated paper, the wretchedness and ruin their degenerate counsels had brought on their country. The compliment paid to one of the great bad men of the old stamp — Cromwell — by his kinsman, a favourite poet of that time, shows what it was he proposed, and what indeed to a great degree he achieved in the success of his ambition:

	"Still as _you_ rise, the _state_, exalted too,
	Finds no distemper whilst 't is changed by _you_;
	Changed like the world's great scene, when without noise
	The rising sun night's _vulgar_ lights destroys."

These disturbers were not so much men usurping power as men asserting their natural place in society. Their rising was to light up and beautify the world. They conquered their competitors by outshining them. The hand that smote the country like a destroying angel also communicated to it the force and energy under which it suffered. I do not say — God forbid — that the virtues of such men are to be set as a balance against their crimes; but they were some corrective to their effects. Such, as I said, was our Cromwell. Such was your whole race of Guises, Condés and Colignys. Such were the Richelieus, who in quieter times acted in the spirit of a civil war. Such, as better men and in a less doubtful cause, were your Henry the Fourth and your Sully, though they were nursed in civil confusions and not wholly free of their taint. It is a thing to wonder at, how very soon France, when she had a moment to breathe, recovered and emerged from the longest and most dreadful civil war ever known in any nation. Why? Because among all their massacres they had not killed the _mind_ of their country. A conscious dignity, a noble pride, a generous sense of glory and emulation had not been extinguished. On the contrary, it had been kindled and inflamed. The organs of the state, however battered, still existed. All the prizes of honour and virtue, all the rewards, all the distinctions, remained. But your present confusion, like a paralysis, has struck at the fountain of life itself. Everyone in your country who is in a position to be moved by a principle of honour is disgraced and degraded, and can feel no sensation of life except a mortified and humiliated indignation. But this generation will quickly pass away. The next generation of the nobility will resemble the artisans and clowns and money-jobbers, usurers and Jews who will always be their fellows and sometimes their masters. Believe me, Sir, those who attempt to level never equalise. In every society made up of various descriptions of citizens, some description must be uppermost. The levellers therefore only change and pervert the natural order of things: they overload the building of society by setting up in the air what the solidity of the structure requires to be on the ground. The associations of tailors and carpenters that the republic — of Paris, for instance — is composed of cannot be equal to the situation into which, by the worst of usurpations, a usurpation on the prerogatives of nature, you are attempting to force them.

The Chancellor of France, at the opening of the States-General, said, in a flourish of oratory, that all occupations were honourable. If he meant only that no honest employment is disgraceful, he would not have gone beyond the truth. But in asserting that anything is honourable, we imply some distinction in its favour. The occupation of a hairdresser, or of a working tallow-chandler, cannot be a matter of honour to anyone, to say nothing of a number of other more servile employments. Such men ought not to suffer oppression from the state; but the state suffers oppression if men like them, individually or collectively, are allowed to rule. In this you think you are combating prejudice, but you are at war with nature.

Footnote: Ecclesiasticus, chapter 38, verses 24, 25. "The wisdom of a learned man cometh by opportunity of leisure: and he that hath little business shall become wise. How can he get wisdom that holdeth the plough, and that glorieth in the goad; that driveth oxen, and is occupied in their labors, and whose talk is of bullocks?" Verse 27: "So every carpenter and workmaster, that laboreth night and day," etc. Verse 33: "They shall not be sought for in public counsel, nor sit high in the congregation: they shall not sit on the judge's seat, nor understand the sentence of judgment: they cannot declare justice and judgment, and they shall not be found where parables are spoken." Verse 34: "But they will maintain the state of the world." I do not determine whether this book is canonical, as the Gallican Church until lately considered it, or apocryphal, as it is taken to be here. I am sure it contains a great deal of sense and truth.

I do not take you, my dear Sir, to be of that sophistical, quibbling spirit, or of that ungenerous dullness, which demands for every general observation or sentiment an explicit list of the correctives and exceptions that reason will presume to be included in all the general propositions of reasonable men. You do not imagine that I wish to confine power, authority and distinction to blood and names and titles. No, Sir. There is no qualification for government but virtue and wisdom, actual or presumed. Wherever they are actually found, they carry, in whatever state, condition, profession or trade, Heaven's own passport to human place and honour. Woe to the country that would madly and impiously reject the service of the talents and virtues, civil, military or religious, that are given to grace and to serve it, and would condemn to obscurity everything formed to shed lustre and glory round a state. And woe to the country too that, going to the opposite extreme, considers a low education, a mean and narrow view of things, and a sordid, mercenary occupation a preferable title to command. Everything ought to be open — but not indifferently to every man. No rotation, no appointment by lot, no method of election operating in the spirit of drawing lots or taking turns can be generally good in a government concerned with extensive objects, because none of them has any tendency, direct or indirect, to select the man with a view to the duty, or to fit the one to the other. I do not hesitate to say that the road to eminence and power from an obscure condition ought not to be made too easy, or too much a matter of course. If rare merit is the rarest of all rare things, it ought to pass through some sort of probation. The temple of honour ought to be set on a height. If it is entered through virtue, let it be remembered too that virtue is never tested except by some difficulty and some struggle.

Nothing is a due and adequate representation of a state that does not represent its ability as well as its property. But since ability is a vigorous and active principle, and property is sluggish, inert and timid, property can never be safe from the invasions of ability unless it is, out of all proportion, predominant in the representation. It must be represented too in great masses of accumulation, or it is not properly protected. The characteristic essence of property, formed out of the combined principles of acquiring it and conserving it, is to be _unequal_. The great masses, therefore, which excite envy and tempt rapacity, must be put beyond the possibility of danger. They then form a natural rampart round the lesser properties in all their gradations. The same quantity of property, divided among many in the natural course of things, does not work the same way. Its defensive power is weakened as it is spread out. In that diffusion each man's portion is less than what, in the eagerness of his desires, he may flatter himself he could get by dissipating other people's accumulations. The plunder of the few would in fact give an inconceivably small share to each in the distribution among the many. But the many are not capable of making this calculation, and those who lead them to plunder never intend any such distribution.

The power of perpetuating our property in our families is one of the most valuable and interesting things about it, and the thing that most tends to the perpetuation of society itself. It makes our weakness serve our virtue; it grafts benevolence even onto avarice. The possessors of family wealth, and of the distinction that goes with hereditary possession, being the most concerned in it, are the natural securities for this transmission. With us the House of Peers is formed on this principle. It is composed wholly of hereditary property and hereditary distinction, and is made for that reason the third branch of the legislature, and, in the last resort, the sole judge of all property in all its subdivisions. The House of Commons too, though not necessarily, is always so composed in fact for far the greater part. Let those large proprietors be what they will — and they have their chance of being among the best — at the very worst they are the ballast in the vessel of the commonwealth. For though hereditary wealth and the rank that goes with it are too much idolised by creeping sycophants and by the blind, abject admirers of power, they are too rashly slighted in the shallow speculations of the petulant, presuming, short-sighted coxcombs of philosophy. Some decent, regulated pre-eminence, some preference — not exclusive appropriation — given to birth, is neither unnatural nor unjust nor impolitic.

It is said that twenty-four millions ought to prevail over two hundred thousand. True, if the constitution of a kingdom is a problem in arithmetic. This sort of talk does well enough with a lamp-post as its second; to men who _may_ reason calmly it is ridiculous. The will of the many and their interest must very often differ, and the difference will be great when they make an evil choice. A government of five hundred country attorneys and obscure curates is not good for twenty-four million men, even if it were chosen by forty-eight million; nor is it any the better for being guided by a dozen persons of quality who have betrayed their trust in order to get that power. At present you seem to have strayed off the high road of nature in everything. The property of France does not govern it. Of course property is being destroyed, and rational liberty has no existence. All you have got for the present is a paper circulation and a stock-jobbing constitution. And as for the future, do you seriously think that the territory of France, on the republican system of eighty-three independent municipalities — to say nothing of the parts they are made up of — can ever be governed as one body, or ever be set in motion by the impulse of one mind? When the National Assembly has completed its work, it will have accomplished its own ruin. These commonwealths will not long bear being subject to the republic of Paris. They will not bear having that one body monopolise the captivity of the king and the dominion over the assembly that calls itself national. Each will keep its own portion of the spoil of the Church for itself, and will not allow that spoil, or the juster fruits of its own industry, or the natural produce of its own soil, to be sent off to swell the insolence or pamper the luxury of the tradesmen of Paris. In that they will see none of the equality on the pretext of which they were tempted to throw off their allegiance to their sovereign, and the ancient constitution of their country with it. There can be no capital city in such a constitution as they have lately made. They have forgotten that in framing democratic governments they have virtually dismembered their country. The person they persist in calling king has not a hundredth part of the power left him that would be needed to hold this collection of republics together. The republic of Paris will indeed try to complete the corruption of the army, and to perpetuate the Assembly illegally, without any recourse to its constituents, as the means of continuing its despotism. It will make efforts, by becoming the heart of a boundless paper circulation, to draw everything to itself. But in vain. All this policy will in the end prove as feeble as it is now violent.
