Section Seven: The Rights of Men, and What They Are Not

If this is your actual situation, compared with the situation you were called to as if by the voice of God and man, I cannot find it in my heart to congratulate you on the choice you have made, or on the success that has attended your efforts. As little can I recommend to any other nation a course founded on such principles and productive of such effects. That I must leave to those who can see further into your affairs than I can, and who know best how far your actions serve their designs. The gentlemen of the Revolution Society, who were so early with their congratulations, appear to be strongly of the opinion that there is some political scheme relating to this country in which your proceedings may somehow be useful. For your Dr Price, who seems to have theorised himself into no small degree of fervour on the subject, addresses his hearers in these very remarkable words: "I cannot conclude without recalling _particularly_ to your recollection a consideration which I have _more than once alluded to_, and which probably your thoughts have _been all along anticipating_; a consideration with which _my mind is impressed more than can express_: I mean the consideration of the _favorableness of the present times to all exertions in the cause of liberty_."

It is plain that the mind of this _political_ preacher was at the time big with some extraordinary design, and it is very likely that the thoughts of his audience, who understood him better than I do, ran ahead of him all along in his reflection and through the whole train of consequences it led to.

Before I read that sermon I really thought I lived in a free country, and it was an error I cherished, because it made me like the country I lived in the better. I was of course aware that a jealous, ever-waking vigilance, to guard the treasure of our liberty not only from invasion but from decay and corruption, was our best wisdom and our first duty. But I regarded that treasure as a possession to be secured rather than a prize to be fought for. I did not see how the present time came to be so very favourable to all _exertions_ in the cause of freedom. The present time differs from any other only in the circumstance of what is being done in France. If the example of that nation is to have an influence here, I can easily see why some of their proceedings, which have an unpleasant look and are not entirely reconcilable with humanity, generosity, good faith and justice, are excused with such milky good nature towards the perpetrators and borne with such heroic fortitude on behalf of the sufferers. It is certainly not prudent to discredit the authority of an example you mean to follow.

But granting that, we are led to a very natural question. What is this cause of liberty, and what are these exertions in its favour, for which the example of France is so singularly encouraging? Is our monarchy to be annihilated, along with all the laws, all the courts and all the ancient chartered bodies of the kingdom? Is every landmark in the country to be abolished in favour of a geometrical and arithmetical constitution? Is the House of Lords to be voted useless? Is episcopacy to be abolished? Are the Church lands to be sold to Jews and speculators, or given away to bribe newly invented municipal republics into a share of the sacrilege? Are all taxes to be voted grievances, and the revenue reduced to a patriotic contribution, or patriotic presents? Are silver shoe buckles to be substituted for the land tax and the malt tax to support the naval strength of this kingdom? Are all orders, ranks and distinctions to be jumbled together, so that out of universal anarchy joined to national bankruptcy three or four thousand democracies may be formed into eighty-three, and so that they may all, by some unknown power of attraction, be organised into one? Is it for this great end that the army is to be seduced away from its discipline and its loyalty, first by every kind of debauchery and then by the terrible precedent of a bounty in the form of increased pay? Are the curates to be seduced away from their bishops by holding out the delusive hope of a share in the spoils of their own order? Are the citizens of London to be drawn away from their allegiance by being fed at the expense of their fellow subjects? Is a compulsory paper currency to be substituted for the legal coin of this kingdom? Is what remains of the plundered stock of the public revenue to be spent on the wild project of maintaining two armies to watch each other and to fight each other? If these are the ends and the means of the Revolution Society, I admit they are well matched, and France can furnish them with precedents for both.

I see that your example is held up to shame us. I know we are supposed to be a dull, sluggish race, made passive by finding our situation tolerable, and prevented by a mediocrity of freedom from ever attaining freedom in its full perfection. Your leaders in France began by professing to admire, almost to adore, the British constitution; but as they went on they came to look on it with sovereign contempt. The friends of your National Assembly among us have quite as mean an opinion of what used to be thought the glory of their country. The Revolution Society has discovered that the English nation is not free. They are convinced that the inequality in our representation is a "defect in our Constitution _so gross and palpable_ as to make it excellent chiefly in _form_ and _theory_"; that representation in the legislature of a kingdom is not only the basis of all constitutional liberty in it but of "_all legitimate government_; that without it a _government_ is nothing but an _usurpation_"; that "when the representation is _partial_, the kingdom possesses liberty only _partially_; and if extremely partial, it gives only a _semblance_; and if not only extremely partial, but corruptly chosen, it becomes a _nuisance_." Dr Price considers this inadequacy of representation our _fundamental grievance_; and though as to the corruption of this semblance of representation he hopes it has not yet reached its full perfection of depravity, he fears that "nothing will be done towards gaining for us this _essential blessing_, until some _great abuse of power_ again provokes our resentment, or some _great calamity_ again alarms our fears, or perhaps till the acquisition of a _pure and equal representation by other countries,_ whilst we are _mocked_ with the _shadow_, kindles our shame." To this he adds a note in these words: "A representation chosen chiefly by the Treasury, and a _few_ thousands of the _dregs_ of the people, who are generally paid for their votes."

Footnote: Discourse on the Love of our Country, 3rd edition, p. 39.

You will smile here at the consistency of these democrats, who, when they are off their guard, treat the humbler part of the community with the greatest contempt, while at the same time claiming to make them the depositories of all power. It would take a long discourse to point out to you the many fallacies lurking in the general and equivocal phrase "inadequate representation". I shall only say here, in justice to that old-fashioned constitution under which we have long prospered, that our representation has been found perfectly adequate to every purpose for which a representation of the people can be wanted or devised. I defy the enemies of our constitution to show otherwise. To set out the particulars in which it is found to serve its ends so well would require a treatise on our practical constitution. I state the doctrine of the revolutionists here only so that you and others may see what opinion these gentlemen hold of the constitution of their own country, and why they seem to think that some great abuse of power, or some great calamity, would be much softened to their feelings by giving a chance for a constitution according to their ideas. You see _why they_ are so enamoured of your fair and equal representation, which, once obtained, might produce the same effects here. You see that they regard our House of Commons as only "a semblance", "a form", "a theory", "a shadow", "a mockery", and perhaps "a nuisance".

These gentlemen pride themselves on being systematic, and not without reason. They must therefore look on this gross and palpable defect of representation, this fundamental grievance as they call it, as a thing not merely vicious in itself but as making our whole government absolutely _illegitimate_ and no better than a downright _usurpation_. Another revolution, to get rid of this illegitimate and usurped government, would of course be perfectly justifiable, if not absolutely necessary. Indeed their principle, if you consider it at all carefully, goes much further than altering the election of the House of Commons. For if popular representation, or choice, is necessary to the _legitimacy_ of all government, the House of Lords is at one stroke made a bastard and corrupted in its blood. That House is no representative of the people at all, even in "semblance" or "in form". The case of the crown is quite as bad. In vain may the crown try to shelter itself from these gentlemen behind the authority of the settlement made at the Revolution. The Revolution, which is appealed to for a title, wants a title itself on their system. On their theory the Revolution rests on no more solid a basis than our present formalities, since it was made by a House of Lords representing nobody but themselves and by a House of Commons exactly like the present one — that is, as they call it, by a mere "shadow and mockery" of representation.

They must destroy something, or they seem to themselves to exist for no purpose. One set is for destroying the civil power through the ecclesiastical; another for demolishing the ecclesiastical through the civil. They are aware that the worst consequences might follow for the public from accomplishing this double ruin of Church and State; but they are so heated with their theories that they give more than hints that this ruin, with all the mischiefs that must lead to it and accompany it, and which appear quite certain to them, would not be unwelcome, or very far from their wishes. A man among them of great authority, and certainly of great talents, speaking of a supposed alliance between Church and State, says: "Perhaps _we must wait for the fall of the civil powers_, before this most unnatural alliance be broken. Calamitous, no doubt, will that time be. But what convulsion in the political world ought to be a subject of lamentation, if it be attended with so desirable an effect?" You see with what a steady eye these gentlemen are prepared to contemplate the greatest calamities that could befall their country.

It is no wonder, then, that holding these ideas of everything in their constitution and government at home, in Church and State alike, as illegitimate and usurped, or at best a hollow mockery, they look abroad with an eager and passionate enthusiasm. While they are possessed by such notions, it is useless to talk to them of the practice of their ancestors, the fundamental laws of their country, or the fixed form of a constitution whose merits are confirmed by the solid test of long experience and of growing public strength and national prosperity. They despise experience as the wisdom of unlettered men; and as for the rest, they have worked a mine underground that will blow up, in one grand explosion, all the examples of antiquity, all precedents, charters and acts of Parliament. They have "the rights of men". Against these there can be no prescription; against these no argument is binding; these admit of no tempering and no compromise; anything withheld from their full demand is so much fraud and injustice. Against these rights of men of theirs, let no government look for security in the length of its existence or in the justice and mildness of its administration. If its forms do not square with their theories, the objections of these theorists are as valid against an old and beneficent government as against the most violent tyranny or the newest usurpation. They are always at issue with governments, not on a question of abuse but on a question of competence and a question of title. I have nothing to say to the clumsy subtlety of their political metaphysics. Let it be their amusement in the schools.

	_Illa_ se jactet in aula
	Æolus, et clauso ventorum carcere regnet.

But do not let them break out of prison to burst on us like a Levanter, sweeping the earth with their hurricane and breaking up the fountains of the great deep to overwhelm us.

I am far from denying in theory, and my heart is quite as far from withholding in practice — if it were in my power to give or withhold — the _real_ rights of men. In denying their false claims of right, I do not mean to injure the rights that are real, and that their pretended rights would utterly destroy. If civil society is made for the advantage of man, then all the advantages it is made for become his right. It is an institution of beneficence, and law itself is only beneficence acting by a rule. Men have a right to live by that rule. They have a right to justice as between themselves, whether their fellows hold political office or follow an ordinary occupation. They have a right to the fruits of their industry, and to the means of making their industry fruitful. They have a right to what their parents acquired, to the nourishment and improvement of their children, to instruction in life and consolation in death. Whatever each man can do separately, without trespassing on others, he has a right to do for himself; and he has a right to a fair portion of everything that society, with all its combinations of skill and force, can do in his favour. In this partnership all men have equal rights, but not to equal things. A man with only five shillings in the partnership has as good a right to it as the man with five hundred pounds has to his larger share; but he has no right to an equal dividend out of the product of the joint stock. And as for the share of power, authority and direction that each individual ought to have in the management of the state, that I must deny to be among the direct original rights of man in civil society; for I have in mind the civil social man and no other. It is a thing to be settled by convention.

If civil society is the offspring of convention, that convention must be its law. That convention must limit and modify every kind of constitution formed under it. Every sort of legislative, judicial or executive power is its creature. They can have no existence in any other state of things; and how can any man claim, under the conventions of civil society, rights that do not even presuppose its existence — rights that are absolutely repugnant to it? One of the first motives to civil society, and one that becomes one of its fundamental rules, is _that no man should be judge in his own cause_. By this each person has at once divested himself of the first fundamental right of uncovenanted man, which is to judge for himself and assert his own cause. He abdicates all right to be his own governor. He gives up, largely, even the right of self-defence, the first law of nature. Men cannot enjoy the rights of an uncivil and of a civil state together. So that he may obtain justice, he gives up his right of determining what justice is in the points that matter most to him. So that he may secure some liberty, he surrenders the whole of it in trust.

Government is not made in virtue of natural rights, which may and do exist entirely independently of it, and exist in much greater clarity and in a much greater degree of abstract perfection; but their abstract perfection is their practical defect. By having a right to everything they lack everything. Government is a contrivance of human wisdom to provide for human _wants_. Men have a right that these wants should be provided for by that wisdom. Among these wants is to be counted the want, outside civil society, of a sufficient restraint on their passions. Society requires not only that the passions of individuals be subdued, but that even in the mass and body, as well as in individuals, the inclinations of men should frequently be thwarted, their will controlled, and their passions brought into subjection. This can only be done _by a power out of themselves_, one that is not, in the exercise of its function, subject to the very will and the very passions it is its office to bridle and subdue. In this sense the restraints on men, as well as their liberties, are to be counted among their rights. But since liberties and restrictions vary with times and circumstances, and admit of infinite modification, they cannot be settled by any abstract rule, and nothing is so foolish as to discuss them on that principle.

The moment you take anything away from the full right of every man to govern himself, and allow any artificial, positive limitation on those rights, from that moment the whole organisation of government becomes a matter of convenience. That is what makes the constitution of a state, and the due distribution of its powers, a matter of the most delicate and complicated skill. It requires a deep knowledge of human nature and human necessities, and of the things that help or hinder the various ends the machinery of civil institutions is meant to pursue. The state must have recruits for its strength and remedies for its diseases. What is the use of debating a man's abstract right to food or to medicine? The question is how to procure them and how to administer them. In that deliberation I shall always advise calling in the farmer and the physician rather than the professor of metaphysics.

The science of constructing a commonwealth, or renovating it, or reforming it, is like every other experimental science: it cannot be taught _a priori_, in advance of the experiment. Nor is it a short experience that can instruct us in that practical science, because the real effects of moral causes are not always immediate, and what is harmful in the first instance may be excellent in its remoter operation — its excellence may even arise from the ill effects it produces at the beginning. The reverse happens too: very plausible schemes with very pleasing beginnings have often had shameful and lamentable conclusions. In states there are often obscure and almost hidden causes, things that appear at first sight of little importance, on which a very great part of their prosperity or adversity may most essentially depend. Since the science of government is therefore so practical in itself, and intended for such practical purposes, and requires experience — more experience, indeed, than any one person can acquire in a whole lifetime, however shrewd and observant he may be — it is with infinite caution that any man ought to venture on pulling down a building that has answered the common purposes of society in any tolerable degree for ages, or on building it up again without having models and patterns of proven usefulness in front of him.

These metaphysical rights, entering common life like rays of light passing into a dense medium, are by the laws of nature refracted out of their straight line. Indeed, in the gross and complicated mass of human passions and concerns, the primitive rights of men undergo such a variety of refractions and reflections that it becomes absurd to talk of them as if they continued in the simplicity of their original direction. The nature of man is intricate; the objects of society are of the greatest possible complexity; and therefore no simple disposition or direction of power can suit either man's nature or the quality of his affairs. When I hear simplicity of contrivance aimed at and boasted of in any new political constitution, I am at no loss to decide that the builders are either grossly ignorant of their trade or totally negligent of their duty. The simple governments are fundamentally defective, to say no worse of them. If you were to contemplate society from only one point of view, all these simple forms of government are infinitely captivating. In effect each would answer its single end far more perfectly than the more complex kind can attain all its complex purposes. But it is better that the whole should be answered imperfectly and irregularly than that, while some parts are provided for with great exactness, others should be totally neglected, or perhaps materially damaged, by excessive care for a favourite member.

The pretended rights of these theorists are all extremes, and in proportion as they are metaphysically true they are morally and politically false. The rights of men lie in a sort of _middle_, incapable of definition but not impossible to discern. The rights of men in governments are their advantages, and these are often balances between different goods, compromises sometimes between good and evil and sometimes between evil and evil. Political reason is a computing principle: adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing morally true denominations, not metaphysically or mathematically true ones.

These theorists almost always confound the right of the people with their power by a piece of sophistry. The body of the community, whenever it can come to act, can meet with no effective resistance; but until power and right are the same thing, the whole body of them has no right that is inconsistent with virtue, and with the first of all the virtues, prudence. Men have no right to what is unreasonable and not for their benefit. A pleasant writer did say "_Liceat perire poetis_" — let poets be allowed to perish — when one of them was said to have leapt in cold blood into the flames of a volcanic revolution, "_ardentem frigidus Ætnam insiluit_"; but I consider such a frolic an unjustifiable poetic licence rather than one of the franchises of Parnassus. And whether the man who chose to exercise this kind of right were poet, divine or politician, I think wiser and therefore more charitable thoughts would urge me to save him rather than to preserve his brass slippers as monuments of his folly.
