Section Eight: The Sixth of October, and the Age of Chivalry

(Part 2 of 2)

This king, to say no more of him, and this queen, and their infant children — who would once have been the pride and hope of a great and generous people — were then forced to abandon the sanctuary of the most splendid palace in the world, which they left swimming in blood, polluted by massacre and strewn with scattered limbs and mutilated bodies. From there they were conducted to the capital of their kingdom. Two men had been picked out of the unprovoked, unresisted, indiscriminate slaughter that had been made of the gentlemen of birth and family who composed the king's bodyguard. These two gentlemen were cruelly and publicly dragged to the block, with all the parade of an execution of justice, and beheaded in the great court of the palace. Their heads were stuck on spears and led the procession, while the royal captives who followed in the train were moved slowly along amid the horrid yells, the shrilling screams, the frantic dancing, the infamous insults and all the unutterable abominations of the furies of hell in the abused shape of the vilest of women. After they had been made to taste, drop by drop, more than the bitterness of death, in the slow torture of a twelve-mile journey drawn out over six hours, they were lodged, under a guard made up of the very soldiers who had conducted them through this famous triumph, in one of the old palaces of Paris, now converted into a Bastille for kings.

Is this a triumph to be consecrated at altars, to be commemorated with grateful thanksgiving, to be offered up to the Divine Humanity with fervent prayer and enthusiastic ejaculation? These Theban and Thracian orgies, acted in France and applauded only in the Old Jewry, kindle prophetic enthusiasm, I assure you, in the minds of very few people in this kingdom — although a saint and apostle who may have revelations of his own, and who has so completely vanquished all the mean superstitions of the heart, may be inclined to think it pious and decorous to compare it with the entrance into the world of the Prince of Peace, proclaimed in a holy temple by a venerable sage, and not long before announced no worse by the voice of angels to the quiet innocence of shepherds.

At first I was at a loss to account for this fit of unguarded transport. I knew, of course, that the sufferings of monarchs are a delicious repast to certain palates. There were reflections that might have kept this appetite within some bounds of temperance. But when I took one circumstance into account, I was obliged to admit that a good deal of allowance ought to be made for the society, and that the temptation was too strong for ordinary discretion. I mean the circumstance of the victory-shout of the triumph, the animating cry calling for "_all_ the BISHOPS to be hanged on the lamp-posts", which might well have brought on a burst of enthusiasm at the foreseen consequences of this happy day. To such enthusiasm I allow a little deviation from prudence. I allow this prophet to break out into hymns of joy and thanksgiving at an event that looks like the forerunner of the Millennium and of the projected Fifth Monarchy, in the destruction of all Church establishments. There was, however, as there is in all human affairs, something in the middle of this joy to exercise the patience of these worthy gentlemen and to try the long-suffering of their faith. The actual murder of the king and queen and their child was still wanting to the other auspicious circumstances of this "_beautiful day_". The actual murder of the bishops, though called for by so many holy ejaculations, was wanting too. A group of regicide and sacrilegious slaughter was indeed boldly sketched, but it was only sketched. Unhappily it was left unfinished, in this great history-piece of the massacre of the innocents. What hardy brush from the school of the rights of men will finish it remains to be seen. The age has not yet the complete benefit of that diffusion of knowledge which has undermined superstition and error; and the king of France needs another object or two to consign to oblivion, in consideration of all the good that is to come out of his own sufferings and the patriotic crimes of an enlightened age.

Footnote: "Tous les Évêques à la lanterne!"

Footnote: It is proper here to refer to a letter written on this subject by an eyewitness. That eyewitness was one of the most honest, intelligent and eloquent members of the National Assembly, and one of the most active and zealous reformers of the state. He was obliged to withdraw from the Assembly, and afterwards became a voluntary exile, on account of the horrors of this pious triumph and the dispositions of the men who, profiting by crimes if not causing them, have taken the lead in public affairs. _Extract of M. de Lally Tollendal's Second Letter to a Friend_. "Parlons du parti que j'ai pris; il est bien justifé dans ma conscience.—Ni cette ville coupable, ni cette assemblée plus coupable encore, ne méritoient que je me justifie; mais j'ai à cœur que vous, et les personnes qui pensent comme vous, ne me condamnent pas.—Ma santé, je vous jure, me rendoit mes fonctions impossibles; mais même en les mettant de côté il a été au-dessus de mes forces de supporter plus longtems l'horreur que me causoit ce sang,—ces têtes,—cette reine _presque egorgée_,—ce roi, amené _esclave_, entrant à Paris au milieu de ses assassins, et précédé des têtes de ses malheureux gardes,—ces perfides janissaires, ces assassins, ces femmes cannibales,—ce cri de TOUS LES ÉVÊQUES À LA LANTERNE, dans le moment où le roi entre sa capitale avec deux évêques de son conseil dans sa voiture,—un _coup de fusil_, que j'ai vu tirer dans un _des carrosses de la reine_,—M. Bailly appellant cela _un beau jour_,—l'assemblée ayant déclaré froidement le matin, qu'il n'étoit pas de sa dignité d'aller toute entière environner le roi,—M. Mirabeau disant impunément dans cette assemblée, que le vaisseau de l'état, loin d'être arrêté dans sa course, s'élanceroit avec plus de rapidité que jamais vers sa régénération,—M. Barnave, riant avec lui, quand des flots de sang couloient autour de nous,—le vertueux Mounier échappant par miracle à vingt assassins, qui avoient voulu faire de sa tête un trophée de plus: Voilà ce qui me fit jurer de ne plus mettre le pied _dans cette caverne d'Antropophages_ [the National Assembly], où je n'avois plus de force d'élever la voix, où depuis six semaines je l'avois élevée en vain. Moi, Mounier, et tous les honnêtes gens, ont pensé que le dernier effort à faire pour le bien étoit d'en sortir. Aucune idée de crainte ne s'est approchée de moi. Je rougirois de m'en défendre. J'avois encore reçû sur la route de la part de ce peuple, moins coupable que ceux qui l'ont enivré de fureur, des acclamations, et des applaudissements, dont d'autres auroient été flattés, et qui m'ont fait frémir. C'est à l'indignation, c'est à l'horreur, c'est aux convulsions physiques, que le seul aspect du sang me fait éprouver que j'ai cédé. On brave une seule mort; on la brave plusieurs fois, quand elle peut être utile. Mais aucune puissance sous le ciel, mais aucune opinion publique ou privée n'ont le droit de me condamner à souffrir inutilement mille supplices par minute, et à périr de désespoir, de rage, au milieu des _triomphes_, du crime que je n'ai pu arrêter. Ils me proscriront, ils confisqueront mes biens. Je labourerai la terre, et je ne les verrai plus. Voilà ma justification. Vous pourrez la lire, la montrer, la laisser copier; tant pis pour ceux qui ne la comprendront pas; ce ne sera alors moi qui auroit eu tort de la leur donner." In English: "Let me speak of the course I have taken; it is fully justified in my own conscience. Neither that guilty city nor that still guiltier assembly deserved that I should justify myself; but I care that you, and those who think as you do, should not condemn me. My health, I swear to you, made my duties impossible; but even setting that aside, it was beyond my strength to endure any longer the horror that this blood caused me — those heads — that queen with her throat all but cut — that king brought in as a slave, entering Paris among his assassins and preceded by the heads of his unhappy guards — those treacherous janissaries, those assassins, those cannibal women — that cry of ALL THE BISHOPS TO THE LAMP-POST at the very moment when the king enters his capital with two bishops of his council in his carriage — a musket shot that I saw fired into one of the queen's coaches — M. Bailly calling this a beautiful day — the Assembly having coldly declared that morning that it was not consistent with its dignity to go in a body and surround the king — M. Mirabeau saying with impunity in that assembly that the ship of state, far from being checked in her course, would drive on towards her regeneration faster than ever — M. Barnave laughing along with him while floods of blood ran round about us — the virtuous Mounier escaping by a miracle from twenty assassins who wanted to make one more trophy of his head. That is what made me swear never again to set foot in that cavern of cannibals, where I no longer had the strength to raise my voice, and where for six weeks I had raised it in vain. Mounier and I, and all honest men, judged that the last effort we could make for good was to get out of it. No idea of fear came near me. I should blush to defend myself against the charge. On the road I had even received, from that people who are less guilty than the men who made them drunk with fury, acclamations and applause that would have flattered others and that made me shudder. It is to indignation, to horror, to the physical convulsions that the mere sight of blood brings on in me, that I have given way. A man faces a single death; he faces it many times over, when it can be of use. But no power under heaven, no opinion public or private, has the right to condemn me to suffer a thousand torments a minute to no purpose, and to perish of despair and rage in the middle of the triumphs of a crime I could not stop. They will proscribe me, they will confiscate my goods. I shall plough the earth, and I shall not see them again. There is my justification. You may read it, show it, let it be copied; so much the worse for those who will not understand it; it will not then be I who was in the wrong to give it to them." This military man had not such good nerves as the peaceable gentlemen of the Old Jewry. See M. Mounier's narrative of these transactions: also a man of honour and virtue and talent, and therefore a fugitive. (Note: M. Mounier was then speaker of the National Assembly. He has since been obliged to live in exile, though one of the firmest defenders of liberty.)

Although this work of our new light and knowledge did not go as far as in all probability it was meant to go, I must still think that such treatment of any human creature must be shocking to anyone not made for accomplishing revolutions. But I cannot stop there. Moved by the inborn feelings of my nature, and not illuminated by a single ray of this newly sprung modern light, I confess to you, Sir, that the exalted rank of the sufferers — and particularly the sex, the beauty and the amiable qualities of the descendant of so many kings and emperors, together with the tender age of royal infants, unaware only through infancy and innocence of the cruel outrages their parents were exposed to — instead of being a subject for exultation, adds not a little to what I feel about that most melancholy occasion.

I hear that the august person who was the principal object of our preacher's triumph, though he bore himself well, felt that shameful occasion deeply. As a man it became him to feel for his wife and his children, and for the faithful guards of his person who were massacred in cold blood around him. As a prince it became him to feel for the strange and frightful transformation of his civilised subjects, and to grieve more for them than to be anxious for himself. This takes little from his fortitude, while it adds infinitely to the honour of his humanity. I am very sorry to say — very sorry indeed — that such persons are in a situation in which it is not unbecoming in us to praise the virtues of the great.

I hear, and I rejoice to hear, that the great lady, the other object of the triumph, bore that day as she bears all the days since — one is anxious that beings made for suffering should suffer well — and that she bears the imprisonment of her husband, and her own captivity, and the exile of her friends, and the insulting flattery of formal addresses, and the whole weight of her accumulated wrongs, with a serene patience, in a manner suited to her rank and race and worthy of the daughter of a sovereign distinguished for her piety and her courage; that like her mother she has lofty feelings; that she feels with the dignity of a Roman matron; that in the last extremity she will save herself from the last disgrace; and that if she must fall, she will fall by no ignoble hand.

It is now sixteen or seventeen years since I saw the queen of France, then the Dauphiness, at Versailles; and surely there never lighted on this orb, which she hardly seemed to touch, a more delightful vision. I saw her just above the horizon, decorating and cheering the elevated sphere she had just begun to move in, glittering like the morning star, full of life and splendour and joy. Oh, what a revolution! And what a heart I must have, to contemplate that elevation and that fall without emotion! Little did I dream, when she added titles of veneration to those of enthusiastic, distant, respectful love, that she should ever be obliged to carry the sharp antidote against disgrace concealed in that bosom. Little did I dream that I should have lived to see such disasters fall on her in a nation of gallant men, in a nation of men of honour and of cavaliers. I thought ten thousand swords must have leapt from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her with insult.

But the age of chivalry is gone. That of sophisters, economists and calculators has succeeded, and the glory of Europe is extinguished for ever. Never, never more shall we behold that generous loyalty to rank and sex, that proud submission, that dignified obedience, that subordination of the heart, which kept alive, even in servitude itself, the spirit of an exalted freedom. The unbought grace of life, the cheap defence of nations, the nurse of manly sentiment and heroic enterprise, is gone. It is gone, that sensibility of principle, that chastity of honour, which felt a stain like a wound, which inspired courage while it softened ferocity, which ennobled whatever it touched, and under which vice itself lost half its evil by losing all its grossness.

This mixed system of opinion and sentiment had its origin in the ancient chivalry; and the principle, though varied in appearance by the varying state of human affairs, lived on and had its influence through a long succession of generations, right down to the time we live in. If it should ever be totally extinguished, the loss, I fear, will be great. It is this that has given modern Europe its character. It is this that has distinguished Europe under all its forms of government, and distinguished it to its advantage, from the states of Asia, and possibly from the states that flourished in the most brilliant periods of the ancient world. It was this that, without confounding ranks, produced a noble equality and handed it down through all the gradations of social life. It was this opinion that softened kings into companions and raised private men to be the fellows of kings. Without force and without opposition, it subdued the fierceness of pride and power. It obliged sovereigns to submit to the soft collar of social esteem, compelled stern authority to submit to elegance, and gave a domination that vanquishes laws to be itself subdued by manners.

But now all this is to be changed. All the pleasing illusions that made power gentle and obedience liberal, that harmonised the different shades of life, and that by a bland assimilation brought into politics the feelings which beautify and soften private society, are to be dissolved by this new conquering empire of light and reason. All the decent drapery of life is to be rudely torn off. All the added ideas, furnished out of the wardrobe of a moral imagination, which the heart owns and the understanding ratifies as necessary to cover the defects of our naked, shivering nature and to raise it to dignity in our own estimation, are to be exploded as a ridiculous, absurd and antiquated fashion.

On this scheme of things, a king is only a man, a queen is only a woman, a woman is only an animal — and an animal not of the highest order. All homage paid to the sex in general as such, without any distinct view to the individual, is to be regarded as romance and folly. Regicide and parricide and sacrilege are only fictions of superstition, corrupting jurisprudence by destroying its simplicity. The murder of a king, or a queen, or a bishop, or a father is only common homicide — and if the people happen in any way to be gainers by it, a sort of homicide much the most pardonable, and one we ought not to inquire into too severely.

On the scheme of this barbarous philosophy, which is the offspring of cold hearts and muddy understandings, and which is as void of solid wisdom as it is destitute of all taste and elegance, laws are to be supported only by their own terrors, and by whatever concern each individual may find in them from his own private theorising, or can spare for them from his own private interests. In the groves of _their_ academy, at the end of every avenue, you see nothing but the gallows. Nothing is left to engage the affections on behalf of the commonwealth. On the principles of this mechanical philosophy, our institutions can never be embodied, if I may use the expression, in persons, so as to create in us love, veneration, admiration or attachment. But the sort of reason that banishes the affections is incapable of taking their place. These public affections, combined with manners, are needed sometimes as supplements, sometimes as correctives, and always as aids to law. The rule laid down by a wise man, and a great critic too, for the construction of poems, is equally true of states: "_Non satis est pulchra esse poemata, dulcia sunto_" — it is not enough for poems to be beautiful; they must be sweet. There ought to be a system of manners in every nation that a well-formed mind would relish. To make us love our country, our country ought to be lovely.

But power of some kind or other will survive the shock in which manners and opinions perish, and it will find other and worse means of supporting itself. The usurpation that has destroyed ancient principles in order to subvert ancient institutions will hold power by arts similar to those by which it acquired it. When the old feudal and chivalrous spirit of _fealty_, which by freeing kings from fear freed both kings and subjects from the precautions of tyranny, is extinct in men's minds, plots and assassinations will be forestalled by preventive murder and preventive confiscation, and by that long roll of grim and bloody maxims which make up the political code of every power that does not rest on its own honour and the honour of those who are to obey it. Kings will be tyrants from policy, when subjects are rebels from principle.

When ancient opinions and rules of life are taken away, the loss cannot possibly be measured. From that moment we have no compass to steer by, nor can we tell distinctly for what port we are steering. Europe taken as a whole was undoubtedly in a flourishing condition on the day your Revolution was completed. How much of that prosperous state was owing to the spirit of our old manners and opinions is not easy to say; but as such causes cannot be without effect, we must presume that on the whole their effect was beneficial.

We are all too apt to consider things in the state we find them in, without sufficiently attending to the causes that produced them and may be holding them up. Nothing is more certain than that our manners, our civilisation, and all the good things connected with manners and civilisation, have in this European world of ours depended for ages on two principles, and were indeed the result of both combined: I mean the spirit of a gentleman and the spirit of religion. The nobility and the clergy, the one by profession and the other by patronage, kept learning in existence even amid arms and confusion, and while governments were still in their causes rather than formed. Learning paid back what it had received to nobility and priesthood, and paid it with interest, by enlarging their ideas and furnishing their minds. Happy, if they had all gone on knowing their indissoluble union and their proper places! Happy, if learning, not corrupted by ambition, had been content to remain the instructor and had not aspired to be the master! Along with its natural protectors and guardians, learning will be cast into the mire and trodden down under the hooves of a swinish multitude.

Footnote: See the fate of Bailly and Condorcet, supposed to be particularly alluded to here. Compare the circumstances of the trial and execution of the first of them with this prediction.

If, as I suspect, modern letters owe more than they are always willing to admit to ancient manners, so do other interests that we value quite as much as they are worth. Even commerce and trade and manufacture, the gods of our economical politicians, are themselves perhaps only creatures, only effects, which we choose to worship as first causes. They certainly grew up in the same shade in which learning flourished. They too may decay along with the principles that naturally protect them. With you, for the present at least, they all threaten to disappear together. Where a people lacks trade and manufactures, and the spirit of nobility and religion remains, sentiment supplies their place, and not always badly; but if commerce and the arts should be lost in an experiment to see how well a state can stand without these old fundamental principles, what sort of thing must a nation be — gross, stupid, ferocious, and at the same time poor and sordid barbarians, destitute of religion, honour or manly pride, possessing nothing at present and hoping for nothing hereafter?

I hope you are not going fast, and by the shortest road, to that horrible and disgusting condition. Already a poverty of conception, a coarseness and vulgarity, appears in all the proceedings of the Assembly and of all their instructors. Their liberty is not liberal. Their science is presumptuous ignorance. Their humanity is savage and brutal.

It is not clear whether in England we learned those grand and decorous principles and manners, of which considerable traces still remain, from you, or whether you took them from us. But I think we trace them best to you. You seem to me to be _gentis incunabula nostræ_, the cradle of our race. France has always influenced manners in England, more or less; and when your fountain is choked up and polluted, the stream will not run long or run clear with us, or perhaps with any nation. This gives all Europe, in my opinion, only too close and connected an interest in what is being done in France. Excuse me, then, if I have dwelt too long on the atrocious spectacle of the sixth of October, 1789, or have given too much scope to the reflections that have risen in my mind on the occasion of the most important of all revolutions, which may be dated from that day: I mean a revolution in sentiments, manners and moral opinions. As things now stand, with everything respectable destroyed outside us, and an attempt being made to destroy every principle of respect within us, one is almost forced to apologise for harbouring the common feelings of men.
