Section Nine: Why I Feel Differently, and a Defence of Prejudice

Why do I feel so differently from the Reverend Dr Price, and from those of his lay flock who choose to adopt the sentiments of his discourse? For this plain reason: because it is _natural_ that I should. Because we are so made as to be affected at such spectacles with melancholy thoughts about the unstable condition of mortal prosperity and the terrible uncertainty of human greatness. Because in those natural feelings we learn great lessons. Because in events like these our passions instruct our reason. Because when kings are hurled from their thrones by the Supreme Director of this great drama, and become objects of insult to the base and of pity to the good, we look on such disasters in the moral order as we should look on a miracle in the physical one. We are alarmed into reflection; our minds, as was observed long ago, are purified by terror and pity; our weak, unthinking pride is humbled under the workings of a mysterious wisdom. Some tears might be drawn from me if such a spectacle were shown on the stage. I should be truly ashamed to find in myself that superficial, theatrical sense of painted distress, while I could exult over the real thing in life. With a mind so perverted I could never venture to show my face at a tragedy. People would think that the tears Garrick used to extort from me, or Siddons not long since, were the tears of hypocrisy; I should know them to be the tears of folly.

Indeed, the theatre is a better school of moral sentiment than churches where the feelings of humanity are outraged like this. Poets, who have to deal with an audience not yet graduated from the school of the rights of men, and who must address themselves to the moral constitution of the heart, would not dare present such a triumph as a matter for exultation. There, where men follow their natural impulses, they would not tolerate the odious maxims of a Machiavellian policy, whether applied to gaining monarchical or democratic tyranny. They would reject them on the modern stage as they once did on the ancient, where an audience could not bear even the hypothetical proposal of such wickedness in the mouth of a tyrant being played, however suited it was to the character he sustained. No theatre audience in Athens would sit through what has been borne in the middle of the real tragedy of this triumphal day: a leading actor weighing, as though in scales hung up in a shop of horrors, so much actual crime against so much possible advantage — and after putting weights in and taking them out, announcing that the balance came down on the side of the advantages. They would not bear to see the crimes of the new democracy posted up as in a ledger against the crimes of the old despotism, and the book-keepers of politics finding democracy still in debt, but by no means unable or unwilling to pay the balance. In the theatre, the first instinctive glance, without any elaborate process of reasoning, would show that this method of political accounting would justify crime to any extent whatever. They would see that on these principles, even where the very worst acts were not committed, that was owing to the luck of the conspirators rather than to any thrift on their part in spending treachery and blood. They would soon see that criminal means, once tolerated, are soon preferred. They offer a shorter road to the object than the highway of the moral virtues. Once perfidy and murder are justified for the public benefit, the public benefit soon becomes the pretext and perfidy and murder the end — until rapacity, malice, revenge and a fear more dreadful than revenge have glutted their insatiable appetites. Such must be the consequence of losing, in the splendour of these triumphs of the rights of men, all natural sense of right and wrong.

But the reverend pastor exults in this "leading in triumph" because, if you please, Louis the Sixteenth was "an arbitrary monarch" — that is to say, in other words, neither more nor less than because he was Louis the Sixteenth, and because he had the misfortune to be born king of France, with prerogatives that a long line of ancestors, and a long acquiescence of the people, had put him in possession of without any act of his own. It has indeed turned out a misfortune to him that he was born king of France. But misfortune is not crime, nor is indiscretion always the greatest guilt. I shall never think that a prince whose whole reign was a series of concessions to his subjects, who was willing to relax his authority, to give up his prerogatives, to call his people to a share of freedom their ancestors had never known and perhaps never wanted — such a prince, though he may be subject to the common frailties of men and of princes, though he once thought it necessary to provide force against the desperate designs plainly being carried on against his person and the remains of his authority — even taking all that into account, I shall be brought only with great difficulty to think he deserves the cruel and insulting triumph of Paris and of Dr Price. I tremble for the cause of liberty, at such an example set before kings. I tremble for the cause of humanity, at the unpunished outrages of the most wicked of mankind. But there are people of that low and degenerate cast of mind who look up with a sort of complacent awe and admiration at kings who know how to keep firm in their seat, to hold a strict hand over their subjects, to assert their prerogative, and by the wide-awake vigilance of a severe despotism to guard against the very first approaches of freedom. Against such men as those they never raise their voices. Deserters from principle, enlisted with fortune, they never see any good in suffering virtue nor any crime in prosperous usurpation.

If it could be made clear to me that the king and queen of France — those, I mean, who were such before the triumph — were inexorable and cruel tyrants, and that they had formed a deliberate scheme for massacring the National Assembly (I think I have seen something like the latter insinuated in certain publications), I should think their captivity just. If that is true, much more ought to have been done — but done, in my opinion, in another manner. The punishment of real tyrants is a noble and awful act of justice, and it has truly been called a consolation to the human mind. But if I were to punish a wicked king I should have regard to the dignity of avenging the crime. Justice is grave and decorous, and in its punishments seems rather to submit to a necessity than to make a choice. Had the subject been Nero, or Agrippina, or Louis the Eleventh, or Charles the Ninth — if Charles the Twelfth of Sweden after the murder of Patkul, or his predecessor Christina after the murder of Monaldeschi, had fallen into your hands, Sir, or into mine, I am sure our conduct would have been different.

If the French king, or the king of the French — or whatever name he goes by in the new vocabulary of your constitution — has really, in his own person and in his queen's, deserved these unacknowledged but unavenged attempts at murder, and those frequent indignities that are crueller than murder, then such a person would ill deserve even the subordinate executive trust that I understand is to be placed in him; nor is he fit to be called chief of a nation he has outraged and oppressed. A worse choice for such an office in a new commonwealth than a deposed tyrant could not possibly be made. But to degrade and insult a man as the worst of criminals, and afterwards to trust him with your highest concerns as a faithful, honest and zealous servant, is not consistent in reasoning, nor prudent in policy, nor safe in practice. Those who could make such an appointment would be guilty of a more flagrant breach of trust than any they have committed against the people yet. Since this is the only crime in which your leading politicians could have acted inconsistently, I conclude that there is no sort of ground for these horrid insinuations. I think no better of all the other calumnies.

In England we give them no credit. We are generous enemies; we are faithful allies. We spurn from us with disgust and indignation the slanders of men who bring us their anecdotes with the fleur-de-lis branded on their shoulder. We have Lord George Gordon fast in Newgate; and neither his being a public convert to Judaism, nor his having in his zeal against Catholic priests and clergy of every sort raised a mob — excuse the term, it is still in use here — that pulled down all our prisons, has preserved him a liberty he did not make himself worthy of by any virtuous use of it. We have rebuilt Newgate and tenanted the mansion. We have prisons almost as strong as the Bastille for those who dare to libel the queens of France. In that spiritual retreat let the noble libeller remain. Let him meditate there on his Talmud until he learns a conduct more becoming to his birth and his parts, and less disgraceful to the ancient religion he has converted to — or until some persons from your side of the water, to please your new Hebrew brethren, ransom him. He may then be able to purchase, with the old hoards of the synagogue and a very small percentage on the long compound interest of the thirty pieces of silver (Dr Price has shown us what miracles compound interest will perform in 1790 years), the lands that have lately been discovered to have been usurped by the Gallican Church. Send us your Popish Archbishop of Paris, and we will send you our Protestant rabbi. We shall treat the person you send us in exchange like a gentleman and an honest man, as he is; but pray let him bring the fund of his hospitality, bounty and charity with him, and depend upon it we shall never confiscate a shilling of that honourable and pious fund, nor think of enriching the Treasury with the spoils of the poor-box.

To tell you the truth, my dear Sir, I think the honour of our nation is somewhat concerned in disowning the proceedings of this society of the Old Jewry and the London Tavern. I hold no man's proxy. I speak only for myself when I disclaim, as I do with all possible earnestness, all communion with the actors in that triumph or with its admirers. When I assert anything else about the people of England, I speak from observation and not from authority; but I speak from the experience I have had in a fairly wide and mixed acquaintance with the inhabitants of this kingdom, of every description and rank, and after a course of attentive observation begun early in life and continued for nearly forty years. Considering that we are divided from you by a slender ditch of about twenty-four miles, and that traffic between the two countries has lately been very great, I have often been astonished to find how little you seem to know of us. I suspect this is because you form your judgment of this nation from certain publications which represent the opinions and dispositions generally prevalent in England very erroneously, if they represent them at all. The vanity, restlessness, petulance and spirit of intrigue of several petty cabals, who try to hide their total unimportance in bustle and noise and puffing and quoting one another, makes you imagine that our contemptuous neglect of their abilities is a general sign that we agree with their opinions. No such thing, I assure you. Because half a dozen grasshoppers under a fern make the field ring with their importunate chirping, while thousands of great cattle repose beneath the shadow of the British oak and chew the cud and are silent, pray do not imagine that the ones making the noise are the only inhabitants of the field, or that they are therefore many in number, or that they are anything after all but the little, shrivelled, meagre, hopping, though loud and troublesome insects of the hour.

I will almost venture to say that not one in a hundred among us shares in the "triumph" of the Revolution Society. If the king and queen of France and their children were to fall into our hands by the chance of war, in the bitterest of all hostilities — I deprecate such an event, I deprecate such hostility — they would be treated to another sort of triumphal entry into London. We have had a king of France in that situation before now; you have read how he was treated by the victor in the field, and in what manner he was afterwards received in England. Four hundred years have passed over us, but I do not believe we are materially changed since then. Thanks to our sullen resistance to innovation, thanks to the cold sluggishness of our national character, we still bear the stamp of our forefathers. We have not, as I conceive, lost the generosity and dignity of thinking of the fourteenth century; nor have we yet refined ourselves into savages. We are not the converts of Rousseau; we are not the disciples of Voltaire; Helvétius has made no progress among us. Atheists are not our preachers; madmen are not our lawgivers. We know that _we_ have made no discoveries, and we think none are to be made, in morality — nor many in the great principles of government, nor in the ideas of liberty, which were understood long before we were born quite as well as they will be after the grave has heaped its earth on our presumption and the silent tomb has imposed its law on our pert loquacity. In England we have not yet been completely gutted of our natural entrails. We still feel within us, and we cherish and cultivate, those inbred sentiments which are the faithful guardians and active monitors of our duty and the true supporters of every liberal and manly morality. We have not been drawn and trussed so that we might be stuffed, like birds in a museum, with chaff and rags and paltry blurred shreds of paper about the rights of man. We keep the whole of our feelings still native and entire, unspoiled by pedantry and unbelief. We have real hearts of flesh and blood beating in our breasts. We fear God; we look up with awe to kings, with affection to Parliaments, with duty to magistrates, with reverence to priests and with respect to nobility. Why? Because when such ideas are brought before our minds it is _natural_ to be affected in that way; because all other feelings are false and spurious, and tend to corrupt our minds, to vitiate our primary morals, to make us unfit for rational liberty, and, by teaching us a servile, licentious and abandoned insolence, to make us the cheap sport of a few holidays and perfectly fit for — and justly deserving of — slavery for the whole course of our lives.

Footnote: The English are, I think, misrepresented in a letter published in one of the papers by a gentleman thought to be a Dissenting minister. Writing to Dr Price about the spirit prevailing in Paris, he says: "The spirit of the people in this place has abolished all the proud _distinctions_ which the _king_ and _nobles_ had usurped in their minds: whether they talk of _the king, the noble, or the priest_, their whole language is that of the most _enlightened and liberal amongst the English_." If this gentleman means to confine the terms _enlightened and liberal_ to one set of men in England, it may be true. It is not generally so.

You see, Sir, that in this enlightened age I am bold enough to confess that we are generally men of untaught feelings; that instead of throwing away all our old prejudices we cherish them to a very considerable degree; and, to take more shame to ourselves, we cherish them because they are prejudices, and the longer they have lasted and the more generally they have prevailed, the more we cherish them. We are afraid to set men up to live and trade each on his own private stock of reason, because we suspect that the stock in each man is small, and that the individuals would do better to draw on the general bank and capital of nations and of ages. Many of our men of speculation, instead of exploding a general prejudice, employ their sagacity to discover the latent wisdom in it. If they find what they are looking for — and they seldom fail — they think it wiser to keep the prejudice with the reason wrapped inside it than to throw away the coat of prejudice and leave nothing but the naked reason; because prejudice, with its reason, carries a motive to put that reason into action and an affection that will make it last. Prejudice is ready to hand in an emergency. It engages the mind beforehand in a steady course of wisdom and virtue, and does not leave a man hesitating at the moment of decision, sceptical, puzzled and unresolved. Prejudice makes a man's virtue his habit, and not a series of unconnected acts. Through just prejudice his duty becomes a part of his nature.

Your literary men and your politicians, and the whole clan of the enlightened among us with them, differ from us fundamentally on these points. They have no respect for the wisdom of others, but they make up for it by a very full measure of confidence in their own. With them it is a sufficient reason to destroy an old scheme of things that it is an old one. As to the new, they feel no sort of fear about how long a building run up in haste will last, because duration is no object to men who think that little or nothing was done before their own time and who place all their hopes in discovery. They conceive, very systematically, that everything which gives permanence is mischievous, and so they are at inexpiable war with all establishments. They think government may be varied like fashions in dress, and with as little ill effect; that no principle of attachment to any constitution of the state is needed beyond a sense of present convenience. They always speak as though they held that there is a peculiar sort of contract between them and their magistrates which binds the magistrate but has nothing reciprocal in it, and that the majesty of the people has a right to dissolve it for no reason but its own will. Their attachment even to their own country goes only so far as it agrees with some of their passing projects; it begins and ends with whatever scheme of politics happens to suit their opinion of the moment.

These doctrines, or rather these sentiments, seem to prevail with your new statesmen. But they are wholly different from those we have always acted on in this country.

I hear that it is sometimes given out in France that what is being done among you follows the example of England. Allow me to say that hardly anything done with you has originated in the practice or the prevailing opinions of this people, either in the act or in the spirit of the proceeding. Let me add that we are as unwilling to learn these lessons from France as we are sure that we never taught them to that nation. The cabals here who take a sort of share in your transactions consist as yet of only a handful of people. If, unluckily, by their intrigues and their sermons and their publications, and by a confidence drawn from an expected union with the counsels and forces of the French nation, they should draw considerable numbers into their faction, and should then seriously attempt anything here in imitation of what has been done with you, the outcome, I will venture to prophesy, will be that with some trouble to their country they will soon accomplish their own destruction. This people refused to change their law in remote ages out of respect for the infallibility of popes, and they will not alter it now out of a pious implicit faith in the dogmatism of philosophers — though the first was armed with the anathema and the crusade, and though the second should act with the libel and the lamp-post.

Formerly your affairs were your own concern only. We felt for them as men, but we kept aloof from them, because we were not citizens of France. But when we see the model held up for ourselves, we must feel as Englishmen, and, feeling, we must provide as Englishmen. Your affairs, in spite of us, are made part of our interest — so far at least as to keep your panacea, or your plague, at a distance. If it is a panacea, we do not want it: we know the consequences of unnecessary medicine. If it is a plague, it is such a plague that the precautions of the strictest quarantine ought to be set up against it.

I hear on all sides that a cabal calling itself philosophic takes the glory of many of these late proceedings, and that its opinions and systems are the true animating spirit of the whole of them. I have never heard of any party in England, literary or political, known at any time by such a description. It is not composed of those men, is it, whom ordinary people in their blunt, homely style commonly call atheists and infidels? If it is, I admit that we too have had writers of that description, who made some noise in their day. At present they repose in lasting oblivion. Who born within the last forty years has read one word of Collins, and Toland, and Tindal, and Chubb, and Morgan, and that whole race who called themselves freethinkers? Who reads Bolingbroke now? Who ever read him through? Ask the booksellers of London what has become of all these lights of the world. In as few years their few successors will go to the family vault of "all the Capulets". But whatever they were, or are, with us they were and are wholly unconnected individuals. With us they kept the common nature of their kind and were not gregarious. They never acted in a body, nor were they known as a faction in the state, nor did they presume to influence any of our public concerns in that name or character or for the purposes of such a faction. Whether they ought to exist so, and be permitted to act so, is another question. As no such cabals have existed in England, so neither has the spirit of them had any influence in establishing the original frame of our constitution, or in any one of the several repairs and improvements it has undergone. The whole has been done under the auspices, and is confirmed by the sanction, of religion and piety. The whole has come out of the simplicity of our national character, and from a sort of native plainness and directness of understanding which for a long time marked the men who have successively held authority among us. That disposition remains still — at least in the great body of the people.

We know, and, what is better, we feel inwardly, that religion is the basis of civil society and the source of all good and all comfort. In England we are so convinced of this that there is no rust of superstition, with which the accumulated absurdity of the human mind might have crusted it over in the course of ages, that ninety-nine in a hundred of the people of England would not prefer to impiety. We shall never be such fools as to call in an enemy of the substance of any system to remove its corruptions, to supply its defects, or to perfect its construction. If our religious tenets should ever need further explaining, we shall not call on atheism to explain them. We shall not light up our temple from that unhallowed fire. It will be illuminated with other lights. It will be perfumed with other incense than the infectious stuff imported by the smugglers of adulterated metaphysics. If our church establishment should need revision, it is not avarice or rapacity, public or private, that we shall employ to audit or receive or apply its consecrated revenue. Violently condemning neither the Greek nor the Armenian, nor, now that the heats have subsided, the Roman system of religion, we prefer the Protestant — not because we think it has less of the Christian religion in it, but because in our judgment it has more. We are Protestants not from indifference but from zeal.

Footnote: Sit igitur hoc ab initio persuasum civibus, dominos esse omnium rerum ac moderatores deos; eaque, quæ gerantur, eorum geri vi, ditione, ac numine; eosdemque optime de genere hominum mereri; et qualis quisque sit, quid agat, quid in se admittat, qua mente, qua pietate colat religiones intueri: piorum et impiorum habere rationem. His enim rebus imbutæ mentes haud sane abhorrebunt ab utili et a vera sententia. — Cicero, On the Laws, book 2. (Let the citizens be persuaded from the first that the gods are the lords and rulers of all things, that what is done is done by their power and authority, that they are the great benefactors of the human race, and that they observe what each man is, what he does and what he takes upon himself, with what mind and with what piety he keeps the observances of religion — and that they take account of the pious and the impious. Minds steeped in these things will hardly be averse to a useful and a true opinion.)

We know, and it is our pride to know, that man is by his constitution a religious animal; that atheism is against not only our reason but our instincts, and that it cannot prevail for long. But if, in a moment of riot, in a drunken delirium from the hot spirit drawn out of the alembic of hell which is now boiling so furiously in France, we should uncover our nakedness by throwing off the Christian religion, which has been our boast and comfort till now and one great source of civilisation among us and among many other nations, then we are apprehensive — being well aware that the mind will not endure a vacuum — that some uncouth, pernicious and degrading superstition might take its place.

For that reason, before we take away the natural, human means of respect from our establishment and give it up to contempt, as you have done, and in doing it have incurred the penalties you richly deserve to suffer, we ask that something else be presented to us in its place. We shall then form our judgment.

On these ideas, instead of quarrelling with establishments, as some do who have made a philosophy and a religion out of their hostility to such institutions, we cleave closely to them. We are resolved to keep an established church, an established monarchy, an established aristocracy and an established democracy, each in the degree in which it exists, and in no greater. I shall show you presently how much of each of these we possess.

It has been the misfortune of this age — not, as these gentlemen think it, its glory — that everything is to be argued about, as if the constitution of our country were always to be a subject of altercation rather than of enjoyment. For that reason, and also for the satisfaction of any among you who may wish to profit by examples, I venture to trouble you with a few thoughts on each of these establishments. I do not think they were unwise in ancient Rome, who, when they wanted to remodel their laws, sent commissioners to examine the best-constituted republics within their reach.
