Section Ten: The Church Establishment, and the Seizure of Its Property

(Part 1 of 5)

First let me speak of our church establishment, which is the first of our prejudices — not a prejudice destitute of reason, but one with profound and far-reaching wisdom wrapped up in it. I speak of it first. It is first and last and midmost in our minds. For taking our stand on the religious system we are now in possession of, we go on acting on the sense of mankind, early received and uniformly continued. That sense has not only, like a wise architect, built up the august fabric of states; like a provident owner, to preserve the structure from profanation and ruin as a sacred temple purged of all the impurities of fraud and violence and injustice and tyranny, it has solemnly and for ever consecrated the commonwealth and everyone who officiates in it. This consecration is made so that all who administer the government of men — in which they stand in the person of God Himself — should have high and worthy notions of their function and their destination; so that their hope should be full of immortality; so that they should look not to the paltry pelf of the moment, nor to the temporary and passing praise of ordinary people, but to a solid, permanent existence in the permanent part of their nature, and to a permanent fame and glory in the example they leave as a rich inheritance to the world.

Such sublime principles ought to be infused into persons in exalted situations, and religious establishments provided that will continually revive and enforce them. Every sort of moral, every sort of civil, every sort of political institution that aids the rational and natural ties connecting the human understanding and affections to the divine is no more than necessary to build up that wonderful structure, Man — whose prerogative it is to be to a great degree a creature of his own making, and who, when he is made as he ought to be made, is destined to hold no trivial place in the creation. But whenever a man is set over men, as the better nature ought always to preside, in that case above all he should be brought as near to his perfection as possible.

The consecration of the state by a state religious establishment is also necessary in order to work a wholesome awe upon free citizens; because to secure their freedom they must enjoy some definite portion of power. To them, therefore, a religion connected with the state and with their duty towards it becomes even more necessary than it is in societies where the people, by the terms of their subjection, are confined to private sentiments and the management of their own family concerns. Everyone possessing any portion of power ought to be strongly and awfully impressed with the idea that they act in trust, and that they must account for their conduct in that trust to the one great Master, Author and Founder of society.

This principle ought to be impressed even more strongly on the minds of those who make up the collective sovereignty than on the minds of single princes. Without instruments those princes can do nothing. Whoever uses instruments, in finding helps, finds impediments as well. Their power is therefore by no means complete, nor are they safe in extreme abuse of it. Such persons, however elevated by flattery and arrogance and self-conceit, must be aware that in one way or another, whether positive law covers them or not, they are accountable even here for abusing their trust. If they are not cut off by a rebellion of their people, they may be strangled by the very janissaries kept for their security against every other rebellion. So we have seen the king of France sold by his soldiers for an increase of pay. But where popular authority is absolute and unrestrained, the people have an infinitely greater confidence in their own power, because a far better founded one. They are themselves in great measure their own instruments. They are nearer to their objects. Besides, they are less answerable to one of the greatest controlling powers on earth, the sense of fame and reputation. The share of infamy likely to fall to each individual in a public act is small indeed: the force of opinion works in inverse ratio to the number of those who abuse the power. Their own approval of their own acts has to them the appearance of a public verdict in their favour. A perfect democracy is therefore the most shameless thing in the world. Being the most shameless, it is also the most fearless. No man there fears that he can personally be made subject to punishment. Certainly the people at large never ought to be: for as all punishments are examples made for the preservation of the people at large, the people at large can never become the subject of punishment by any human hand. It is therefore of infinite importance that they should not be allowed to imagine that their will, any more than a king's, is the standard of right and wrong. They ought to be persuaded that they are quite as little entitled, and far less qualified, to use arbitrary power of any kind with safety to themselves; and that therefore they are not, under a false show of liberty, really to exercise an unnatural, inverted domination, tyrannically exacting from those who serve the state not an entire devotion to their interest, which is their right, but an abject submission to their momentary will — extinguishing by that means, in everyone who serves them, all moral principle, all sense of dignity, all use of judgment and all consistency of character, while by the very same process they hand themselves over as a proper, a suitable, but a most contemptible prey to the servile ambition of popular sycophants or courtly flatterers.

Footnote: Quicquid multis peccatur inultum. (Whatever is done wrong by many goes unpunished. — Lucan.)

When the people have emptied themselves of all the appetite of selfish will — which without religion it is utterly impossible they ever should — and when they are conscious that they exercise, and exercise perhaps at a higher link in the chain of delegation, a power which to be legitimate must accord with that eternal, unchangeable law in which will and reason are the same thing, they will be more careful how they place power in base and incapable hands. In naming men to office they will not appoint to the exercise of authority as to a pitiful job, but as to a holy function; not according to their sordid, selfish interest, nor their wanton caprice, nor their arbitrary will. They will confer that power — which any man may well tremble to give or to receive — only on those in whom they can discern that predominant proportion of active virtue and wisdom, taken together and fitted to the charge, which is to be found in the great and unavoidable mixed mass of human imperfections and infirmities.

When they are habitually convinced that no evil can be acceptable, either in the doing or the permitting, to Him whose essence is good, they will be better able to root out of the minds of all magistrates — civil, ecclesiastical or military — anything that bears the least resemblance to a proud and lawless domination.

But one of the first and most leading principles on which the commonwealth and the laws are consecrated is this: that the temporary possessors and life-tenants in it, forgetting what they have received from their ancestors or what is owed to their posterity, should not act as if they were the outright masters; that they should not think it among their rights to cut off the entail or commit waste on the inheritance, destroying at their pleasure the whole original fabric of their society, and risking leaving those who come after them a ruin instead of a habitation — teaching those successors to respect their contrivances as little as they had themselves respected the institutions of their forefathers. By this unprincipled readiness to change the state as often and as much and in as many ways as there are floating fancies or fashions, the whole chain and continuity of the commonwealth would be broken; no one generation could link with another; men would become little better than the flies of a summer.

And first of all, the science of jurisprudence, the pride of the human intellect, which with all its defects and redundancies and errors is the collected reason of ages, combining the principles of original justice with the infinite variety of human concerns, would be studied no longer, being treated as a heap of old exploded errors. Personal self-sufficiency and arrogance — the certain attendants on everyone who has never met with a wisdom greater than his own — would usurp the tribunal. Of course there would then be no settled laws establishing invariable grounds of hope and fear to keep men's actions in a certain course or direct them to a certain end. Nothing stable in the ways of holding property or exercising office could give a solid ground for any parent to calculate on in educating his children, or in choosing how they were to be established in the world later. No principles would be worked early into their habits. As soon as the ablest instructor had finished his laborious course of teaching, instead of sending out his pupil accomplished in a virtuous discipline that would win him attention and respect in his place in society, he would find everything altered, and that he had turned out a poor creature for the contempt and derision of the world, ignorant of the true grounds on which anyone is now valued. Who could guarantee that a tender and delicate sense of honour would beat almost with the first pulses of the heart, when no man could know what the test of honour would be in a nation continually varying the standard of its coinage? No part of life would keep what it had gained. Barbarism in science and literature, unskilfulness in the arts and manufactures, would infallibly follow from the want of a steady education and a settled principle; and so the commonwealth itself would in a few generations crumble away, be disconnected into the dust and powder of individuality, and at last be scattered to all the winds of heaven.

To avoid, then, the evils of inconstancy and changeableness, ten thousand times worse than those of obstinacy and the blindest prejudice, we have consecrated the state, so that no man should approach to look into its defects or corruptions except with due caution; so that he should never dream of beginning its reformation by its subversion; so that he should come to the faults of the state as to the wounds of a father, with pious awe and trembling concern. By this wise prejudice we are taught to look with horror on those children of their country who are ready to hack that aged parent rashly in pieces and put him in the magicians' kettle, in hopes that by their poisonous weeds and wild incantations they may regenerate the paternal constitution and renew their father's life.

Society is indeed a contract. Subordinate contracts for objects of merely occasional interest may be dissolved at pleasure; but the state ought not to be considered as nothing better than a partnership agreement in a trade of pepper and coffee, calico or tobacco, or some other such low concern, to be taken up for a little temporary interest and dissolved at the whim of the parties. It is to be looked on with another sort of reverence, because it is not a partnership in things that serve only the gross animal existence of a temporary and perishable nature. It is a partnership in all science, a partnership in all art, a partnership in every virtue and in all perfection. As the ends of such a partnership cannot be reached in many generations, it becomes a partnership not only between those who are living, but between those who are living, those who are dead, and those who are to be born. Each contract of each particular state is only a clause in the great primeval contract of eternal society, linking the lower natures with the higher, connecting the visible and the invisible world, according to a fixed compact sanctioned by the inviolable oath that holds all physical and all moral natures each in its appointed place. This law is not subject to the will of those who, by an obligation above them and infinitely superior to them, are bound to submit their own will to it. The municipal corporations of that universal kingdom are not morally at liberty, at their pleasure and on their speculations about some possible improvement, to separate and tear apart wholesale the bonds of their subordinate community and dissolve it into an unsocial, uncivil, unconnected chaos of elementary principles. Only the first and supreme necessity — a necessity that is not chosen but chooses, a necessity paramount to deliberation, which admits no discussion and demands no evidence — can justify a resort to anarchy. This necessity is no exception to the rule, because the necessity is itself also a part of that moral and physical disposition of things which man must obey by consent or by force. But if what is only submission to necessity is made an object of choice, the law is broken, nature is disobeyed, and the rebels are outlawed, cast out and exiled from this world of reason and order and peace and virtue and fruitful penitence into the opposite world of madness, discord, vice, confusion and unavailing sorrow.

These, my dear Sir, are, and were, and I think long will be, the sentiments of not the least learned and reflecting part of this kingdom. Those included in that description form their opinions on such grounds as such persons ought to form them on. The less inquiring receive them from an authority which men whom Providence dooms to live on trust need not be ashamed to rely on. These two sorts of men move in the same direction, though not in the same place. They both move with the order of the universe. They all know or feel this great ancient truth: "_Quod illi principi et præpotenti Deo qui omnem hunc mundum regit nihil eorum quæ quidem fiant in terris acceptius quam concilia et coetus hominum jure sociati quæ civitates appellantur_" — nothing that is done on earth is more acceptable to that supreme and all-powerful God who rules this whole world than those assemblies and gatherings of men associated under law which are called states. They take this tenet of the head and heart not from the great name it immediately bears, nor from the greater name it is derived from, but from the only thing that can give true weight and sanction to any learned opinion: the common nature and common relation of men. Persuaded that all things ought to be done with reference to a point, and referring everything to the point of reference all things should be directed to, they think themselves bound to renew the memory of their high origin and lineage not only as individuals in the sanctuary of the heart, or gathered together in that personal capacity, but also in their corporate character, to perform their national homage to the Institutor and Author and Protector of civil society — without which civil society man could not possibly reach the perfection his nature is capable of, nor even make a remote and faint approach to it. They conceive that He who gave us our nature to be perfected by our virtue also willed the necessary means of its perfection: He willed, therefore, the state; He willed its connection with the source and original archetype of all perfection. Those who are convinced of this His will, which is the law of laws and the sovereign of sovereigns, cannot think it blameworthy that this corporate fealty and homage of ours, this recognition of a paramount lordship — I had almost said this offering up of the state itself as a worthy oblation on the high altar of universal praise — should be performed, as all public, solemn acts are performed, in buildings, in music, in decoration, in speech, in the dignity of persons, according to the customs of mankind as their nature has taught them: that is, with modest splendour, with unassuming state, with mild majesty and sober pomp. For those purposes they think some part of the wealth of the country is as usefully employed as it could be in feeding the luxury of individuals. It is the public ornament. It is the public consolation. It nourishes the public hope. The poorest man finds his own importance and dignity in it, whereas the wealth and pride of individuals at every moment makes the man of humble rank and fortune feel his inferiority, and degrades and cheapens his condition. It is for the man in humble life, to raise his nature and to remind him of a state in which the privileges of wealth will cease, where he will be equal by nature and may be more than equal by virtue, that this portion of his country's general wealth is employed and sanctified.

I assure you I do not aim at singularity. I am giving you opinions that have been accepted among us from very early times to this moment, with a continued and general approval, and which are indeed so worked into my mind that I cannot distinguish what I have learned from others from the results of my own reflection.

It is on some such principles that the majority of the people of England, far from thinking a national religious establishment unlawful, hardly think it lawful to be without one. In France you are wholly mistaken if you do not believe us attached to it above all other things and beyond all other nations; and where this people has acted unwisely and unjustifiably in its favour, as in some instances they most certainly have, you will at least discover their zeal in their very errors.

This principle runs through their whole system of politics. They do not regard their church establishment as convenient but as essential to their state — not as something foreign and separable, added on for convenience, which they may either keep up or lay aside according to their notions of the moment. They regard it as the foundation of their whole constitution, with which, and with every part of which, it holds an indissoluble union. Church and state are inseparable ideas in their minds, and the one is scarcely ever mentioned without the other.

Our education is so shaped as to confirm and fix this impression. Our education is in a manner wholly in the hands of clergymen, at every stage from infancy to manhood. Even when our young men leave schools and universities and enter that most important period of life when experience and study begin to link together, and when with that in view they visit other countries, three quarters of those who go abroad with our young nobility and gentlemen are clergymen — not as austere masters, nor as mere attendants, but as friends and companions of a graver cast, and not seldom men as well born as themselves. Instead of the old family servants we have seen acting as governors to leading men from other parts of Europe, we send these; and with them, as with relations, our young men commonly keep up a close connection through life. By this connection we conceive that we attach our gentlemen to the church, and that we liberalise the church by its intercourse with the leading characters of the country.

We are so tenacious of the old ecclesiastical forms and fashions of instruction that very little alteration has been made in them since the fourteenth or fifteenth century, adhering in this as in everything else to our old settled maxim, never to depart from antiquity entirely or all at once. We found these old institutions on the whole favourable to morality and discipline, and we thought they could be amended without altering the ground they stood on. We thought they were capable of receiving and improving, and above all of preserving, the additions of science and literature as the order of Providence should successively produce them. And after all, with this Gothic and monkish education — for such it is in its groundwork — we may put in our claim to as ample and as early a share in all the improvements in science, in the arts and in literature that have illuminated and adorned the modern world as any other nation in Europe: and we think one main cause of that improvement was our not despising the patrimony of knowledge our forefathers left us.

It is because of our attachment to a church establishment that the English nation did not think it wise to entrust that great fundamental interest of the whole to what they entrust no part of their civil or military public service to — that is, to the unsteady and precarious contributions of individuals. They go further. They certainly never have allowed, and never will allow, the fixed estate of the church to be converted into a pension, dependent on the Treasury, to be delayed, withheld, or perhaps extinguished by fiscal difficulties — difficulties that may sometimes be pretended for political purposes, and are in fact often brought on by the extravagance, negligence and rapacity of politicians. The people of England think they have constitutional motives, as well as religious ones, against any scheme for turning their independent clergy into ecclesiastical pensioners of the state. They tremble for their liberty at the thought of the influence of a clergy dependent on the crown; they tremble for the public peace at the thought of the disorders of a factious clergy, if it were made to depend on anything other than the crown. They therefore made their church, like their king and their nobility, independent.

Out of these united considerations of religion and constitutional policy, and out of their sense of a duty to make sure provision for the consolation of the feeble and the instruction of the ignorant, they have incorporated and identified the estate of the church with the mass of _private property_, of which the state is not the owner, either for use or for dominion, but only the guardian and the regulator. They have provided that the endowment of this establishment should be as stable as the earth it stands on, and should not fluctuate with the tides of stocks and shares.

The men of England — I mean the men of light and leading in England, whose wisdom, if they have any, is open and direct — would be ashamed, as of a silly and deceitful trick, to profess a religion in name that by their proceedings they plainly despise. If by their conduct, the only language that rarely lies, they seemed to regard the great ruling principle of the moral and natural world as a mere invention for keeping ordinary people in obedience, they think they would defeat the political purpose they had in view by such conduct. They would find it difficult to make others believe in a system they visibly gave no credit to themselves. The Christian statesmen of this land would indeed provide first for the _multitude_, because it is the _multitude_, and is therefore as such the first object of the ecclesiastical institution and of all institutions. They have been taught that the fact of the Gospel's being preached to the poor was one of the great tests of its true mission. They think, therefore, that those who do not take care that it should be preached to the poor do not believe it. But since they know that charity is not confined to any one description of people but ought to apply itself to all who have wants, they are not deprived of a due and anxious feeling of pity for the distresses of the miserable great. They are not repelled by a fastidious delicacy, by the stench of their arrogance and presumption, from giving a medicinal attention to their mental blotches and running sores. They are aware that religious instruction is of more consequence to those people than to any others: from the greatness of the temptation they are exposed to; from the important consequences that attend their faults; from the contagion of their bad example; from the necessity of bending the stubborn neck of their pride and ambition to the yoke of moderation and virtue; and from a consideration of the fat stupidity and gross ignorance about what it most concerns men to know which prevails at courts, and at the head of armies, and in senates, quite as much as at the loom and in the field.

The English people are satisfied that to the great the consolations of religion are as necessary as its instructions. They too are among the unhappy. They feel personal pain and domestic sorrow. In these they have no privilege, but must pay their full share of the levy imposed on mortality. They want this sovereign balm under their gnawing cares and anxieties, which, being less taken up with the limited wants of animal life, range without limit and are varied by infinite combinations in the wild and unbounded regions of the imagination. Some charitable dole is needed by these, our often very unhappy brethren, to fill the gloomy void that reigns in minds with nothing on earth to hope or fear; something to relieve the killing languor and overworked lassitude of people who have nothing to do; something to excite an appetite for existence in the jaded satiety that attends all pleasures which can be bought, where nature is not left to her own process, where even desire is anticipated and so enjoyment is defeated by studied schemes and contrivances of delight, and no interval and no obstacle is put between the wish and its accomplishment.

The people of England know how little influence the teachers of religion are likely to have with the wealthy and powerful of long standing, and how much less with the newly fortunate, if they appear in a style in no way matched to those they must associate with, and over whom they must in some cases exercise something like an authority. What are people to think of a body of teachers if they see no part of it above the level of their own household servants? If the poverty were voluntary there might be some difference. Strong instances of self-denial work powerfully on our minds, and a man who has no wants has gained great freedom and firmness and even dignity. But since the mass of any description of men are only men, and their poverty cannot be voluntary, the disrespect that attends all lay poverty will not spare the ecclesiastical kind. Our provident constitution has therefore taken care that those who are to instruct presumptuous ignorance, and to be censors over insolent vice, should neither incur their contempt nor live on their alms; nor will it tempt the rich to neglect the true medicine of their minds. For these reasons, while we provide first for the poor, and with a parental solicitude, we have not banished religion, like something we were ashamed to be seen with, to obscure municipalities or rustic villages. No: we will have her raise her mitred head in courts and parliaments. We will have her mixed through the whole mass of life and blended with all the classes of society. The people of England will show the haughty potentates of the world and their talking sophisters that a free, a generous, an informed nation honours the high magistrates of its church; that it will not allow the insolence of wealth and titles, or any other species of proud pretension, to look down with scorn on what they look up to with reverence, nor presume to trample on that acquired personal nobility which they intend always to be, and which often is, the fruit — not the reward, for what could be the reward? — of learning, piety and virtue. They can see an archbishop walk before a duke without pain or grudging. They can see a bishop of Durham or a bishop of Winchester in possession of ten thousand pounds a year, and cannot conceive why it is in worse hands than estates of the same value in the hands of this earl or that squire; although it may be true that the bishop does not keep so many dogs and horses, fed with the food that ought to nourish the children of the people. It is true that the whole church revenue is not always employed, down to the last shilling, in charity, nor perhaps ought it to be; but some of it generally is. It is better to cherish virtue and humanity by leaving much to free will, even at some loss to the object, than to try to make men mere machines and instruments of a political benevolence. The world on the whole will gain by a liberty without which virtue cannot exist.

Once the commonwealth has established the estates of the church as property, it can consistently hear nothing about more or less. Too much and too little are alike treason against property. What evil can arise from the quantity in any one hand, while the supreme authority has full sovereign oversight of this, as of any property, to prevent every species of abuse — and, whenever it notably goes astray, to give it a direction agreeable to the purposes it was instituted for?

In England most of us think it is envy and malignity towards men who are often the founders of their own fortune, and not any love of the self-denial and mortification of the ancient church, that makes some people look askance at the distinctions and honours and revenues which, taken from nobody, are set apart for virtue. The ears of the people of England can tell the difference. They hear these men speak broad. Their tongue betrays them. Their language is the _patois_ of fraud, the cant and gibberish of hypocrisy. The people of England must think so when these praters pretend to carry the clergy back to that primitive evangelical poverty which in spirit ought always to exist in them — and in us too, however little we may like it — but which in the fact must vary when the relation of that body to the state is altered, when manners, when modes of life, when indeed the whole order of human affairs has undergone a total revolution. We shall believe these reformers to be honest enthusiasts, instead of thinking them, as we now do, cheats and deceivers, when we see them throwing their own goods into the common stock and submitting their own persons to the austere discipline of the early church.

With these ideas rooted in their minds, the Commons of Great Britain will never in a national emergency look for their resource in confiscating the estates of the church and the poor. Sacrilege and proscription are not among the ways and means of our Committee of Supply. The Jews in Change Alley have not yet dared to hint at their hopes of a mortgage on the revenues belonging to the see of Canterbury. I am not afraid of being disavowed when I assure you that there is not _one_ public man in this kingdom whom you would care to quote — no, not one, of any party or description — who does not condemn the dishonest, perfidious and cruel confiscation the National Assembly has been driven to make of that property which it was their first duty to protect.

It is with the exultation of a little national pride that I tell you those among us who wished to pledge the societies of Paris in the cup of their abominations have been disappointed. The robbery of your church has proved a security to the possessions of ours. It has roused the people. They see that enormous and shameless act of proscription with horror and alarm. It has opened their eyes, and will open them more and more, to the selfish enlargement of mind and the narrow liberality of sentiment of insidious men, who, beginning in close hypocrisy and fraud, have ended in open violence and plunder. At home we see similar beginnings. We are on our guard against similar conclusions.

I hope we shall never be so utterly lost to all sense of the duties the law of social union imposes on us as to confiscate the goods of a single unoffending citizen on any pretext of public service. Who but a tyrant — a name that expresses everything which can vitiate and degrade human nature — could think of seizing the property of men unaccused, unheard, untried, by whole descriptions, by hundreds and thousands together? Who that had not lost every trace of humanity could think of casting men of exalted rank and sacred function, some of them of an age to call at once for reverence and compassion, down from the highest situation in the commonwealth, where they were maintained by their own landed property, into a state of poverty, depression and contempt?

The confiscators have indeed made their victims some allowance out of the scraps and fragments of their own tables, from which they have been so harshly driven, and which have been spread so bountifully as a feast for the harpies of usury. But to drive men from independence to living on alms is itself a great cruelty. What might be a tolerable condition for men in one state of life, unaccustomed to anything else, may, when all those circumstances are altered, be a dreadful revolution — one that a virtuous mind would feel pain in condemning any guilt to, except a guilt that would demand the offender's life. But to many minds this punishment of _degradation_ and _infamy_ is worse than death. Undoubtedly it is an infinite aggravation of this cruel suffering that the persons who were taught a double prejudice in favour of religion, by their education and by the place they held in administering its functions, are to receive the remnants of their property as alms from the profane and impious hands of the men who plundered them of all the rest — to receive, if they are to receive at all, the maintenance of religion not from the charitable contributions of the faithful but from the insolent tenderness of known and avowed atheism, measured out to them on the scale of the contempt in which religion is held, and for the purpose of rendering those who take the allowance vile and of no account in the eyes of mankind.
