Section Ten: The Church Establishment, and the Seizure of Its Property

(Part 3 of 5)

The madness of the confiscation project, on the plan first pretended, soon became apparent. To bring this unwieldy mass of landed property, enlarged by the confiscation of the whole vast landed domain of the crown, onto the market all at once was obviously to defeat the profits the confiscation was meant to produce, by depreciating the value of those lands and indeed of all the landed estates throughout France. Such a sudden diversion of all the country's circulating money from trade into land must be a further mischief. What step was taken? Did the Assembly, on becoming aware of the inevitable ill effects of their projected sale, go back to the offers of the clergy? No distress could oblige them to travel by a road disgraced by any appearance of justice. Giving up all hope of a general immediate sale, another project seems to have succeeded. They proposed to take stock in exchange for the church lands. Great difficulties arose in that project over equalising the things to be exchanged. Other obstacles presented themselves too, which threw them back on some scheme of sale. The municipalities had taken alarm. They would not hear of transferring the whole plunder of the kingdom to the stockholders in Paris. Many of those municipalities had been reduced, and reduced by system, to the most deplorable poverty. Money was nowhere to be seen. They were therefore brought to the point that was so ardently desired. They panted for a currency of any kind that might revive their perishing industry. The municipalities were then to be admitted to a share of the spoil, which plainly made the first scheme, if it had ever been seriously entertained, altogether impracticable. Public needs pressed on every side. The Minister of Finance repeated his call for supply in a most urgent, anxious and foreboding voice. Pressed on all sides in this way, instead of the first plan of converting their bankers into bishops and abbots, and instead of paying the old debt, they contracted a new one at three per cent, creating a new paper currency founded on an eventual sale of the church lands. They issued this paper currency to satisfy, in the first instance, chiefly the demands made on them by the _bank of discount_, the great machine or paper-mill of their fictitious wealth.

The spoil of the church had now become the only resource for all their operations in finance, the vital principle of all their politics, the sole security for the existence of their power. It was necessary, by every means including the most violent, to put every individual on the same footing and to bind the nation together in one guilty interest to uphold this act and the authority of the men who did it. In order to force the most reluctant into a share of their pillage, they made their paper circulation compulsory in all payments. Anyone who considers the general tendency of their schemes towards this one object as a centre, and as a centre from which all their later measures radiate, will not think I dwell too long on this part of the National Assembly's proceedings.

To cut off all appearance of connection between the crown and public justice, and to bring the whole under implicit obedience to the dictators in Paris, the old independent judicature of the Parlements, with all its merits and all its faults, was wholly abolished. While the Parlements existed it was clear that the people might one day resort to them and rally under the standard of their ancient laws. It became a matter for consideration, however, that the magistrates and officers of the courts now abolished _had purchased their places_ at a very high price, for which — as well as for the duty they performed — they received only a very low return of interest. Simple confiscation is a favour reserved for the clergy; towards the lawyers some appearances of equity are to be kept up, and they are to receive compensation to an immense amount. Their compensation becomes part of the national debt, for the liquidation of which there is the one inexhaustible fund. The lawyers are to have their compensation in the new church paper, which is to march in step with the new principles of judicature and legislature. The dismissed magistrates are to take their share of martyrdom with the clergy, or else to receive their own property out of such a fund and in such a manner as everyone seasoned in the ancient principles of jurisprudence, and sworn to guard property, must look on with horror. Even the clergy are to receive their miserable allowance out of the depreciated paper, stamped with the indelible character of sacrilege and with the symbols of their own ruin — or else they must starve. So violent an outrage on credit, property and liberty as this compulsory paper currency has seldom been exhibited by the alliance of bankruptcy and tyranny in any age or any nation.

In the course of all these operations the grand _arcanum_ at last comes out: that in reality, and in any fair sense, the lands of the church, so far as anything certain can be gathered from their proceedings, are not to be sold at all. By the late resolutions of the National Assembly they are indeed to be delivered to the highest bidder. But it is to be observed that _a certain portion only of the purchase-money is to be laid down_. A period of twelve years is to be allowed for paying the rest. The philosophic purchasers are therefore to be put instantly into possession of the estate on payment of a sort of fine. It becomes in some respects a kind of gift to them, to be held on the feudal tenure of zeal for the new establishment. This project is plainly meant to let in a body of purchasers who have no money. The consequence will be that these purchasers, or rather grantees, will pay not only out of the rents as they fall due, which the state might just as well receive itself, but out of the spoil of building materials, out of waste committed in the woods, and out of whatever money hands habituated to the grip of usury can wring from the miserable peasant. He is to be handed over to the mercenary and arbitrary discretion of men who will be spurred to every species of extortion by the growing demands on the growing profits of an estate held under the precarious settlement of a new political system.

When all the frauds, impostures, violences, robberies, burnings, murders, confiscations, compulsory paper currencies and every description of tyranny and cruelty used to bring about and uphold this Revolution have their natural effect — that is, to shock the moral feelings of all virtuous and sober minds — the supporters of this philosophic system immediately strain their throats declaiming against the old monarchical government of France. When they have made that deposed power sufficiently black, they then argue as though everyone who disapproves of their new abuses must of course be a partisan of the old, and as though those who condemn their crude and violent schemes of liberty ought to be treated as advocates of servitude. I admit that their necessities do compel them to this base and contemptible fraud. Nothing can reconcile men to their proceedings and projects but the supposition that there is no third option between them and some tyranny as odious as anything the records of history or the invention of poets can supply. This prattle of theirs hardly deserves the name of sophistry. It is nothing but plain impudence. Have these gentlemen never heard, in the whole circle of the worlds of theory and practice, of anything between the despotism of a monarch and the despotism of a multitude? Have they never heard of a monarchy directed by laws, controlled and balanced by the great hereditary wealth and hereditary dignity of a nation, and both of these controlled again by a judicious check from the reason and feeling of the people at large, acting through a suitable and permanent organ? Is it impossible, then, that a man might be found who, without criminal ill intention or pitiable absurdity, prefers such a mixed and tempered government to either extreme — and who may think that nation destitute of all wisdom and all virtue which, having it in its power to obtain such a government easily, _or rather to confirm it when actually possessed_, chose instead to commit a thousand crimes and to subject their country to a thousand evils in order to avoid it? Is it a truth so universally acknowledged that a pure democracy is the only tolerable form human society can be cast in, that a man is not allowed to hesitate about its merits without being suspected of being a friend to tyranny — that is, an enemy of mankind?

I do not know what to call the present ruling authority in France. It professes to be a pure democracy, though I think it is in a direct line to become shortly a mischievous and ignoble oligarchy. But for the present I will grant it to be a contrivance of the nature and effect it pretends to. I condemn no form of government on merely abstract principles. There may be situations in which the purely democratic form becomes necessary. There may be some — very few, and very particularly circumstanced — where it would be clearly desirable. I do not take this to be the case of France, or of any other great country. Until now we have seen no examples of considerable democracies. The ancients knew them better. Not being wholly unread in the authors who saw most of those constitutions and understood them best, I cannot help agreeing with their opinion that an absolute democracy, no more than an absolute monarchy, is to be reckoned among the legitimate forms of government. They think it rather the corruption and degeneracy of a republic than its sound constitution. If I remember rightly, Aristotle observes that a democracy has many striking points of resemblance to a tyranny. Of this I am certain: that in a democracy the majority of the citizens is capable of exercising the cruellest oppression on the minority, whenever strong divisions prevail in that kind of polity, as they often must — and that the oppression of the minority will extend to far greater numbers, and will be carried on with much greater fury, than can almost ever be feared from the dominion of a single sceptre. In such a popular persecution, individual sufferers are in a far more deplorable condition than in any other. Under a cruel prince they have the balmy compassion of mankind to soothe the smart of their wounds, and the applause of the people to encourage their generous constancy under their sufferings; but those who are wronged by multitudes are deprived of all outside consolation. They seem deserted by mankind, overpowered by a conspiracy of their whole species.

Footnote: When I wrote this I quoted from memory, many years after reading the passage. A learned friend has found it, and it is as follows: τὸ ἠ̂θος τὸ αὐτό, καὶ ἄμφω δεσποτικὰ τω̂ν βελτιόνων, καὶ τὰ ψηφίσματα ὥσπερ ἐκει̂ τὰ ἐπιτάγματα, καὶ ὁ δημαγωγὸς καὶ ὁ κόλαξ οἱ αὐτοὶ καὶ ἀνάλογον. καὶ μάλιστα δ' ἑκάτεροι παρ' ἑκατέροις ἰσχύουσιν, οἱ μὲν κόλακες παρὰ τοι̂ς τυράννοις, οἱ δὲ δημαγωγοὶ παρὰ τοι̂ς δήμοις τοι̂ς τοιούτοις. "The ethical character is the same: both exercise despotism over the better class of citizens; and decrees are in the one what ordinances and arrêts are in the other. The demagogue, too, and the court favourite are not infrequently the same men, and always bear a close analogy; and these have the principal power, each in their respective forms of government — favourites with the absolute monarch, and demagogues with a people such as I have described." — Aristotle, Politics, book 4, chapter 4.

But suppose democracy does not have that inevitable tendency to party tyranny which I take it to have, and suppose it possesses as much good when unmixed as I am sure it possesses when compounded with other forms. Does monarchy, on its side, contain nothing at all to recommend it? I do not often quote Bolingbroke, nor have his works in general left any lasting impression on my mind. He is a presumptuous and a superficial writer. But he has one observation that is in my opinion not without depth and solidity. He says he prefers a monarchy to other governments because you can graft any description of republic on a monarchy better than you can graft anything of monarchy on the republican forms. I think he is perfectly right. The fact is so historically, and it agrees well with the theory.

I know how easy a subject it is to dwell on the faults of departed greatness. By a revolution in the state, yesterday's fawning sycophant is converted into the austere critic of the present hour. But steady, independent minds, when they have something of such serious concern to mankind as government under consideration, will disdain to play the satirist and the declaimer. They will judge human institutions as they judge human characters. They will sort the good from the evil, which is mixed in mortal institutions as it is in mortal men.

Your government in France, though usually and I think justly reputed the best of the unqualified or ill-qualified monarchies, was still full of abuses. Those abuses accumulated over a length of time, as they must accumulate in every monarchy that is not under the constant inspection of a popular representative body. I am no stranger to the faults and defects of the overthrown government of France, and I do not think I am inclined either by nature or by policy to write a panegyric on anything that is a just and natural object of censure. But the question now is not about the vices of that monarchy but about its existence. Is it true, then, that the French government was such as to be incapable of reform or undeserving of it, so that it was of absolute necessity that the whole fabric should be pulled down at once and the ground cleared for putting up a theoretical, experimental building in its place? All France was of a different opinion at the beginning of the year 1789. The instructions given to the representatives at the States-General, from every district in that kingdom, were full of projects for reforming that government, without the remotest hint of any design to destroy it. Had such a design been so much as insinuated then, I believe there would have been but one voice, and that voice would have rejected it with scorn and horror. Men have sometimes been led by degrees, and sometimes hurried, into things they would never have allowed the remotest approach to if they could have seen the whole of them together. When those instructions were given there was no question that abuses existed and that they demanded reform, nor is there now. In the interval between the instructions and the Revolution things changed their shape; and in consequence of that change, the true question now is whether those who would have reformed or those who have destroyed are in the right.

To hear some men speak of the late monarchy of France, you would imagine they were talking about Persia bleeding under the ferocious sword of Nadir Shah, or at least describing the barbarous anarchic despotism of Turkey, where the finest countries in the most genial climates in the world are wasted by peace more than any countries have been harried by war, where the arts are unknown, where manufactures languish, where science is extinguished, where agriculture decays, where the human race itself melts away and perishes under the observer's eye. Was this the case of France? I have no way of settling the question except by reference to facts, and the facts do not support the resemblance. Along with much evil there is some good in monarchy itself; and the French monarchy must have received some correction of its evil from religion, from laws, from manners and from opinion, which made it a despotism rather in appearance than in reality — though by no means a free, and therefore by no means a good, constitution.

Among the standards by which the effects of a government on any country are to be estimated, I must count the state of its population as not the least reliable. No country in which population flourishes and is progressively improving can be under a _very_ mischievous government. About sixty years ago the intendants of the généralités of France made, among other matters, a report on the population of their several districts. I have not the books by me, which are very voluminous, nor do I know where to get them — I am obliged to speak from memory, and therefore the less positively — but I think the population of France was estimated by them, even at that period, at twenty-two million souls. At the end of the last century it had generally been reckoned at eighteen. On either of these estimates France was not ill-peopled. M. Necker, whose authority for his own time is at least equal to that of the intendants for theirs, reckons the people of France in the year 1780, and on apparently sure principles, at twenty-four million six hundred and seventy thousand. But was this the probable ultimate limit under the old establishment? Dr Price is of the opinion that the growth of population in France was by no means at its height in that year. I certainly defer to Dr Price's authority a good deal more in these calculations than I do in his general politics. This gentleman, taking his ground on M. Necker's data, is very confident that since the date of that minister's calculation the French population has increased rapidly — so rapidly that in the year 1789 he will not agree to rate the people of that kingdom at less than thirty millions. After making a large deduction from Dr Price's sanguine calculation, and I think a large one ought to be made, I have no doubt the population of France did increase considerably during this later period. But suppose it increased by no more than enough to bring the twenty-four million six hundred and seventy thousand up to twenty-five millions: still a population of twenty-five millions, and increasing, on a space of about twenty-seven thousand square leagues, is immense. It is, for instance, a good deal more than the proportional population of this island, or even than that of England, the best-peopled part of the United Kingdom.

It is not universally true that France is a fertile country. Considerable tracts of it are barren and labour under other natural disadvantages. In those parts of that territory where things are more favourable, so far as I can discover, the numbers of the people correspond to the indulgence of nature. The généralité of Lille — this, I admit, is the strongest example — about ten years ago contained seven hundred and thirty-four thousand six hundred souls on an extent of four hundred and four and a half leagues, which is one thousand seven hundred and seventy-two inhabitants to each square league. The average for the rest of France is about nine hundred inhabitants to the same measure.

Footnote: De l'Administration des Finances de la France, by M. Necker, volume 1, page 288.

I do not attribute this population to the deposed government, because I do not like to compliment the contrivances of men with what is largely due to the bounty of Providence. But that decried government cannot have obstructed, and most probably favoured, the operation of those causes — whatever they were, whether of nature in the soil or of habits of industry among the people — which have produced so large a number of the species throughout that whole kingdom, and in some particular places such prodigies of population. I will never suppose that the fabric of a state which experience shows to contain a principle favourable to the increase of mankind, however latent that principle may be, is the worst of all political institutions.

The wealth of a country is another and no contemptible standard by which we may judge whether a government is on the whole protective or destructive. France far exceeds England in the multitude of her people, but I take her comparative wealth to be much inferior to ours, less equal in its distribution and less ready in its circulation. I believe the difference in the form of the two governments to be among the causes of this advantage on England's side. I speak of England, not of the whole British dominions, which if compared with those of France would to some degree weaken the comparative rate of wealth on our side. But wealth that will not bear comparison with the riches of England may still amount to a very respectable degree of prosperity. M. Necker's book, published in 1785, contains an accurate and interesting collection of facts about public economy and political arithmetic, and his reflections on the subject are generally wise and liberal. In that work he gives an idea of the state of France very remote from the portrait of a country whose government was a perfect grievance, an absolute evil, admitting no cure but the violent and uncertain remedy of a total revolution. He states that from the year 1726 to the year 1784 there was coined at the mint of France, in gold and silver, to the amount of about one hundred million pounds sterling.

Footnote: De l'Administration des Finances de la France, by M. Necker.

Footnote: Volume 3, chapters 8 and 9.

It is impossible that M. Necker should be mistaken about the amount of bullion coined at the mint. That is a matter of official record. This able financier's reasonings about the quantity of gold and silver that remained in circulation when he wrote in 1785 — about four years before the deposition and imprisonment of the French king — are not equally certain; but they rest on grounds so apparently solid that it is not easy to refuse a considerable degree of assent to his calculation. He puts the _numéraire_, or what we call _specie_, then actually existing in France at about eighty-eight millions of the same English money. A great accumulation of wealth for one country, large as that country is! So far was M. Necker from thinking this influx of wealth likely to cease when he wrote in 1785, that he assumes a future annual increase of two per cent on the money brought into France during the periods he computed from.

Some adequate cause must originally have brought all the money coined at its mint into that kingdom, and some cause equally effective must have kept at home, or drawn back into its bosom, such a vast flood of treasure as M. Necker calculates to remain for domestic circulation. Make any reasonable deductions from M. Necker's computation, and the remainder must still amount to an immense sum. Causes powerful enough to acquire and to retain like this are not to be found in discouraged industry, insecure property and a positively destructive government. Indeed, when I consider the face of the kingdom of France, the multitude and wealth of her cities, the useful magnificence of her spacious highroads and bridges, the opportunity of her artificial canals and navigations opening the conveniences of sea communication through a solid continent of such immense extent; when I turn my eyes to the stupendous works of her ports and harbours and to her whole naval apparatus, whether for war or for trade; when I bring before my view the number of her fortifications, built with such bold and masterly skill and made and maintained at such prodigious cost, presenting an armed front and an impenetrable barrier to her enemies on every side; when I recall how very small a part of that extensive region is uncultivated, and to what complete perfection the growing of many of the best productions of the earth has been brought in France; when I reflect on the excellence of her manufactures and fabrics, second to none but ours and in some particulars not second; when I contemplate the grand foundations of charity, public and private; when I survey the state of all the arts that beautify and polish life; when I count up the men she has bled to extend her fame in war, her able statesmen, the multitude of her profound lawyers and theologians, her philosophers, her critics, her historians and antiquaries, her poets and her orators, sacred and profane — I see in all this something that awes and commands the imagination, that checks the mind on the brink of hasty and indiscriminate censure, and that demands we should examine very seriously what and how great the latent vices are that could authorise us to level so spacious a fabric with the ground all at once. I do not recognise in this view of things the despotism of Turkey. Nor do I discern the character of a government that has been on the whole so oppressive, or so corrupt, or so negligent, as to be utterly unfit _for all reformation_. I must think such a government well deserved to have its excellences heightened, its faults corrected and its capacities improved into a British constitution.

Whoever has examined the proceedings of that deposed government over several years back cannot fail to have noticed, amid the inconstancy and fluctuation natural to courts, an earnest effort towards the prosperity and improvement of the country. He must admit that it had long been employed in removing some abusive practices and usages that had prevailed in the state, and in considerably correcting many others — and that even the unlimited power of the sovereign over the persons of his subjects, inconsistent as it undoubtedly was with law and liberty, had been growing more moderate in its exercise every day. So far from refusing itself to reformation, that government was open, with a blameworthy degree of readiness, to all sorts of projects and projectors on the subject. Rather too much countenance was given to the spirit of innovation, which was soon turned against those who fostered it and ended in their ruin. It is only cold and no very flattering justice to that fallen monarchy to say that for many years it offended more by levity and want of judgment in several of its schemes than by any lack of diligence or public spirit. To compare the government of France over the last fifteen or sixteen years with wise and well-constituted establishments of that or any other period is not to act fairly. But if it is compared with any of the former reigns, in point of prodigality in spending money or of rigour in the exercise of power, I believe candid judges will give little credit to the good intentions of those who dwell perpetually on the gifts to favourites, or the expenses of the court, or the horrors of the Bastille, in the reign of Louis the Sixteenth.

Footnote: The world is obliged to M. de Calonne for the pains he has taken to refute the scandalous exaggerations about some of the royal expenses, and to expose the false account given of pensions, for the wicked purpose of provoking the populace to crimes of every kind.

Whether the system, if it deserves such a name, now built on the ruins of that ancient monarchy will be able to give a better account of the population and wealth of the country it has taken under its care is very doubtful. Instead of improving by the change, I expect that a long series of years must be counted before it can recover in any degree from the effects of this philosophic Revolution, and before the nation can be put back on its former footing. If Dr Price should think fit, a few years from now, to favour us with an estimate of the population of France, he will hardly be able to make up his tale of thirty million souls as computed in 1789, or the Assembly's computation of twenty-six millions for that year, or even M. Necker's twenty-five millions in 1780. I hear that there are considerable emigrations from France, and that many, quitting that voluptuous climate and that seductive Circean liberty, have taken refuge in the frozen regions and under the British despotism of Canada.

With coin disappearing as it now is, nobody would think it the same country in which the present minister of finance was able to discover eighty million pounds sterling in specie. From its general aspect one would conclude it had been for some time past under the special direction of the learned academicians of Laputa and Balnibarbi. The population of Paris has already declined so far that M. Necker stated to the National Assembly that the provision to be made for its subsistence was a fifth less than what had formerly been found necessary. It is said, and I have never heard it contradicted, that a hundred thousand people are out of work in that city, though it has become the seat of the imprisoned court and of the National Assembly. Nothing, I am credibly informed, can exceed the shocking and disgusting spectacle of beggary displayed in that capital. Indeed the votes of the National Assembly leave no doubt of the fact. They have lately appointed a standing committee on begging. They are contriving at once a vigorous police on this subject and, for the first time, the imposition of a tax to maintain the poor, for whose present relief great sums appear on the face of the public accounts for the year. Meanwhile the leaders of the legislative clubs and coffee houses are intoxicated with admiration at their own wisdom and ability. They speak with the most sovereign contempt of the rest of the world. They tell the people, to comfort them in the rags they have clothed them in, that they are a nation of philosophers; and sometimes by all the arts of quackish parade, by show and tumult and bustle, and sometimes by alarms of plots and invasions, they try to drown the cries of poverty and to divert the observer's eyes from the ruin and wretchedness of the state. A brave people will certainly prefer liberty accompanied by a virtuous poverty to a depraved and wealthy servitude. But before the price of comfort and wealth is paid, one ought to be pretty sure that it is real liberty being purchased, and that she is to be had at no other price. I shall always, however, regard that liberty as very equivocal in her appearance which has not wisdom and justice for her companions, and does not lead prosperity and plenty in her train.

Footnote: See Gulliver's Travels for the idea of countries governed by philosophers.

Footnote: M. de Calonne states the falling off of the population of Paris as far more considerable, and it may be so, since the date of M. Necker's calculation.

Footnote: The account stands as follows.

	                                                      Livres        £    s.  d.
	Relief work to make up for the lack of employment,
	   in Paris and in the provinces                    3,866,920   161,121  13   4
	Suppression of vagrancy and begging                 1,671,417    69,642   7   6
	Premiums on the importation of grain                5,671,907   236,329   9   2
	Expenses relating to subsistence, less the
	   recoveries that have been made                  39,871,790 1,661,324  11   8
	                                                   ---------- ---------
	Total                                              51,082,034 2,128,418   1   8

	Editor's note: The source prints the third figure in the sterling
	column as 235,329 9s 2d. Every other row of the table converts at
	exactly twenty-four livres to the pound, and only with 236,329 9s 2d
	does the column add up to the printed total. The figure is corrected.

When I sent this book to the press I had some doubt about the nature and extent of the last item in the accounts above, which appears only under a general head with no detail. Since then I have seen M. de Calonne's work. I must count it a great loss to me that I did not have that advantage earlier. M. de Calonne thinks this item is on account of general subsistence; but as he cannot understand how a loss of more than £1,661,000 sterling could be sustained on the difference between the price and the sale of grain, he seems to attribute this enormous head of charge to secret expenses of the Revolution. I cannot say anything positive on that subject. The reader is able to judge, from the aggregate of these immense charges, of the state and condition of France and of the system of public economy adopted in that nation. These items of account produced no inquiry and no discussion in the National Assembly.

The advocates of this Revolution, not content with exaggerating the vices of their ancient government, strike at the fame of their country itself by painting almost everything that could have attracted the attention of strangers — I mean their nobility and their clergy — as objects of horror. If this were only a libel there would not be much in it. But it has practical consequences. Had your nobility and gentry, who formed the great body of your landed men and the whole of your military officers, resembled those of Germany at the period when the Hanseatic towns were forced to confederate against the nobles in defence of their property; had they been like the Orsini and the Vitelli in Italy, who used to sally out of their fortified dens to rob the trader and the traveller; had they been like the Mamelukes in Egypt or the Nayars on the coast of Malabar — then I do admit that too critical an inquiry into the means of freeing the world from such a nuisance might not be advisable. The statues of Equity and Mercy might be veiled for a moment. The tenderest minds, confounded by the dreadful emergency in which morality submits to the suspension of its own rules in favour of its own principles, might turn aside while fraud and violence accomplished the destruction of a pretended nobility that disgraced human nature while it persecuted it. The persons most abhorrent from blood and treason and arbitrary confiscation might remain silent spectators of this civil war between the vices.
