Section Ten: The Church Establishment, and the Seizure of Its Property

(Part 4 of 5)

But did the privileged nobility who met at Versailles in 1789 under the king's summons, or their constituents, deserve to be looked on as the Nayars or Mamelukes of this age, or as the Orsini and Vitelli of former times? If I had asked the question then, I should have passed for a madman. What have they done since, that they should be driven into exile, that their persons should be hunted about, mangled and tortured, their families dispersed, their houses laid in ashes; that their order should be abolished and its very memory extinguished if possible, by ordering them to change the names they were commonly known by? Read their instructions to their representatives. They breathe the spirit of liberty as warmly, and recommend reformation as strongly, as any other order. Their privileges in the matter of taxation were surrendered voluntarily, just as the king from the beginning surrendered all pretence of a right of taxation. On the question of a free constitution there was only one opinion in France. The absolute monarchy was at an end. It breathed its last without a groan, without a struggle, without a convulsion. All the struggle, all the dissension, arose afterwards, over preferring a despotic democracy to a government of reciprocal control. The victorious party's triumph was a triumph over the principles of a British constitution.

I have noticed the affectation that has prevailed in Paris for many years past, to a degree that is perfectly childish, of idolising the memory of your Henry the Fourth. If anything could put a man out of humour with that ornament of the kingly character, it would be this overdone style of insidious panegyric. The people who have worked this engine the hardest are those who have ended their panegyrics by dethroning his successor and descendant — a man at least as good-natured as Henry the Fourth, altogether as fond of his people, and who has done infinitely more to correct the ancient vices of the state than that great monarch did, or than we can be sure he ever meant to do. It is well for his panegyrists that they do not have him to deal with. For Henry of Navarre was a resolute, active and politic prince. He did possess great humanity and mildness, but a humanity and mildness that never stood in the way of his interests. He never sought to be loved without first putting himself in a position to be feared. He used soft language with determined conduct. He asserted and maintained his authority wholesale, and dealt out his acts of concession only in retail. He spent the income of his prerogative nobly, but he took care not to break into the capital — never abandoning for a moment any of the claims he made under the fundamental laws, and never sparing to shed the blood of those who opposed him, often in the field and sometimes on the scaffold. Because he knew how to make his virtues respected by the ungrateful, he has earned the praises of men whom, if they had lived in his time, he would have shut up in the Bastille and brought to punishment along with the regicides he hanged after he had starved Paris into surrender.

If these panegyrists are in earnest in their admiration of Henry the Fourth, they must remember that they cannot think more highly of him than he thought of the nobility of France, whose virtue, honour, courage, patriotism and loyalty were his constant theme.

But the nobility of France have degenerated since the days of Henry the Fourth. This is possible, but it is more than I can believe to be true to any great degree. I do not pretend to know France as accurately as some others; but I have tried all my life to make myself acquainted with human nature, or I should be unfit to take even my humble part in the service of mankind. In that study I could not pass over a vast portion of our nature as it appeared modified in a country only twenty-four miles from the shore of this island. On my best observation, compared with my best inquiries, I found your nobility for the greater part composed of men of high spirit and a delicate sense of honour, both as individuals and with regard to their whole body, over which they kept a censorial eye beyond what is common in other countries. They were tolerably well bred; very obliging, humane and hospitable; frank and open in conversation; with a good military tone, and reasonably tinctured with literature, particularly the authors in their own language. Many had claims far above this description. I speak of those one generally met with.

As to their behaviour towards the lower classes, they seemed to me to conduct themselves with good nature, and with something nearer to familiarity than is generally practised with us in the dealings between the higher and lower ranks of life. To strike anyone, even in the most abject condition, was in a manner unknown and would be highly disgraceful. Instances of other ill treatment of the humble part of the community were rare; and as to attacks on the property or personal liberty of the commons, I never heard of any at all from _them_ — nor, while the laws were in force under the ancient government, would such tyranny in subjects have been permitted. As landowners I had no fault to find with their conduct, though I found much to blame and much I could wish changed in many of the old tenures. Where they let their land for rent, I could not discover that their agreements with their farmers were oppressive; nor, when they were in partnership with the farmer, as was often the case, have I ever heard that they took the lion's share. The proportions did not seem inequitable. There may have been exceptions, but they were certainly exceptions only. I have no reason to believe that in these respects the landed nobility of France were worse than the landed gentry of this country, and they were certainly in no respect more vexatious than the landholders of their own nation who were not noble. In the cities the nobility had no kind of power; in the country very little. You know, Sir, that much of the civil government, and the policing of the most essential parts of it, was not in the hands of the nobility that presents itself first to our thoughts. The revenue, whose system and collection were the most grievous parts of the French government, was not administered by the men of the sword, nor were they answerable for the vices of its principle, or for the vexations in its management where any such existed.

Denying, as I am well warranted in doing, that the nobility had any considerable share in the oppression of the people in the cases where real oppression existed, I am ready to admit that they were not without considerable faults and errors. A foolish imitation of the worst part of the manners of England, which damaged their natural character without putting in its place what they perhaps meant to copy, has certainly made them worse than they used to be. Habitual dissoluteness of manners, continued beyond the pardonable period of life, was more common among them than it is with us; and it reigned with less hope of remedy, though possibly with somewhat less mischief, by being covered with more outward decorum. They gave too much countenance to that licentious philosophy which has helped to bring on their ruin. There was another and more fatal error among them. Those of the commons who came up to or exceeded many of the nobility in wealth were not fully admitted to the rank and estimation that wealth, in reason and good policy, ought to confer in every country, though I do not think equally with the estimation given to other nobility. The two kinds of aristocracy were kept too punctiliously apart — less so, however, than in Germany and some other nations.

This separation, as I have already taken the liberty of suggesting to you, I take to be one principal cause of the destruction of the old nobility. The military in particular was too exclusively reserved for men of family. But after all, this was an error of opinion, which a conflicting opinion would have rectified. A permanent assembly, in which the commons had their share of power, would soon have abolished whatever was too invidious and insulting in these distinctions; and even the faults in the morals of the nobility would probably have been corrected by the greater variety of occupation and pursuit that a constitution by orders would have given rise to.

All this violent outcry against the nobility I take to be a mere work of art. To be honoured and even privileged by the laws, opinions and inveterate usages of one's country, growing out of the prejudice of ages, has nothing in it to provoke horror and indignation in any man. Even to be too tenacious of those privileges is not absolutely a crime. The strong struggle in every individual to keep possession of what he has found to belong to him and to distinguish him is one of the securities against injustice and despotism implanted in our nature. It works as an instinct to secure property and to keep communities in a settled state. What is there to shock anyone in this? Nobility is a graceful ornament to the civil order. It is the Corinthian capital of polished society. "_Omnes boni nobilitati semper favemus_" — all good men always favour the nobility — was the saying of a wise and good man. It is indeed one sign of a liberal and benevolent mind to incline towards it with some sort of partial leaning. A man feels no ennobling principle in his own heart who wishes to level all the artificial institutions that have been adopted to give a body to opinion and permanence to fleeting esteem. It is a sour, malignant, envious disposition, with no taste for the reality of virtue or for any image or representation of it, that sees with joy the unmerited fall of what had long flourished in splendour and honour. I do not like to see anything destroyed, any void produced in society, any ruin on the face of the land. It was therefore with no disappointment or dissatisfaction that my inquiries and observations failed to show me any incorrigible vices in the nobility of France, or any abuse that could not be removed by a reform well short of abolition. Your nobility did not deserve punishment; but to degrade is to punish.

It was with the same satisfaction that I found the result of my inquiry about your clergy was not dissimilar. It is no soothing news to my ears that great bodies of men are incurably corrupt. I do not listen with much credulity to anyone speaking evil of those they are about to plunder. I rather suspect that vices are invented or exaggerated when profit is expected from punishing them. An enemy is a bad witness; a robber is a worse. There were undoubtedly vices and abuses in that order, and there must be. It was an old establishment, and not frequently revised. But I saw no crimes in the individuals that merited confiscation of their property, nor those cruel insults and degradations and that unnatural persecution which have been substituted for regulation that would have improved them.

If there had been any just cause for this new religious persecution, the atheistic libellers who act as trumpeters to rouse the populace to plunder do not love anybody so much as to refrain from dwelling with satisfaction on the vices of the existing clergy. They have not done so. They find themselves obliged to rake through the histories of former ages — which they have ransacked with a malignant and profligate industry — for every instance of oppression and persecution committed by that body or in its favour, in order to justify their own persecutions and their own cruelties on very iniquitous, because very illogical, principles of retaliation. After destroying all other genealogies and family distinctions, they invent a sort of pedigree of crimes. It is not very just to chastise men for the offences of their natural ancestors; but to take the fiction of ancestry in a corporate succession as a ground for punishing men who have no relation to the guilty acts except in names and general descriptions is a refinement in injustice belonging to the philosophy of this enlightened age. The Assembly punishes men, many and perhaps most of whom abhor the violent conduct of clergymen in former times as much as their present persecutors can, and who would be as loud and as strong in saying so if they were not well aware of the purposes all this declamation is being used for.

Corporate bodies are immortal for the good of their members but not for their punishment. Nations themselves are such corporations. We in England might as well think of waging inexpiable war on all Frenchmen for the evils they have brought on us in the various periods of our mutual hostilities. You might on your side think yourselves justified in falling on all Englishmen for the unparalleled calamities brought on the people of France by the unjust invasions of our Henrys and our Edwards. Indeed we should be mutually justified in this exterminating war on one another quite as much as you are in the unprovoked persecution of your present countrymen for the conduct of men of the same name in other times.

We do not draw the moral lessons from history that we might. On the contrary, without care it may be used to corrupt our minds and destroy our happiness. In history a great volume is unrolled for our instruction, drawing the materials of future wisdom out of the past errors and infirmities of mankind. Perverted, it may serve as an arsenal furnishing offensive and defensive weapons for parties in church and state, supplying the means of keeping alive or reviving dissensions and animosities, and adding fuel to civil fury. History consists for the greater part of the miseries brought on the world by pride, ambition, avarice, revenge, lust, sedition, hypocrisy, ungoverned zeal and all the train of disorderly appetites, which shake the public with the same

	        "troublous storms that toss
	The private state, and render life unsweet."

These vices are the _causes_ of those storms. Religion, morals, laws, prerogatives, privileges, liberties, rights of men, are the _pretexts_. The pretexts are always found in some specious appearance of a real good. Would you secure men from tyranny and sedition by rooting out of the mind the principles these fraudulent pretexts appeal to? If you did, you would root out everything valuable in the human breast. As these are the pretexts, so the ordinary actors and instruments in great public evils are kings, priests, magistrates, senates, parliaments, national assemblies, judges and captains. You would not cure the evil by resolving that there should be no more monarchs, nor ministers of state, nor ministers of the Gospel — no interpreters of law, no general officers, no public councils. You might change the names; the things in some shape must remain. A certain _quantum_ of power must always exist in the community, in some hands and under some name. Wise men will apply their remedies to vices, not to names — to the causes of evil, which are permanent, and not to the occasional organs by which they act and the transitory forms in which they appear. Otherwise you will be wise historically and a fool in practice. Two ages seldom have the same fashion in their pretexts and the same modes of mischief. Wickedness is a little more inventive than that. While you are discussing the fashion, the fashion has gone by. The very same vice takes on a new body. The spirit transmigrates; and far from losing its principle of life by the change of appearance, it is renewed in its new organs with the fresh vigour of a youthful activity. It walks abroad, it continues its ravages, while you are gibbeting the carcass or demolishing the tomb. You are terrifying yourselves with ghosts and apparitions while your house is the haunt of robbers. So it is with all those who, attending only to the shell and husk of history, think they are waging war on intolerance, pride and cruelty, while under colour of abhorring the bad principles of antiquated parties they are authorising and feeding the same odious vices in different factions, and perhaps in worse ones.

Your citizens of Paris formerly lent themselves as ready instruments to slaughter the followers of Calvin, at the infamous massacre of St Bartholomew. What should we say to anyone who could think of retaliating on the Parisians of today for the abominations and horrors of that time? They are indeed brought to abhor _that_ massacre. Ferocious as they are, it is not difficult to make them dislike it, because the politicians and fashionable teachers have no interest in giving their passions exactly the same direction. Still, they find it in their interest to keep the same savage dispositions alive. It was only the other day that they had this very massacre acted on the stage for the amusement of the descendants of those who committed it. In this tragic farce they brought on the Cardinal of Lorraine in his robes of office, ordering general slaughter. Was this spectacle meant to make the Parisians abhor persecution and loathe the shedding of blood? No: it was to teach them to persecute their own pastors. It was to rouse them, by raising a disgust and horror of their clergy, to an eagerness for hunting down an order which, if it ought to exist at all, ought to exist not only in safety but in reverence. It was to stimulate their cannibal appetites — which one would think had been gorged sufficiently — with variety and seasoning, and to make them quick for new murders and massacres if it should suit the purpose of the Guises of the day. An Assembly in which a multitude of priests and prelates sat was obliged to endure this indignity at its door. The author was not sent to the galleys, nor the players to the house of correction. Not long after this performance those same players came before the Assembly to claim the rites of the very religion they had dared to expose, and to show their prostituted faces in the senate, while the Archbishop of Paris, whose office was known to his people only by his prayers and blessings and his wealth only by his alms, is forced to abandon his house and fly from his flock as from ravening wolves, because, if you please, in the sixteenth century the Cardinal of Lorraine was a rebel and a murderer.

Footnote: This is on a supposition of the truth of this story; but he was not in France at the time. One name serves as well as another.

Such is the effect of the perversion of history by men who for the same nefarious purposes have perverted every other part of learning. But those who will stand on that elevation of reason which places centuries under our eye and brings things to the true point of comparison, which obscures little names and effaces the colours of little parties, and to which nothing can rise but the spirit and moral quality of human actions — those men will say to the teachers of the Palais Royal: the Cardinal of Lorraine was the murderer of the sixteenth century; you have the glory of being the murderers in the eighteenth; and this is the only difference between you. But history in the nineteenth century, better understood and better employed, will, I trust, teach a civilised posterity to abhor the misdeeds of both these barbarous ages. It will teach future priests and magistrates not to retaliate on the speculative and inactive atheists of future times for the enormities committed by the present practical zealots and furious fanatics of that wretched error, which in its quiescent state is more than punished whenever it is embraced. It will teach posterity not to make war on either religion or philosophy for the abuse the hypocrites of both have made of the two most valuable blessings conferred on us by the bounty of the universal Patron, who eminently favours and protects the race of man in all things.

If your clergy, or any clergy, should show themselves vicious beyond the fair bounds allowed to human infirmity, and beyond those professional faults that can hardly be separated from professional virtues, then, though their vices can never countenance the exercise of oppression, I do admit they would naturally have the effect of much abating our indignation against tyrants who exceed measure and justice in punishing them. I can allow in clergymen of every division some tenaciousness of their own opinion, some overflow of zeal to propagate it, some partiality to their own state and office, some attachment to the interest of their own body, some preference for those who listen to their doctrines with docility over those who scorn and deride them. I allow all this, because I am a man who has to deal with men, and who would not, through a violence of toleration, run into the greatest intolerance of all. I must bear with infirmities until they fester into crimes.

Undoubtedly the natural progress of the passions from frailty into vice ought to be prevented by a watchful eye and a firm hand. But is it true that the body of your clergy had passed those limits of a just allowance? From the general style of your recent publications of all sorts, one would be led to believe that your clergy in France were a sort of monsters, a horrible composition of superstition, ignorance, sloth, fraud, avarice and tyranny. But is this true? Is it true that the lapse of time, the ceasing of conflicting interests, and the woeful experience of the evils that come of party rage have had no sort of influence in gradually improving their minds? Is it true that they were daily making fresh invasions on the civil power, troubling the domestic quiet of their country, and making the operations of its government feeble and precarious? Is it true that the clergy of our times have pressed the laity down with an iron hand and were everywhere lighting the fires of a savage persecution? Did they try by every fraud to increase their estates? Did they habitually exceed the due demands on estates that were their own? Or, rigidly screwing right up into wrong, did they turn a legal claim into a vexatious extortion? Not possessing power, were they filled with the vices of those who envy it? Were they inflamed with a violent, litigious spirit of controversy? Goaded on by the ambition of intellectual sovereignty, were they ready to fly in the face of all magistracy, to fire churches, to massacre the priests of other descriptions, to pull down altars, and to make their way over the ruins of overthrown governments to an empire of doctrine — sometimes flattering, sometimes forcing the consciences of men out of the jurisdiction of public institutions into submission to their personal authority, beginning with a claim of liberty and ending with an abuse of power?

These, or some of these, were the vices charged, and not wholly without foundation, against several of the churchmen of former times, who belonged to the two great parties that then divided and distracted Europe.

If in France there was, as in other countries there visibly is, a great abatement rather than any increase of these vices, then instead of loading the present clergy with the crimes of other men and the odious character of other times, in common equity they ought to be praised, encouraged and supported for departing from a spirit that disgraced their predecessors, and for taking on a temper of mind and manners more suited to their sacred function.

When my occasions took me to France towards the close of the late reign, the clergy in all their forms engaged a considerable part of my curiosity. So far from finding the complaints and discontents against that body which some publications had given me reason to expect — except from one set of men, not then very numerous though very active — I noticed little or no public or private uneasiness on their account. On further examination I found the clergy in general to be persons of moderate minds and decorous manners; and I include the seculars and the regulars of both sexes. I did not have the good fortune to know a great many of the parish clergy, but in general I received a perfectly good account of their morals and of their attention to their duties. With some of the higher clergy I had a personal acquaintance, and of the rest of that class very good means of information. They were almost all of them persons of noble birth. They resembled others of their own rank, and where there was any difference it was in their favour. They were more fully educated than the military nobility, so as by no means to disgrace their profession by ignorance or by unfitness for the exercise of their authority. They seemed to me, beyond the clerical character, liberal and open, with the hearts of gentlemen and men of honour, neither insolent nor servile in their manners and conduct. They seemed to me rather a superior class — a set of men among whom you would not be surprised to find a Fénelon. I saw among the clergy in Paris men of great learning and candour, many of a description not to be met with anywhere else, and I had reason to believe that this description was not confined to Paris. What I found in other places I know was accidental, and therefore to be presumed a fair sample. I spent a few days in a provincial town where, in the bishop's absence, I passed my evenings with three clergymen, his vicars-general, men who would have done honour to any church. They were all well informed; two of them of deep, general and extensive erudition, ancient and modern, Eastern and Western, and particularly in their own profession. They had a wider knowledge of our English divines than I expected, and they entered into the genius of those writers with a critical accuracy. One of these gentlemen has since died: the Abbé Morangis. I pay this tribute without reluctance to the memory of that noble, reverend, learned and excellent person, and I would do the same as cheerfully to the merits of the others, who I believe are still living, if I did not fear to hurt men I am unable to help.

Some of these clergymen of rank deserve general respect on every ground. They deserve gratitude from me and from many English people. If this letter should ever come into their hands, I hope they will believe that there are people of our nation who feel for their unmerited fall, and for the cruel confiscation of their fortunes, with no common feeling. What I say of them is a testimony, so far as one feeble voice can go, that I owe to truth. Wherever the question of this unnatural persecution is concerned, I will pay it. No one shall prevent me from being just and grateful. The time is fitted for the duty; and it is particularly becoming to show our justice and gratitude when men who have deserved well of us and of mankind are labouring under popular obloquy and the persecutions of oppressive power.

Before your Revolution you had about a hundred and twenty bishops. A few of them were men of eminent sanctity and charity without limit. When we talk of the heroic we are of course talking of rare virtue. I believe instances of eminent depravity may be as rare among them as instances of transcendent goodness. Examples of avarice and of licentiousness may be picked out, I do not question it, by those who delight in the sort of investigation that leads to such discoveries. A man as old as I am will not be astonished that several men in every description do not lead that perfect life of self-denial with regard to wealth or pleasure which everyone wishes for, which some expect, and which nobody exacts more rigorously than those who are most attentive to their own interests or most indulgent to their own passions. When I was in France, I am certain that the number of vicious prelates was not great. Certain individuals among them, not distinguished for the regularity of their lives, made some amends for lacking the severe virtues by possessing the liberal ones, and were endowed with qualities that made them useful in church and state. I am told that with few exceptions Louis the Sixteenth was more attentive to character in his promotions to that rank than his immediate predecessor, and I believe it may be true, since some spirit of reform has prevailed throughout the whole reign. But the present ruling power has shown a disposition only to plunder the church. It has punished _all_ prelates, which is to favour the vicious, at least in point of reputation. It has made a degrading establishment of pensioners, to which no man of liberal ideas or liberal condition will destine his children. It must settle into the lowest classes of the people. As the lower clergy with you are not numerous enough for their duties, as those duties are beyond measure minute and toilsome, and as you have left no middle class of clergy at their ease, in future nothing of science or erudition can exist in the Gallican Church. To complete the project, without the least attention to the rights of patrons, the Assembly has provided for an elective clergy in future — an arrangement that will drive out of the clerical profession every man of sobriety and everyone who can claim independence in his function or his conduct, and that will throw the whole direction of the public mind into the hands of a set of licentious, bold, crafty, factious, flattering wretches, of such a condition and such habits of life as will make their contemptible pensions, beside which an exciseman's stipend is lucrative and honourable, an object of low and illiberal intrigue. Those officers whom they still call bishops are to be elected to a comparatively mean provision, by the same arts — that is, electioneering arts — by men of every religious tenet known or inventable. The new lawgivers have settled nothing whatever about their qualifications, in doctrine or in morals, any more than they have done for the subordinate clergy; nor does anything appear to stop both the higher and the lower from practising or preaching, at their discretion, any mode of religion or irreligion they please. I do not yet see what jurisdiction the bishops are to have over their subordinates, or whether they are to have any jurisdiction at all.

In short, Sir, it seems to me that this new ecclesiastical establishment is intended only to be temporary, and preparatory to the utter abolition of the Christian religion under any of its forms, whenever men's minds have been prepared for this last stroke against it by the accomplishment of the plan for bringing its ministers into universal contempt. Anyone who will not believe that the philosophical fanatics who guide these matters have long entertained such a design is utterly ignorant of their character and their proceedings. These enthusiasts do not scruple to avow their opinion that a state can subsist better without any religion than with one, and that they are able to supply the place of any good there may be in it by a project of their own — namely, by a sort of education they have imagined, founded on a knowledge of the physical wants of men and carried progressively up to an enlightened self-interest which, when well understood, they tell us, will identify itself with a larger and public interest. The scheme of this education has long been known. Lately they distinguish it, having acquired an entirely new nomenclature of technical terms, by the name of a _Civic Education_.

I hope their partisans in England — to whom I attribute very inconsiderate conduct rather than the ultimate object of this detestable design — will succeed neither in plundering the clergy nor in introducing a principle of popular election to our bishoprics and parish livings. In the present condition of the world this would be the last corruption of the church, the utter ruin of the clerical character, and the most dangerous shock the state ever received through a misunderstood arrangement of religion. I know well enough that the bishoprics and livings, under royal and seigniorial patronage as they now are in England and as they lately were in France, are sometimes acquired by unworthy methods; but the other mode of ecclesiastical canvassing subjects them infinitely more surely and more generally to all the evil arts of low ambition, which, operating on and through greater numbers, will produce mischief in proportion.
