Section Ten: The Church Establishment, and the Seizure of Its Property

(Part 5 of 5)

Those of you who have robbed the clergy think you will easily reconcile your conduct to all Protestant nations, because the clergy you have plundered, degraded and given over to mockery and scorn are Roman Catholic — that is, of _their own_ supposed persuasion. I have no doubt that some miserable bigots will be found here as elsewhere, who hate sects and parties different from their own more than they love the substance of religion, and who are angrier with those who differ from them over particular plans and systems than they are displeased with men who attack the foundation of our common hope. Such men will write and speak on the subject in the manner to be expected from their temper and character. Burnet says that when he was in France in the year 1683, "the method which carried over the men of the finest parts to Popery was this: they brought themselves to doubt of the whole Christian religion; when that was once done, it seemed a more indifferent thing of what side or form they continued outwardly." If that was then the ecclesiastical policy of France, they have since had far too much reason to repent of it. They preferred atheism to a form of religion that did not agree with their ideas. They succeeded in destroying that form, and atheism has succeeded in destroying them. I can readily believe Burnet's story, because I have seen too much of a similar spirit among ourselves — and a little of it is much too much. The humour, however, is not general.

The teachers who reformed our religion in England bore no sort of resemblance to your present reforming doctors in Paris. Perhaps they were, like the men they opposed, rather more under the influence of party spirit than one could wish; but they were the most sincere believers, men of the most fervent and exalted piety, ready to die — as some of them did die — like true heroes in defence of their particular ideas of Christianity, and they would have died with equal fortitude and more cheerfully for that stock of general truth whose branches they contended for with their blood. Those men would have disowned with horror the wretches who claim fellowship with them on no other ground than having pillaged the people they carried on controversies with, and having despised the common religion for whose purity the reformers exerted themselves with a zeal that unmistakably declared their highest reverence for the substance of the system they wanted to reform. Many of their descendants have kept the same zeal, but, being less engaged in conflict, with more moderation. They do not forget that justice and mercy are substantial parts of religion. Impious men do not recommend themselves to their communion by iniquity and cruelty towards any description of their fellow creatures.

We hear these new teachers continually boasting of their spirit of toleration. That men should tolerate all opinions when they think none of any value is a matter of small merit. Equal neglect is not impartial kindness. The species of benevolence that arises out of contempt is not true charity. There are plenty of men in England who tolerate in the true spirit of toleration. They think the dogmas of religion are all of importance, though in different degrees, and that among them there is, as among all things of value, a just ground of preference. They favour, therefore, and they tolerate. They tolerate not because they despise opinions but because they respect justice. They would reverently and affectionately protect all religions, because they love and venerate the great principle they all agree on and the great object they are all directed to. They begin to see more and more plainly that we all have a common cause against a common enemy. They will not be so misled by the spirit of faction as to fail to distinguish what is done in favour of their own subdivision from acts of hostility which, aimed through some particular description of men, are aimed at the whole body that they themselves are included in under another name. It is impossible for me to say what the character of every description of men among us may be. But I speak for the greater part; and for them I must tell you that sacrilege is no part of their doctrine of good works; and that, so far from inviting you into their fellowship on such a title, if your professors are admitted to their communion they must carefully conceal their doctrine that it is lawful to proscribe innocent men, and they must make restitution of all stolen goods whatsoever. Until then they are none of ours.

You may suppose that we do not approve your confiscating the revenues of bishops and deans and chapters and parish clergy who possess independent estates in land, because we have the same sort of establishment in England. That objection, you will say, cannot apply to the confiscation of the goods of monks and nuns and the abolition of their orders. It is true that this particular part of your general confiscation does not touch England as a precedent in point; but the reason applies, and it goes a long way. The Long Parliament confiscated the lands of deans and chapters in England on the same ideas on which your Assembly has put the lands of the monastic orders up for sale. But the danger lies in the principle of injustice and not in the description of persons it is first exercised on. I see in a country very near us a course of policy pursued that sets justice, the common concern of mankind, at defiance. With the National Assembly of France, possession is nothing, law and usage are nothing. I see the National Assembly openly condemning the doctrine of prescription, which one of the greatest of their own lawyers tells us, with great truth, is part of the law of nature. He tells us that fixing its limits positively, and securing it from invasion, were among the reasons why civil society itself was instituted. Once prescription is shaken, no kind of property is secure as soon as it becomes an object large enough to tempt the cupidity of needy power. I see a practice perfectly answering to their contempt for this great fundamental part of natural law. I see the confiscators beginning with bishops and chapters and monasteries, but I do not see them ending there. I see the princes of the blood, who by the oldest usages of that kingdom held large landed estates, deprived of their possessions with hardly the compliment of a debate, and reduced, in place of their stable independent property, to the hope of some precarious charitable pension at the pleasure of an Assembly which will of course pay little regard to the rights of pensioners at pleasure when it despises those of legal proprietors. Flushed with the insolence of their first inglorious victories, and pressed by the distresses their own lust of unhallowed gain has caused, disappointed but not discouraged, they have at last ventured to subvert all property of every description throughout the whole extent of a great kingdom. They have compelled all men, in all transactions of commerce, in the disposal of land, in civil dealing and through the whole intercourse of life, to accept as perfect payment and good and lawful tender the symbols of their speculations on a projected sale of their plunder. What vestiges of liberty or property have they left? The tenant right of a cabbage garden, a year's interest in a hovel, the goodwill of an alehouse or a baker's shop, the very shadow of a constructive property, are treated more ceremoniously in our Parliament than the oldest and most valuable landed possessions in the hands of the most respectable persons are with you, or than the whole body of the moneyed and commercial interest of your country. We hold the legislative authority in high regard; but we have never dreamt that Parliaments had any right whatever to violate property, to overrule prescription, or to force a currency of their own invention into the place of one that is real and recognised by the law of nations. But you, who began by refusing to submit to the most moderate restraints, have ended by establishing an unheard-of despotism. I find that the ground your confiscators go on is this: that their proceedings could not indeed be supported in a court of justice, but that the rules of prescription cannot bind a legislative assembly. So this legislative assembly of a free nation sits not for the security but for the destruction of property — and not of property only, but of every rule and maxim that can give it stability, and of the very instruments that alone can give it circulation.

Footnote: Domat.

Footnote: Speech of M. Camus, published by order of the National Assembly.

When the Anabaptists of Münster in the sixteenth century had filled Germany with confusion by their system of levelling and their wild opinions about property, what country in Europe did the progress of their fury not give just cause for alarm? Of all things, wisdom is the most terrified by epidemic fanaticism, because of all enemies it is the one she is least able to find any kind of resource against. We cannot be ignorant of the spirit of atheistical fanaticism inspired by a multitude of writings scattered about with incredible industry and expense, and by sermons delivered in all the streets and public places of Paris. These writings and sermons have filled the populace with a black and savage ferocity of mind that overrides in them the common feelings of nature as well as all sentiments of morality and religion — so much so that these wretches are brought to bear with sullen patience the intolerable distresses caused them by the violent convulsions and transfers that have been made in property. The spirit of proselytism attends this spirit of fanaticism. They have societies to intrigue and correspond at home and abroad for the propagation of their tenets. The republic of Berne, one of the happiest, most prosperous and best-governed countries on earth, is one of the great objects they aim at destroying. I am told they have to some extent succeeded in sowing the seeds of discontent there. They are busy throughout Germany. Spain and Italy have not been left untried. England is not left out of the comprehensive scheme of their malignant charity; and in England we find men who stretch out their arms to them, who recommend their example from more than one pulpit, and who choose, at more than one periodical meeting, to correspond publicly with them, to applaud them and to hold them up for imitation — who receive from them tokens of brotherhood, and standards consecrated in the middle of their rites and mysteries, and who propose leagues of perpetual friendship to them at the very time when the power to which our constitution has exclusively delegated the treaty-making capacity of this kingdom may find it expedient to make war on them.

Footnote: Whether the following description is strictly true I do not know; but it is what the publishers would have pass for true, in order to encourage others. In a letter from Toul, printed in one of their papers, is this passage about the people of that district: "Dans la Révolution actuelle, ils ont résisté à toutes les _séductions du bigotisme, aux persécutions et aux tracasseries_ des ennemis de la Révolution. _Oubliant leurs plus grands intérêts_ pour rendre hommage aux vues d'ordre général qui ont déterminé l'Assemblée Nationale, ils voient, _sans se plaindre_, supprimer cette foule d'établissemens ecclésiastiques par lesquels _ils subsistoient_; et même, en perdant leur siège épiscopal, la seule de toutes ces ressources qui pouvoit, ou plutôt _qui devoit, en toute équité_, leur être conservée, condamnés _à la plus effrayante misère_ sans avoir _été ni pu être entendus, ils ne murmurent point_; ils restent fidèles aux principes du plus pur patriotisme; ils sont encore prêts à _verser leur sang_ pour le maintien de la constitution, qui va réduire leur ville _à la plus déplorable nullité_." In English: in the present Revolution they have resisted all the seductions of bigotry, and all the persecutions and harassments of the enemies of the Revolution. Forgetting their own greatest interests in order to pay homage to the views of general order that have guided the National Assembly, they watch without complaining while that crowd of church establishments is suppressed which was what they lived by; and even in losing their bishop's seat, the one resource of them all that could have been — or rather that in all equity ought to have been — preserved to them, condemned to the most frightful poverty without having been heard, or having been able to be heard, they do not murmur. They remain faithful to the principles of the purest patriotism; they are still ready to shed their blood to maintain the constitution that is about to reduce their town to the most deplorable nothingness. These people are not supposed to have endured those sufferings and injustices in a struggle for liberty, for the same account states truly that they have always been free. Their patience under beggary and ruin, and their enduring the most flagrant and admitted injustice without remonstrance, can, if it is strictly true, be nothing but the effect of this dire fanaticism. A great multitude all over France is in the same condition and the same temper.

Footnote: See the proceedings of the confederation at Nantes.

It is not the confiscation of our church property, following this example in France, that I dread, though I think that would be no trifling evil. The great source of my anxiety is that it should ever be considered in England to be the policy of a state to look for a resource in confiscations of any kind, or that any one description of citizens should come to regard any of the others as their proper prey. Nations are wading deeper and deeper into an ocean of boundless debt. Public debts, which at first were a security to governments by giving many people an interest in the public peace, are likely in their excess to become the means of overthrowing them. If governments provide for these debts by heavy taxes, they perish by becoming odious to the people. If they do not provide for them, they will be undone by the efforts of the most dangerous of all parties: I mean an extensive, discontented moneyed interest, injured and not destroyed. The men who make up this interest look for their security first to the good faith of government and second to its power. If they find the old governments worn out and effete, their springs slack, and not vigorous enough for their purposes, they may look for new ones possessed of more energy — and this energy will be derived not from any acquisition of resources but from a contempt of justice. Revolutions are favourable to confiscation, and it is impossible to know under what obnoxious names the next confiscations will be authorised. I am sure that the principles now predominant in France extend to a great many persons, and descriptions of persons, in every country, who think their harmless idleness is their security. This kind of innocence in proprietors can be argued into uselessness, and uselessness into an unfitness for their estates. Many parts of Europe are in open disorder. In many others there is a hollow murmuring underground; a confused movement is felt that threatens a general earthquake in the political world. Already confederacies and correspondences of the most extraordinary kind are forming in several countries. In such a state of things we ought to be on our guard. In all changes, if changes there must be, the circumstance that will do most to blunt the edge of their mischief and to promote whatever good may be in them is that they should find us with our minds tenacious of justice and tender of property.

Footnote: "Si plures sunt ii quibus improbe datum est, quam illi quibus injuste ademptum est, idcirco plus etiam valent? Non enim numero hæc judicantur, sed pondere. Quam autem habet æquitatem, ut agrum multis annis, aut etiam sæculis ante possessum, qui nullum habuit habeat, qui autem habuit amittat? Ac, propter hoc injuriæ genus, Lacedæmonii Lysandrum Ephorum expulerunt; Agin regem (quod nunquam antea apud eos acciderat) necaverunt; exque eo tempore tantæ discordiæ secutæ sunt, ut et tyranni exsisterent, et optimates exterminarentur, et preclarissime constituta respublica dilaberetur. Nec vero solum ipsa cecidit, sed etiam reliquam Græciam evertit contagionibus malorum, quæ a Lacedæmoniis profectæ manarunt latius." In English: if those to whom property has been wrongly given are more numerous than those from whom it was unjustly taken, does that make them weigh more? These matters are judged not by number but by weight. And what fairness is there in a man who has never owned any land taking possession of land held for many years or even for centuries, and the man who did own it losing it? It was for this kind of injustice that the Spartans expelled Lysander the ephor and put King Agis to death, a thing that had never happened among them before; and from that time such discords followed that tyrants arose, the leading men were driven out, and a state most admirably constituted fell to pieces. Nor did it merely fall itself; it overturned the rest of Greece as well by the contagion of the evils which, starting from the Spartans, spread more widely. After speaking of the conduct of Aratus of Sicyon, the model of true patriots, which was in a very different spirit, he says: "Sic par est agere cum civibus; non (ut bis jam vidimus) hastam in foro ponere et bona civium voci subjicere præconis. At ille Græcus (id quod fuit sapientis et præstantis viri) omnibus consulendum esse putavit: eaque est summa ratio et sapientia boni civis, commoda civium non divellere, sed omnes eadem æquitate continere." In English: this is the right way to deal with one's fellow citizens — not, as we have now twice seen, to set up the spear in the forum and put the goods of citizens under the auctioneer's voice. But that Greek, as became a wise and outstanding man, thought that the good of all must be consulted; and this is the highest reason and wisdom in a good citizen, not to tear the interests of the citizens apart but to hold them all together within the same equity. — Cicero, On Duties, book 2.

Footnote: See two books entitled "Einige Originalschriften des Illuminatenordens" and "System und Folgen des Illuminatenordens". Munich, 1787.

But it will be argued that this confiscation in France ought not to alarm other nations. They say it is not made out of wanton rapacity, that it is a great measure of national policy adopted to remove an extensive, inveterate, superstitious mischief. It is with the greatest difficulty that I am able to separate policy from justice. Justice is itself the great standing policy of civil society, and any notable departure from it, in any circumstances, lies under the suspicion of being no policy at all.

When men are encouraged into a certain mode of life by the existing laws and protected in it as a lawful occupation; when they have adapted all their ideas and all their habits to it; when the law has long made adherence to its rules a ground of reputation and departure from them a ground of disgrace and even of penalty — then I am sure it is unjust for a legislature by an arbitrary act to do sudden violence to their minds and their feelings, forcibly to degrade them from their state and condition, and to stigmatise with shame and infamy that character and those customs which had before been made the measure of their happiness and honour. If to this is added expulsion from their homes and confiscation of all their goods, I am not sagacious enough to see how this despotic sport made of the feelings, consciences, prejudices and properties of men can be distinguished from the rankest tyranny.

If the injustice of the course pursued in France is clear, the policy of the measure — that is, the public benefit expected from it — ought to be at least as evident and at least as important. A man who acts under the influence of no passion, and who has nothing in view in his projects but the public good, will immediately be struck by a great difference between what policy would dictate at the original introduction of such institutions and what it dictates on a question of abolishing them entirely, when they have cast their roots wide and deep and when, by long habit, things more valuable than themselves have become adapted to them and in a manner interwoven with them, so that the one cannot be destroyed without notably damaging the other. He might be embarrassed if the case really were as the sophisters represent it in their paltry style of debating. But in this, as in most questions of state, there is a middle. There is something else besides the bare alternative of absolute destruction or unreformed existence. _Spartam nactus es; hanc exorna_ — Sparta is what has fallen to you, so make the best of it. This is in my opinion a rule of profound sense, and it ought never to be out of the mind of an honest reformer. I cannot conceive how any man can have brought himself to such a pitch of presumption as to regard his country as nothing but a _carte blanche_ on which he may scribble whatever he pleases. A man full of warm, speculative benevolence may wish his society were constituted otherwise than he finds it; but a good patriot and a true politician always considers how he can make the most of the existing materials of his country. A disposition to preserve and an ability to improve, taken together, would be my standard of a statesman. Everything else is vulgar in the conception and perilous in the execution.

There are moments in the fortunes of states when particular men are called on to make improvements by great mental exertion. In those moments, even when they seem to enjoy the confidence of their prince and their country and to be invested with full authority, they do not always have apt instruments to hand. A politician who wants to do great things looks for a _power_ — what our workmen call a _purchase_; and if he finds that power, in politics as in mechanics, he cannot be at a loss how to apply it. In the monastic institutions, in my opinion, was to be found a great _power_ for the machinery of political benevolence. There were revenues under a public direction; there were men wholly set apart and dedicated to public purposes, with no ties and no principles but public ones — men who could not possibly convert the estate of the community into a private fortune, men closed to self-interest whose avarice is on behalf of some community, men to whom personal poverty is honour and implicit obedience stands in the place of freedom. It is vain for a man to look to the possibility of making such things when he wants them. The winds blow as they please. These institutions are the products of enthusiasm; they are the instruments of wisdom. Wisdom cannot create materials; they are the gifts of nature or of chance, and her pride is in the use of them. The perennial existence of corporate bodies, and their fortunes, are things particularly suited to a man who takes long views — who meditates designs that take time to fashion and are meant to last when they are accomplished. He does not deserve to rank high, or even to be mentioned in the order of great statesmen, who, having obtained the command and direction of such a power as existed in the wealth, the discipline and the habits of the corporations you have rashly destroyed, can find no way of turning it to the great and lasting benefit of his country. On a view of this subject a thousand uses suggest themselves to a contriving mind. To destroy any power growing wild from the rank productive force of the human mind is almost equivalent, in the moral world, to destroying the apparently active properties of bodies in the material one. It would be like trying to destroy — if it were within our competence to destroy — the expansive force of fixed air in nitre, or the power of steam, or of electricity, or of magnetism. These energies always existed in nature and were always discernible. Some of them seemed useless, some noxious, some no better than a plaything for children, until contemplative ability, combining with practical skill, tamed their wild nature, subdued them to use, and made them at once the most powerful and the most tractable agents in the service of the great views and designs of men. Did fifty thousand persons, whose mental and bodily labour you might direct, and so many hundred thousand a year of a revenue that was neither lazy nor superstitious, seem too big for your abilities to wield? Had you no way of using the men except by converting monks into pensioners? Had you no way of turning the revenue to account except through the improvident resource of a spendthrift sale? If you were so destitute of mental funds, the proceeding follows in its natural course. Your politicians do not understand their trade, and so they sell their tools.

But the institutions savour of superstition in their very principle, and they nourish it by a permanent and standing influence. This I do not mean to dispute; but it ought not to hinder you from drawing out of superstition itself whatever resources it may furnish for the public advantage. You draw benefits from many dispositions and many passions of the human mind that are of quite as doubtful a colour, to the moral eye, as superstition is. It was your business to correct and moderate whatever was noxious in this passion, as in all the passions. But is superstition the greatest of all possible vices? In its possible excess I think it becomes a very great evil. It is, however, a moral subject, and of course admits of every degree and every modification. Superstition is the religion of feeble minds, and they must be tolerated in an admixture of it, in some trifling or some enthusiastic shape or other, or else you will deprive weak minds of a resource that the strongest have found necessary. The body of all true religion consists, to be sure, in obedience to the will of the Sovereign of the world, in a confidence in His declarations, and in imitation of His perfections. The rest is our own. It may be prejudicial to that great end, or it may be a help to it. Wise men, who as such are not _admirers_ — not admirers, at least, of the _munera terræ_, the gifts of the earth — are not violently attached to these things, nor do they violently hate them. Wisdom is not the severest corrector of folly. It is the rival follies that wage such unrelenting war on one another, and make such cruel use of their advantages whenever they can engage the immoderate common run of people on the one side or the other in their quarrels. Prudence would stay neutral; but if, in the contest between fond attachment and fierce antipathy over things whose nature was never meant to produce such heat, a prudent man were obliged to choose which errors and excesses of enthusiasm he would condemn and which he would bear with, perhaps he would think the superstition that builds more tolerable than the one that demolishes; the one that adorns a country than the one that deforms it; the one that endows than the one that plunders; the one that disposes men to mistaken beneficence than the one that stimulates them to real injustice; the one that leads a man to refuse himself lawful pleasures than the one that snatches from others the scanty subsistence of their self-denial. Such, I think, is very nearly the state of the question between the ancient founders of monkish superstition and the superstition of the pretended philosophers of the hour.

For the present I put off all consideration of the supposed public profit of the sale, which I take to be perfectly delusive in any case. I shall consider it here only as a transfer of property, and I shall trouble you with a few thoughts on the policy of that transfer.

In every prosperous community something more is produced than goes to the immediate support of the producer. This surplus forms the income of the landed capitalist. It will be spent by a proprietor who does not labour. But this idleness is itself the spring of labour, this repose the spur of industry. The state's only concern is that the capital taken in rent from the land should be returned to the industry it came from, and that its spending should do the least possible damage to the morals of those who spend it and of the people it is returned to.

In every view of receipt, of expenditure and of personal employment, a sober legislator would carefully compare the possessor he is being urged to expel with the stranger proposed to fill his place. Before we incur the inconveniences that _must_ attend all violent revolutions in property through extensive confiscation, we ought to have some rational assurance that the purchasers of the confiscated property will be to a considerable degree more industrious, more virtuous, more sober, less disposed to extort an unreasonable proportion of the labourer's gains or to consume on themselves a larger share than is fit for one individual — or else that they will be qualified to dispense the surplus in a steadier and more equal manner, so as to answer the purposes of a politic expenditure, than the old possessors, call those possessors bishops or canons or commendatory abbots or monks or what you please. The monks are lazy. Be it so. Suppose them employed in nothing but singing in the choir. They are as usefully employed as those who neither sing nor say — as usefully, even, as those who sing on the stage. They are as usefully employed as if they worked from dawn to dark at the innumerable servile, degrading, unseemly, unmanly and often most unwholesome and pestilent occupations that the social economy inevitably dooms so many wretches to. If it were not generally pernicious to disturb the natural course of things and to impede in any degree the great wheel of circulation that is turned by the strangely directed labour of these unhappy people, I should be infinitely more inclined to rescue them by force from their miserable industry than to disturb the tranquil repose of monastic quiet by violence. Humanity, and perhaps policy, might justify me better in the first than in the second. It is a subject I have often reflected on, and never reflected on without feeling. I am sure that nothing except the necessity of submitting to the yoke of luxury and the despotism of fashion, which will distribute the surplus product of the soil in their own imperious way, can justify tolerating such trades and employments in a well-regulated state. But for the purpose of that distribution, it seems to me that the idle expenses of monks are quite as well directed as the idle expenses of us lay loiterers.

Where the advantages of the possession and of the project are equal, there is no motive for a change. But in the present case they are perhaps not equal, and the difference is in favour of the possession. It does not appear to me that the expenses of the men you are going to expel in fact take a course so directly and generally tending to corrupt and degrade and make miserable those they pass through as the expenses of the favourites you are intruding into their houses. Why should the spending of a great landed property, which is a dispersal of the surplus product of the soil, appear intolerable to you or to me when it takes its course through the building up of vast libraries, which are the history of the strength and weakness of the human mind; through great collections of ancient records and medals and coins, which attest and explain laws and customs; through paintings and statues that by imitating nature seem to extend the limits of creation; through grand monuments of the dead, which carry on the regards and connections of life beyond the grave; through collections of the specimens of nature, which become a representative assembly of all the classes and families of the world, and which by their arrangement make science easier and by exciting curiosity open the way into it? If by great permanent establishments all these objects of expense are better secured from the inconstant sport of personal caprice and personal extravagance, are they worse than if the same tastes prevailed in scattered individuals? Does not the sweat of the mason and the carpenter, who toil in order to share the sweat of the peasant, flow as pleasantly and as healthily in constructing and repairing the majestic buildings of religion as in the painted booths and sordid sties of vice and luxury? As honourably and as profitably in repairing the sacred works that grow hoary with innumerable years as on the momentary receptacles of passing voluptuousness — in opera houses and brothels and gaming houses and clubhouses and obelisks in the Champ de Mars? Is the surplus product of the olive and the vine worse employed in the frugal maintenance of persons whom the fictions of a pious imagination raise to dignity by placing them in the service of God, than in pampering the innumerable multitude who are degraded by being made useless domestics, subservient to the pride of man? Is the decoration of temples an expenditure less worthy of a wise man than ribbons and laces and national cockades and little private houses and late suppers and all the innumerable fopperies and follies that wealth sports away the burden of its superfluity in?

We tolerate even these — not out of love for them, but for fear of worse. We tolerate them because property and liberty require that toleration up to a point. But why proscribe the other and surely, from every point of view, the more laudable use of estates? Why, through the violation of all property and an outrage on every principle of liberty, forcibly carry them from the better use to the worse?

This comparison between the new individuals and the old bodies is made on the supposition that no reform could be made in the latter. But in a question of reformation I always consider corporate bodies, whether single persons or many, to be much more susceptible than private citizens ever can be, or perhaps ought to be, of a public direction by the power of the state in the use of their property and in the regulation of their members' modes and habits of life; and this seems to me a very material consideration for anyone undertaking something that deserves the name of a political enterprise. So much for the estates of the monasteries.

As to the estates held by bishops and canons and commendatory abbots, I cannot find out any reason why some landed estates may not be held otherwise than by inheritance. Can any philosophic spoiler undertake to demonstrate the positive or the comparative evil of having a certain, and a large, portion of landed property pass in succession through persons whose title to it is, always in theory and often in fact, an eminent degree of piety, morals and learning — a property which by its destination, in their turn and on the score of merit, gives renewal and support to the noblest families and to the lowest the means of dignity and elevation; a property whose tenure is the performance of a duty, whatever value you choose to set on that duty, and whose proprietors' character demands at least an outward decorum and gravity of manners; men who are to exercise a generous but temperate hospitality, who are to consider part of their income as a trust for charity, and who, even when they fail in that trust, when they slide out of their character and degenerate into a mere ordinary secular nobleman or gentleman, are in no respect worse than those who may succeed them in their forfeited possessions? Is it better that estates should be held by men who have no duty than by men who have one? By men whose character and destination point them at virtues, than by men who have no rule and no direction in spending their estates but their own will and appetite? Nor are these estates held altogether in the character or with the evils supposed to be inherent in mortmain. They pass from hand to hand in a more rapid circulation than any other. No excess is good, and therefore too great a proportion of landed property may be held officially for life; but it does not seem to me materially injurious to any commonwealth that there should be some estates that stand a chance of being acquired by means other than the previous acquisition of money.
