Section Eleven: The New Constitution, and How It Was Built

(Part 1 of 4)

This letter has grown to a great length, though it is short indeed compared with the infinite extent of the subject. Various other calls have from time to time drawn my mind away from it. I was not sorry to give myself leisure to see whether I might not find reasons in the proceedings of the National Assembly to change or qualify some of my first sentiments. Everything has confirmed me more strongly in my first opinions. It was my original purpose to survey the principles of the National Assembly with regard to the great fundamental establishments, and to compare the whole of what you have put in the place of what you have destroyed with the several members of our British constitution. But this plan is of greater extent than I first reckoned, and I find you have little wish to take advantage of any examples. For the present I must content myself with some remarks on your establishments, reserving what I meant to say about the spirit of our British monarchy, aristocracy and democracy as they exist in practice for another time.

I have surveyed what has been done by the governing power in France. I have certainly spoken of it freely. Men whose principle it is to despise the ancient, permanent sense of mankind and to set up a scheme of society on new principles must naturally expect that those of us who think better of the judgment of the human race than of theirs will regard both them and their devices as men and schemes on trial. They must take it for granted that we attend closely to their reason but not at all to their authority. They do not have one of the great influencing prejudices of mankind in their favour. They avow their hostility to opinion. Of course, then, they must expect no support from that influence, which they have deposed from the seat of its jurisdiction along with every other authority.

I can never regard this Assembly as anything but a voluntary association of men who have used circumstances to seize the power of the state. They do not have the sanction and authority of the character they first met under. They have assumed another of a very different nature, and have completely altered and inverted all the relations they originally stood in. They do not hold the authority they exercise under any constitutional law of the state. They have departed from the instructions of the people who sent them — and those instructions, since the Assembly did not act by virtue of any ancient usage or settled law, were the sole source of their authority. The most considerable of their acts have not been carried by great majorities; and in this sort of near division, which carries only the constructive authority of the whole, strangers will consider the reasons as well as the resolutions.

If they had set up this new experimental government as a necessary substitute for an expelled tyranny, mankind would anticipate the time of prescription, which through long usage mellows into legality governments that were violent at their beginning. Everyone whose affections lead them towards the conservation of civil order would recognise the child as legitimate even in its cradle, having been produced from those principles of compelling expediency to which all just governments owe their birth and by which they justify their continuance. But men will be late and reluctant in giving any sort of countenance to the operations of a power that has derived its birth from no law and no necessity, and that on the contrary has had its origin in the vices and sinister practices by which the social union is often disturbed and sometimes destroyed. This Assembly has hardly a year's prescription. We have their own word for it that they have made a revolution. To make a revolution is a measure which _primâ fronte_, on the face of it, requires an apology. To make a revolution is to subvert the ancient state of one's country, and no common reasons are called for to justify so violent a proceeding. The sense of mankind authorises us to inquire into the manner in which new power was acquired, and to criticise the use made of it, with less awe and reverence than is usually granted to a settled and recognised authority.

In obtaining and securing their power, the Assembly proceeds on principles that are the exact opposite of those which appear to direct them in the use of it. An observation on this difference will let us into the true spirit of their conduct. Everything they have done, or continue to do, in order to obtain and keep their power, is done by the most common arts. They proceed exactly as their ancestors in ambition have done before them. Trace them through all their artifices and frauds and violences, and you will find nothing at all that is new. They follow precedents and examples with the punctilious exactness of a pleader. They never depart an inch from the authentic formulas of tyranny and usurpation. But in all the regulations that touch the public good the spirit has been the very reverse of this. There they commit the whole to the mercy of untried speculations; they abandon the dearest interests of the public to loose theories that none of them would choose to trust the slightest of his own private concerns to. They make this difference because in their desire to obtain and secure power they are thoroughly in earnest, and there they travel by the beaten road. The public interests, about which they have no real anxiety, they abandon wholly to chance — and I say to chance, because there is nothing in experience to prove that their schemes tend to any benefit.

We must always look with a pity not unmixed with respect on the errors of men who are timid and doubtful of themselves on points where the happiness of mankind is concerned. But in these gentlemen there is nothing of the tender parental anxiety that shrinks from cutting up the infant for the sake of an experiment. In the vastness of their promises and the confidence of their predictions they far outdo all the boasting of quacks. The arrogance of their pretensions in a manner provokes and challenges us to inquire into their foundation.

I am convinced that there are men of considerable parts among the popular leaders in the National Assembly. Some of them display eloquence in their speeches and their writings. That cannot exist without powerful and cultivated talents. But eloquence may exist without a proportionate degree of wisdom. When I speak of ability I am obliged to distinguish. What they have done to support their system speaks of no ordinary men. In the system itself, taken as the scheme of a republic constructed to procure the prosperity and security of the citizen and to promote the strength and grandeur of the state, I confess I am unable to find anything that shows, in a single instance, the work of a comprehensive and disposing mind, or even the provisions of a common prudence. Everywhere their purpose seems to have been to evade and slip aside from _difficulty_. It has been the glory of the great masters in every art to confront difficulty and overcome it, and, having overcome the first difficulty, to turn it into an instrument for new conquests over new difficulties — so enabling themselves to extend the empire of their science and even to push forward the landmarks of the human understanding itself beyond the reach of their original thoughts. Difficulty is a severe instructor, set over us by the supreme ordinance of a parental Guardian and Legislator, who knows us better than we know ourselves, and who loves us better too. _Pater ipse colendi haud facilem esse viam voluit_ — the Father himself willed that the way of cultivation should not be easy. He who wrestles with us strengthens our nerves and sharpens our skill. Our antagonist is our helper. This friendly conflict with difficulty obliges us to become intimately acquainted with our object and compels us to consider it in all its relations. It will not let us be superficial. It is the want of nerve in the understanding for such a task, it is the degenerate fondness for tricky short cuts and little deceptive facilities, that has created governments with arbitrary powers in so many parts of the world. It created the late arbitrary monarchy of France. It has created the arbitrary republic of Paris. With such men, defects in wisdom are to be supplied by fullness of force. They gain nothing by it. Beginning their labours on a principle of sloth, they have the common fortune of slothful men. The difficulties they had eluded rather than escaped meet them again on their way; they multiply and thicken on them; they are entangled, through a labyrinth of confused detail, in an industry without limit and without direction; and in the end the whole of their work turns out feeble, vicious and insecure.

It is this inability to wrestle with difficulty that has obliged the arbitrary Assembly of France to begin their schemes of reform with abolition and total destruction. But is it in destroying and pulling down that skill is displayed? Your mob can do that at least as well as your assemblies. The shallowest understanding and the rudest hand are more than equal to that task. Rage and frenzy will pull down more in half an hour than prudence, deliberation and foresight can build up in a hundred years. The errors and defects of old establishments are visible and palpable. It calls for little ability to point them out; and where absolute power is given, a single word is all it takes to abolish the vice and the establishment together. The same lazy but restless disposition, which loves sloth and hates quiet, directs these politicians when they come to the work of supplying the place of what they have destroyed. To make everything the reverse of what they have seen is quite as easy as to destroy. No difficulties arise in what has never been tried. Criticism is almost baffled in discovering the defects of what has not existed; and eager enthusiasm and cheating hope have the whole wide field of imagination to range in with little or no opposition.

Footnote: A leading member of the Assembly, M. Rabaut de St Étienne, has expressed the principle of all their proceedings as clearly as possible; nothing could be simpler: "_Tous les établissemens en France couronnent le malheur du peuple: pour le rendre heureux, il faut le renouveler, changer ses idées, changer ses loix, changer ses mœurs, ... changer les hommes, changer les choses, changer ses mots, ... tout détruire; oui, tout détruire; puisque tout est à recréer_." In English: every establishment in France crowns the misery of the people; to make them happy it must be made new — change their ideas, change their laws, change their manners, change the men, change the things, change the words, destroy everything; yes, destroy everything, since everything must be created again. This gentleman was chosen president of an assembly that does not sit at the _Quinze-Vingts_ or the _Petites Maisons_ — the Paris hospital for the blind and the madhouse — and that is composed of persons giving themselves out to be rational beings; but neither his ideas nor his language nor his conduct differ in the smallest degree from the speeches, opinions and actions of those, inside the Assembly and outside it, who direct the machine now at work in France.

To preserve and to reform at the same time is quite another thing. When the useful parts of an old establishment are kept, and whatever is added has to be fitted to what is retained, then a vigorous mind, steady and persevering attention, various powers of comparison and combination, and the resources of an understanding fruitful in expedients must all be exercised — and exercised in a continued conflict with the combined force of opposite vices: with the obstinacy that rejects all improvement and the levity that is fatigued and disgusted with everything it possesses. But you may object: "A process of this kind is slow. It is not fit for an Assembly that glories in performing the work of ages in a few months. Such a way of reforming might possibly take many years." Without question it might, and it ought. It is one of the excellences of a method that has time among its assistants that its operation is slow and in some cases almost imperceptible. If circumspection and caution are a part of wisdom when we work only on inanimate matter, surely they become a part of duty as well when the subject of our demolition and construction is not brick and timber but sentient beings, multitudes of whom may be made miserable by a sudden alteration of their state and condition and habits. But it seems to be the prevailing opinion in Paris that an unfeeling heart and an undoubting confidence are the only qualifications for a perfect legislator. My ideas of that high office are very different. The true lawgiver ought to have a heart full of sensibility. He ought to love and respect his kind, and to fear himself. His temperament may be allowed to catch his ultimate object at an intuitive glance, but his movements towards it ought to be deliberate. Political arrangement, being a work for social ends, can only be wrought by social means. There mind must conspire with mind. Time is required to produce that union of minds which alone can produce all the good we aim at. Our patience will achieve more than our force. If I might venture to appeal to something so much out of fashion in Paris — I mean experience — I should tell you that in my course I have known, and according to my measure have worked alongside, great men, and I have never yet seen a plan that was not improved by the observations of people much inferior in understanding to the man who took the lead in the business. By a slow but well-sustained progress the effect of each step is watched; the success or failure of the first gives us light for the second; and so, from light to light, we are conducted safely through the whole series. We see that the parts of the system do not clash. The evils latent in the most promising contrivances are provided for as they arise. One advantage is sacrificed to another as little as possible. We compensate, we reconcile, we balance. We are enabled to unite into a consistent whole the various anomalies and contending principles that are found in the minds and the affairs of men. From this arises not an excellence in simplicity but one far superior, an excellence in composition. Where the great interests of mankind are concerned through a long succession of generations, that succession ought to be admitted to some share in the councils that are to affect it so deeply. If justice requires this, the work itself requires the help of more minds than one age can furnish. It is from this view of things that the best legislators have often been satisfied with establishing some sure, solid, ruling principle in government — a power like the one some of the philosophers have called a plastic nature — and, having fixed the principle, have afterwards left it to its own operation.

To proceed in this manner, that is, with a presiding principle and a prolific energy, is to my mind the criterion of profound wisdom. What your politicians take for the marks of a bold, hardy genius are only proofs of a deplorable want of ability. By their violent haste and their defiance of the process of nature, they are delivered over blindly to every projector and adventurer, to every alchemist and quack. They despair of turning anything common to account. Diet is nothing in their system of remedies. The worst of it is that this despair of curing common disorders by regular methods arises not only from a defect of comprehension but, I fear, from some malignity of disposition. Your legislators seem to have taken their opinions of all professions, ranks and offices from the declamations and buffooneries of satirists, who would themselves be astonished if they were held to the letter of their own descriptions. By listening only to these, your leaders regard everything only on the side of its vices and faults, and view those vices and faults under every colour of exaggeration. It is undoubtedly true, though it may seem paradoxical, that in general those who are habitually employed in finding and displaying faults are unqualified for the work of reformation, because their minds are not only unfurnished with patterns of the fair and the good, but by habit they come to take no delight in contemplating such things. By hating vices too much they come to love men too little. It is therefore no wonder that they should be disinclined and unable to serve them. From this arises the constitutional disposition of some of your guides to pull everything to pieces. At this malicious game they display the whole of their _quadrimanous_ activity. As for the rest: the paradoxes of eloquent writers, brought out purely as a sport of fancy to try their talents, rouse attention and excite surprise, are taken up by these gentlemen not in the spirit of the original authors, as a means of cultivating their taste and improving their style — these paradoxes become with them serious grounds of action on which they proceed to regulate the most important concerns of the state. Cicero describes Cato comically as trying to act in the commonwealth on the school paradoxes that exercised the wits of junior students of Stoic philosophy. If that was true of Cato, these gentlemen copy him in the manner of certain people who lived about his time — _pede nudo Catonem_, playing Cato by going barefoot. Mr Hume told me that he had the secret of Rousseau's principles of composition from Rousseau himself. That acute though eccentric observer had perceived that to strike and interest the public, the marvellous must be produced; that the marvellous of the heathen mythology had long since lost its effect; that the giants, magicians, fairies and heroes of romance which succeeded it had exhausted the portion of credulity belonging to their age; and that nothing was now left to a writer but the species of the marvellous which could still be produced, and with as great an effect as ever, though in another way — that is, the marvellous in life, in manners, in characters and in extraordinary situations, giving rise to new and unlooked-for strokes in politics and morals. I believe that if Rousseau were alive and in one of his lucid intervals, he would be shocked at the practical frenzy of his pupils, who are servile imitators in their paradoxes and reveal an implicit faith even in their unbelief.

Men who undertake considerable things, even in a regular way, ought to give us grounds for presuming ability. But the physician of the state who is not satisfied with curing disorders and undertakes to regenerate constitutions ought to display uncommon powers. Some very unusual appearances of wisdom ought to show themselves on the face of the designs of men who appeal to no practice and copy no model. Have any such appeared? I shall take a view — and for the subject it will be a very short one — of what the Assembly has done with regard, first, to the constitution of the legislature; next to that of the executive power; then to that of the judicature; afterwards to the model of the army; and I shall conclude with the system of finance: to see whether we can discover in any part of their schemes the portentous ability that might justify these bold undertakers in the superiority they assume over mankind.

It is in the model of the sovereign and presiding part of this new republic that we should expect their grand display. Here they had to prove their title to their proud demands. For the plan itself at large, and for the reasons it is grounded on, I refer to the journals of the Assembly of 29 September 1789 and to the later proceedings that have made any alterations in it. So far as I can see light in a matter that is somewhat confused, the system remains substantially as it was originally framed. My few remarks will concern its spirit, its tendency, and its fitness for framing a popular commonwealth — which is what they profess theirs to be — suited to the ends for which any commonwealth, and particularly such a commonwealth, is made. At the same time I mean to consider whether it is consistent with itself and with its own principles.

Old establishments are tried by their effects. If the people are happy, united, wealthy and powerful, we presume the rest. We conclude that to be good from which good is derived. In old establishments various correctives have been found for their departures from theory. Indeed they are the results of various necessities and expediences. They are not often constructed after any theory; theories are rather drawn out of them. In them we often see the end best obtained where the means do not seem perfectly reconcilable to what we imagine was the original scheme. The means taught by experience may be better suited to political ends than those contrived in the original project. They react in turn on the primitive constitution, and sometimes improve the very design they seem to have departed from. I think all this might be curiously illustrated in the British constitution. At worst, the errors and deviations of every kind in the reckoning are found and computed, and the ship proceeds on her course. That is the case with old establishments; but in a new and merely theoretical system, every contrivance is expected to show on the face of it that it answers its ends, especially when the projectors are in no way embarrassed by any effort to fit the new building to an old one, either in the walls or in the foundations.

The French builders, clearing away as mere rubbish everything they found, and, like their ornamental gardeners, forming everything into an exact level, propose to rest the whole local and general legislature on three bases of three different kinds — one geometrical, one arithmetical and the third financial. The first they call _the basis of territory_, the second _the basis of population_, and the third _the basis of contribution_. To accomplish the first of these purposes they divide the area of their country into eighty-three pieces, regularly square, of eighteen leagues by eighteen. These large divisions are called _Departments_. These they portion out, still by square measurement, into seventeen hundred and twenty districts called _Communes_. These again they subdivide, still by square measurement, into smaller districts called _Cantons_, making 6,400 in all.

At first view this geometrical basis of theirs presents nothing much to admire or to blame. It calls for no great legislative talents. Nothing more than an accurate land surveyor with his chain and sight and theodolite is needed for a plan like this. In the old divisions of the country, various accidents from time to time, and the ebb and flow of various properties and jurisdictions, settled the boundaries. Those boundaries were undoubtedly not made on any fixed system. They were subject to some inconveniences, but they were inconveniences for which use had found remedies and habit had supplied accommodation and patience. In this new pavement of square within square, and this organisation and semi-organisation made on the system of Empedocles and Buffon rather than on any political principle, it is impossible that innumerable local inconveniences, which men are not used to, should not arise. But I pass over these, because specifying them requires an accurate knowledge of the country which I do not possess.

When these state surveyors came to look over their work of measurement, they soon found that in politics the most fallacious of all things was geometrical demonstration. They then had recourse to another basis, or rather buttress, to support the building that was tottering on that false foundation. It was evident that the goodness of the soil, the number of the people, their wealth and the largeness of their contribution made such infinite variations between square and square as to make measurement a ridiculous standard of power in the commonwealth, and equality in geometry the most unequal of all measures in the distribution of men. However, they could not give it up; but dividing their political and civil representation into three parts, they allotted one of those parts to square measurement, without a single fact or calculation to establish whether this territorial proportion of representation was fairly assigned, or ought on any principle really to be a third. Having given geometry this portion, a third for her dowry, out of compliment, I suppose, to that sublime science, they left the other two to be scrambled for between the other parts, population and contribution.

When they came to provide for population, they were not able to proceed quite so smoothly as they had done in the field of their geometry. Here their arithmetic came up against their juridical metaphysics. Had they stuck to their metaphysical principles, the arithmetical process would have been simple indeed. Men, with them, are strictly equal and are entitled to equal rights in their own government. On this system each head would have its vote, and every man would vote directly for the person who was to represent him in the legislature. "But softly — by regular degrees, not yet." This metaphysical principle, to which law, custom, usage, policy and reason were all to yield, is to yield itself to their pleasure. There must be many degrees, and some stages, before the representative can come into contact with his constituent. Indeed, as we shall soon see, these two persons are to have no communion with each other at all. First, the voters in the _Canton_, who compose what they call _primary assemblies_, are to have a _qualification_. What! A qualification on the indefeasible rights of men? Yes, but it shall be a very small qualification. Our injustice shall be very little oppressive: only the local valuation of three days' labour paid to the public. Why, this is not much, I readily admit, for anything but the utter subversion of your equalising principle. As a qualification it might as well be dropped, for it answers none of the purposes qualifications are established for; and on your own ideas it excludes from a vote the very man whose natural equality most needs protection and defence — I mean the man who has nothing but his natural equality to guard him. You order him to buy the right which you had told him nature gave him free at his birth, and of which no authority on earth could lawfully deprive him. As against the man who cannot come up to your market, a tyrannous aristocracy is established at the very outset, and by you who pretend to be its sworn enemy.

The gradation goes on. These primary assemblies of the _Canton_ elect deputies to the _Commune_, one for every two hundred qualified inhabitants. Here is the first medium interposed between the primary elector and the representative legislator, and here a new turnpike is set up for taxing the rights of men with a second qualification: for nobody can be elected to the _Commune_ who does not pay the value of ten days' labour. Nor have we finished yet. There is still another gradation. These _Communes_, chosen by the _Canton_, elect to the _Department_; and the deputies of the _Department_ choose their deputies to the _National Assembly_. Here is a third barrier of senseless qualification. Every deputy to the National Assembly must pay, in direct contribution, the value of a _mark of silver_. Of all these qualifying barriers we must think alike: that they are impotent to secure independence and strong only to destroy the rights of men.

Footnote: The Assembly, in carrying out their committee's plan, made some alterations. They have struck out one stage in these gradations, which removes part of the objection; but the main objection — namely, that in their scheme the first constituent voter has no connection with the representative legislator — remains in all its force. There are other alterations, some possibly for the better and some certainly for the worse; but to the author the merit or demerit of these smaller alterations seems of no moment, where the scheme itself is fundamentally vicious and absurd.

In all this process, which in its fundamental elements professes to consider only _population_ on a principle of natural right, there is a manifest attention to _property_ — which, however just and reasonable it may be on other schemes, is on theirs perfectly indefensible.

When they come to their third basis, that of _Contribution_, we find that they have lost sight of the rights of men still more completely. This last basis rests _entirely_ on property. A principle totally different from the equality of men, and utterly irreconcilable with it, is thereby admitted; but no sooner is this principle admitted than, as usual, it is subverted — and it is not subverted, as we shall see presently, in order to bring the inequality of riches nearer to the level of nature. The additional share in the third portion of representation, a portion reserved exclusively for the higher contribution, is made to regard only the _district_ and not the individuals in it who pay. It is easy to see, from the course of their reasonings, how much they were embarrassed by their contradictory ideas of the rights of men and the privileges of riches. The Committee of Constitution as good as admit that the two are wholly irreconcilable. "The relation with regard to the contributions is without doubt _null_," they say, "when the question is about the balance of political rights as between individual and individual, without which _personal equality would be destroyed_ and _an aristocracy of the rich_ would be established. But this inconvenience entirely disappears when the proportional relation of the contribution is considered only in the _great masses_ and is solely between province and province; in that case it serves only to form a just reciprocal proportion between the cities, without affecting the personal rights of the citizens."

Here the principle of _contribution_, taken between man and man, is condemned as _null_ and destructive of equality — and as pernicious too, because it leads to establishing an _aristocracy of the rich_. Yet it must not be abandoned. And the way of getting round the difficulty is to establish the inequality between department and department, leaving all the individuals in each department on an exact par. Observe that this parity between individuals had already been destroyed when the qualifications within the departments were settled; nor does it seem a matter of great importance whether the equality of men is injured in masses or individually. An individual is not of the same importance in a mass represented by a few as in a mass represented by many. It would be too much to tell a man jealous of his equality that the elector who votes for three members has the same franchise as the one who votes for ten.

Now take it from the other point of view, and let us suppose their principle of representation according to contribution — that is, according to riches — to be well imagined, and a necessary basis for their republic. In this third basis they assume that riches ought to be respected, and that justice and policy require that riches should entitle men in some way or other to a larger share in the administration of public affairs. It is now to be seen how the Assembly provides for the pre-eminence, or even the security, of the rich, by conferring on their district, in virtue of their wealth, that larger measure of power which is denied to them personally. I readily admit — indeed I should lay it down as a fundamental principle — that in a republican government with a democratic basis the rich do require an additional security beyond what they need in monarchies. They are subject to envy, and through envy to oppression. On the present scheme it is impossible to guess what advantage they get from the aristocratic preference on which the unequal representation of the masses is founded. The rich cannot feel it either as a support to their dignity or as a security to their fortune, for the aristocratic mass is generated from purely democratic principles, and the prevalence given to it in the general representation has no sort of reference to, or connection with, the persons on account of whose property this superiority of the mass is established. If the contrivers of this scheme meant any sort of favour to the rich in consequence of their contribution, they ought to have conferred the privilege either on the individual rich or on some class formed of rich persons, as historians represent Servius Tullius to have done in the early constitution of Rome; because the contest between the rich and the poor is not a struggle between corporation and corporation but a contest between men and men — a competition not between districts but between descriptions of people. The scheme would answer its purpose better if it were inverted: if the votes of the masses were made equal and the votes within each mass were proportioned to property.

Let us suppose one man in a district — it is an easy supposition — to contribute as much as a hundred of his neighbours. Against them he has only one vote. If there were only one representative for the mass, his poor neighbours would outvote him a hundred to one for that single representative. Bad enough. But amends are to be made to him. How? The district, in virtue of his wealth, is to choose, say, ten members instead of one; that is to say, by paying a very large contribution he has the happiness of being outvoted a hundred to one by the poor for ten representatives instead of being outvoted in exactly the same proportion for a single member. In truth, instead of benefiting from this larger quantity of representation, the rich man is subjected to an additional hardship. The increase of representation within his province sets up nine more persons, and as many more than nine as there may be democratic candidates, to cabal and intrigue and flatter the people at his expense and to his oppression. By this means an interest is held out to multitudes of the lower sort in obtaining a salary of eighteen livres a day — to them a vast object — besides the pleasure of living in Paris and their share in the government of the kingdom. The more the objects of ambition are multiplied and made democratic, in just that proportion the rich are endangered.

So it must go between the poor and the rich in the province deemed aristocratic, which in its internal relations is the very reverse of that character. In its external relations, that is in its relation to the other provinces, I cannot see how the unequal representation given to masses on account of wealth becomes the means of preserving the equipoise and the tranquillity of the commonwealth. For if it is one of the objects to secure the weak from being crushed by the strong, as in all society it undoubtedly is, how are the smaller and poorer of these masses to be saved from the tyranny of the wealthier? Is it by giving the wealthy further and more systematic means of oppressing them? When we come to a balance of representation between corporate bodies, provincial interests and rivalries and jealousies are quite as likely to arise among them as among individuals, and their divisions are likely to produce a much hotter spirit of dissension and something coming much nearer to a war.

I see that these aristocratic masses are formed on what is called the principle of direct contribution. Nothing could be a more unequal standard than this. Indirect contribution, which arises from duties on consumption, is in truth a better standard, and follows and discovers wealth more naturally than direct contribution does. It is difficult, indeed, to fix a standard of local preference on account of the one, or the other, or both, because some provinces may pay more of either or of both on account of causes that are not intrinsic but arise from the very districts over which they have gained a preference in consequence of their apparent contribution. If the masses were independent sovereign bodies who were to provide for a federal treasury by separate contingents, and if the revenue did not, as it does, include many impositions running through the whole, which affect men individually and not corporately and which by their nature confound all territorial limits, then something might be said for the basis of contribution founded on masses. But of all things, this representation measured by contribution is the most difficult to settle on principles of equity in a country that regards its districts as members of a whole. For a great city such as Bordeaux or Paris appears to pay a vast body of duties, almost out of all assignable proportion to other places, and its mass is reckoned accordingly. But are these cities the true contributors in that proportion? No. The consumers of the goods imported into Bordeaux, who are scattered all over France, pay the import duties of Bordeaux. The produce of the vintage in Guienne and Languedoc gives that city the means of a contribution that grows out of an export trade. The landholders who spend their estates in Paris, and are thereby the creators of that city, contribute for Paris out of the provinces their revenues arise in. Very nearly the same arguments apply to the representative share given on account of _direct_ contribution, because direct contribution must be assessed on wealth, real or presumed, and that local wealth will itself arise from causes that are not local and which therefore in equity ought not to produce a local preference.
