Section Eleven: The New Constitution, and How It Was Built

(Part 2 of 4)

It is very remarkable that in this fundamental regulation, which settles the representation of the mass on direct contribution, they have not yet settled how that direct contribution is to be laid or how apportioned. Perhaps there is some hidden policy in this strange procedure, tending to keep the present Assembly in being. However, until they do settle it they can have no certain constitution. It must depend in the end on the system of taxation, and must vary with every variation in that system. As they have contrived matters, their taxation does not depend so much on their constitution as their constitution on their taxation. This must introduce great confusion among the masses, just as the variable qualification for votes within the district must, if ever real contested elections take place, cause endless internal controversy.

Comparing the three bases together, not on their political reason but on the ideas the Assembly works from, and testing its consistency with itself, we cannot help observing that the principle the committee call the basis of _population_ does not begin to operate from the same point as the two other principles, called the bases of _territory_ and of _contribution_, which are both aristocratic in nature. The consequence is that where all three begin to operate together, the working of the first on the two others produces the most absurd inequality. Every canton contains four square leagues and is reckoned to contain on average 4,000 inhabitants, or 680 voters in the _primary assemblies_, which vary in numbers with the population of the canton and send _one deputy_ to the _commune_ for every 200 voters. _Nine cantons_ make a _commune_.

Now let us take _a canton_ containing _a seaport town of trade_ or _a great manufacturing town_. Let us suppose the population of this canton to be 12,700 inhabitants, or 2,193 voters, forming _three primary assemblies_ and sending _ten deputies_ to the _commune_.

Set against this _one_ canton _two_ others of the remaining eight in the same commune. We may suppose these to have their fair population of 4,000 inhabitants and 680 voters each, or 8,000 inhabitants and 1,360 voters between them. These will form only _two primary assemblies_ and send only _six_ deputies to the _commune_.

When the assembly of the _commune_ comes to vote on the _basis of territory_, which is the first principle admitted to operate in that assembly, the _single canton_, which has _half_ the territory of the _other two_, will have _ten_ voices to _six_ in electing _three deputies_ to the assembly of the department — deputies chosen on the express ground of representing territory. Striking as this inequality is, it will be aggravated still further if we suppose, as we fairly may, that the _several_ other cantons of the _commune_ fall proportionally short of the average population by as much as the _principal canton_ exceeds it.

Now for _the basis of contribution_, which is also a principle admitted to operate first in the assembly of the _commune_. Let us again take _one_ canton such as the one described above. If the whole of the direct contributions paid by a great trading or manufacturing town is divided equally among the inhabitants, each individual will be found to pay much more than an individual living in the country on the same average. The whole paid by the inhabitants of the first will be more than the whole paid by the inhabitants of the second — we may fairly assume a third more. Then the 12,700 inhabitants, or 2,193 voters, of the canton will pay as much as 19,050 inhabitants, or 3,289 voters, of the _other cantons_, which is nearly the estimated proportion of inhabitants and voters of _five_ other cantons. Now the 2,193 voters will, as I said before, send only _ten_ deputies to the assembly; the 3,289 voters will send _sixteen_. So for an _equal_ share in the contribution of the whole _commune_ there will be a difference of _sixteen_ voices to _ten_ in voting for deputies who are to be chosen on the principle of representing the general contribution of the whole _commune_.

By the same mode of computation we shall find that 15,875 inhabitants, or 2,741 voters, of the _other_ cantons, who pay _one sixth_ _less_ towards the contribution of the whole _commune_, will have _three_ voices _more_ than the 12,700 inhabitants, or 2,193 voters, of the _one_ canton.

Such is the fantastical and unjust inequality between mass and mass in this curious apportionment of the rights of representation arising out of _territory_ and _contribution_. The qualifications these confer are in truth negative qualifications, which give a right in inverse proportion to the possession of them.

In this whole contrivance of the three bases, consider it in whatever light you please, I do not see a variety of objects reconciled in one consistent whole, but several contradictory principles reluctantly and irreconcilably brought together and held together by your philosophers, like wild beasts shut up in a cage to claw and bite each other to their mutual destruction.

I am afraid I have gone too far into their way of considering the formation of a constitution. They have much metaphysics, but bad; much geometry, but bad; much proportional arithmetic, but false. Yet even if it were all as exact as metaphysics and geometry and arithmetic ought to be, and if their schemes were perfectly consistent in all their parts, it would only make a fairer and more sightly vision. It is remarkable that in a great arrangement of mankind not one reference whatever is to be found to anything moral or anything political — nothing that relates to the concerns, the actions, the passions, the interests of men. _Hominem non sapiunt_ — they have no savour of the human being.

You see that I am considering this constitution only as electoral, leading by steps to the National Assembly. I do not go into the internal government of the departments and their genealogy through the communes and cantons. In the original plan these local governments are to be composed as nearly as possible in the same manner and on the same principles as the elective assemblies. Each of them is a body perfectly compact and rounded in itself.

You cannot fail to see that this scheme has a direct and immediate tendency to sever France into a variety of republics and to make them totally independent of each other, with no direct constitutional means of coherence, connection or subordination except what may come from their acquiescence in the decisions of the general congress of ambassadors from each independent republic. That is what the National Assembly is in reality; and such governments, I admit, do exist in the world, though in forms infinitely better suited to the local and habitual circumstances of their people. But such associations, which are hardly bodies politic at all, have generally been the effect of necessity and not of choice; and I believe the present French power is the very first body of citizens who, having obtained full authority to do what they pleased with their country, have chosen to dismember it in this barbarous manner.

It is impossible not to observe that in the spirit of this geometrical distribution and arithmetical arrangement these pretended citizens treat France exactly like a conquered country. Acting as conquerors, they have imitated the policy of the harshest of that harsh breed. The policy of such barbarous victors, who despise a subdued people and insult their feelings, has always been to destroy every vestige of the ancient country so far as they could — in religion, in government, in laws and in manners; to confound all territorial limits; to produce a general poverty; to put their properties up to auction; to crush their princes, nobles and pontiffs; to lay low everything that had lifted its head above the level, or that could serve to combine or rally the disbanded people in their distresses under the standard of old opinion. They have made France free in the way that those sincere friends of the rights of mankind, the Romans, freed Greece and Macedon and other nations. They destroyed the bonds of their union under colour of providing for the independence of each of their cities.

When the members who compose these new bodies of cantons and communes and departments — arrangements deliberately produced through the medium of confusion — begin to act, they will find themselves in great measure strangers to one another. The electors and the elected throughout, especially in the rural _cantons_, will frequently be without any civil habits or connections, or any of that natural discipline which is the soul of a true republic. Magistrates and collectors of revenue are now no longer acquainted with their districts, nor bishops with their dioceses, nor parish priests with their parishes. These new colonies of the rights of men bear a strong resemblance to the sort of military colonies Tacitus remarked on in the declining policy of Rome. In better and wiser days the Romans, whatever course they took with foreign nations, were careful to make the elements of a methodical subordination and settlement grow up together, and even to lay the foundations of discipline within the military. But when all the good arts had fallen into ruin, they proceeded, as your Assembly does, on the equality of men, and with as little judgment and as little care for the things that make a republic tolerable or durable. In this as in almost every instance your new commonwealth is born and bred and fed in the corruptions that mark degenerate and worn-out republics. Your child comes into the world with the symptoms of death on it; the _facies Hippocratica_ forms the character of its face and the prognosis of its fate.

Footnote: "Non, ut olim, universæ legiones deducebantur, cum tribunis, et centurionibus, et sui cujusque ordinis militibus, ut consensu et caritate rempublicam efficerent; sed ignoti inter se, diversis manipulis, sine rectore, sine affectibus mutuis, quasi ex alio genere mortalium repente in unum collecti, numerus magis quam colonia." In English: whole legions were no longer settled together, as they once were, with their tribunes and centurions and the soldiers of each rank, so as to make a commonwealth by common consent and mutual affection; instead they were strangers to one another, drawn from different companies, with no leader and no mutual attachments, as though suddenly collected into one place out of some other race of men — a number rather than a colony. — Tacitus, Annals, book 14, section 27. All this will apply still better to the unconnected, rotating, biennial national assemblies in this absurd and senseless constitution.

The legislators who framed the ancient republics knew that their business was too arduous to be accomplished with no better apparatus than the metaphysics of an undergraduate and the mathematics and arithmetic of an exciseman. They had to deal with men, and they were obliged to study human nature. They had to deal with citizens, and they were obliged to study the effects of the habits communicated by the circumstances of civil life. They were aware that the operation of this second nature on the first produced a new combination, and that from this arose many diversities among men according to their birth, their education, their professions, the periods of their lives, their residence in town or country, their several ways of acquiring and settling property, and the quality of that property itself — all of which made them, as it were, so many different species of animal. From this they thought themselves obliged to sort their citizens into such classes, and to place them in such situations in the state, as their particular habits qualified them to fill, and to allot them such appropriate privileges as would secure them what their specific occasions required, and would furnish each description with the force to protect it in the conflict caused by the diversity of interests that must exist and must contend in every complex society. For the legislator would have been ashamed that the coarse husbandman should know well how to sort and use his sheep and horses and oxen, and should have common sense enough not to abstract and equalise them all into animals without providing each kind with its appropriate food and care and employment — while he, the economist and disposer and shepherd of his own kindred, subliming himself into an airy metaphysician, was determined to know nothing of his flocks except as men in general. It is for this reason that Montesquieu observed, very justly, that the great legislators of antiquity made their greatest display of power in their classification of the citizens, and even soared above themselves there. It is here that your modern legislators have gone deep into the negative series and sunk below even their own nothing. Where the first sort of legislators attended to the different kinds of citizens and combined them into one commonwealth, the others, the metaphysical and alchemical legislators, have taken exactly the contrary course. They have tried to confound all sorts of citizens, as far as they could, into one homogeneous mass, and then they divided this amalgam of theirs into a number of incoherent republics. They reduce men to loose counters, merely for the sake of simple counting, and not to figures, whose power is to come from their place in the table. The elements of their own metaphysics might have taught them better lessons. The roll of their own table of categories might have informed them that there was something else in the intellectual world besides _substance_ and _quantity_. They might learn from the catechism of metaphysics that there are eight more heads in every complex deliberation which they have never thought of — though these, of all the ten, are the ones on which the skill of man can operate at all.

Footnote: Qualitas, Relatio, Actio, Passio, Ubi, Quando, Situs, Habitus. (Quality, relation, action, passion, place, time, position, state.)

So far from following that able arrangement of some of the old republican legislators, which follows the moral conditions and propensities of men with a solicitous accuracy, they have levelled and crushed together all the orders they found even under the coarse, unartificial arrangement of the monarchy — a form of government in which the classing of the citizens is not of so much importance as it is in a republic. It is true, however, that every such classification, if properly ordered, is good in all forms of government, and forms a strong barrier against the excesses of despotism as well as being the necessary means of giving effect and permanence to a republic. For want of something of this kind, if the present project of a republic should fail, all securities for a moderated freedom fail along with it, and all the indirect restraints that mitigate despotism are removed — so much so that if monarchy should ever regain an entire ascendancy in France, under this or any other dynasty, it will probably be the most completely arbitrary power that has ever appeared on earth, unless it is voluntarily tempered at the outset by the wise and virtuous counsels of the prince. This is to play a most desperate game.

They even declare that the confusion attending all such proceedings is one of their objects, and they hope to secure their constitution by a terror of the return of the evils that attended the making of it. "By this," they say, "its destruction will become difficult for authority, which cannot break it up without the entire disorganisation of the whole state." They presume that if this authority ever came to the same degree of power that they have acquired, it would make a more moderate and chastened use of it, and would piously tremble at entirely disorganising the state in the savage manner they have done themselves. They expect from the virtues of a returning despotism the security that is to be enjoyed by the offspring of their own popular vices.

I wish, Sir, that you and my readers would read M. de Calonne's work on this subject attentively. It is not only eloquent but an able and instructive performance. I confine myself to what he says about the constitution of the new state and the condition of the revenue. As for this minister's disputes with his rivals, I do not wish to pronounce on them. As little do I mean to hazard any opinion about his ways and means, financial or political, for taking his country out of its present disgraceful and deplorable condition of servitude, anarchy, bankruptcy and beggary. I cannot speculate quite so sanguinely as he does; but he is a Frenchman, and has a closer duty in these matters and better means of judging them than I can have. I hope that the formal avowal he refers to, made by one of the principal leaders in the Assembly, about the tendency of their scheme to bring France not only from a monarchy to a republic but from a republic to a mere confederacy, will be very particularly attended to. It adds new force to my observations; and indeed M. de Calonne's work supplies my deficiencies with many new and striking arguments on most of the subjects of this letter.

Footnote: See l'État de la France, page 363.

It is this determination to break their country into separate republics that has driven them into the greatest number of their difficulties and contradictions. If it were not for this, all the questions of exact equality, and these balances of individual rights and population and contribution that can never be settled, would be wholly useless. Representation, though drawn from the parts, would be a duty that regarded the whole equally. Each deputy to the Assembly would be the representative of France and of all its descriptions of people — of the many and the few, of the rich and the poor, of the great districts and the small. All these districts would themselves be subordinate to some standing authority existing independently of them, an authority in which their representation and everything belonging to it originated and to which it was directed. This standing, unalterable, fundamental government would make that territory truly and properly a whole, and it is the only thing that could. With us, when we elect popular representatives, we send them to a council in which each man individually is a subject, submitted to a government complete in all its ordinary functions. With you the elective Assembly is the sovereign and the sole sovereign, and all the members are therefore integral parts of that sole sovereignty. With us it is totally different. With us the representative, separated from the other parts, can have no action and no existence. The government is the point of reference for the several members and districts of our representation. This is the centre of our unity. This government of reference is a trustee for the _whole_ and not for the parts. So is the other branch of our public council: I mean the House of Lords. With us the king and the Lords are separate and joint securities for the equality of each district, each province, each city. When did you ever hear in Great Britain of a province suffering from the inequality of its representation? Of a district that had no representation at all? Not only do our monarchy and our peerage secure the equality on which our unity depends, but so does the spirit of the House of Commons itself. The very inequality of representation that is so foolishly complained of is perhaps the very thing that prevents us from thinking or acting as members for districts. Cornwall elects as many members as all Scotland. But is Cornwall better taken care of than Scotland? Few people trouble their heads about any of your bases, outside a few giddy clubs. Most of those who wish for any change on any plausible grounds desire it on different ideas altogether.

Your new constitution is the very reverse of ours in its principle, and I am astonished that anyone could dream of holding up anything done in it as an example for Great Britain. With you there is little, or rather no, connection between the last representative and the first constituent. The member who goes to the National Assembly is not chosen by the people, nor accountable to them. There are three elections before he is chosen; two sets of magistracy come between him and the primary assembly, so as to make him, as I have said, the ambassador of a state and not the representative of the people within a state. This changes the whole spirit of the election; nor can any corrective your constitution-mongers have devised make him anything other than what he is. The very attempt to do it would inevitably introduce a confusion more horrid, if possible, than the present one. There is no way of making a connection between the original constituent and the representative except by the roundabout means that would lead the candidate to apply in the first instance to the primary electors, so that by their authoritative instructions — and perhaps something more — those primary electors might force the two succeeding bodies of electors to make a choice agreeable to their wishes. But this would plainly subvert the whole scheme. It would be to plunge them back into that tumult and confusion of popular election which their interposed gradations of election are meant to avoid, and in the end to risk the whole fortune of the state with those who have the least knowledge of it and the least interest in it. This is a perpetual dilemma into which they are thrown by the vicious, weak and contradictory principles they have chosen. Unless the people break up and level this gradation, it is plain that they do not substantially elect to the Assembly at all; indeed they elect as little in appearance as in reality.

What is it that we all look for in an election? To answer its real purposes you must first possess the means of knowing whether your man is fit, and then you must retain some hold on him by personal obligation or dependence. To what end are these primary electors complimented, or rather mocked, with a choice? They can never know anything about the qualities of the man who is to serve them, nor has he any obligation whatever to them. Of all the powers unfit to be delegated by those who have any real means of judging, the most peculiarly unfit is one that relates to a _personal_ choice. In case of abuse, that body of primary electors can never call the representative to account for his conduct. He is too far removed from them in the chain of representation. If he behaves badly at the end of his two years' lease, it does not concern him for two years more. By the new French constitution the best and wisest representatives go into this _Limbus Patrum_ equally with the worst. Their bottoms are presumed foul, and they must go into dock to be refitted. Every man who has served in an Assembly is ineligible for two years after. Just as these magistrates begin to learn their trade, like chimney sweeps, they are disqualified from exercising it. Superficial, new, petulant acquisition, and interrupted, dronish, broken, ill recollection, are to be the destined character of all your future governors. Your constitution has too much jealousy in it to have much sense. You consider the representative's breach of trust so exclusively that you do not regard the question of his fitness to execute it at all.

This purgatorial interval is not unfavourable to a faithless representative, who may be as good a canvasser as he was a bad governor. In this time he may intrigue his way into a superiority over the wisest and most virtuous. Since in the end all the members of this elective constitution are equally fugitive and exist only for the election, the people to whom he is to be responsible when he asks for a renewal of his trust may no longer be the same people who chose him. To call all the secondary electors of the _commune_ to account is ridiculous, impracticable and unjust: they may themselves have been deceived in their choice, as the third set of electors, those of the _department_, may be in theirs. In your elections responsibility cannot exist.

Finding no sort of principle of coherence with one another in the nature and constitution of the several new republics of France, I considered what cement the legislators had provided for them out of any extraneous materials. I take no notice of their confederations, their _spectacles_, their civic feasts and their enthusiasm; they are nothing but mere tricks. But tracing their policy through their actions, I think I can make out the arrangements by which they propose to hold these republics together. The first is the _confiscation_, with the compulsory paper currency attached to it; the second is the supreme power of the city of Paris; the third is the general army of the state. I shall reserve what I have to say about the last until I come to consider the army as a head by itself.

As to the operation of the first, the confiscation and the paper currency, merely as a cement, I cannot deny that these two, each depending on the other, may for some time make a sort of cement — provided their madness and folly in managing it, and in tempering the parts together, does not produce a repulsion at the very outset. But allowing the scheme some coherence and some duration, it appears to me that if after a while the confiscation is not found sufficient to support the paper coinage, as I am morally certain it will not be, then instead of cementing it will add infinitely to the dissociation and distraction and confusion of these confederate republics, both in relation to each other and in the several parts within each of them. But if the confiscation should succeed so far as to sink the paper currency, the cement is gone with the circulation. Meanwhile its binding force will be very uncertain, and it will tighten or slacken with every variation in the credit of the paper.

Only one thing is certain in this scheme, an effect that is seemingly collateral but is, I have no doubt, direct in the minds of the men who conduct this business: its effect in producing an _oligarchy_ in every one of the republics. A paper circulation not founded on any real money deposited or pledged, already amounting to forty-four millions of English money, and forcibly substituted for the coin of the kingdom, thereby becoming the substance of its revenue as well as the medium of all its commercial and civil intercourse, must put whatever power and authority and influence is left, in whatever form it may take, into the hands of the managers and conductors of that circulation.

In England we feel the influence of the Bank, though it is only the centre of a voluntary dealing. A man knows little indeed of the influence of money on mankind who does not see the force of the management of a moneyed concern so much more extensive than any of ours, and by its nature so much more dependent on its managers. But this is not merely a money concern. There is another member of the system inseparably connected with this money management. It consists in the means of drawing out portions of the confiscated lands for sale at discretion, and carrying on a process of continual transmutation of paper into land and land into paper. When we follow this process in its effects, we may conceive something of the intensity of the force with which this system must operate. By this means the spirit of money-jobbing and speculation goes into the mass of land itself and incorporates with it. By this kind of operation that species of property becomes, as it were, volatilised; it takes on an unnatural and monstrous activity, and thereby throws into the hands of the several managers, principal and subordinate, Parisian and provincial, all the representative of money and perhaps a full tenth part of all the land in France — land which has now acquired the worst and most pernicious part of the evil of a paper circulation, the greatest possible uncertainty in its value. They have reversed Latona's kindness to the landed property of Delos. They have sent theirs to be blown about like the light fragments of a wreck, _oras et littora circum_, round the shores and the coasts.

The new dealers, being all habitual adventurers with no fixed habits or local attachments, will buy in order to job out again, as the market in paper or in money or in land offers an advantage. For though a holy bishop thinks agriculture will derive great advantages from the "_enlightened_" usurers who are to buy the church confiscations, I, who am not a good farmer but an old one, beg leave with great humility to tell his late Lordship that usury is no tutor of agriculture; and if the word "enlightened" is to be understood according to the new dictionary, as it always is in your new schools, I cannot conceive how a man's not believing in God can teach him to cultivate the earth with the least additional skill or encouragement. "_Diis immortalibus sero_" — I sow for the immortal gods — said an old Roman as he held one handle of the plough while Death held the other. Though you were to add all the directors of the two Academies to the directors of the _Caisse d'Escompte_ in the commission, an old experienced peasant is worth them all. I have got more information on a curious and interesting branch of husbandry in one short conversation with an old Carthusian monk than I have derived from all the bank directors I have ever talked with. There is no cause for alarm, however, at money dealers meddling with rural economy. These gentlemen are too wise in their generation. At first, perhaps, their tender and susceptible imaginations may be captivated with the innocent and unprofitable delights of a pastoral life; but in a little while they will find that agriculture is a trade much more laborious and much less lucrative than the one they had left. After delivering its panegyric, they will turn their backs on it like their great precursor and prototype. Like him, they may begin by singing "_Beatus ille_" — happy the man — but what will be the end?

	Hæc ubi locutus fœnerator Alphius,
	  Jam jam futurus rusticus,
	Omnem relegit Idibus pecuniam,
	  Quærit Calendis ponere.

	(When Alphius the moneylender had said all this, on the very point
	of becoming a countryman, he called in all his money on the Ides
	— and on the first of the month was looking to put it out again.)

They will cultivate the _Caisse d'Église_, under this prelate's sacred auspices, with much more profit than its vineyards and its cornfields. They will employ their talents according to their habits and their interests. They will not follow the plough while they can direct treasuries and govern provinces.

Your legislators, new in everything, are the very first to have founded a commonwealth on gaming and infused that spirit into it as its vital breath. The great object of these politics is to metamorphose France from a great kingdom into one great gaming table; to turn its inhabitants into a nation of gamblers; to make speculation as extensive as life and mix it with all life's concerns; and to divert the whole of the hopes and fears of the people out of their usual channels into the impulses and passions and superstitions of men who live on chances. They loudly proclaim their opinion that this present system of a republic cannot possibly exist without this kind of gaming fund, and that the very thread of its life is spun out of the staple of these speculations. The old gaming in the funds was mischievous enough, undoubtedly, but it was mischievous only to individuals. Even at its greatest extent, in the Mississippi and the South Sea, it affected comparatively few; and where it extends further, as in lotteries, the spirit has only a single object. But where the law, which in most circumstances forbids gaming and in none countenances it, is itself debauched so as to reverse its own nature and policy and expressly to force the subject to this destructive table, by bringing the spirit and symbols of gaming into the smallest matters and engaging everybody in it and in everything — there a more dreadful epidemic disease of that kind is spread than has yet appeared in the world. With you a man can neither earn nor buy his dinner without a speculation. What he receives in the morning will not have the same value at night. What he is compelled to take in payment of an old debt will not be received as the same when he comes to pay a debt he has contracted himself; nor will it be the same when by prompt payment he could avoid contracting any debt at all. Industry must wither away. Economy must be driven out of your country. Careful provision will have no existence. Who will labour without knowing the amount of his pay? Who will study to increase what nobody can estimate? Who will accumulate when he does not know the value of what he saves? Abstract it from its uses in gaming, and to accumulate your paper wealth would be not the providence of a man but the disordered instinct of a jackdaw.

The truly melancholy part of the policy of systematically making a nation of gamblers is this: that though all are forced to play, few can understand the game, and fewer still are in a condition to make use of that knowledge. The many must be the dupes of the few who conduct the machine of these speculations. What effect it must have on the country people is visible. The townsman can calculate from day to day; the countryman cannot. When the peasant first brings his corn to market, the magistrate in the town obliges him to take the assignat at par; when he goes to the shop with this money, he finds it seven per cent the worse for crossing the street. He will not readily come back to that market. The townspeople will be inflamed; they will force the country people to bring their corn. Resistance will begin, and the murders of Paris and St Denis may be repeated all over France.

What does the empty compliment paid to the country signify, in giving it perhaps more than its share in the theory of your representation? Where have you placed the real power over moneyed and landed circulation? Where have you placed the means of raising and lowering the value of every man's freehold? Those whose operations can take ten per cent from the possessions of every man in France, or add ten per cent to them, must be the masters of every man in France. The whole of the power obtained by this Revolution will settle in the towns, among the burghers and the moneyed directors who lead them. The landed gentleman, the yeoman and the peasant have none of them the habits or inclinations or experience that could lead them to any share in this, the sole source of power and influence now left in France. The very nature of country life, the very nature of landed property, in all the occupations and all the pleasures they afford, make combination and arrangement — the sole way of procuring and exerting influence — in a manner impossible among country people. Combine them with all the art and all the industry you can, and they are always dissolving back into individuality. Anything in the nature of incorporation is almost impracticable among them. Hope, fear, alarm, jealousy, the story of a day that does its business and dies — all the things that are the reins and spurs by which leaders check or urge the minds of followers — are not easily employed, or hardly at all, among scattered people. They assemble, they arm, they act with the utmost difficulty and at the greatest expense. Their efforts, if they can ever be begun, cannot be sustained. They cannot proceed systematically. If the country gentlemen attempt an influence through the mere income of their property, what is that against the influence of men who have ten times their income to sell, and who can ruin their property by bringing their plunder to meet it at market? If the landed man wants to mortgage, he lowers the value of his land and raises the value of assignats. He increases the power of his enemy by the very means he must use to contend with him. The country gentleman, therefore, and the officer by sea and land, and the man of liberal views and habits attached to no profession, will be as completely excluded from the government of his country as if he had been proscribed by law. It is obvious that in the towns all the things that conspire against the country gentleman combine in favour of the money manager and director. In towns, combination is natural. The habits of burghers, their occupations, their amusements, their business, their idleness, continually bring them into contact with one another. Their virtues and their vices are sociable; they are always in garrison; and they come embodied and half-disciplined into the hands of men who mean to form them for civil or military action.

All these considerations leave no doubt in my mind that if this monster of a constitution can last, France will be wholly governed by the agitators in corporations, by societies in the towns formed of directors in assignats and trustees for the sale of church lands, attorneys, agents, money-jobbers, speculators and adventurers, composing an ignoble oligarchy founded on the destruction of the crown, the church, the nobility and the people. Here end all the deceitful dreams and visions of the equality and rights of men. In "the Serbonian bog" of this base oligarchy they are all absorbed, sunk and lost for ever.
