Section Twelve: The Finances, and the Paper Money

(Part 1 of 2)

Having finished my few remarks on the constitution of the supreme power, the executive, the judicature and the military, and on the reciprocal relation of all these establishments, I shall say something about the ability your legislators have shown with regard to the revenue.

In their proceedings on this object, if it is possible, still fewer traces appear of political judgment or financial resource. When the States met, the great object seemed to be to improve the system of revenue, to enlarge its collection, to cleanse it of oppression and vexation, and to establish it on the most solid footing. Great expectations were entertained on that head throughout Europe. It was by this grand arrangement that France was to stand or fall; and this became, very properly in my opinion, the test by which the skill and patriotism of the men who ruled in that Assembly would be tried. The revenue of the state is the state. In effect, everything depends on it, whether for support or for reform. The dignity of every occupation depends wholly on the quantity and the kind of virtue that can be exerted in it. Since all great qualities of the mind that operate in public, and are not merely suffering and passive, require force for their display — I had almost said for their unequivocal existence — the revenue, which is the spring of all power, becomes in its administration the sphere of every active virtue. Public virtue, being magnificent and splendid in its nature, instituted for great things and occupied with great concerns, requires abundant scope and room, and cannot spread and grow under confinement in straitened, narrow and sordid circumstances. It is through the revenue alone that the body politic can act in its true genius and character; and it will therefore display just as much of its collective virtue, and as much of the virtue that characterises the men who move it and are as it were its life and guiding principle, as it possesses a just revenue. For it is from this source that not only magnanimity and liberality and beneficence and fortitude and providence and the tutelary protection of all good arts derive their food and the growth of their organs, but continence and self-denial and labour and vigilance and frugality and whatever else there is in which the mind shows itself above the appetite are nowhere more in their proper element than in the provision and distribution of the public wealth. It is therefore not without reason that the science of speculative and practical finance, which must call so many auxiliary branches of knowledge to its aid, stands high in the estimation not only of ordinary people but of the wisest and best of men. And as this science has grown along with the progress of its object, the prosperity and improvement of nations has generally increased with the increase of their revenues; and both will continue to grow and flourish as long as the balance between what is left to strengthen the efforts of individuals and what is collected for the common efforts of the state keeps a due reciprocal proportion and a close correspondence and communication. And perhaps it may be owing to the greatness of revenues, and to the urgency of state necessities, that old abuses in the constitution of finances are discovered and their true nature and rational theory comes to be more perfectly understood — so much so that a smaller revenue might have been more distressing in one period than a far greater one is found to be in another, the proportionate wealth remaining the same. In this state of things the French Assembly found something in their revenues to preserve, secure and administer wisely, as well as to abrogate and alter. Though their proud assumptions might justify the severest tests, in trying their abilities on their financial proceedings I shall only consider what is the plain, obvious duty of a common finance minister, and try them on that, and not on models of ideal perfection.

The objects of a financier, then, are to secure an ample revenue; to impose it with judgment and equality; to employ it economically; and, when necessity obliges him to use credit, to secure its foundations in that instance and for ever by the clearness and candour of his proceedings, the exactness of his calculations and the solidity of his funds. Under these heads we may take a short and distinct view of the merits and abilities of the men in the National Assembly who have taken the management of this arduous concern on themselves.

Far from any increase of revenue in their hands, I find from a report by M. Vernier of the Committee of Finances, dated the second of last August, that the amount of the national revenue, compared with what it produced before the Revolution, was diminished by two hundred millions, or _eight millions sterling_, of the annual income — considerably more than a third of the whole.

If this is the result of great ability, surely ability was never displayed in a more distinguished manner or with a more powerful effect. No common folly, no vulgar incapacity, no ordinary official negligence, no official crime even, no corruption, no peculation, hardly any direct hostility that we have seen in the modern world could in so short a time have made so complete an overthrow of the finances and, with them, of the strength of a great kingdom. _Cedo quî vestram rempublicam tantam amisistis tam cito?_ — tell me, how did you lose so great a commonwealth so quickly?

As soon as the Assembly met, the sophisters and declaimers began by decrying the ancient constitution of the revenue in many of its most essential branches, such as the public monopoly of salt. They charged it, as truly as unwisely, with being ill contrived, oppressive and partial. They were not content to use this description in speeches introducing some plan of reform; they declared it in a solemn resolution or public sentence, as though judicially passed on it, and circulated this throughout the nation. At the same time as they passed the decree, they ordered with equal gravity that this same absurd, oppressive and partial tax should go on being paid until they could find a revenue to replace it. The consequence was inevitable. The provinces that had always been exempt from this salt monopoly, some of them charged with other contributions perhaps equivalent to it, were wholly disinclined to bear any part of the burden that an equal distribution was to relieve the others of. As for the Assembly, occupied as it was with declaring and violating the rights of men and with its arrangements for general confusion, it had neither the leisure nor the capacity to contrive, nor the authority to enforce, any plan of any kind for replacing the tax, or equalising it, or compensating the provinces, or for leading their minds towards any scheme of accommodation with the other districts that were to be relieved. The people of the salt provinces, impatient under taxes condemned by the very authority that had ordered them to be paid, very soon found their patience exhausted. They thought themselves as skilful at demolishing as the Assembly could be. They relieved themselves by throwing off the whole burden. Encouraged by this example, each district, or part of a district, judging its own grievance by its own feeling and its own remedy by its own opinion, did as it pleased about the other taxes.

We are next to see how they have conducted themselves in contriving equal taxes, proportioned to the means of the citizens and least likely to lie heavily on the active capital employed in generating the private wealth from which the public fortune must be derived. By allowing the several districts, and several individuals within each district, to judge what part of the old revenue they might withhold, a new inequality of the most oppressive kind was introduced instead of better principles of equality. Payments were regulated by dispositions. The parts of the kingdom that were most submissive, most orderly or most affectionate towards the commonwealth bore the whole burden of the state. Nothing turns out to be so oppressive and unjust as a feeble government. To fill up all the deficiencies in the old taxes, and the new deficiencies of every kind that were to be expected, what was left to a state without authority? The National Assembly called for a voluntary benevolence — for a quarter of the income of all the citizens, to be assessed on the honour of the people who were to pay it. They obtained rather more than could rationally have been calculated on, but far indeed from what answered their real necessities, and much less their fond expectations. Rational people could have hoped for little from this tax of theirs in the disguise of a benevolence — a weak, ineffective and unequal tax, a tax by which luxury and avarice and selfishness were screened and the load thrown on productive capital, on integrity, generosity and public spirit, a tax laid by regulation upon virtue. At length the mask is thrown off, and they are now trying, with little success, to exact their benevolence by force.

This benevolence, the rickety offspring of weakness, was to be supported by another resource, the twin brother of the same prolific imbecility. The patriotic donations were to make good the failure of the patriotic contribution. John Doe was to become security for Richard Roe. By this scheme they took things of great price from the giver, comparatively of small value to the receiver; they ruined several trades; they pillaged the crown of its ornaments, the churches of their plate, and the people of their personal decorations. The invention of these juvenile pretenders to liberty was really nothing but a servile imitation of one of the poorest resources of a doting despotism. They took an old, huge, full-bottomed periwig out of the wardrobe of the antiquated frippery of Louis the Fourteenth to cover the premature baldness of the National Assembly. They produced this old-fashioned formal folly, though it had been so abundantly exposed in the Memoirs of the Duke de Saint-Simon — as if reasonable men needed any argument to show its mischief and insufficiency. A device of the same kind was tried within my memory by Louis the Fifteenth, but it never answered at any time. However, the necessities of ruinous wars were some excuse for desperate projects. The deliberations of calamity are rarely wise. But here there was a season for arrangement and foresight. It was in a time of profound peace, enjoyed for five years and promising to last much longer, that they had recourse to this desperate trifling. They were bound to lose more reputation by sporting with these toys and playthings of finance in their serious situation, filling half their journals as these have done, than could possibly be made up by the poor temporary supply they yielded. It seemed as if the men who adopted such projects were wholly ignorant of their circumstances, or wholly unequal to their necessities. Whatever virtue there may be in these devices, it is obvious that neither the patriotic gifts nor the patriotic contribution can ever be resorted to again. The resources of public folly are soon exhausted. Indeed the whole of their scheme of revenue is to make, by any artifice, an appearance of a full reservoir for the hour, while at the same time they cut off the springs and living fountains of perennial supply. The account M. Necker furnished not long ago was without question meant to be favourable. He gives a flattering view of the means of getting through the year, but he expresses, as it is natural he should, some apprehension for the year to follow. On this last forecast, instead of going into the grounds of the apprehension in order to prevent the predicted evil by proper foresight, M. Necker receives a sort of friendly reprimand from the President of the Assembly.

As to their other schemes of taxation, it is impossible to say anything about them with certainty, since they have not yet come into operation; but nobody is so sanguine as to imagine that they will fill up any perceptible part of the wide gaping breach their incapacity has made in their revenues. At present the state of their treasury sinks lower every day in cash and swells higher every day in fictitious representation. Now that so little is to be found within or without but paper — the representative not of wealth but of want, the creature not of credit but of power — they imagine that our flourishing condition in England is owing to bank paper, and not the bank paper to the flourishing condition of our commerce, to the solidity of our credit, and to the total exclusion of any idea of power from any part of the transaction. They forget that in England not one shilling of paper money of any description is received except by choice; that the whole has had its origin in cash actually deposited; and that it is convertible at pleasure, in an instant and without the smallest loss, into cash again. Our paper is of value in commerce because in law it is of none. It is powerful on the Exchange because in Westminster Hall it is impotent. In payment of a debt of twenty shillings a creditor may refuse all the paper of the Bank of England. Nor is there among us a single public security, of any quality or nature whatever, that is enforced by authority. In fact it might easily be shown that our paper wealth, instead of lessening the real coin, tends to increase it; that instead of being a substitute for money it only makes its entry, its exit and its circulation easier; and that it is the symbol of prosperity and not the badge of distress. A scarcity of cash and an exuberance of paper was never a subject of complaint in this nation.

Well, but a lessening of prodigal expense, and the economy introduced by the virtuous and sapient Assembly, makes amends for the losses sustained in the receipt of revenue. In this at least they have fulfilled the duty of a financier. Have those who say so looked at the expenses of the National Assembly itself? Of the municipalities? Of the city of Paris? Of the increased pay of the two armies? Of the new police? Of the new judicatures? Have they even carefully compared the present pension list with the old one? These politicians have been cruel, not economical. Comparing the expenses of the former prodigal government in relation to the revenues of that time with the expenses of this new system as against the state of its new treasury, I believe the present will be found beyond all comparison more costly.

Footnote: The reader will observe that I have touched only lightly, as my plan required nothing more, on the condition of the French finances in relation to the demands on them. If I had intended to do otherwise, the materials in my hands for such a task are not altogether complete. On this subject I refer the reader to M. de Calonne's work and to the tremendous display he has made of the havoc and devastation in the public estate and in all the affairs of France, caused by the presumptuous good intentions of ignorance and incapacity. Such causes will always produce such effects. Looking over that account with a fairly strict eye, and deducting, with perhaps too much rigour, everything that may be put down to a financier out of office who might be supposed by his enemies to want to make the most of his case, I believe it will be found that mankind was never at any time furnished with a more salutary lesson of caution against the daring spirit of innovators than the one supplied at the expense of France.

It remains only to consider the proofs of financial ability furnished by the present French managers when they have to raise supplies on credit. Here I am a little at a stand, for credit, properly speaking, they have none. The credit of the ancient government was not the best, indeed; but they could always command money on some terms, not only at home but from most of the countries of Europe where a surplus capital had accumulated, and the credit of that government was improving daily. The establishment of a system of liberty would of course be supposed to give it new strength — and so it would actually have done, if a system of liberty had been established. What offers has their government of pretended liberty had from Holland, from Hamburg, from Switzerland, from Genoa, from England, to deal in their paper? Why should these nations of commerce and economy enter into any money dealings with a people who attempt to reverse the very nature of things, among whom they see the debtor prescribing at the point of the bayonet the medium of his own solvency to his creditor, discharging one of his engagements with another, turning his very penury into his resource, and paying his interest with his rags?

Their fanatical confidence in the omnipotence of church plunder has led these philosophers to overlook all care of the public estate, just as the dream of the philosopher's stone leads dupes, under the more plausible delusion of the hermetic art, to neglect all rational means of improving their fortunes. With these philosophic financiers, this universal medicine made of church mummy is to cure all the evils of the state. These gentlemen perhaps do not believe much in the miracles of piety, but it cannot be questioned that they have an undoubting faith in the prodigies of sacrilege. Is there a debt that presses them? Issue _assignats_. Are compensations to be made, or a maintenance decreed, to men they have robbed of their freehold in their office or expelled from their profession? _Assignats_. Is a fleet to be fitted out? _Assignats_. If sixteen millions sterling of these _assignats_ forced on the people leave the wants of the state as urgent as ever, then issue, says one, thirty millions sterling of _assignats_ — issue eighty millions more of _assignats_, says another. The only difference between their financial factions is over the greater or lesser quantity of _assignats_ to be imposed on the public sufferance. They are all professors of _assignats_. Even those whose natural good sense and knowledge of commerce, not yet obliterated by philosophy, furnish decisive arguments against this delusion, conclude their arguments by proposing an issue of _assignats_. I suppose they must talk of _assignats_, since no other language would be understood. All experience of their inefficacy does not discourage them in the least. Are the old _assignats_ depreciated at market? What is the remedy? Issue new _assignats_. _Mais si maladia opiniatria non vult se garire, quid illi facere? Assignare; postea assignare; ensuita assignare_ — but if the obstinate disease will not be cured, what is he to do? Assignate; then assignate; and after that assignate. The word is altered by a trifle. The Latin of your present doctors may be better than that of your old comedy; their wisdom and the variety of their resources are the same. They have no more notes in their song than the cuckoo — though, far from the softness of that harbinger of summer and plenty, their voice is as harsh and as ominous as the raven's.

Who but the most desperate adventurers in philosophy and finance could ever have thought of destroying the settled revenue of the state, the sole security for the public credit, in the hope of rebuilding it with the materials of confiscated property? If, however, an excessive zeal for the state has led a pious and venerable prelate — a father of the Church by anticipation — to pillage his own order, and, for the good of the church and the people, to take on himself the place of grand financier of confiscation and comptroller-general of sacrilege, then in my opinion he and his coadjutors were bound to show by their subsequent conduct that they knew something of the office they had assumed. Once they had resolved to appropriate a certain portion of the landed property of their conquered country to the _fisc_, it was their business to make their bank a real fund of credit, so far as such a bank was capable of becoming one.

Footnote: La Bruyère, of Bossuet.

To establish a current circulating credit on any _land-bank_, in any circumstances whatever, has so far proved difficult at the very least. The attempt has commonly ended in bankruptcy. But when the Assembly had been led, through a contempt of moral principles, into a defiance of economic ones, it might at least have been expected that nothing would be left undone on their part to lessen this difficulty and to prevent any aggravation of this bankruptcy. It might be expected that, to make your land-bank tolerable, every means would be adopted that could display openness and candour in the statement of the security, and everything that could help the recovery of the debt. To take things at their most favourable, your condition was that of a man with a large landed estate which he wished to dispose of in order to discharge a debt and supply certain services. Not being able to sell it at once, you wished to mortgage. What would a man of fair intentions and ordinary clear understanding do in such circumstances? Ought he not first to ascertain the gross value of the estate, the charges of managing and disposing of it, and the encumbrances of all kinds, perpetual and temporary, that affect it — and then, striking a net surplus, calculate the just value of the security? When that surplus, which is the creditor's only security, had been clearly ascertained and properly vested in the hands of trustees, he would then indicate the parcels to be sold and the time and conditions of sale. After that he would allow the public creditor, if he chose, to subscribe his stock into this new fund — or he might receive proposals for an _assignat_ from people who would advance money to buy this species of security. That would be to proceed like men of business, methodically and rationally, and on the only principles of public and private credit that exist. The dealer would then know exactly what he was buying, and the only doubt that could hang on his mind would be the dread of a resumption of the spoil, which might one day be made, perhaps with the addition of punishment, from the sacrilegious grip of the execrable wretches who could become purchasers at the auction of their innocent fellow citizens.

An open and exact statement of the clear value of the property, and of the time and circumstances and place of sale, was necessary in order to efface as far as possible the stigma that has always been branded on every kind of land-bank. It became necessary on another principle too: that is, on account of a pledge of faith previously given on the subject, so that their future fidelity in a slippery business might be established by their adherence to their first engagement. When they had finally decided on a state resource from church booty, they came to a solemn resolution on the subject on the fourteenth of April 1790, and pledged themselves to their country "that, in the statement of the public charges for each year, there should be brought to account a sum sufficient to defray the expenses of the Roman Catholic and Apostolic religion, the support of the ministers at the altars, the relief of the poor, and the pensions of the clergy, secular and regular, of the one sex and of the other, _in order that the estates and goods which are at the disposal of the nation may be disengaged of all charges, and employed by the representatives, or the legislative body, to the great and most pressing exigencies of the state."_ On the same day they further engaged that the sum necessary for the year 1791 should be determined forthwith.
