Section Twelve: The Finances, and the Paper Money

(Part 2 of 2)

In this resolution they admit that it is their duty to show distinctly the expense of the objects above, which by other resolutions they had already engaged should come first in the order of provision. They admit that they ought to show the estate clear and disengaged of all charges, and that they should show it immediately. Have they done this immediately, or at any time? Have they ever furnished a rent roll of the immovable estate, or given in an inventory of the movable effects, which they confiscate to their assignats? How they can fulfil their engagement to hold out to the public service "an estate disengaged of all charges" without authenticating either the value of the estate or the amount of the charges, I leave to their English admirers to explain. Instantly on this assurance, and before taking a single step towards making it good, they issue sixteen millions sterling of their paper on the credit of so handsome a declaration. This was manly. Who, after such a masterly stroke, can doubt their abilities in finance? But then, before any further emission of these financial _indulgences_, they took care at least to make good their original promise. If any such estimate, either of the value of the estate or of the amount of the encumbrances, has been made, it has escaped me. I have never heard of it.

At length they have spoken out, and have made a full discovery of their abominable fraud in holding out the church lands as a security for any debts or any service whatever. They rob only to enable themselves to cheat; but in a very short time they defeat the ends of both the robbery and the fraud by making out accounts for other purposes, which blow up their whole apparatus of force and deception. I am obliged to M. de Calonne for his reference to the document that proves this extraordinary fact; it had somehow escaped me. Indeed it was not necessary to make out my assertion about the breach of faith on the declaration of the fourteenth of April 1790. It now appears from a report of their own committee that the charge of keeping up the reduced ecclesiastical establishments, and the other expenses attending religion, and maintaining the religious of both sexes who are retained or pensioned, and the other accompanying expenses of the same nature which they have brought on themselves by this convulsion in property, exceeds the income of the estates acquired by it by the enormous sum of two millions sterling a year — besides a debt of seven millions and upwards. These are the calculating powers of imposture! This is the finance of philosophy! This is the result of all the delusions held out to engage a miserable people in rebellion, murder and sacrilege, and to make them prompt and zealous instruments in the ruin of their country! Never in any case did a state enrich itself by confiscating from its citizens. This new experiment has succeeded like all the rest. Every honest mind, every true lover of liberty and humanity, must rejoice to find that injustice is not always good policy, nor rapine the highroad to riches. I add with pleasure, in a note, the able and spirited observations of M. de Calonne on this subject.

Footnote: "Ce n'est point à l'assemblée entière que je m'adresse ici; je ne parle qu'à ceux qui l'égarent, en lui cachant sous des gazes séduisantes le but où ils l'entraînent. C'est à eux que je dis: Votre objet, vous n'en disconviendrez pas, c'est d'ôter tout espoir au clergé, et de consommer sa ruine; c'est-là, en ne vous soupçonnant d'aucune combinaison de cupidité, d'aucun regard sur le jeu des effets publics, c'est-là ce qu'on doit croire que vous avez en vue dans la terrible opération que vous proposez; c'est ce qui doit en être le fruit. Mais le peuple que vous y intéressez, quel avantage peut-il y trouver? En vous servant sans cesse de lui, que faites-vous pour lui? Rien, absolument rien; et, au contraire, vous faites ce qui ne conduit qu'à l'accabler de nouvelles charges. Vous avez rejeté, à son préjudice, une offre de 400 millions, dont l'acceptation pouvoit devenir un moyen de soulagement en sa faveur; et à cette ressource, aussi profitable que légitime, vous avez substitué une injustice ruineuse, qui, de votre propre aveu, charge le trésor public, et par conséquent le peuple, d'un surcroît de dépense annuelle de 50 millions au moins, et d'un remboursement de 150 millions. Malheureux peuple! voilà ce que vous vaut en dernier résultat l'expropriation de l'Église, et la dureté des décrets taxateurs du traitement des ministres d'une religion bienfaisante; et désormais ils seront à votre charge: leurs charités soulageoient les pauvres; et vous allez être imposés pour subvenir à leur entretien!" In English: it is not the whole assembly I am addressing here; I speak only to the men who are leading it astray, hiding from it under seductive veils the goal they are dragging it towards. To them I say: your object, you will not deny it, is to take away all hope from the clergy and to complete their ruin. That — without suspecting you of any calculation of greed, or any eye to the play of the public funds — is what we must believe you have in view in the terrible operation you propose, and that is what its fruit must be. But the people you are engaging in it: what advantage can they find in it? Making constant use of them as you do, what do you do for them? Nothing, absolutely nothing; on the contrary, you do what can only end in loading them with new burdens. To their prejudice you have rejected an offer of 400 millions, the acceptance of which might have become a means of relief in their favour; and for that resource, as profitable as it was legitimate, you have substituted a ruinous injustice which, by your own admission, charges the public treasury, and consequently the people, with an additional annual expense of at least 50 millions and a repayment of 150 millions. Unhappy people! This is what the expropriation of the church comes to for you in the end, and the harshness of the decrees fixing the salaries of the ministers of a beneficent religion; and from now on they will be a charge on you. Their charity used to relieve the poor, and you are going to be taxed to keep them. — _De l'État de la France,_ page 81. See also page 92 and the pages following.

To persuade the world of the bottomless resource of ecclesiastical confiscation, the Assembly has proceeded to other confiscations of estates in offices, which could not be done with any ordinary colour of justice without being compensated out of this grand confiscation of landed property. On this fund, which was to show a surplus disengaged of all charges, they have thrown a new charge: namely, the compensation of the whole body of the disbanded judicature and of all suppressed offices and estates — a charge I cannot ascertain, but which unquestionably amounts to many millions of French money. Another of the new charges is an annuity of four hundred and eighty thousand pounds sterling, to be paid, if they choose to keep faith, by daily payments, for the interest of the first assignats. Have they ever given themselves the trouble of stating fairly the expense of managing the church lands in the hands of the municipalities, to whose care and skill and diligence, and that of their legion of unknown under-agents, they have chosen to commit the charge of the forfeited estates — the consequence of which had been so ably pointed out by the Bishop of Nancy?

But it is unnecessary to dwell on these obvious heads of encumbrance. Have they made out any clear statement of the grand encumbrance of all, by which I mean the whole of the general and municipal establishments of every sort, and compared it with the regular income from revenue? Every deficiency in these becomes a charge on the confiscated estate before the creditor can plant his cabbages on a single acre of church property. There is no other prop but this confiscation to keep the whole state from tumbling to the ground. In this situation they have deliberately covered with a thick fog everything they ought to have taken pains to clear; and then, blindfolded themselves, like bulls that shut their eyes when they charge, they drive their slaves at the point of the bayonet — blindfolded, indeed, no worse than their lords — to take their fictions for currency and to swallow paper pills at thirty-four millions sterling a dose. Then they proudly lay in their claim to future credit, after the failure of all their past engagements, and at a time when it is clear, if anything in such a matter can be clear, that the surplus estates will never answer even the first of their mortgages — I mean that of the four hundred millions, or sixteen millions sterling, of assignats. In all this procedure I can discern neither the solid sense of plain dealing nor the subtle dexterity of ingenious fraud. The objections within the Assembly to pulling up the floodgates for this inundation of fraud go unanswered; but they are thoroughly refuted by a hundred thousand financiers in the street. These are the numbers the metaphysical arithmeticians compute by. These are the grand calculations on which a philosophical public credit is founded in France. They cannot raise supplies, but they can raise mobs. Let them rejoice in the applause of the club at Dundee for their wisdom and patriotism in applying the plunder of the citizens to the service of the state. I hear of no address on this subject from the directors of the Bank of England — though their approval would carry a _little_ more weight in the scale of credit than the club at Dundee's. But to do the club justice, I believe the gentlemen who compose it are wiser than they appear: that they will be less liberal with their money than with their addresses, and that they would not give a dog's ear of their most rumpled and ragged Scotch paper for twenty of your fairest assignats.

Early this year the Assembly issued paper to the amount of sixteen millions sterling. What must be the state into which the Assembly has brought your affairs, when the relief afforded by so vast a supply has been hardly perceptible? This paper also suffered an almost immediate depreciation of five per cent, which in a little while came to about seven. The effect of these assignats on the receipt of revenue is remarkable. M. Necker found that the collectors of revenue, who received in coin, paid the treasury in assignats. The collectors made seven per cent by receiving in money and accounting in depreciated paper. It was not very difficult to foresee that this must be inevitable. It was no less embarrassing for that. M. Necker was obliged, for a considerable part of it in the London market I believe, to buy gold and silver for the mint, which came to about twelve thousand pounds above the value of the commodity gained. That minister was of the opinion that, whatever secret nutritive virtue assignats might have, the state could not live on them alone — that some real silver was necessary, particularly to satisfy men who, having iron in their hands, were not likely to distinguish themselves for patience when they perceived that an increase of pay held out to them in real money was to be fraudulently drawn back again in depreciated paper. In this very natural distress the minister applied to the Assembly to order the collectors to pay in specie what they had received in specie. It could not escape him that if the Treasury paid three per cent for the use of a currency that came back to it seven per cent worse than the minister issued it, such dealing could not greatly tend to enrich the public. The Assembly took no notice of his recommendation. They were in this dilemma: if they went on receiving the assignats, cash must become a stranger to their Treasury; if the Treasury refused those paper _amulets_, or discountenanced them in any degree, they would destroy the credit of their sole resource. They seem, then, to have made their choice, and to have given their paper some sort of credit by taking it themselves; while at the same time, in their speeches, they made a kind of swaggering declaration, something rather beyond legislative competence I think — that there is no difference in value between metallic money and their assignats. This was a good, stout, proof article of faith, pronounced under an anathema by the venerable fathers of this philosophic synod. _Credat_ who will — certainly not _Judæus Apella_.

A noble indignation rises in the minds of your popular leaders on hearing the magic lantern of their financial show compared with the fraudulent exhibitions of Mr Law. They cannot bear to hear the sands of his Mississippi compared with the rock of the church on which they build their system. Pray let them suppress this glorious spirit until they show the world what piece of solid ground there is for their assignats which they have not already preoccupied with other charges. They do injustice to that great mother fraud in comparing it with their degenerate imitation. It is not true that Law built solely on a speculation about the Mississippi. He added the East India trade; he added the African trade; he added the farms of all the farmed revenue of France. All these together unquestionably could not support the structure that the public enthusiasm, not he, chose to build on those bases. But by comparison these were generous delusions. They supposed, and they aimed at, an increase of the commerce of France. They opened the whole range of the two hemispheres to it. They did not think of feeding France out of her own substance. A grand imagination found something captivating in this flight of commerce. It was enough to dazzle the eye of an eagle. It was not made to entice the nose of a mole, nuzzling and burying itself in its mother earth, as yours is. Men had not then shrunk from their natural dimensions through a degrading and sordid philosophy, fitted for low and vulgar deceptions. Above all, remember that in imposing on the imagination, the managers of that system paid a compliment to the freedom of men. In their fraud there was no admixture of force. That was reserved for our own time, to quench the little glimmerings of reason that might break in on the solid darkness of this enlightened age.

On recollection, I have said nothing of one scheme of finance that might be urged in favour of these gentlemen's abilities, and which has been introduced with great pomp though not yet finally adopted in the National Assembly. It comes with something solid in aid of the credit of the paper circulation, and much has been said of its usefulness and its elegance. I mean the project for coining the bells of the suppressed churches into money. This is their alchemy. There are some follies that baffle argument, that go beyond ridicule, and that excite no feeling in us but disgust; and therefore I say no more about it.

It is as little worth remarking any further on all their drawing and redrawing, on their circulation for putting off the evil day, on the play between the Treasury and the _Caisse d'Escompte_, and on all these old exploded contrivances of mercantile fraud now exalted into policy of state. The revenue will not be trifled with. Prattle about the rights of men will not be accepted in payment for a biscuit or a pound of gunpowder. Here, then, the metaphysicians come down from their airy speculations and faithfully follow examples. What examples? The examples of bankrupts. But defeated, baffled, disgraced, with their breath and their strength and their inventions and their fancies all deserting them, their confidence still holds its ground. In the manifest failure of their abilities they take credit for their benevolence. When the revenue disappears in their hands, they have the presumption, in some of their recent proceedings, to value _themselves_ on the relief given to the people. They did not relieve the people. If they had any such intentions, why did they order the obnoxious taxes to be paid? The people relieved themselves, in spite of the Assembly.

But waiving all discussion about which party can claim the merit of this fallacious relief, has there in fact been any relief to the people in any form? M. Bailly, one of the grand agents of paper circulation, lets you into the nature of this relief. His speech to the National Assembly contained a high and laboured panegyric on the inhabitants of Paris for the constancy and unbroken resolution with which they have borne their distress and misery. A fine picture of public happiness! What! Great courage and unconquerable firmness of mind, to endure benefits and to sustain redress? One would think from this learned lord mayor's speech that the Parisians had spent the last twelvemonth suffering the straits of some dreadful blockade — that Henry the Fourth had been stopping up the approaches to their supply and Sully thundering with his artillery at the gates of Paris — when in reality they are besieged by no enemies but their own madness and folly, their own credulity and perverseness. But M. Bailly will sooner thaw the eternal ice of his Atlantic regions than restore the central heat to Paris while it remains "smitten with the cold, dry, petrific mace" of a false and unfeeling philosophy. Some time after this speech, on the thirteenth of last August, the same magistrate, giving an account of his administration at the bar of the same Assembly, expresses himself as follows: "In the month of July 1789" — the period of everlasting commemoration — "the finances of the city of Paris were _yet_ in good order; the expenditure was counterbalanced by the receipts, and she had at that time a million (forty thousand pounds sterling) in the bank. The expenses she has been forced to incur _subsequent to the Revolution_ amount to 2,500,000 livres. From these expenses, and from the great falling off in the produce of the _free gifts_, there has arisen not only a momentary but a _total_ want of money." This is the Paris on whose nourishment such immense sums, drawn from the vitals of all France, have been spent in the course of the last year. As long as Paris stands in the place of ancient Rome, so long will she be maintained by the subject provinces. It is an evil inevitably attending the dominion of sovereign democratic republics. As happened at Rome, it may outlive the republican domination that gave rise to it. In that case despotism itself must submit to the vices of popularity. Rome under her emperors united the evils of both systems, and this unnatural combination was one great cause of her ruin.

To tell the people that they are relieved by the dilapidation of their public estate is a cruel and insolent imposition. Before valuing themselves on the relief given to the people by the destruction of their revenue, statesmen ought first to have attended carefully to the solution of this problem: whether it is more advantageous to the people to pay considerably and gain in proportion, or to gain little or nothing and be unburdened of all contribution. My mind is made up to decide in favour of the first. Experience is with me, and I believe the best opinions are too. To keep a balance between the subject's power of acquisition and the demands he has to answer on the part of the state is the fundamental part of a true politician's skill. The means of acquisition come first in time and in arrangement. Good order is the foundation of all good things. To be able to acquire, the people must be tractable and obedient without being servile. The magistrate must have his reverence and the laws their authority. The body of the people must not have the principles of natural subordination artificially rooted out of their minds. They must respect the property they cannot share. They must labour to obtain what labour can obtain; and when they find, as they commonly do, that the success is not proportioned to the effort, they must be taught where their consolation lies, in the final proportions of eternal justice. Whoever deprives them of that consolation deadens their industry and strikes at the root of all acquisition as of all conservation. The man who does this is the cruel oppressor and the merciless enemy of the poor and wretched — at the same time as, by his wicked speculations, he exposes the fruits of successful industry and the accumulations of fortune to the plunder of the negligent, the disappointed and the unprosperous.

Too many professional financiers are apt to see nothing in revenue but banks and circulations and annuities on lives and tontines and perpetual rents and all the small wares of the shop. In a settled order of the state these things are not to be slighted, nor is skill in them to be held of trivial value. They are good, but only good when they assume the effects of that settled order and are built on it. But when men think that these beggarly contrivances can supply a resource against the evils that result from breaking up the foundations of public order, and from causing or allowing the principles of property to be subverted, they will leave, in the ruin of their country, a melancholy and lasting monument to the effect of preposterous politics and presumptuous, short-sighted, narrow-minded wisdom.

The effects of the incapacity shown by the popular leaders in all the great members of the commonwealth are to be covered with the "all-atoning name" of liberty. In some people I do see great liberty; in many, if not in most, I see an oppressive, degrading servitude. But what is liberty without wisdom and without virtue? It is the greatest of all possible evils, for it is folly and vice and madness without tuition or restraint. Those who know what virtuous liberty is cannot bear to see it disgraced by incapable heads on the strength of their having high-sounding words in their mouths. Grand, swelling sentiments of liberty I am sure I do not despise. They warm the heart; they enlarge and liberalise our minds; they animate our courage in a time of conflict. Old as I am, I read the fine raptures of Lucan and Corneille with pleasure. Nor do I wholly condemn the little arts and devices of popularity. They make it easier to carry many points of moment; they keep the people together; they refresh the mind in its exertions; and they spread an occasional gaiety over the severe brow of moral freedom. Every politician ought to sacrifice to the Graces and to join compliance with reason. But in such an undertaking as the one in France, all these subsidiary sentiments and artifices are of little use. To make a government requires no great prudence. Settle the seat of power, teach obedience, and the work is done. To give freedom is easier still. There is no need to guide; you need only let go the rein. But to form a _free government_ — that is, to temper these opposite elements of liberty and restraint together into one consistent work — requires much thought, deep reflection, and a sagacious, powerful, combining mind. This I do not find in the men who take the lead in the National Assembly. Perhaps they are not so miserably deficient as they appear. I rather believe they are not. It would put them below the common level of human understanding. But when leaders choose to make themselves bidders at an auction of popularity, their talents will be of no service in constructing the state. They will become flatterers instead of legislators, the instruments and not the guides of the people. If any of them should happen to propose a scheme of liberty soberly limited and defined with proper qualifications, he will immediately be outbid by competitors producing something more splendidly popular. Suspicions will be raised about his fidelity to his cause. Moderation will be stigmatised as the virtue of cowards, and compromise as the prudence of traitors — until, in the hope of preserving the credit that might let him temper and moderate on some occasions, the popular leader is obliged to become active in propagating doctrines and establishing powers that will afterwards defeat any sober purpose he might ultimately have aimed at.
