Section Thirteen: What I Wish for My Own Country

But am I so unreasonable as to see nothing at all deserving praise in the tireless labours of this Assembly? I do not deny that among an infinite number of acts of violence and folly, some good may have been done. Men who destroy everything will certainly remove some grievance. Men who make everything new stand a chance of establishing something beneficial. But to give them credit for what they have done by virtue of the authority they have usurped, or to excuse them for the crimes by which that authority was acquired, it would have to appear that the same things could not have been accomplished without producing such a revolution. Most assuredly they could; because almost every one of their regulations that is not highly equivocal was contained either in the king's concession, voluntarily made at the meeting of the States, or in the concurring instructions to the orders. Some usages have been abolished on just grounds; but they were such that if they had stood exactly as they were to all eternity, they would have detracted very little from the happiness and prosperity of any state. The improvements of the National Assembly are superficial; their errors are fundamental.

Whatever they are, I would rather my countrymen recommended the example of the British constitution to our neighbours than took models from them for improving our own. In our constitution we have an invaluable treasure. We are not, I think, without some causes for apprehension and complaint; but we owe these not to our constitution but to our own conduct. I think our happy situation is owing to our constitution — but owing to the whole of it, and not to any part of it singly; owing in great measure to what we have left standing through our several reviews and reformations, as well as to what we have altered or added. Our people will find employment enough for a truly patriotic, free and independent spirit in guarding what they possess from violation. I would not rule out alteration either; but even when I changed, it should be in order to preserve. I should be led to my remedy by a great grievance. In whatever I did, I should follow the example of our ancestors. I would make the repair as nearly as possible in the style of the building. A politic caution, a guarded circumspection, a timidity of principle rather than of temperament, were among the ruling principles of our forefathers in their most decided conduct. Not being illuminated with the light of which the gentlemen of France tell us they have so abundant a share, they acted under a strong sense of the ignorance and fallibility of mankind. He who had made them fallible rewarded them for attending to their own nature in their conduct. Let us imitate their caution if we wish to deserve their fortune or to keep what they left us. Let us add, if we please, but let us preserve what they have left; and, standing on the firm ground of the British constitution, let us be content to admire the aeronauts of France rather than attempt to follow them in their desperate flights.

I have told you my sentiments candidly. I do not think they are likely to alter yours. I do not know that they ought to. You are young; you cannot guide the fortune of your country, but must follow it. Hereafter, though, they may be of some use to you, in some future form your commonwealth may take. In its present form it can hardly remain; but before its final settlement it may be obliged to pass, as one of our poets says, "through great varieties of untried being", and to be purified by fire and blood in all its transmigrations.

I have little to recommend my opinions but long observation and much impartiality. They come from a man who has been no tool of power and no flatterer of greatness, and who in his last acts does not wish to belie the tenor of his life. They come from a man almost the whole of whose public exertion has been a struggle for the liberty of others; in whose breast no anger lasting or vehement has ever been kindled except by what he considered to be tyranny; and who has snatched the hours he has spent on your affairs from his share in the efforts good men are making to discredit wealthy oppression, persuading himself as he did so that he was not departing from his usual office. They come from a man who desires honours and distinctions and salaries very little, and expects them not at all; who has no contempt for fame and no fear of obloquy; who avoids contention, though he will hazard an opinion; from a man who wishes to preserve consistency, but who would preserve it by varying his means in order to secure the unity of his end — and who, when the balance of the vessel he sails in may be endangered by overloading on one side, is anxious to carry the small weight of his reasons over to the side that may keep it in trim.
