Medea
(Part 2 of 3)

Chorus.
Anger like this is a terrible thing, and hard to heal, when people who
were close to each other fall out and fight.

Jason.
It seems I had better be a decent speaker after all. I will have to be
like a good helmsman, who reefs his sail right down to the edges and
runs out from under the storm, to get clear of this gale you keep
blowing from your mouth, woman. As for me, since you pile your favour
so high, I say it was Aphrodite who saved my voyage, and nobody else,
god or mortal. You have a subtle mind, I grant you. But it would be an
ungracious story to go through, how Love forced you, with arrows
nobody can dodge, to save my skin. Still, I will not weigh it too
finely. However you helped me, it was help, and I do not complain of
it. But you took more for saving me than you ever gave, as I will now
show you.

First, you live in Greece, instead of a barbarian country. You know
what justice is, and how to live by law instead of by whoever is
strongest. Every Greek has heard how clever you are, and you have a
name. If you were still living out at the far edge of the world,
nobody would ever have mentioned you. As for me, I would not want gold
in the house, or a voice to sing more sweetly than Orpheus, if my luck
did not make me famous with it. That is all I have to say about my
labours, and I only say it because you were the one who set up this
contest of speeches.

Now, the royal marriage you threw in my face. Here I am going to show
you, first, that I was clever; second, that I kept myself in hand; and
third, that I was a great friend to you and to my children. No, keep
quiet. When I moved here from the country of Iolcus, dragging one
hopeless disaster after another behind me, what luckier find could I
possibly have found than this, an exile marrying a king's daughter?
Not, as you keep stinging yourself with thinking, because I hated
your bed and had been struck down with desire for a new bride. Not
because I was eager to win some contest for having the most children,
either. The ones I have are enough, and I have no complaint about
them. No. I did it so that, first and most important, we could live
well and not go short, because I know that a poor man's friends all
get out of his way. So that I could bring the children up in a manner
worthy of my house, and father brothers for the children I have by
you, and put them all on the same footing, and join the family into
one, and we would all be happy. What do you need more children for?
For me, it pays to use the children still to come to help the ones I
already have. Have I planned badly? You would not say so yourself, if
your bed were not stinging you.

But you women have got to the point where, as long as the bed is
going right, you think you have everything, and the moment something
goes wrong in the bed, you turn on the best and finest things you
have as though they were your worst enemies. Men should have found
some other way of getting children, and there should have been no
such thing as women. Then there would be no trouble in the world for
anyone.

Chorus.
Jason, you have dressed these words up very well. All the same, even
if I am saying something you will not like, I think you have betrayed
your wife, and what you are doing is not just.

Medea.
I certainly differ from most people about a great many things. To my
mind, a man who is in the wrong and is a clever speaker by nature
deserves the heaviest penalty of all. He is so sure his tongue can
dress up an injustice nicely that he has the nerve to try anything.
And he is not so very clever, either. So do not put on your fine
manners with me now, and your gift for speaking. One word will lay
you flat. If you were not a bad man, you should have talked me round
first and then made this marriage, instead of doing it behind the
backs of the people who loved you.

Jason.
Oh yes, you would have given that proposal a warm welcome, I am sure,
if I had told you about the marriage. When even now you cannot bring
yourself to let go of the great rage in your heart.

Medea.
That is not what held you back. A barbarian wife was starting to look
bad for you, as you got on towards old age.

Jason.
Get this clear. It was not for the woman's sake that I married into
the royal bed I have now. I told you before: I wanted to save you, and
to father royal sons to be brothers to my own children, a wall round
the house.

Medea.
May I never have the kind of prosperity that hurts, or the kind of
wealth that stings my heart.

Jason.
Do you know how to change that prayer, and look wiser for it? Pray
that good things never look painful to you, and that when your luck is
in you do not think it is out.

Medea.
Go on, add outrage to it. You have somewhere to turn. I am the one who
goes into exile from this country alone.

Jason.
You chose this yourself. Blame nobody else.

Medea.
By doing what? Marrying someone and betraying you?

Jason.
By calling down unholy curses on the royal house.

Medea.
Yes, and I am a curse on your house too, as it turns out.

Jason.
I am not going to argue any more of this with you. But if you want to
take some of my money, to help the children or to help you in your
exile, say so. I am ready to give with an open hand, and to send
tokens to my friends abroad, who will treat you well. If you refuse
this, woman, you are a fool. Let go of your anger and you will come
out of it better.

Medea.
I would not make use of those friends of yours, and I would not accept
a thing. Do not offer it to us. A bad man's gifts do nobody any good.

Jason.
Well then. I call the gods to witness that I am willing to do
everything for you and for the children. But you do not like good
things. You are so stubborn you push away the people who care about
you, and so you will suffer all the more.

Medea.
Go. You are aching for the girl you have just broken in, and you have
been away from the house too long. Go and be a bridegroom. Because
perhaps, with the god's help I will say it, you are making the kind of
marriage you will wish you had never made.

(Jason goes off towards the palace.)

Chorus.
	Love that comes in too strong
	brings men no good name
	and no goodness either.
	But if Aphrodite comes in just enough,
	there is no god so gracious.
	Never, my lady, aim at me from your golden bow
	the arrow no one escapes, dipped in desire.

Chorus.
	Let a steady heart love me,
	the finest gift the gods give.
	Never let terrible Aphrodite
	strike my spirit into quarrelling tempers
	and fights that are never fed full, over some other woman's bed.
	Let her honour marriages that keep the peace,
	and judge with a sharp mind who should sleep with whom.

Chorus.
	My country. My home.
	Never let me be a woman without a city,
	dragging out a life of helplessness
	that there is no crossing,
	the most pitiful of griefs.
	Let death, let death bring me down first,
	when I have finished this day.
	There is no hardship worse
	than to lose the land you were born in.

Chorus.
	I have seen it. I do not need
	anybody else's story to tell it.
	No city, not one of your friends
	pitied you when you suffered
	the most terrible thing there is to suffer.
	Let him die unthanked, the man who could
	honour his friends and will not,
	will not unlock a clean mind to them.
	He will never be a friend of mine.

(Aegeus, the king of Athens, comes in, on his way through Corinth.)

Aegeus.
Medea, be happy. Nobody knows a better opening than that for greeting
a friend.

Medea.
And you be happy too, Aegeus, son of clever Pandion. Where have you
come from, to be setting foot in this country?

Aegeus.
From Apollo's ancient oracle. I have just left it.

Medea.
What sent you to the navel of the earth, where the god sings his
answers?

Aegeus.
I was asking how I might get the seed of children.

Medea.
By the gods. Have you been living childless all this while?

Aegeus.
We are childless. Some god has arranged it.

Medea.
Do you have a wife, or have you never known a woman's bed?

Aegeus.
I am not unyoked. I have a marriage bed.

Medea.
Then what did Apollo tell you about children?

Aegeus.
Words too clever for a man to piece together.

Medea.
Am I allowed to know what the god said?

Aegeus.
Certainly. It needs a clever mind, if anything does.

Medea.
What did he say, then? Tell me, if I am allowed to hear it.

Aegeus.
That I must not untie the foot of the wineskin that sticks out.

Medea.
Until you have done what? Or reached what country?

Aegeus.
Until I come home again to my father's hearth.

Medea.
And what do you want here, that you have sailed to this country?

Aegeus.
There is a man called Pittheus, the king of the land of Troezen.

Medea.
The son of Pelops, they say, and a very godly man.

Aegeus.
I want to share the god's answer with him.

Medea.
Yes, he is a clever man, and used to handling things like this.

Aegeus.
And to me the dearest of all the friends I have fought beside.

Medea.
Well, good luck to you, and may you get everything you long for.

Aegeus.
But why are your eyes like that? Why is your skin so wasted?

Medea.
Aegeus, my husband is the worst man alive, to me.

Aegeus.
What do you mean? Tell me plainly why you are so low.

Medea.
Jason is wronging me, and I never did a thing to him.

Aegeus.
What has he done? Tell me more clearly.

Medea.
He has put another woman over us as mistress of the house.

Aegeus.
Surely he has not had the nerve to do a thing as shameful as that?

Medea.
Be sure of it. We who were dear to him before are nothing now.

Aegeus.
Did he fall in love? Or did he come to hate your bed?

Medea.
A great love, yes. He was born faithless to the people he owes.

Aegeus.
Then let him go, if he is as bad as you say.

Medea.
What he fell in love with was marrying into a king's family.

Aegeus.
And who is giving him the bride? Finish the story for me.

Medea.
Creon, who rules this land of Corinth.

Aegeus.
Then you have every excuse for your grief, lady.

Medea.
I am finished. And on top of it, I am being driven out of the
country.

Aegeus.
By whom? That is another new trouble you are telling me about.

Medea.
Creon is driving me out of the land of Corinth as an exile.

Aegeus.
And Jason allows it? I do not think much of that either.

Medea.
Not in so many words. But he is willing to put up with it. Aegeus, I
beg you, by this beard of yours, by your knees, I am your suppliant.
Pity me. Pity me, the luckless woman. Do not stand and watch me
thrown out alone. Take me into your country, into your house, at your
hearth. If you do, may the gods bring your longing for children to
fruit, and may you die a happy man yourself. You do not know what a
find you have found in me. I will put an end to your childlessness. I
will make you the father of children. I know the drugs for it.

Aegeus.
There are many reasons, lady, why I am eager to do you this favour.
First, for the sake of the gods. Second, for the children you promise
me, because on that score I am completely at a loss. So this is how
it stands with me. If you come to my country, I will try to protect
you as your host, which is only just. But I give you this much warning
in advance, lady. I will not be willing to take you out of this land
myself. If you come to my house on your own, you will stay there safe
from harm, and I will never hand you over to anyone. But it is your
own feet that must carry you out of this country. I want to be
blameless in the eyes of my hosts here as well.

Medea.
So be it. But if I could have a pledge from you on this, I would have
everything I want from you.

Aegeus.
Do you not trust me? What is the difficulty?

Medea.
I trust you. But the house of Pelias is my enemy, and so is Creon. If
you were bound to me by oaths, you would not let them take me out of
your country. If you had only made an agreement in words, and were not
sworn before the gods, you might become their friend, and you might
give in when their heralds came asking. No, you would not hold out. My
side is weak, and they have wealth and a royal house.

Aegeus.
There is a great deal of foresight in what you say. Well, if that is
what you want, I do not refuse to do it. It is the safest thing for
me too, to have some excuse I can show your enemies, and it puts your
own position on firmer ground. Name the gods.

Medea.
Swear by the floor of the Earth, and by the Sun, who was the father of
my father, and by the whole race of the gods, all together in one
oath.

Aegeus.
To do what, or not to do what? Say it.

Medea.
That you will never throw me out of your country yourself, and that if
any enemy of mine wants to take me, you will never willingly let me
go, as long as you live.

Aegeus.
I swear by Earth, and by the holy light of the Sun, and by all the
gods, that I will stand by what I hear from you.

Medea.
That is enough. And if you do not stand by this oath, what should
happen to you?

Aegeus.
Whatever happens to men who do not keep faith with the gods.

Medea.
Go, and be happy. Everything is well. I will come to your city as fast
as I can, once I have done what I mean to do, and got what I want.

(Aegeus goes on his way.)

Chorus.
	May Hermes, the son of Maia, the lord who guides travellers,
	bring you safe to your house,
	and may you get the thing you are set on
	and hurrying after, Aegeus,
	because you have shown yourself a good man in my eyes.

Medea.
Zeus. Justice, daughter of Zeus. Light of the Sun. Now, my friends,
we are going to win a glorious victory over my enemies. We have set
foot on the road. Now there is hope that the people I hate will pay
what they owe. Because this man has appeared, right where I was
struggling hardest, as a harbour for my plans. I will tie my stern
cable to him, when I reach the town and the citadel of Pallas Athena.

Now I will tell you all my plans. Do not expect to enjoy them. I will
send one of my slaves to Jason and ask him to come and see me. When he
comes, I will speak softly to him. I will say that I think as he does,
that this royal marriage he has betrayed us for is a good thing, that
it is to our advantage and well thought out. And I will ask that my
children stay here. Not that I would leave my children on enemy soil
for my enemies to insult. No. I ask it so that I can kill the king's
daughter by a trick. I will send them carrying gifts in their hands,
gifts for the bride, so that they will not be exiled from this land:
a fine-woven dress and a wreath of beaten gold. And if she takes the
finery and puts it on her skin, she will die horribly, and so will
anyone who touches the girl. That is the kind of drug I am going to
smear on my gifts.

But there I leave that part of the story. I groan at the thing that
has to be done after it. I am going to kill my children. My own. There
is nobody who is going to take them from me. And when I have brought
Jason's whole house down in ruins, I will leave this land, running
from the murder of the children I love most, having found the nerve
for the most unholy act there is. Because to be laughed at by my
enemies is not something I can bear, my friends. Let it come. What
good is living to me? I have no country, no home, no way out of my
troubles. I went wrong the day I left my father's house, talked round
by the words of a Greek man, and with the god's help he is going to
pay me for it. He will never see the children I gave him alive again,
and he will never father a child on his new-yoked bride, because she
has to die, a bad woman dying badly, by my drugs. Let no one think me
weak, or feeble, or the quiet kind. I am the other kind. Heavy on my
enemies, and kind to my friends. People like that are the ones whose
lives are remembered.

Chorus.
Since you have shared this plan with us, I forbid you to do it. I
want to help you, and I am taking the side of the laws that human
beings live by.

Medea.
There is no other way. You are forgiven for saying it. You are not
suffering what I am suffering.

Chorus.
But will you have the nerve to kill your own children, woman?

Medea.
Yes. That is the way my husband will be bitten deepest.

Chorus.
And you would become the most wretched woman alive.

Medea.
Let it come. Every word between now and then is a waste. Now go, and
fetch Jason here. When I need someone I can trust, I always use you.
Say nothing about what I have decided, if you are loyal to your
masters, and if you were born a woman.

(The Nurse goes to fetch Jason.)

Chorus.
	Children of Erechtheus, blessed since the old days,
	children of the blessed gods, from a holy land
	that no enemy has ever sacked, you feed on wisdom,
	the most glorious there is, and you walk delicately
	through the brightest of air, where once, the story goes,
	golden-haired Harmony gave birth to the nine holy Muses,
	the Muses of Pieria.

Chorus.
	And they sing that Aphrodite draws water
	from the streams of the lovely-flowing Cephisus,
	and breathes over the country
	the gentle, sweet-breathing breezes of the winds,
	and that she always sets a fragrant wreath of rose-blossom on her hair,
	and sends the Loves to sit beside Wisdom,
	to work with her at every kind of excellence.

Chorus.
	So how will the city of the holy rivers,
	how will the country that sees its friends safe on their way,
	take you in, the killer of your children,
	the unholy woman, to live among its people?
	Think of the blow that falls on your children.
	Think of the murder you are taking on.
	No. By your knees, every way there is,
	in every way we can, we beg you:
	do not murder
	your children.

Chorus.
	Where will you get the boldness for it,
	in your mind, or in your hand,
	or in your heart, bringing this terrible daring
	down on your own children?
	How will you look at your children
	and take on the murderer's part
	without a tear? You will not be able to.
	When your children fall at your feet and beg,
	you will not be able to wet your hand
	in their blood with a hardened heart.

(Jason comes in from the palace.)

Jason.
I have come, as I was told to. Even though you hate me, you shall not
go without this much at least. I will hear what new thing it is you
want from me, woman.

Medea.
Jason, I ask you to forgive what I said. It is only fair that you
should put up with my tempers, after all the love there has been
between the two of us. I have been going over it with myself, and I
have been telling myself off. "You wretch, why are you raving like
this, and picking fights with people who are planning well? Why are
you making an enemy of the rulers of this land, and of your husband,
who is doing the most useful thing he could do for us, marrying a
princess and fathering brothers for my children? Am I not going to let
go of my anger, when the gods are providing so well? What is the matter
with me? Do I not have children? Do I not know that we are exiles from
this land, and short of friends?" When I thought it through, I saw how
badly I had been reasoning, and how pointless my anger was.

So now I approve. I think you kept your head, taking this marriage on
for us, and I was the fool. I should have been in on these plans. I
should have helped to arrange the wedding, and stood beside the bed,
and enjoyed looking after your bride. But we are what we are, we
women. I will not say bad. But you should not have sunk to matching
us at it, or answered childishness with childishness. I give in. I
admit I had it wrong then, but I have thought it through better now.

Children, children, come here. Leave the house, come out, and greet
your father with me, and speak to him. Make up with him, along with
your mother, and put away the old hatred against the people we owe.
We have made a truce, and the anger is gone.

(The children come out of the house, with the Tutor.)

Take his right hand. Oh. How I keep thinking of the troubles that are
hidden. Children, will you go on living a long time, and go on holding
out a loving arm like this? Poor me. How close to tears I am, how full
of fear. Now that I have finally ended this quarrel with your father,
I have filled this soft face with tears.

Chorus.
The tears have started pale from my eyes as well. I only hope the
trouble goes no further than it has.

Jason.
I approve of this, woman, and I do not blame you for what went before.
It is natural for the female sex to lose their tempers when a husband
smuggles in another marriage on the side. But your heart has changed
for the better. You have recognised the winning plan, late, but you
have recognised it. That is how a sensible woman acts. And for you,
children, your father has been thinking hard, and with the gods' help
he has set up a great deal of security. I think that one day you will
be the first men in this land of Corinth, along with your brothers.
Just grow up. Your father is working out the rest, and so is whichever
of the gods is kind to us. I want to see you grow up strong and come
to the end of your youth, standing over my enemies. You there, why are
you wetting your eyes with pale tears? Why have you turned your white
cheek away? Why are you not glad to hear this from me?

Medea.
It is nothing. I was thinking about these children.

Jason.
Then take heart. I am going to arrange things well for them.

Medea.
I will. I will not doubt what you say. But a woman is a female thing,
and she is born to tears.

Jason.
Then why are you groaning so much over these children?

Medea.
I gave birth to them. And when you prayed for the children to live,
pity came over me, wondering whether it will happen. But about the
reasons you came here to talk to me: some of it has been said, and I
will mention the rest now. Since the rulers of this land have decided
to send me away, and since it is best for me too, I see that well
enough, not to live here in your way and in the way of the rulers of
the land, because they think I am an enemy to their house, I am
leaving this country and going into exile. But the children. So that
they can be brought up by your hand, ask Creon not to send them into
exile from this land.

Jason.
I do not know if I could persuade him. But I must try.

Medea.
Then at least tell your wife to ask her father not to send the
children into exile from this land.

Jason.
Certainly. And her, I think, I will persuade.

Medea.
If she is a woman like the rest of us. And I will take a
share in this job with you. I will send her gifts, by far the most
beautiful things there are among human beings today, I know it: a
fine-woven dress and a wreath of beaten gold, and the children will
carry them to her. One of the servants must go and bring the finery
out here, as quickly as possible. She is going to be happy not once
but ten thousand times over, getting you for a husband, the best of
men, and owning the finery that the Sun, my father's father, gave to
his descendants.

(A servant brings the dress and the golden wreath out of the house.)

Take these wedding gifts in your hands, children, and carry them to
the happy royal bride, and give them to her. They are not gifts
anybody could find fault with.

Jason.
What are you doing, you foolish woman, emptying your hands of these?
Do you think the royal house is short of dresses? Short of gold? Keep
them. Do not give them away. If the woman thinks I am worth anything
at all, she will put me before money, I know that well enough.

Medea.
Do not talk to me like that. Gifts persuade even the gods, they say,
and gold does more with human beings than ten thousand words. Her luck
is in. A god is making her fortune grow now. She is young, and she is
a queen. And to save my children from exile I would give my life, not
just gold. Now, children, go into the rich house, to your father's new
wife, my mistress, and beg her. Beg her not to send you into exile from
this land, and give her the finery. This is the thing that matters
most: she must take these gifts into her own hand. Go, as fast as you
can. And may you do it well, and come back to your mother with the
good news she is longing to hear.
