Hecuba
(Part 1 of 3)

(The Greek camp on the shore of the Thracian Chersonese, in front of
Agamemnon's tent. The Ghost of Polydorus appears.)

Ghost of Polydorus.
I have come from the hiding place of the dead and the gates of
darkness, where Hades lives apart from the other gods. I am Polydorus,
the son of Hecuba, the daughter of Cisseus, and of Priam. When the city
of the Phrygians was in danger of falling to the Greek spear, my father
was afraid, and he sent me secretly out of the land of Troy to the
house of Polymestor, his Thracian guest-friend, who sows this rich flat
country of the Chersonese and rules a horse-loving people with his
spear. And my father sent a great deal of gold out with me, in secret,
so that if the walls of Ilium ever fell, the children who survived him
would not go short of the means to live. I was the youngest of Priam's
sons, and that was why he smuggled me out of the country: with a boy's
arm I could carry neither armour nor spear. So as long as the boundary
stones of our land stood upright, and the towers of Troy were
unbroken, and my brother Hector was winning with his spear, I grew up
well in the house of the Thracian, my father's guest-friend, and did
well on his care, like a young shoot. Poor fool that I was. But when
Troy was destroyed, and Hector's life with it, and my father's hearth
was dug up out of the ground, and he himself fell at the god-built
altar, butchered by the murderous son of Achilles, then my father's
guest-friend killed me, for the sake of the gold. He killed a helpless
boy, and when he had killed me he threw me into the swell of the sea,
so that he could keep the gold in his own house. I lie on the beach,
and then again in the surge of the sea, carried up and down on the
long back-and-forth of the waves, unwept, unburied. And now I have left
my body behind and I am hovering over my dear mother Hecuba, and this
is the third day I have hung in the air, all the time my poor mother
has been here in this land, the Chersonese, since she came from Troy.

All the Achaeans are sitting quietly by their ships on the shore of
this Thracian country, because the son of Peleus, Achilles, appeared
above his tomb and held back the whole Greek army as they were
steering their oars for home across the sea. He is asking for my sister
Polyxena, to have her slaughtered at his tomb as his victim and his
prize of honour. And he will get it. The men who were his friends will
not send him away without his gift. Fate is leading my sister to her
death this very day. So my mother will look on the corpses of two
children at once, mine and my poor sister's. Because I am going to
appear, so that I can get the grave I am so wretched without: I will
show up in the shallows at the feet of a slave woman. I begged this
from the powers below, that I might get a tomb and fall into my
mother's hands. So what I wanted for myself will come about. Now I will
get out of the way of old Hecuba. Here she comes, stepping out from
under Agamemnon's tent, terrified by my ghost.

Ah. Mother. You came from a king's house and lived to see the day of
slavery. You are as badly off now as you were once well off. Some god
is weighing your old good fortune against you, and destroying you to
balance the scale.

(The Ghost goes. Hecuba comes out of Agamemnon's tent, held up by
captive Trojan women.)

Hecuba.
	Lead the old woman out in front of the tent, children,
	lead her, hold her upright, Trojan women,
	your fellow slave now, and once your queen.
	Take me, carry me, guide me, lift me up,
	hold me by my old hand,
	and I will lean on the crooked staff of your arm
	and hurry my slow-footed
	walk along, one joint in front of the other.
	Oh lightning of Zeus. Oh darkness of night.
	Why am I lifted up like this in the night
	by terrors, by phantoms? Oh lady Earth,
	mother of the black-winged dreams,
	I send this vision of the night away from me,
	the one about my son, who is being kept safe in Thrace,
	and about Polyxena, my dear daughter,
	the terrible sight I saw in my dreams and learned and understood.
	Gods of the earth below, keep my son safe.
	He is the only anchor my house has left,
	and he is in snowy Thrace,
	in the keeping of his father's guest-friend.
	Something new is coming.
	A song of grief is coming for women who grieve.
	Never before has my heart been so relentless,
	shivering, afraid.
	Where, Trojan women, can I find
	the inspired soul of Helenus, or Cassandra,
	to read my dreams for me?
	I saw a dappled deer with a wolf's bloody claw in its throat,
	dragged from my knees without pity, and slaughtered.
	And this frightens me too: over the very top
	of his tomb
	came the ghost of Achilles, and he asked for a prize,
	one of the Trojan women who have suffered so much.
	Away from my child, away from my child, send this thing,
	you powers, I beg you.

(The Chorus of captive Trojan women comes in.)

Chorus.
	Hecuba, I have slipped away to you in a hurry,
	leaving my master's tent,
	where the lot assigned me and posted me
	as a slave, driven out of the city
	of Ilium, hunted down at the point
	of the Achaeans' spears.
	I bring nothing to lighten what you suffer.
	I have picked up a heavy load of news
	for you, lady, and I am the herald of your pain.
	In the full assembly of the Achaeans, they say,
	it was decided to make your daughter
	a sacrifice to Achilles. You know how he stood
	on his tomb and appeared in his golden armour
	and held back the sea-going ships,
	with their sails already straining at the ropes,
	and shouted this:
	"Where are you off to, Greeks, leaving
	my tomb without its prize?"
	And a wave of quarrelling broke,
	and opinion split in two through the Greek
	army of spearmen, some for giving
	the tomb its victim, some against.
	There was one man working hard for your good,
	Agamemnon, who keeps the bed
	of the god-possessed prophetess.
	But the two sons of Theseus, shoots of Athens,
	made two different speeches
	and agreed on one judgement:
	to crown the tomb of Achilles
	with fresh blood. They said they would never
	put Cassandra's bed
	ahead of the spear of Achilles.
	The heat of the argument, pulled tight,
	was about equal, until that shifty-minded
	chatterer, that sweet-talker, that pleaser of crowds,
	the son of Laertes, persuaded the army
	not to push aside the best of all the Greeks
	for the sake of a slave's throat,
	and not to have one of the dead
	standing beside Persephone
	say that the Greeks had left the plains of Troy
	ungrateful to the Greeks
	who died for Greece.
	Odysseus will be here any moment now,
	to drag the foal from your breast
	and tear her out of your old hand.
	Go to the temples, go to the altars,
	sit at Agamemnon's knees as a suppliant,
	call on the gods, the ones in heaven
	and the ones under the earth.
	Either your prayers will keep you
	from being robbed of your poor child,
	or you must watch a girl fall forward on the tomb,
	reddened with blood
	from her gold-hung throat
	in a dark, shining stream.

Hecuba.
	Oh, I am wretched. What sound can I make?
	What cry, what wail,
	miserable in a miserable old age,
	in a slavery that cannot be endured,
	cannot be borne? Oh.
	Who will defend me? What family,
	what city? The old man is gone,
	the children are gone.
	Which way am I to go, this way or that?
	Where can I hurry to? Where is any god
	or power to help me?
	Oh, you who have brought me evil,
	Trojan women, you who have brought me
	evil and pain, you have destroyed me, destroyed me. Life
	in the light is nothing I want any more.
	Poor foot, lead me,
	lead an old woman
	to this tent. Oh child, oh daughter
	of the most wretched mother alive, come out, come out
	of the tent. Hear your mother's voice.
	Oh child, so that you know what it is, what it is
	I am hearing said about your life.

Polyxena.
	Io.
	Mother, mother, why are you shouting? What news
	have you cried out, that you have scared me out of the tent
	like a bird, with this fright?

Hecuba.
	Oh, my child.

Polyxena.
	Why do you speak to me in that voice of bad omen? It is an evil beginning.

Hecuba.
	Aiai, your life.

Polyxena.
	Say it. Do not hide it any longer.
	I am afraid, I am afraid, mother,
	of why you are groaning like this.

Hecuba.
	Oh child, child of a wretched mother.

Polyxena.
	What is this you are going to tell me?

Hecuba.
	The Greeks have made up one mind
	and are straining to cut your throat at the tomb
	for the son of Peleus.

Polyxena.
	Oh, mother, how can you say
	such unenviable evils? Tell me,
	tell me, mother.

Hecuba.
	I am telling you, child, a report of bad omen.
	They bring me word that the Argives have voted
	and decided about your life.

Polyxena.
	Oh, you who have suffered terrible things, oh, all-wretched,
	oh, mother of a miserable life,
	what is this, what is this outrage now,
	most hateful, unspeakable,
	that some power has stirred up against you?
	No longer is this daughter yours, no longer
	will I share your slavery, wretched beside
	your wretched old age.
	Like a cub, like a calf reared on the mountain,
	you will see me, wretched woman, wretched girl,
	torn out of your hand,
	my throat cut, sent down to Hades
	under the dark of the earth, where among the dead
	I will lie, poor thing.
	And for you, mother, in your misery,
	I cry with every lament I have,
	but for my own life, its outrage and its ruin,
	I shed no tear. For me, dying
	has turned out the better fortune.

Chorus.
And here is Odysseus, walking fast, Hecuba, coming to tell you
something new.

(Odysseus comes in with attendants.)

Odysseus.
Lady, I think you already know what the army has decided and the vote
that has been passed, but I will tell you all the same. The Achaeans
have voted to slaughter your daughter Polyxena on the high mound of
Achilles' grave. They have appointed me to escort the girl and bring
her there. The son of Achilles will preside over the sacrifice and act
as priest. So you know what to do? Do not make us tear her away by
force, and do not get into a wrestling match with me. Know how much
strength you have, and know the trouble you are in. Even in bad times,
it is clever to think the thoughts you have to think.

Hecuba.
Aiai. So a great struggle is here, it seems, full of groaning and not
short of tears. And so I did not die where I should have died. Zeus did
not destroy me. He is keeping me alive, so that I can look at evils
worse than the evils before, wretch that I am.

But if slaves may put questions to free men, questions that do not
hurt them or bite at their hearts, then you should speak now and
answer, and we who are asking should hear.

Odysseus.
You may. Ask. I do not grudge you the time.

Hecuba.
Do you remember when you came to Troy as a spy, ugly in filthy rags,
with drops of blood running from your eyes down your chin?

Odysseus.
I remember. It touched more than the surface of my heart.

Hecuba.
And Helen recognised you, and told me, and only me?

Odysseus.
I remember. I was in great danger.

Hecuba.
And you took hold of my knees, and made yourself humble?

Odysseus.
So humble that my hand went dead, gripping your dress.

Hecuba.
And I saved you, and I sent you out of the country?

Odysseus.
You did. That is why I see this light of the sun.

Hecuba.
And what did you say then, when you were my slave?

Odysseus.
I found a great many things to say, so as not to die.

Hecuba.
Then are you not a coward, with these plans of yours? You had from me
exactly what you say you had, and you do us no good in return and all
the harm you can. You are an ungrateful breed, all of you who chase
the honours of a public speaker. I wish I had never known you. You
hurt your friends and think nothing of it, as long as you can say
something to please the crowd.

But tell me, what kind of clever move did they think it was, when they
voted death for this child? Was it duty that pushed them to slaughter a
human being at a tomb, where an ox is the proper thing to kill? Or is
it that Achilles wants to kill the people who killed him, and is
aiming at her, with justice on his side? But she never did him any
harm. It is Helen he should have asked for, as the victim for his
grave. She destroyed him. She is the one who brought him to Troy. And
if some prisoner has to be picked out to die, one who is outstanding
in beauty, that does not point to us. The daughter of Tyndareus is the
most striking to look at, and she was found to have done him no less
wrong than we did. That is the argument I set against him, on the
question of justice.

Now hear what you owe me in return, since I am asking for it. You took
hold of my hand, by your own account, and you fell at my feet and
touched this old cheek. Now I take hold of you in the same way, at the
same places, and I ask for the favour I did you then, and I beg you:
do not tear my child out of my arms. Do not kill her. There are dead
enough. She is my joy, and I forget my troubles in her. She is my
comfort for everything I have lost. She is my city, my nurse, my
walking stick, my guide on the road. Those who have power should not
use it for what is wrong, and those who are doing well should not
think they will do well forever. I was somebody once, and now I am not
any more. One day took all my happiness away.

Oh, by your beard, my friend, have some respect for me, have some pity.
Go to the Achaean army and talk them round. Tell them how hateful it is
to kill women you did not kill the first time, when you dragged them
from the altars, but pitied instead. Among you the law about bloodshed
is the same for the free and for slaves. Your standing will persuade
them, even if you argue badly. The same speech from a nobody and from a
man of reputation does not carry the same weight.

Chorus.
No human nature is so hard that it could hear your groans, your long
laments, your cries of grief, and not let fall a tear.

Odysseus.
Hecuba, let me teach you something, and do not, because you are angry,
make an enemy in your mind of a man who is talking sense. Your life,
the body that did me a good turn, I am ready to save, and I say nothing
different. But what I said in front of everybody I will not deny: that
when Troy was taken, your daughter should be given as a victim to the
first man of the army, since he asked for her. Here is where most
cities go wrong: when a man who is good and willing gets nothing more
than worse men do. To us, lady, Achilles is worth honouring. He died
for the land of Greece, and died as well as a man can. Is it not a
disgrace, if we use a man as a friend while he can see, and once he is
dead, use him no more? Well then. What will people say, if once again
the army musters and there is a fight with an enemy? Will we fight, or
will we love our own lives, seeing the dead man gets no honour? As for
me, while I live, if I had only a little to live on each day, I would
have enough. But I would want my tomb to be seen to be honoured. That
gratitude lasts a long time.

You say you suffer pitiably. Here is my answer. On our side there are
old women and old men no less wretched than you, and young wives robbed
of the best of husbands, whose bodies this dust of Ida covers. Bear it.
As for us, if we are wrong to think we should honour the brave, we
will be charged with stupidity. But you barbarians, go on not counting
your friends as friends, and go on not admiring the men who died well,
so that Greece may prosper, and you may have what your policies
deserve.

Chorus.
Aiai. To be a slave is always an evil thing. It puts up with what it
should not, because force wins.

Hecuba.
Daughter, my words about your death are gone, thrown into the air for
nothing. But you, if you have some power greater than your mother's,
hurry, let out every note like a nightingale's mouth, and do not be
robbed of your life. Fall at the knee of this man Odysseus and make him
pity you, and beg him. You have a reason to give: he has children too.
Make him pity what has happened to you.

Polyxena.
I see you, Odysseus, hiding your right hand under your cloak and
turning your face away, so that I cannot touch your beard. Do not
worry. You have escaped my Zeus, the god of suppliants. I will follow
you, because I must, and because I want to die. If I were unwilling, I
would show myself a coward, a woman in love with her own life. Why
should I live? My father was king of all the Phrygians. That was the
start of my life. Then I was brought up on fine hopes, a bride for
kings, with no small rivalry over my marriage, over whose house and
hearth I would come to. And I was mistress, poor thing, of the women of
Ida, a girl that women and girls looked up to, equal to a goddess
except for one thing: death. And now I am a slave. First of all the
name makes me want to die. It is not a name I am used to. And then I
might get a master with a savage heart, whoever buys me for silver, me,
the sister of Hector and of so many others. He would put me to
grinding grain in his house whether I liked it or not, and sweeping his
floors, and standing at the loom, dragging through wretched days. And
some slave, bought from who knows where, would dirty my bed, the bed
that was once thought worthy of kings. No. I give up this light with
eyes that are still free, and I hand my body over to Hades. Take me,
Odysseus, and finish me off when you have taken me. I see nothing
here, no hope and no expectation, to give me any confidence that I
will ever be happy again. Mother, do not stand in my way, not with a
word, not with an act. Agree with me that I should die before I meet
with shameful things I do not deserve. Someone who is not used to
tasting evils bears it, but it hurts to put her neck in the yoke. She
would be far luckier dead than alive. To live without honour is heavy
labour.

Chorus.
It is a wonderful stamp, and a plain one, among mortals, to be born of
good parents, and the name of good birth goes further still in those
who deserve it.

Hecuba.
You spoke well, daughter, but there is pain in the fine words.
Odysseus, if you must do the son of Peleus a favour and escape blame,
do not kill this girl. Take me to the pyre of Achilles and stab me. Do
not spare me. I bore Paris, who shot the son of Thetis with his arrows
and destroyed him.

Odysseus.
It was not your death, old woman, that Achilles' ghost asked the
Achaeans for. It was hers.

Hecuba.
Then at least kill me together with my daughter, and there will be
twice as much blood to drink for the earth and for the dead man who
demands it.

Odysseus.
Your daughter's death is enough. We need not add one death to another.
I wish we did not owe this one.

Hecuba.
I am absolutely bound to die with my daughter.

Odysseus.
How? I did not know I had a master.

Hecuba.
Like ivy on an oak. That is how I will hold on to her.

Odysseus.
Not if you listen to people who are wiser than you.

Hecuba.
I will not let go of this child of my own free will.

Odysseus.
And I will not go away and leave her here either.

Polyxena.
Mother, listen to me. And you, son of Laertes, go easy on a parent who
has every reason to be angry. And you, poor mother, do not fight the
people who have power over us. Do you want to be thrown to the ground,
and tear your old skin, pushed about by force, and to be dragged off
shamefully by a young man's arm? That is what will happen. Do not. It
is not worthy of you. No, my dear mother, give me your sweet hand, and
let me lay my cheek against your cheek. Because never again, but now
for the very last time, I will look at the rays of the sun and its
round disc. You are hearing the last of my words to you. Oh mother, oh
you who bore me, I am going down below now.

Hecuba.
Oh daughter. And I will go on living in the light, as a slave.

Polyxena.
No bridegroom, no wedding song, none of what should have been mine.

Hecuba.
You are pitiful, child, and I am a wretched woman.

Polyxena.
And there in Hades I will lie apart from you.

Hecuba.
Oh. What am I going to do? Where will I end my life?

Polyxena.
I will die a slave, and my father was a free man.

Hecuba.
And I, of fifty children, have not one.

Polyxena.
What shall I say for you to Hector, or to your old husband?

Hecuba.
Tell them I am the most wretched of all women.

Polyxena.
Oh breast, oh the breasts that fed me so sweetly.

Hecuba.
Oh daughter, oh your wretched fate, before your time.

Polyxena.
Goodbye, you who bore me. Goodbye, Cassandra, from me.

Hecuba.
Others say goodbye and fare well. There is no faring well for your
mother.

Polyxena.
And my brother Polydorus, among the horse-loving Thracians.

Hecuba.
If he is alive. I doubt it. I have no luck in anything.

Polyxena.
He is alive, and when you die he will close your eyes.

Hecuba.
I am dead already. My troubles have killed me before my death.

Polyxena.
Take me, Odysseus, and put my robe over my head. Before my throat is
cut, my mother's laments have melted my heart already, and I am
melting hers with my crying. Oh light. I can still speak your name, but
I have no share in you except the time it takes me to walk between the
sword and the pyre of Achilles.

(Odysseus and his men lead Polyxena away.)

Hecuba.
Oh, I am fainting. My limbs are giving way. Daughter, touch your
mother, reach out your hand, give it to me. Do not leave me childless.
I am destroyed, friends. If only I could see the Spartan woman like
this, Helen, sister of the sons of Zeus. With her beautiful eyes she
brought Troy down, Troy that was happy once, in the ugliest way there
is.

(Hecuba sinks to the ground.)
