The Suppliants
(Part 1 of 3)

(Eleusis, in front of the temple of Demeter. Aethra, the mother of
Theseus, sits at the altar. Around her, in a ring, stand the old women
of Argos, dressed in mourning, holding out olive branches. Adrastus
lies on the ground by the gateway with his head covered, and a group of
boys stands near him.)

Aethra.
Demeter, keeper of the hearth of this land of Eleusis, and you
servants of the goddess who look after her temple: give happiness to
me, and to my son Theseus, and to the city of Athens, and to the
country of Pittheus, where my father brought me up, Aethra, in a rich
house, and gave me as a wife to Aegeus, the son of Pandion, because the
oracle of Apollo told him to. I am making this prayer because I have
been looking at these old women. They have left their homes in the
land of Argos and fallen at my knees with the suppliant's olive branch
in their hands, and a terrible thing has happened to them. Their seven
noble sons died around the gates of Cadmus's city, and they are
childless. Adrastus, the king of Argos, led those men there once. He
wanted to win a share of the inheritance of Oedipus for his son-in-law
Polyneices, who was an exile. Now their mothers want to bury the dead,
the men the spear killed, in the earth, and the winners are stopping
them. They will not allow the bodies to be taken up. They are treating
the laws of the gods with contempt.

Adrastus shares the load of this appeal to me. There he lies, his eyes
wet with tears, groaning over his spear, and over the most disastrous
expedition he ever sent out of his house. He keeps pressing me to
persuade my son with my prayers to become the man who recovers the
dead and helps to bury them, either by talking or by the strength of
his spear. He lays this one task on my son and on the city of Athens.

I happen to be here because I had come out of my house to this
precinct to offer the first sacrifice for the ploughing of the land,
here where the fruitful ear of grain first showed itself, bristling
above this earth. And I am waiting, at the holy altars of the two
goddesses, Persephone and her mother Demeter, holding these leaves
that tie me down though they are no rope, out of pity for these
grey-haired mothers whose children are gone, and out of respect for
the sacred garlands. My herald has gone to the city to call Theseus
here, so that he can either lift these women's grief off the land, or
release me from this suppliant's hold on me, by doing something the
gods approve of. For women, if they have any sense, it is right to do
everything through men.

Chorus.
	I beg you, old woman,
	an old mouth begging,
	down on my knees at your knee.
	Free my children. Lawless men
	have left the limbs of the dead, unstrung by death,
	as food for the wild beasts of the mountains.

Chorus.
	Look at the pitiful tears
	welling out of my eyes and lying on the lids,
	the grey skin of my old flesh
	torn by my own fingernails. What else can I do?
	I never laid my dead sons out in my house,
	and I do not see the earth heaped up over their graves.

Chorus.
	You too, lady, once bore a son.
	You made your bed dear to your husband.
	So give me a share of your mind,
	share it with me, as much as I ache,
	miserable, for the dead that I bore.
	Persuade your son, oh, we beg you, to go
	to the river Ismenus and put into my arms
	the bodies of the dead, young men in their strength, lying about unburied.

Chorus.
	Not as holy custom allows, but under force,
	I have come, falling down and begging
	at the altars of the gods, where the fire is lit.
	My cause is just, and you have
	the power, in the good luck of your own child, to lift
	the misfortune off me. I suffer pitifully and I beg you,
	put my dead son into my wretched hands,
	let me wrap my arms round the poor limbs of my boy.

Chorus.
	Here comes another contest of wailing, wailing
	taking up the wailing. The hands of the servant women are ringing.
	Come, beating in time with the song,
	come, you who share the pain,
	the dance that Hades honours.
	Drag the white nail down the cheek
	and bloody it, bloody the skin.
	What is done for the dead
	is an ornament to the living.

Chorus.
	This pleasure in wailing is never satisfied. It carries me away,
	so much labour, like a wet drop
	running down a steep rock face,
	never stopping, forever. Wailing.
	When children die, it is a woman's nature
	to suffer it out in cries. That labour is laid on us.
	E, e.
	If I were dead, I could forget
	these pains.

(Theseus comes in.)

Theseus.
What wailing was that I heard, and the beating of breasts, and dirges
for the dead, echoing out of this temple? Fear gives me wings. My
mother has been away from home a long time, and I have come on foot to
find her, in case something has happened to her. Ah. What is this? I
see a strange opening for talk. My old mother sitting at the altar,
and foreign women with her, and their trouble is not all of one kind.
From their old eyes they are driving pitiful tears down to the ground.
Their hair is cut, and their clothes are not clothes for a festival.
What is this, mother? It is yours to tell me, and mine to listen. I am
expecting news.

Aethra.
My son, these women are the mothers of the seven generals who died
around the gates of Cadmus's city. They are holding me under guard
with their suppliant branches, in a ring, child, as you can see.

Theseus.
And who is this man groaning so pitifully in the gateway?

Aethra.
Adrastus, they tell me. The king of Argos.

Theseus.
And the boys round him? Are they his children?

Aethra.
No. They are the sons of the dead men.

Theseus.
Then why have they come to us, with the suppliant's hand held out?

Aethra.
I know why. But from here on the story is theirs to tell, child.

Theseus.
You, the man wrapped up in his cloak. I am asking you. Uncover your
head and speak, and let the groaning go. Nothing gets done except by
way of the tongue.

Adrastus.
Glorious victor, king of the land of Athens, Theseus, I have come as a
suppliant to you and to your city.

Theseus.
What are you hunting for? What do you need?

Adrastus.
You know about the expedition I led, and how it ended in ruin.

Theseus.
You did not exactly cross Greece in silence.

Adrastus.
There I lost the best men of Argos.

Theseus.
That is what miserable war does.

Adrastus.
I went to the city and asked for these dead men.

Theseus.
Trusting to heralds, Hermes's men, so that you could bury them?

Adrastus.
Yes. And even then the men who killed them would not let me.

Theseus.
What do they say, when what you ask for is holy?

Adrastus.
Say? They are winning, and they do not know how to carry it.

Theseus.
So have you come to me for advice? Or for what?

Adrastus.
I want you, Theseus, to bring the sons of Argos home.

Theseus.
And where is Argos now? Was all that boasting for nothing?

Adrastus.
We stumbled, and we are finished. We have come to you.

Theseus.
Is this your own private idea, or the whole city's?

Adrastus.
All the sons of Danaus beg you to bury the dead.

Theseus.
And what made you march seven companies against Thebes?

Adrastus.
I was doing a favour for my two sons-in-law.

Theseus.
Which of the Argives did you give your daughters to?

Adrastus.
I made no marriage for my house inside the family.

Theseus.
You gave Argive girls to foreigners?

Adrastus.
Yes. To Tydeus, and to Polyneices, the Theban-born.

Theseus.
What made you want a marriage like that?

Adrastus.
Riddles from Apollo, hard to make out. They crept up on me.

Theseus.
What did Apollo say, when he settled the girls' marriage?

Adrastus.
To give my two daughters to a boar and a lion.

Theseus.
And how did you unwind the god's oracle?

Adrastus.
Two exiles came to my gates one night, and they were both...

Theseus.
Who and who? Say it. You are talking about two men at once.

Adrastus.
Tydeus and Polyneices. They started fighting each other.

Theseus.
And you gave your daughters to them, as if they were the beasts?

Adrastus.
Yes. Watching them fight, I saw the two animals.

Theseus.
And how had they come to leave the borders of their own countries?

Adrastus.
Tydeus was in exile for shedding a kinsman's blood.

Theseus.
And the son of Oedipus? Why had he left Thebes?

Adrastus.
Because of his father's curse. So that he would not kill his brother.

Theseus.
That was a sensible exile you describe, and a voluntary one.

Adrastus.
But the ones who stayed at home wronged the one who was away.

Theseus.
You do not mean his brother robbed him of his property?

Adrastus.
I went to settle that account. And then I was destroyed.

Theseus.
Did you go to the seers? Did you look at the flame of the burnt
offerings?

Adrastus.
Oh. You are driving me right to the place where I stumbled worst.

Theseus.
You did not go, it seems, with the goodwill of the gods.

Adrastus.
Worse. I went against Amphiaraus, over his head.

Theseus.
You turned your back on the divine as easily as that?

Adrastus.
The shouting of young men knocked the sense out of me.

Theseus.
You went for courage instead of good counsel.

Adrastus.
Yes. And that has destroyed many a general. But listen, bravest head
in all Greece, king of Athens. I am ashamed to be falling to the ground
and wrapping my hand round your knee, a grey-haired man, a king, and a
fortunate one, once. But I have no choice. I have to give way to what
has happened to me. Save the dead for me. Pity my troubles, and pity
these women, the mothers of the men who died, whose grey old age has
come to them with no children in it. They found the strength to come
here and set a stranger's foot on foreign soil, barely able to move
their old limbs, and not as an embassy to the mysteries of Demeter,
but to bury their dead, when they themselves should have been buried
by the hands of those sons, in their prime.

It is wise for a rich man to look at poverty, and for a poor man to
look up at the rich, admiring them, so that the love of money takes
hold of him; and for people who are not in trouble to look at pitiful
things and be afraid. And a man who makes songs should be happy when
he brings the songs he makes into the world. If he is not, if he is
hurting at home, there is no way he can give pleasure to others. It
would not even be right.

Now perhaps you will say: why pass over the land of Pelops and lay
this labour on Athens? I ought to explain that. Sparta is cruel, and
her ways are shifty. The other cities are small and weak. Your city is
the only one that could take this labour on. It looks at what is
pitiful, and it has you for a shepherd, young and good; and many
cities have been destroyed for the want of one, with no general to
lead them.

Chorus.
And I say the same as this man does, Theseus. Take my troubles to
heart, out of pity.

Theseus.
I have argued this same point with other people before, and worked at
it. Someone said that there is more bad than good in the lives of
mortals. I hold the opposite opinion: that for human beings the good
outweighs the bad. If it did not, we would not be alive in the light.
I praise whichever of the gods it was who took our life out of the
muddle, out of living like beasts, and set it in order. First he put
understanding in us. Then he gave us a tongue, the messenger of
speech, so that we could recognise words. Then food from the crops,
and for the crops drops of water out of the sky, to feed what grows
from the earth and water its belly. And on top of that, shelter
against winter, and ways of keeping off the burning heat the god sends
down; and sailing the sea, so that we could exchange with one another
whatever a country lacks. And where things are unclear and we have no
certain knowledge, the seers look into the fire, and into the folds of
the entrails, and read the birds, and tell us in advance. Are we not
spoiled, when a god has fitted life out for us like this, if it is not
enough for us? But our cleverness wants to be stronger than the god,
and with pride settled in our hearts we think we are wiser than the
gods.

You seem to me to belong to that company. You were not born clever.
You were yoked to the oracles of Apollo and gave your daughters to
foreigners on the strength of them, as if the gods were real, and you
mixed a bright house with a muddy one and left a running sore on your
own. A wise man should never mix unjust bodies with just ones. He
should get prosperous friends for his family. Because the god treats
their fortunes as one, and by the pains of the sick man he destroys
the man who shares his sickness and did nothing wrong. You led all the
Argives out to war when the seers were telling you what the gods said,
and then you dishonoured them, forced your way past the gods, and
destroyed your city. You were led astray by young men, the kind who
enjoy being honoured and swell wars without any justice in them,
ruining the citizens: one so that he can command an army, one so that
he can get power into his hands and commit outrage with it, another
for profit, never looking to see whether the people are harmed by any
of it.

There are three classes of citizens. The rich are useless, and always
want more. The have-nots, short of a living, are dangerous. They give
too big a share to envy, and they shoot evil stings at the men who
have something, fooled by the tongues of bad leaders. Of the three
parts, it is the one in the middle that saves cities, by keeping
whatever order the city lays down. And after all that, am I to become
your ally? What fine thing could I say to my citizens? Go, and good
luck to you. If you did not plan well, press down on your own fortune
yourself, and leave us alone.

Chorus.
He went wrong. But that is in young men, and he should be forgiven.
And we have come to you as a healer of these things, my lord.

Adrastus.
I did not choose you as a judge of my troubles, my lord, nor, if it
turns out that I did something badly, as the man to punish and
correct me. I came so that I might get some good of you. If you will
not, I have to be content with your decision. What else can I do?
Come, old women. Go. Leave the grey-green leaves here where they lie,
lay the branches down, and call the gods to witness, and the earth,
and Demeter, the goddess who carries the torch, and the light of the
sun, that our prayers in the gods' name did us no good at all.

Chorus.
Your mother's father Pittheus was a son of Pelops, and we come from
the land of Pelops. The blood of your fathers is the blood of ours.
What are you doing? Will you betray these branches, and throw old
women out of your land with nothing of what they had a right to? Do
not. A wild beast has the rock for a refuge, and a slave has the
altars of the gods, and a city, when the storm hits it, cowers up
against another city. Nothing in human life is happy all the way to
the end.

Chorus.
	Get up, poor woman, from the holy floor of Persephone,
	get up and go to him, lay your hand on his knees,
	beg him to bring home the bodies of your dead children. Oh, my misery,
	the boys I lost under the walls of Cadmus's city.
	Io moi. Take me, carry me, lead me, guide these poor old hands.
	By your beard, friend, most honoured man in Greece,
	I beg you, falling round your knee and your hand, wretched as I am.
	Pity me, for my children. I am a suppliant, a wanderer
	pouring out a pitiful lament, a pitiful one.
	Do not stand by, child, and let my sons lie unburied in the land of Cadmus,
	a joy for the wild beasts, young men your own age. I beg you.
	Look at the tears on my eyelids, as I fall like this
	at your knees, to win a grave for my children.

Theseus.
Mother, why are you crying, with your thin veil pulled over your eyes?
Is it because you heard these women's miserable wailing? Something
went through me too. Lift your white head. Do not sit weeping at the
holy altar of Demeter.

Aethra.
Aiai.

Theseus.
Their troubles are not yours to groan over.

Aethra.
Poor women.

Theseus.
You were not born one of them.

Aethra.
May I say something, child, that would be good for you and for the
city?

Theseus.
Yes. Plenty of wisdom comes from women too.

Aethra.
But the thing I am keeping back makes me hesitate.

Theseus.
That is a shameful thing to say. Hiding good words from your own
people.

Aethra.
Then I will not keep quiet now and blame myself later for the silence
I kept today, and call it a bad silence. And I will not throw away the
fine thing I have to say out of the fear that it is useless for women
to speak well. My son, first I tell you to look to the gods' side of
this, so that you do not fall by dishonouring them. You think well
about everything else. This is the one place where you have stumbled.

Beyond that: if there were no duty to have the nerve to act for people
who are wronged, I would have kept very quiet. But as it is, you
should understand how much honour this brings you, and it costs me no
fear to advise it, child. There are men of violence keeping the dead
from their share of a grave and the rites of burial. Force them, with
your own hand, to do what they have to do. Stop men who are throwing
the laws of all Greece into confusion. Because what holds human cities
together is this: a man keeping the laws well.

And someone will say it was cowardice in your hands. That when your
city could have won the crown of glory you were afraid, and stood
back. That you took on the fight with a wild boar and worked hard at a
cheap job, and where you should have looked at a helmet and a spear
point and worked it through, you were found to be a coward. Do not do
it, child. Not if you are mine. Do you see how your country, when they
mock her for having no plan, looks back at the mockers with a fierce
eye? Because she grows in her labours. Cities that keep quiet and do
things in the dark see in the dark too, from being so careful. Will
you not go, child, and help the dead, and these wretched women who
need you? I am not afraid for you, since you are setting out with
justice on your side. And though I see Cadmus's people doing well, I
am confident they will throw the dice differently yet. The god turns
everything upside down again.

Chorus.
Dearest woman, you have spoken well for him and for me. This is a
double joy.

Theseus.
Mother, the words I said to this man were right, and I gave my
opinion of the plans that made him fall. But I also see what you are
warning me about: that it does not suit my character to run from
danger. I have done many fine things, and I have chosen this as my
habit before the Greeks: always to stand as the punisher of the
wicked. So I cannot refuse labours. What will my enemies say of me,
when you, my mother, who fear for me more than anyone does, are the
first to tell me to take this labour on?

I will do it. I will go and free the dead by persuading them with
words. If not, then by force of the spear, right away, and the gods
will not begrudge it. But I want the whole city to approve of this as
well. It will approve, because I want it; still, if I add an argument,
I will have the people better disposed. I made the people the sole
ruler here, when I set this city free and gave every man an equal
vote. I will take Adrastus as the proof of what I say and go to the
assembly of the citizens. When I have persuaded them, I will gather
picked young Athenians and come back here, and sitting under arms I
will send word to Creon, asking for the bodies of the dead.

And you, old women, take the holy garlands off my mother, so that I
can take her dear hand and lead her to the house of Aegeus. A man is
wretched who does not serve his parents in return. It is the finest
of all repayments. What he gives, he gets back from his own children,
the same as he gave to the ones who bore him.

(Theseus leads Aethra away. Adrastus and the boys stay by the altar.)

Chorus.
	Argos, land of horses, my father's ground,
	did you hear this, did you hear
	what the king means to do, holy toward the gods
	and great, for all Pelasgia,
	and all through Argos?

Chorus.
	If only he could come to the end of my troubles and past it,
	and still take up the mother's
	treasure, bloodied as it is,
	and make the land of Inachus his friend
	by helping her.

Chorus.
	A fine ornament for cities, a labour done in reverence,
	and it keeps its thanks forever.
	What will the city decide for me? Will it cut
	a treaty of friendship with me, and will we get graves for our children?

Chorus.
	Defend a mother, city of Pallas, defend her,
	so that the laws of mortals are not defiled.
	You honour justice, and you give
	the lesser share to injustice, and you always rescue the unlucky.

(Theseus comes back with an Athenian herald.)

Theseus.
You have always served the city and me with this skill of yours,
carrying my proclamations. Go across the Asopus and the water of the
Ismenus and tell the high and mighty king of the Cadmeans this:
Theseus asks you, as a favour, to let him bury the dead. He lives in
the land next to yours, he thinks it a fair thing to be granted, and
he would make the whole people of Erechtheus your friends. If they
agree, thank them and come straight back. If they refuse, here is the
second message: they can expect my revellers, and my revellers carry
shields. My army is sitting here ready, round the holy spring of
Callichorus, and it is being reviewed as we speak. And the city took
this labour on willingly, gladly, once it saw that I wanted it.

Ah. Who is this, coming to interrupt my talk? A Cadmean, it seems, a
herald, though I am not sure of it. Wait. He may save you the trouble.
He has come to meet my plans halfway.
