Electra
(Part 3 of 3)

Electra.
Our city is hard to please, and it loves finding fault.

Orestes.
Say what you need to say, sister. The war we had with this man was
one with no truce in it.

Electra.
Well then. Where do I begin with your evils, and where do I end, and
what do I put in the middle? Every morning, before it was light, I
never once stopped going over what I wanted to say to your face, if
only I were ever free of the terrors I used to live in. Well, now I am
free. So I will pay you back now with everything I wanted to say to you
while you were alive.

You destroyed me. You made me and my brother here orphans of a father
we loved, and we had never done you any wrong. You married my mother,
shamefully, and you killed her husband, the man who led the Greeks to
war, when you never went near Troy yourself. And you were fool enough
to hope that, marrying my mother, you would get a faithful wife, when
you had been in my father's bed with her. Let every man know this: when
he ruins another man's wife in secret and then finds he has to marry
her, he is a miserable man if he thinks the self-control she did not
have with the first husband she will suddenly have with him. You lived
in misery and did not know it. You knew perfectly well you had made an
unholy marriage, and my mother knew she had a godless husband. Two bad
people: she took on your fortune, and you took on hers, and each of you
got the other's evil. And everywhere in Argos this is what you heard:
"the woman's husband," never "the man's wife." And that is a shameful
thing, for the wife to be the head of the house and not the husband. I
hate children who are known in the city by their mother's name and not
their father's. When a man makes a grand marriage, above himself,
nobody talks about the husband. The talk is all about the wife.

And here is what deceived you most, and you never saw it. You boasted
that you were somebody, because you had money behind you. Money is
nothing, except to keep company with for a little while. It is nature
that lasts, not money. Nature stays at your side always and lifts your
troubles off you; but wealth that was got unjustly, and lives with
fools, flies out of the house after a short season in flower. As for
what you did with women, a girl should not talk about it, so I will keep
quiet; but I will hint plainly enough. You behaved with outrage,
because you had a king's house and you were so good-looking. Give me a
husband who does not have a girl's face but a man's ways. The sons of
men like that grow up to hang on Ares and the spear; the pretty ones
are only decoration at a dance.

(She kicks the corpse.)

Go to hell. You never understood what you were, until time found you
out and made you pay for it. So let no criminal think, because he ran
the first stretch well, that he has beaten Justice, before he comes up
to the finishing line and rounds the last turn of his life.

Chorus.
He did terrible things, and he has paid terribly for them, to you and
to your brother. Justice has great strength.

Electra.
Well then. You must carry his body inside and give it to the dark,
slaves, so that when my mother comes she does not see a corpse before
her own throat is cut.

Orestes.
Wait. Let us talk about something else.

Electra.
What is it? Those are not rescuers from Mycenae I see, are they?

Orestes.
No. It is the mother who bore me.

Electra.
Then she is walking beautifully into the middle of the net. And look at
her, shining in her carriage and her fine clothes.

Orestes.
What do we do now? Are we going to murder our mother?

Electra.
Has pity taken hold of you, now that you have seen your mother in the
flesh?

Orestes.
Pheu. How can I kill her? She bore me. She brought me up.

Electra.
The same way she killed your father and mine.

Orestes.
Apollo, that was a great stupidity you prophesied.

Electra.
If Apollo is a fool, who is wise?

Orestes.
You told me to kill my mother, when I should not.

Electra.
How are you harmed by avenging your father?

Orestes.
I will be hunted as a mother-killer. I was clean before.

Electra.
And if you do not defend your father, you will be godless.

Orestes.
But my mother. Who will I pay the penalty to, for her blood?

Electra.
And who will you pay, if you let your father's vengeance go?

Orestes.
Was it some avenging spirit that said this, dressed up as the god?

Electra.
Sitting on the holy tripod? I do not think so.

Orestes.
I cannot believe this oracle was well prophesied.

Electra.
Do not turn coward and fall into unmanliness.

Orestes.
So. Am I to lay the same trap for her?

Electra.
The one you brought her husband down with, when you killed Aegisthus.

Orestes.
I will go in. This is a terrible business I am beginning, and I will do
terrible things. If this is what the gods want, so be it. This contest
is bitter to me, and sweet too.

(Orestes goes into the house. Clytemnestra's carriage comes up the
road, with Trojan slave women walking beside it.)

Chorus.
	Io.
	Queen of the land of Argos,
	daughter of Tyndareus,
	sister of the two noble sons of Zeus
	who live in the flaming sky among the stars
	and hold the honour of saving mortals
	in the breaking waves of the sea:
	welcome. I worship you as I worship the blessed gods,
	for your wealth and your great good fortune.
	Now is the time to pay our court
	to your fortunes. Welcome, my queen.

Clytemnestra.
Get down from the wagon, women of Troy, and take my hand, so that I
can step out of this carriage. The temples of the gods are decorated
with the spoils of Phrygia; and I have these women, the pick of the
land of Troy, in exchange for the daughter I lost. A small prize, but a
fine one, for my house.

Electra.
Then may I, mother, since I am a slave, thrown out of my father's house
and living in this wretched place, may I take that blessed hand of
yours?

Clytemnestra.
These slaves are here for that. Do not trouble yourself on my account.

Electra.
Why not? You sent me away from home like a prisoner of war. My house
was captured, and I was captured with it, like these women, and left
without a father.

Clytemnestra.
Well, that is what comes of the plans your father made, against the
people he should least of all have made them against, his own family.
I will speak. Though when a bad reputation has hold of a woman, there
is a bitterness on her tongue. Wrongly, in my view. The right thing is
to learn the facts, and then, if she deserves to be hated, hate her;
and if not, why hate at all?

Tyndareus gave me to your father, not so that I should die, nor the
children I bore. But that man took my daughter out of the house,
talking her into it with a marriage to Achilles, and went off to Aulis
where the fleet lay at its moorings, and there he stretched her over
the altar fire and cut Iphigenia's white cheek. If he had killed one
for the sake of many, to save the city from being captured, or to
benefit his house, or to save his other children, he could have been
forgiven. But it was because Helen could not keep herself in hand, and
the man who married her had no idea how to punish a wife who betrayed
him. That is why he destroyed my child. Even so, wronged as I was, I
would not have gone savage over it; I would not have killed my husband.
But he came home to me with a girl, a raving prophetess with a god
inside her, and put her into his bed, and there we were, two brides
kept in the same house.

Women are foolish. I will not say otherwise. But granted that, when a
husband goes wrong and pushes away the bed he has at home, a woman
wants to copy her husband and get a lover of her own. And then the
blame shines out on us, and the men who caused it get no bad word. If
Menelaus had been carried off from his home in secret, should I have
killed Orestes to get back my sister's husband Menelaus? How would your
father have stood for that? So was he not to die, for killing what was
mine, while I was to suffer at his hands? I killed him. I turned the
only way that was open to me: to his enemies. Which of your father's
friends would have joined me in murdering him? Speak, if you want to,
and answer me freely: how did your father die unjustly?

Chorus.
What you say is just, but the justice is a shameful one. A woman should
give way to her husband in everything, if she has any sense. Anyone who
does not think so does not count in what I am saying.

Electra.
Remember, mother, the last thing you said. You gave me leave to speak
freely to you.

Clytemnestra.
I say it again, and I do not take it back, child.

Electra.
Then when you have heard it, mother, will you make me suffer for it?

Clytemnestra.
No. It will be a pleasure to me to let your heart have its say.

Electra.
Then I will speak. And this is where my preface begins: I wish, mother,
that you had a better mind. Your looks, and Helen's, deserve the praise
they get; but the two of you were born true sisters, both
empty-headed, and neither of you worthy of Castor. She was carried off
and was glad to be ruined; and you destroyed the best man in Greece,
and you hold out the excuse that you killed a husband for the sake of a
child. People do not know you as well as I do. You, before your
daughter's killing had even been decided, when your husband had only
just left home, were sitting at the mirror arranging the golden curls
of your hair. A woman who works at her beauty while her husband is
away from home, cross her off as a bad one. She has no need to show a
pretty face out of doors unless she is looking for trouble. You were
the only woman in all Greece, that I know of, who was glad when things
went well for Troy and clouded over when they went badly, because you
did not want Agamemnon to come home from Troy. And yet you had every
chance to keep yourself in hand, and honourably. You had a husband who
was no worse a man than Aegisthus, one whom Greece chose to be its
general. And when your sister Helen had done what she did, you could
have won a great name for yourself, because bad conduct gives good
conduct a standard to be measured by, and something to look at.

And if, as you say, my father killed your daughter, what wrong did I
do you, or my brother? Why, when you had killed your husband, did you
not hand our father's house over to us? Instead you brought into your
bed what belonged to someone else, and bought your marriage with wages.
And why is your husband not in exile in place of your son, and why has
he not died in place of me, when he has killed me, alive, twice as
thoroughly as my sister was killed? If murder gives judgement, and
murder answers murder, then I will kill you, and your son Orestes with
me, to avenge our father. If that was just, then this is just too. Any
man who looks at wealth or noble birth and marries a wicked woman is a
fool. A humble wife who keeps herself in hand is better in a house than
a grand one.

Chorus.
Marriage is luck for women. Some, I see, fall out well, and some
badly, among mortals.

Clytemnestra.
Child, you were always made to love your father. That is how it is:
some children belong to the men, and others love their mothers more
than their father. I will forgive you. I am not really so very pleased,
child, with what I did. But you, unwashed like this, in these poor
clothes, when you have only just come through childbirth? Oh, I am
wretched, and it is my own planning that did it. I went further in my
anger against my husband than I should have.

Electra.
You groan too late, when there is no cure left. Well, my father is
dead. But the one outside the country, your son, wandering the world,
why do you not bring him home?

Clytemnestra.
I am afraid. I am looking to my own interest, not his. They say he is
angry over his father's murder.

Electra.
And why do you keep your husband so savage against me?

Clytemnestra.
That is his way. And you were born stubborn too.

Electra.
Because I am in pain. But I will stop being angry.

Clytemnestra.
And then he will stop being hard on you.

Electra.
He thinks he is a great man. He is living in my house.

Clytemnestra.
You see? You are fanning up new quarrels again.

Electra.
I am silent. I am afraid of him, exactly as afraid as I am.

Clytemnestra.
Enough of this talk. Why did you send for me, child?

Electra.
You have heard, I think, that I have had a child. Make the sacrifice
for me, because I do not know how, on the tenth moon after the birth,
the way it is done for a child. I have no experience of it. I never had
a child before.

Clytemnestra.
That is a job for someone else, the woman who delivered you.

Electra.
I delivered myself. I gave birth to the baby alone.

Clytemnestra.
Is this house set so far from any friendly neighbour?

Electra.
Nobody wants poor people for friends.

Clytemnestra.
Well, I will go in and make the sacrifice to the gods for the child's
full count of days. And when I have done you this favour, I will go on
to the field where my husband is sacrificing to the Nymphs.
Attendants, take this team away and put them in the stalls. And when
you judge that I have finished this sacrifice to the gods, be back
here. I have to please my husband as well.

(Clytemnestra goes into the house.)

Electra.
Go into my poor house. And be careful, please, that the smoke-blackened
roof does not smear soot on your dress. You will make the sacrifice you
owe to the gods. The basket is begun and the knife is sharpened, the
same knife that brought down the bull; you will fall beside him, struck
down. And in the house of Hades you will be the bride of the man you
slept with in the light. That is the favour I will do you, and you will
pay me justice for my father.

(Electra follows her in.)

Chorus.
	Evil paid back for evil. The winds of the house
	have turned and blow the other way. Once, in his bath,
	my king, my own king, fell,
	and the roof cried out, and the stone coping of the house,
	as he said: "Cruel woman, why are you murdering me,
	come home to my own dear country after ten years of harvests?"

Chorus.
	Justice flows back like the tide and drags her under,
	the wife who ran from her bed, who killed her husband
	when at last he came home
	to the towering walls the Cyclopes built. With her own hand,
	with a sharp-edged weapon, the axe in her two hands, she killed him.
	Poor husband, whatever the evil was that had hold of that wretched woman.
	Like a mountain lioness that ranges
	the oak woods in the meadows, she did this thing.

(Clytemnestra's voice is heard from inside the house.)

Clytemnestra.
	Children, by the gods, do not kill your mother.

Chorus.
	Do you hear a cry under the roof?

Clytemnestra.
	Io moi moi.

Chorus.
	I groan too, for a woman overpowered by her children.
	A god deals out justice, when the time comes.
	You suffered cruelly, but what you did to your husband
	was unholy, poor woman.

Chorus.
But here they come out of the house, spattered with their mother's
fresh blood, trophies on show of a pitiful sacrifice. There is no house
more wretched than the descendants of Tantalus, and there never was.

(Orestes and Electra come out of the house. The two bodies are carried
out after them and laid on the ground.)

Orestes.
	Io, Earth, and Zeus who sees everything
	that mortals do, look at this bloody,
	polluted work: two bodies
	lying on the ground, struck down
	by my hand, the price I have paid
	for my sufferings.

Electra.
	Too many tears, brother, and I am the cause.
	I came through fire in my rage at this woman, wretched that I am,
	at the mother who bore me, her daughter.

Chorus.
	Io, your fate, your fate,
	mother who bore unforgettable griefs,
	unforgettable and worse,
	and suffered them at your own children's hands.
	But you paid for their father's murder, and justly.

Orestes.
	Io, Apollo, the justice you sang of
	was dark, and the griefs you have brought about
	are plain to see, and the lot you gave me is a killer's,
	far from the land of Greece.
	What other city can I go to?
	What host, what god-fearing man
	will look me in the face,
	a man who killed his mother?

Electra.
	Io, io moi. And where can I go, to what dance,
	to what wedding? What husband will take me
	into a bride's bed?

Chorus.
	Again, again your mind
	has shifted with the wind.
	What you think now is holy; it was not then,
	and you did terrible things,
	my dear, to a brother who did not want to.

Orestes.
	Did you see how she threw open her dress, poor woman,
	and showed her breast as she was being killed,
	io moi, letting the limbs that gave me birth
	sink to the ground? And her hair, I —

Chorus.
	I know it well. You went through agony,
	hearing the wail of grief
	from the mother who bore you.

Orestes.
	She screamed this, and put her hand
	on my chin: "My child, I beg you."
	And she hung from my cheeks,
	so that the weapon fell out of my hands.

Chorus.
	Poor woman. How could you bear to see
	with your own eyes the blood
	of your mother as she breathed out her life?

Orestes.
	I threw my cloak over my eyes
	and began the sacrifice with my sword,
	driving it into my mother's throat.

Electra.
	And I urged you on,
	and I took hold of the sword with you.

Chorus.
	You have done the most terrible thing anyone can suffer.

Orestes.
	Take her. Cover our mother's limbs with her dress
	and close up the wounds.
	So it was your own killers you gave birth to.

Electra.
	There. Loved and not loved,
	we wrap this cloak around you.

Chorus.
	The end of the great evils of the house.

Chorus.
	But look, over the top of the roof,
	who are these appearing? Spirits, or gods
	from heaven? This is no road
	for mortals. Why are they coming
	into the open sight of men?

(Castor and Polydeuces, the Dioscuri, appear above the house.)

Castor.
Son of Agamemnon, listen. The twin sons of Zeus, your mother's
brothers, are calling you: Castor, and this is my brother Polydeuces.
We had just stilled a swell in the sea that was terrible for ships when
we came to Argos, because we saw the killing of our sister here, your
mother. She has her justice now; but what you did was not just. And
Apollo, Apollo. But he is my lord, so I keep quiet. He is wise, but the
oracle he gave you was not. Still, we have to accept it. From here on
you must do what Fate and Zeus have settled for you.

Give Electra to Pylades, to take home as his wife. You, leave Argos.
You cannot set foot in this city; you have killed your mother. The
terrible Fates, the goddesses with the faces of dogs, will drive you
round and round like a wheel, a madman wandering. Go to Athens, and
hold on to the holy image of Pallas Athena. She will keep them off you,
fluttering as they are with their terrible snakes, so that they cannot
touch you, holding her round shield with the Gorgon's face over your
head. There is a hill of Ares there, where the gods first sat to vote
on a killing, when savage Ares killed Halirrhothius, the son of the
lord of the sea, in anger at the unholy rape of his daughter; and from
that day the vote given there is the most god-fearing and the most
secure that exists. There you too must run your risk for this murder.
An equal count of votes will save you from dying by the verdict,
because Apollo will take the blame on himself, since it was his oracle
that commanded your mother's murder. And this law will be laid down for
everyone who comes after: an equal vote always acquits the defendant.
Then the terrible goddesses, struck with grief at that, will sink into
a cleft in the earth beside that very hill, and it will be a holy
oracle, revered by mortals. You must go and live in a city of the
Arcadians, by the streams of the Alpheus, near the sanctuary of Zeus of
Mount Lycaeon; and the city will be called after your name.

That is what I have to say to you. As for this corpse, Aegisthus, the
citizens of Argos will cover it in the earth with a grave. Your mother
will be buried by Menelaus, who has only now reached Nauplia, all this
time after he took the land of Troy, and by Helen with him. She has
come from the house of Proteus, leaving Egypt; she never went to Troy.
Zeus, to make strife and slaughter among mortals, sent a phantom of
Helen to Troy in her place. So let Pylades take the girl who is also a
wife, and go home from the land of Achaea, and let him take the man who
is your brother-in-law in name only to the land of Phocis, and give him
riches by the weight. And you, set out along the neck of the Isthmus,
and go to the blessed hill of Cecrops, in Athens. Once you have filled
up the measure of murder that was fated for you, you will be happy,
released from these troubles.

Chorus.
	Sons of Zeus, is it lawful for us
	to come near enough to speak with you?

Castor.
	It is lawful. You are not polluted by this killing.

Electra.
	May I have a share in the talk too, sons of Tyndareus?

Castor.
	You too. I lay this bloody deed
	at Apollo's door.

Chorus.
	How is it that you, two gods, brothers
	of the woman who lies dead here,
	did not keep the Fates away from her house?

Castor.
	Fate, and necessity, led to what had to be,
	and the unwise sounds from Apollo's tongue.

Electra.
	But what Apollo, what oracles,
	made me my mother's murderer?

Castor.
	Shared deeds, shared dooms:
	one ruin, handed down from your fathers,
	has ground you both to pieces.

Orestes.
	Sister, I have seen you again after so long,
	and at once I lose your love,
	and I will leave you, and be left by you.

Castor.
	She has a husband and a house. She has suffered nothing
	to pity, except that she is leaving
	the city of the Argives.

Electra.
	And what greater thing is there to groan for
	than leaving the borders of your own country?

Orestes.
	But I am going out of my father's house,
	and I will stand trial for my mother's blood
	before the votes of strangers.

Castor.
	Courage. You will come
	to the holy city of Pallas. Only hold out.

Electra.
	Press your chest against my chest,
	dearest brother.
	The bloody curses of our mother are cutting us apart
	from our father's house.

Orestes.
	Throw your arms around me. Hold me. And mourn over me
	as you would over a dead man's grave.

Castor.
	Pheu, pheu. That is a terrible thing you have said,
	even for gods to hear.
	Because in me too, and in the gods of heaven,
	there is pity for mortals, who suffer so much.

Orestes.
	I will never see you again.

Electra.
	And I will never come near your eyes again.

Orestes.
	These are the last words I will ever say to you.

Electra.
	Goodbye, my city.
	Goodbye, and goodbye again, women of my city.

Orestes.
	Most faithful of all, are you going already?

Electra.
	I am going, and the tears are wetting my soft eyes.

Orestes.
	Pylades, go, and be happy. Marry her.
	Take Electra as your bride.

Castor.
	Their marriage will be their concern. But you, run from these dogs
	and go on to Athens.
	They are on your trail, and it is terrible,
	the snake-handed ones with the black bodies,
	carrying the fruit of terrible pains.
	And we two must hurry over the Sicilian sea
	to save the prows of ships in the water.
	As we go across the plain of the sky
	we do not help the polluted;
	but those who hold holiness and justice
	dear in their lives, those we set free
	from hard troubles, and save.
	So let no one choose to do wrong,
	or sail with men who break their oaths.
	I am a god, and I say this to mortals.

Chorus.
	Goodbye. And whoever among mortals can fare well,
	and is not worn down by some blow of fortune,
	that is the one who lives a happy life.
