The Trojan Women
(Part 3 of 3)

Helen.
Then am I allowed to answer that, and argue that if I die, I am dying
unjustly?

Menelaus.
I did not come here to argue. I came to kill you.

Hecuba.
Hear her out, Menelaus. Do not let her die without that. And then give
us the other side, the case against her. You know nothing of what she
did in Troy. Put the whole story together and it will kill her. There
will be nowhere for her to run.

Menelaus.
That is a gift that takes time. Still, if she wants to speak, she may.
Understand that I am giving her this for the sake of what you have to
say, so that she can hear it. Not as a favour to her.

Helen.
Perhaps you will not answer me at all, whether you think I argue well
or badly, because you have made up your mind that I am your enemy.
Very well. I will guess at the charges you would bring against me if
we went through it point by point, and I will set my answers against
them, my accusations against yours.

First. This woman here gave birth to the beginning of all the trouble,
when she gave birth to Paris. Second, it was the old man who destroyed
Troy, and me with it: Priam, who did not kill the baby, the child his
wife had dreamed of as a burning torch, a bitter dream and a true one,
the child who was Alexander then. Now hear how the rest of it goes.
This man was made the judge of three goddesses, a team of three. And
Athena's gift to Alexander was this: he would lead the Phrygians in war
and root Greece out of the ground. Hera promised he would hold Asia,
and the farthest edges of Europe, as his kingdom, if Paris judged for
her. And Aphrodite went into raptures over my looks, and promised him
me, if she outran the other goddesses in beauty. Now look where the
argument goes from there. Aphrodite beat the goddesses. And this is
how much my marriage did for Greece: you are not ruled by barbarians.
You did not go down in battle, and you do not live under a tyrant.
What was good luck for Greece was my ruin. I was sold for my beauty,
and I am reviled for the very thing that should have set a crown on
my head.

You will say I have still not come to the point, the thing in front of
us: how I slipped away from your house in secret. He came with no small
goddess at his side, this woman's curse, the ruin of her house, call
him Alexander if you like, or Paris, whichever name you please. And
you, you worst of men, you left him behind in your house and sailed
off from Sparta to Crete.

Well, then.

It is not you I will put the next question to. It is myself. What was
I thinking, when I left my home and followed a stranger, betraying my
country and my house? Punish the goddess. Be stronger than Zeus. He
has power over every other god, and he is her slave. So forgive me.

Here is a respectable argument you might use against me next. When
Paris was dead and gone down into the earth, and my marriage was no
longer the gods' doing, then I should have left his house and gone to
the Argive ships. I tried. That is exactly what I tried to do. My
witnesses are the gatekeepers on the towers and the sentries on the
walls. Time and again they caught me letting my body down from the
battlements to the ground on knotted ropes. And then this new husband
took me by force, Deiphobus, and kept me as his wife, against the
wishes of the Phrygians. So how could you justly put me to death,
husband, and be in the right, when one man married me by force, and
my life here, instead of a victor's prize, was a bitter slavery? If
you want to be stronger than the gods, then wanting it shows how
little you understand.

Chorus.
Queen, defend your children and your country. Break this woman's
persuasion. She speaks well, and she is a criminal. That is a
dangerous thing.

Hecuba.
First I will take the goddesses' side, and show that what she says
about them is not just. I do not believe Hera and the virgin Athena
could ever have been so foolish, one of them to sell her Argos to
barbarians, and Athena to make her Athens a slave of the Phrygians one
day, if they came to Ida over their looks, as if for a game, out of
vanity. Why would the goddess Hera have fallen so in love with beauty?
So she could get herself a better husband than Zeus? And Athena, which
of the gods was she hunting for a husband, she who begged her father to
let her stay a virgin, because she wanted no man's bed? Do not make the
goddesses fools to dress up your own crime. You will not persuade
anyone with sense.

And then you said, and this is the laughable part, that Aphrodite came
with my son to the house of Menelaus. Could she not have stayed
quietly in heaven and brought you to Troy, and all Amyclae along with
you? No. My son was extraordinarily handsome, and when your mind saw
him, your mind turned into Aphrodite. Every piece of foolishness
people commit, they call Aphrodite, and rightly: her name is the
beginning of the word for having no sense. You looked at him, blazing
in his barbarian clothes and his gold, and you went out of your mind.
In Argos you had lived on little. Once you were free of Sparta, you
hoped to drown the Phrygians' city, flowing with gold as it was, under
your spending. Menelaus's house was not big enough for you to run
riot in with your luxuries.

Well, then. You say my son took you by force. Which Spartan noticed?
What cry did you ever raise? Castor was still alive, a young man, and
his twin brother too, not yet among the stars. Then when you came to
Troy, with the Argives on your track, and the struggle was on, spear
against spear, whenever the news that came to you said this man was
winning, you praised Menelaus, so that my son would suffer, having so
great a rival in love. And if the Trojans were doing well, this man
was nothing. You kept your eye on luck, and you made a practice of
following wherever she went. Virtue you did not want.

And then you say you let yourself down from the towers on ropes,
stealing your body away, as if you were staying against your will?
Where were you ever caught knotting a noose, or sharpening a sword,
the things a noble woman would do if she missed her first husband? And
yet I told you, over and over. "Daughter, leave. My sons will find
other brides. I will help you slip away and send you to the Achaean
ships. End this war between the Greeks and us." But that was bitter to
you. In Alexander's house you did as you pleased, and it was outrage,
and you wanted barbarians bowing down to you. That was a great thing
to you. And after all that, you have come out with your body groomed,
and you look at the same sky as your husband. You disgusting thing.
You should have come out humble, in rags, shaking with fear, your head
shaved, with more decency about you than shamelessness, after
everything you did before. Menelaus, so that you know where my speech
ends: crown Greece, as you deserve to, and kill this woman. And make
it a law for every other woman: whoever betrays her husband dies.

Chorus.
Menelaus, be worthy of your ancestors and your house. Punish your
wife. Clear yourself, before Greece, of the charge that you are soft,
and show your enemies you are well born.

Menelaus.
You have come round to the same conclusion as I have: that she left my
house of her own free will for a stranger's bed, and Aphrodite has
been dragged into the speech for show. Go on. Go to the men who will
stone you. Pay back the long labours of the Achaeans in one short
death, and learn not to bring shame on me.

Helen.
No. By your knees, do not lay the gods' sickness on me and kill me for
it. Forgive me.

Hecuba.
And do not betray the allies this woman killed. I beg you for their
sake, and for my children's.

Menelaus.
Enough, old woman. I am not thinking about her. I am telling my men
to take her to the sterns of the ships, where she will sail.

Hecuba.
Then do not let her set foot on the same ship as you.

Menelaus.
What is this? Does she weigh more than she used to?

Hecuba.
There is no lover who does not go on loving.

Menelaus.
That depends on how the minds of the ones we loved turn out. But you
shall have what you want. She will not board the same ship as I do.
What you say is not bad. And when she gets to Argos she will die
badly, as she deserves, a bad woman, and she will teach every woman
to keep herself in hand. That is not easy. But her destruction will
throw a fright into their folly, even if they are worse than she is.

(Menelaus goes out, and his men take Helen after him.)

Chorus.
	So this is how you handed over
	the temple in Troy and the altar
	smoking with incense to the Achaeans,
	Zeus, and the flame of the offering cakes,
	and the smoke of myrrh rising into the sky,
	and holy Pergamos, the citadel,
	and Ida, the glens of Ida thick with ivy,
	running with rivers of melting snow,
	the edge of the world, first struck by the sun,
	a holy place, shining, where the gods were served.

Chorus.
	Gone, the sacrifices to you, gone the dancers'
	glad singing, gone the all-night
	vigils for the gods in the dark,
	the images shaped in gold,
	and the Phrygians' holy moons,
	twelve of them, twelve full moons together.
	I wonder, I wonder, lord, whether you think of this,
	seated on your throne in the sky,
	in the upper air, while the city dies,
	brought down by a rush of blazing fire.

Chorus.
	My love, my husband,
	you are dead and you wander,
	unburied, unwashed, and a ship on the sea
	will carry me, darting on its wings,
	to Argos, where horses graze, where stone walls
	built by Cyclopes reach up to the sky.
	And the crowd of children at the gates
	hang on us and cry, they weep and weep,
	and one cries out, cries out:
	"Mother, oh, the Achaeans are taking me
	alone, out of your sight,
	onto a dark ship
	with oars for the sea,
	to holy Salamis
	or the ridge between two seas,
	the Isthmus, where the gates
	of Pelops's land stand."

Chorus.
	And when Menelaus's boat
	is out in the middle of the sea,
	may the holy fire of the Aegean, the two-forked lightning,
	fall between the banks of oars,
	as he takes me from Troy in tears,
	uproots me from my country, a slave for Greece,
	while the daughter of Zeus
	still holds her golden mirrors,
	the toys of girls.
	May he never reach the land of Laconia,
	his father's hearth and his bedroom,
	nor the town of Pitane,
	nor the goddess with the bronze gates,
	now he has taken back the disgrace
	whose marriage shamed great Greece
	and brought miserable suffering
	to the streams of Simois.

(Talthybius comes in with soldiers, who carry the body of Astyanax on
Hector's shield.)

Chorus.
	Io, io.
	New disasters, one on top of another,
	changing places on this land. Look, wives of Troy,
	miserable women, look at Astyanax, dead,
	the bitter thing the Greeks threw from the towers
	like a discus, killed, and now they bring him here.

Talthybius.
Hecuba, one ship is still here, its oars waiting. It is about to carry
the rest of the spoils of Achilles's son to the coast of Phthia.
Neoptolemus himself has already put out to sea. He had news of fresh
trouble for Peleus: Acastus, the son of Pelias, has driven him out of
the country. So he is gone, faster than that, with no time to spare
for waiting, and Andromache with him. She drew a great many tears from
me when she set out from this land, crying for her country and
speaking to Hector's tomb. And she asked him to let this body be
buried, your Hector's son, who fell from the walls and gave up his
life. And this shield, the terror of the Achaeans, backed with bronze,
that the boy's father used to sling round his side: she asked him not
to carry it to the hearth of Peleus, nor into the same bedroom where
she, the mother of this dead child, is to be married, so that she will
not have to look at it and grieve. Instead of a cedar coffin and a
ring of stone, the boy is to be buried in this. And it is to be put
into your arms, so that you can wrap the body in robes and garlands,
as far as you have the means, given how things are with you. Because
she is gone, and her master's hurry kept her from burying the child
herself. So then, when you have dressed the body, we will heap earth
over him and raise our spears. Do what you have been told, as fast as
you can. One task I have spared you already: as I crossed the streams
of the Scamander there, I washed the body and cleaned the wounds. Now
I will go and break open a grave in the ground for him, so that my
work and yours between them are finished quickly, and the ship can
start for home.

(Talthybius goes.)

Hecuba.
Set Hector's round shield down on the ground. A painful sight, and not
one I love to see. Achaeans. Your spears weigh more than your minds.
What were you afraid of in this child, that you committed a murder
never seen before? That some day he would raise fallen Troy up again?
Then you were nothing, after all. When Hector had the luck in battle,
and ten thousand other hands with him, we were still being destroyed.
And now the city is taken and the Phrygians are dead, and you were
frightened of a baby this size. I have no praise for a fear that is
afraid without ever reasoning it through.

My darling, what a wretched death came to you. If you had died for the
city, once you had had your youth, and marriage, and the kingship that
makes a man like a god, you would have been blessed, if any of those
things is a blessing. As it is, you saw them and you knew them in your
soul, child, but you do not know them. You had them in your house and
got no use of them. Poor boy. How cruelly your father's walls have
shorn your head, the towers Apollo built. The curls your mother tended
so often and kissed, and now, where they were, murder grins out from
the broken bones. I will not say the ugly thing. Hands, how sweetly
you keep the likeness of your father's hands, and you lie in front of
me loose at every joint. Dear mouth, that threw out so many big
promises: you are gone, and you lied to me. You used to fall into my
dress and say, "Mother, I will cut a great lock of my hair for you,
and I will bring my friends in a procession to your tomb, and speak to
you with love." But you are not burying me. I am burying you, the
young one, and I am old, with no city and no children, and you are a
pitiful corpse. Oh, all those kisses, all my nursing of you, those
sleeps we had. Gone. What would a poet ever write on your tomb? "The
Argives killed this child once, because they were afraid of him"? An
inscription that shames Greece. Still, you did not get your father's
property, but you will have his bronze-backed shield to be buried in.
Shield, you kept Hector's beautiful arm safe, and you have lost your
best guardian. How sweet the print of him lies in your handle, and on
your well-turned rim, the sweat that Hector let drip from his brow so
often in the thick of the work, when he pressed you to his chin.

Bring things, bring what you can, to dress this pitiful body out of
what we have. The god is not giving us the luck for anything
beautiful. But what I have, you will get. Anyone is a fool who thinks
he is doing well and takes it for safe and is glad. Luck is like a man
with a wild temper: she jumps this way one moment and that way the
next, and nobody is lucky all the way through.

Chorus.
Here are the women, ready at hand, bringing you ornaments out of the
Phrygian spoils to hang on the dead.

Hecuba.
Child, it is not for winning a horse race, or for beating your friends
with the bow, the customs the Phrygians honour without chasing them to
excess, that your father's mother puts these fine things on you, out
of what once was yours. Helen, whom the gods hate, has robbed you of
them now, and killed your life besides, and destroyed your whole
house.

Chorus.
	E, e. You touched my heart,
	you touched it. You, who would have been to me one day
	the great lord of the city.

Hecuba.
What you should have put on your body at your wedding, marrying the
highest-born woman in Asia, these Phrygian robes, the pride of our
weaving, I hang on your body. And you, who were glorious in victory
once, mother of ten thousand trophies, Hector's beloved shield: take
your crown. You will die with this body without dying. You are far
more worth honouring than the arms of Odysseus, clever and evil.

Chorus.
	Aiai, aiai. The earth will take you, child,
	a bitter thing to mourn.
	Cry out, mother,

Hecuba.
Aiai.

Chorus.
the song for the dead.

Hecuba.
Oh, oh.

Chorus.
Oh, yes. For your evils that cannot be forgotten.

Hecuba.
Some of your wounds I will heal with bandages, a wretched doctor, a
doctor in name and not in fact. The rest your father will see to,
among the dead.

Chorus.
	Beat, beat your head,
	your hands falling like oars,
	io moi moi.

Hecuba.
Dearest women.

Chorus.
Hecuba, say what is yours to say. What is the cry you are making?

Hecuba.
So the gods had nothing in mind but my suffering, and Troy, the one
city out of all of them they hated. We slaughtered oxen for them for
nothing. And yet, if the god had not turned everything upside down and
thrown us under the earth, we would have been nobodies, unsung, never
giving the Muses of later generations a song to sing. Go and bury the
body in its poor tomb. It has the garlands the dead need. I think it
makes little difference to the dead whether anyone gets rich funeral
gifts. That is empty pride, and it belongs to the living.

(The women carry the body away to be buried.)

Chorus.
	Io, io.
	Miserable mother, who has seen the great
	hopes of her life torn to rags in you.
	Counted so happy in your birth
	from noble fathers,
	you have died a terrible death.
	Ea, ea.
	Who are those I see on the heights of Troy,
	hands darting to and fro
	with blazing torches? Some new evil
	is about to fall on Troy.

Talthybius.
Captains, you who have been ordered to burn this city of Priam's, I am
speaking to you. Do not keep the flame idle in your hands any longer.
Throw the fire in, so that we can raze the city of Troy to the ground
and set off for home from Troy, glad to go. And you, so that one order
does two things, daughters of Troy, when the leaders of the army sound
the trumpet, loud and high, go to the Achaean ships and be taken out
of this land. And you, old woman, most unlucky of women, come. These
men have come for you from Odysseus. The lot sends you out of your
country as his slave.

Hecuba.
Oh, I am wretched. So this is the last thing, the very end of all my
evils. I am leaving my country, and the city is being set alight. Old
foot, hurry, hard as it is, so that I can say goodbye to my poor city.
Troy, you who once breathed so grandly among the barbarians, they will
soon take away your famous name. They are burning you, and they are
leading us out of the land already, as slaves. Io, gods. But why do I
call on the gods? They did not hear us before, when we called. Come.
Let us run into the fire. The finest thing for me would be to die with
my country as it burns.

Talthybius.
You are out of your mind with your own sorrows, poor woman. Take her,
men, do not hold back. She has to be put into Odysseus's hand and sent
to him as his prize.

Hecuba.
	Ottototototoi.
	Son of Cronos, lord of Phrygia, father
	who begot our race, do you see what we suffer,
	things the blood of Dardanus never deserved?

Chorus.
	He sees. And the great city
	is no city. It is destroyed. Troy is no more.

Hecuba.
	Ottototototoi.
	Troy is blazing, the roofs
	of Pergamos are burning in the fire,
	the city, and the tops of the walls.

Chorus.
	Like smoke on a wing of wind, rising
	to the sky, the land fallen to the spear wastes away.
	The houses are overrun with raging fire
	and the enemy's spear.

Hecuba.
	Io, land that nursed my children.

Chorus.
	E, e.

Hecuba.
	Children, hear me, know your mother's voice.

Chorus.
	You are calling the dead with a song of grief.

Hecuba.
	Yes, laying my old limbs on the ground
	and beating the earth with both my hands.

Chorus.
	After you I set my knee on the earth,
	calling my own miserable husband
	up from below.

Hecuba.
	We are led, we are carried off,

Chorus.
	Pain, it is pain you cry.

Hecuba.
	under a slave's roof.

Chorus.
	Out of my country.

Hecuba.
	Io.
	Priam, Priam, dead,
	unburied, without a friend,
	you know nothing of my ruin.

Chorus.
	Black death has closed his eyes,
	a holy man, an unholy slaughter.

Hecuba.
	Io, houses of the gods, and my dear city,

Chorus.
	E, e.

Hecuba.
	the murdering flame is yours, and the point of the spear.

Chorus.
	Soon you will fall to the dear ground, and have no name.

Hecuba.
	And the dust, rising to the sky on a wing like smoke,
	will hide my own house from my eyes.

Chorus.
	The name of the land will vanish. Everything
	is gone, one thing here and one thing there,
	and poor Troy is no more.

Hecuba.
	Did you feel that? Did you hear?

Chorus.
	The citadel crashing down.

Hecuba.
	The earth shaking, shaking, the whole

Chorus.
	city, it will wash over the whole city like a wave.

Hecuba.
	Io.
	Trembling limbs, carry my steps.
	Go on, poor limbs,
	to the day of slavery that is your life.

Chorus.
	Io, poor city. And still,
	set your foot forward, to the Achaean ships.
