Helen
(Part 3 of 4)

Menelaus.
And when I have lost you, I will end my own life too.

Helen.
Then how do we die so that it does us some credit?

Menelaus.
I will kill you on the back of this tomb, and then kill myself. But
first I am going to fight a great fight for the right to your bed.
Anyone who wants it, let him come and get it. I am not going to
disgrace the name I made at Troy, or go home to Greece and take a load
of blame with me. I am the man who robbed Thetis of Achilles. I saw
Ajax, Telamon's son, cut his own throat. I saw Nestor, Neleus's son,
left without his boy. And I am not to think my own wife worth dying
for? Of course she is. If the gods have any sense, when a brave man
dies at his enemies' hands they cover him in his tomb with a light
earth, and the cowards they throw out onto a hard bare ridge of rock.

Chorus.
Oh gods, let the family of Tantalus be lucky for once, and step clear
of its evils.

Helen.
Oh, I am wretched. That is the kind of luck I have. Menelaus, we are
finished. The prophetess Theonoe is coming out of the house. I can hear
the house ring as the bolts are drawn. Run. But what is the point of
running? Whether she is here or not, she knows you have come. Oh, I am
lost, I am lost. You came safe out of Troy, out of a barbarian country,
and now you have walked onto barbarian swords all over again.

(Theonoe comes out of the house with her attendants. One carries a
torch, another a brazier with sulphur burning in it.)

Theonoe.
You, lead the way with the torchlight, and burn the sulphur, as the
holy rule requires, to cleanse the deep corners of the air, so that I
can breathe the pure breath of heaven. And you, if anyone has damaged
the path by treading on it with an unholy foot, put the purifying flame
to it. Beat the pine torch on the ground ahead of me, so that I can
pass through. When you have paid the gods the rite I owe them, carry
the fire back inside to the hearth.

Helen. My prophecies. How do they stand now? Your husband Menelaus has
come, here he is in plain sight, stripped of his ships and of the copy
of you. Poor man. What troubles you have escaped to get here, and you
do not know whether you go home or stay where you are. Because there is
a quarrel among the gods over you, and a council is sitting beside
Zeus, on your account, this very day. Hera, who was your enemy before,
is your friend now. She wants to bring you safe home with this woman,
so that Greece can learn that the marriage of Paris, Aphrodite's gift
to him, was no marriage: he was married to a fake. And Aphrodite wants
to wreck your journey home, so that she is never shown up, never proved
to have bought the prize for beauty with a marriage to Helen that came
to nothing. And the decision is mine. Either I do what Aphrodite wants,
and tell my brother you are here, and destroy you. Or I take Hera's
side and save your life by hiding you from him, my own brother, who has
given me orders to tell him the moment you set foot in this country.
One of you go and tell my brother that this man is here, so that I am
safe.

Helen.
Lady, I fall at your knees and beg you. I take my seat here, at this
unhappy station, for myself and for this man, whom I have found at
last, after so long, only to see him killed. Do not tell your brother
that my husband has come back to my arms, into the hands that love him.
Save us. I am begging you. Do not sell your own goodness to your
brother, buying favours from him that are wicked and unjust. God hates
force. He orders everyone to get what they get without robbery. Wealth
that is unjust is wealth to be left alone. The sky is common to all
mortals, and so is the earth, and on it people should fill their houses
without holding what belongs to somebody else, or taking it by force.
Hermes gave me to your father to keep safe for my husband, at the right
moment for the gods and the worst possible moment for me. And here is
my husband, and he wants me back. How can he take me back if he is
dead? And how could your father ever give a living woman back to a dead
man? Think now about what the god wants, and what your father wants.
Would the god, would the dead man, want a neighbour's property given
back to its owner, or would they not? I think they would. So you ought
not to give more weight to a foolish brother than to a good father. You
are a prophetess. You believe in the things of the gods. If you wreck
your father's justice and do a favour to your unjust brother, it is a
disgrace: to know everything divine, what is and what is to come, and
not know what is right.

Take me out of this, wretched as I am, out of the evils I am sunk in.
Give me this, as a little something thrown in on top of my luck. There
is not a person alive who does not hate Helen. All over Greece I am
known as the woman who betrayed her husband and went to live in the
golden houses of the Phrygians. If I get to Greece and set foot in
Sparta again, they will hear, they will see with their own eyes, that
it was a trick of the gods that destroyed them, and that I was never a
traitor to the people I owe. They will bring me back to a good name,
and I will find a husband for my daughter, whom nobody will marry now,
and I will leave this bitter beggar's life behind and enjoy the
property that is sitting in my house. If this man had been killed and
burned on a pyre, I would be loving him with my tears from far away.
But he is alive, he is safe, and I am to have him taken from me? No,
lady. No. I beg you for this one thing. Give me this favour, and copy
your father's ways, a just man's ways. Because that is the finest glory
children have: the child of a good father, who grows up to match the
character of the parents who made him.

Chorus.
The words you have laid before us are pitiful, and so are you. But I
want to hear what Menelaus will say to save his own life.

Menelaus.
I could not bring myself to fall at your knees, or to get tears in my
eyes. If we turned coward we would disgrace Troy worse than anything.
And yet they say it becomes a well-born man to let the tears fall from
his eyes when things go wrong. Well, I will not choose that fine
thing, if it is fine, ahead of courage. If you think it right to save a
stranger who has come, in justice, to get back his own wife, then give
her back and save us into the bargain. If you do not think so, then I
am not wretched for the first time, I have been wretched often enough,
but you will be shown up as a bad woman. What I think is worthy of me
and just, and what will get its grip on your heart most of all, I will
say at your father's grave, since I miss him.

Old man, living in this tomb of stone: give her back. I am demanding my
wife from you, the wife Zeus sent here for you to keep for me. I know
you will never give her back to me yourself, because you are dead. But
this woman will not think it right that her father, whom I am calling
up from below, once the most honoured of men, should get a bad name.
She is the one in charge now. And you, Hades under the ground, I call
you as my ally too. You took plenty of bodies for this woman's sake,
killed by my sword. You have had your pay. Either give those men back
alive, here and now, or make this woman show that she is better than
her god-fearing father, and give me back my wife.

And if you two rob me of my wife, I will tell you the thing she left
out of her speech. I am bound by an oath, lady, so that you know it.
First, to fight your brother, hand to hand. He dies or I do. It is as
simple as that. And if he will not put his foot beside mine and fight,
but tries to starve us out, two suppliants at this tomb, then I have
decided: I kill this woman, and then I drive this two-edged sword into
my own liver, on the back of this tomb, so that the streams of blood
run down the grave. We will lie there, two corpses side by side on this
polished stone, a grief for you that never dies and a reproach to your
father. Your brother is not going to marry her, and neither is anybody
else. I am taking her away, and if I cannot take her home, I will take
her to the dead.

What am I doing? If I went soft and womanish and wept, I would get more
pity and less done. Kill me, if you like. You will not be killing
people without a name. But better to do what I say. Then you are just,
and I get my wife back.

Chorus.
It is for you to judge these speeches, young lady. Judge them in a way
that pleases everyone.

Theonoe.
I was born god-fearing and I want to be. I love myself, and I would not
stain my father's good name, or do my brother a favour that would show
me up as a disgrace. There is a great sanctuary of justice in my
nature. I have it from Nereus, and I will try to keep it, Menelaus.
Since Hera wants to do you good, I will cast my vote with her. As for
Aphrodite, may she be gracious to me, but she and I have never had
anything to do with each other, and I will try to stay a virgin all my
life. As for what you say to reproach my father at this tomb, I have
the same words to say myself. I would be doing wrong if I did not give
her back. Because if he were alive and looking at the light, he would
have given her back to you to have, and you to her. There is a
reckoning for these things among the dead below and among all of us up
here. The mind of the dead does not live, but it keeps its judgement,
and that is immortal, once it has fallen into the immortal air.

So, not to make a long sermon of it: I will keep silent about what you
have begged me, and I will never be an adviser to my brother's folly. I
am doing him good, though he will not think so, if I turn him from
godlessness to something holy. You two find some way out yourselves. I
will stand aside, out of the way, and say nothing. Begin with the gods.
Pray to Aphrodite to let you go home to your country, and pray to Hera
that her mind stays where it is, set on saving you and your husband.
And you, my dead father: as long as I have the strength, you will never
be called godless instead of god-fearing.

(Theonoe goes back into the house with her attendants.)

Chorus.
No one who was born lawless has ever prospered. Hope of safety lies in
a just cause.

Helen.
Menelaus, as far as the lady goes, we are safe. From here on it is for
you to put forward the ideas and stitch together a plan of escape for
the two of us.

Menelaus.
Listen, then. You have been a long time in this house, and you have
grown close to the king's servants.

Helen.
What do you mean by that? You are dangling hopes in front of me, as if
you were about to do something useful for us both.

Menelaus.
Could you persuade one of the men who look after the four-horse
chariots to give us a chariot?

Helen.
I could. But what escape is there for us? We do not know the plains or
the roads of this barbarian country.

Menelaus.
Impossible, as you say. Well then, what if I hid in the house and
killed the king with this two-edged sword?

Helen.
His sister would never put up with that, or keep quiet, if you meant to
kill her own brother.

Menelaus.
And there is no ship, either, to get us away safe. The sea has the one
we had.

Helen.
Listen to me, in case even a woman can say something clever. Are you
willing to be dead in word, without being dead?

Menelaus.
A bad omen. But if it gets me something, I am ready to be called dead
in word, without being dead.

Helen.
And then I would mourn you the way women do, with my hair cut short and
my songs of grief, in front of that godless man.

Menelaus.
And what cure for our two lives is in that? There is something rather
old and worn about the story.

Helen.
I will ask the king of this country to let me bury you in an empty
tomb, as if you had really died at sea.

Menelaus.
Suppose he allows it. Then how do we get away without a ship, once we
have put my body in an empty grave?

Helen.
I will tell him to give me a boat, so that I can let down the
offerings for your tomb into the arms of the sea.

Menelaus.
Well said, all but one thing. If he tells you to set up the tomb on dry
land, your excuse comes to nothing.

Helen.
But I will say that it is not the custom in Greece to bury under the
earth people who have died at sea.

Menelaus.
You have straightened that one out too. Then I will sail with you, and
help let down the offerings, in the same boat.

Helen.
You must be there above all, and your sailors too, the ones who escaped
from the wreck.

Menelaus.
Once I have a ship at anchor, they will stand there, man beside man,
each with a sword in his hand.

Helen.
You must be in charge of all of it. Only let the winds fill our sail
and carry us, and let the ship run fast.

Menelaus.
It will. The gods are going to end my troubles. But who will you say
you heard of my death from?

Helen.
From you. Say that you were the only one who escaped death when you
were sailing with the son of Atreus, and that you saw him die.

Menelaus.
And these rags I have wrapped round my body will back me up as evidence
of a shipwreck.

Helen.
They have come in useful now, though losing everything looked so
untimely then. That misery may turn out to be luck.

Menelaus.
Should I come into the house with you, or sit quietly here at the tomb?

Helen.
Stay here. If he tries anything ugly on you, this tomb will protect
you, and so will your sword. I will go into the house and cut off my
hair, and change my white dress for a black one, and drag my nails down
my cheek till the skin bleeds. Because the contest is a great one, and
I can see the scale tipping two ways: either I have to die, if I am
caught in my scheming, or I go home to my country and bring your body
safe out of this.

Lady Hera, you who lie in the bed of Zeus, give two pitiful people a
breathing space from their troubles. We ask you, throwing our arms
straight up to the sky, where you live among the embroidered stars. And
you, who won the prize for beauty at the price of my marriage,
Aphrodite, Dione's daughter, do not finish me off. You have done me
damage enough already, handing over my name to the barbarians, though
not my body. If you want to kill me, let me die in my father's country.
Why can you never get enough of evil, working at your loves and your
lies, your cunning inventions and your love-charms that bring blood
into houses? If you only knew where to stop, you would be, in every
other way, the sweetest of the gods to human beings. I do not say
otherwise.

(Helen goes into the house. Menelaus stays by the tomb.)

Chorus.
	You who sit in your place of song
	under the leafy halls of the trees,
	I call on you, you,
	the most musical bird that sings,
	the nightingale, the bird of tears:
	come, trilling through your brown throat,
	and help me in my mourning,
	as I sing the pains of poor Helen
	and the tearful fate of the women of Troy
	under the spears of the Achaeans.
	When he raced the roaring plains of the sea with his barbarian oar,
	when he came, he came, bringing Priam's sons a misery,
	your bed, Helen, carried out of Sparta,
	Paris, whose marriage was a curse,
	and Aphrodite showed him the way.

Chorus.
	Many of the Achaeans, by the spear and the flung stones,
	breathed out their last, and a wretched Hades holds them now,
	and their unhappy wives have cut off their hair,
	and their houses stand with no bride in them.
	And many more one man destroyed, alone in his one boat,
	lighting a blazing fire on Euboea, the island in the sea,
	and flinging the Achaeans onto the rocks of Caphereus
	and the shores of the Aegean,
	with the treacherous star he lit.
	And the harbourless hills of Malea, in the blast of the storm,
	when he was swept far from his homeland, Menelaus,
	carrying on his ships the prize of a barbarian expedition,
	no prize but a quarrel with the Greeks,
	Hera's holy phantom.

Chorus.
	What is god, what is not god, and what lies between,
	which mortal can say he has searched and found
	the farthest end of it,
	when he sees the gods' business
	leaping this way, and back again that way,
	and round again, in luck
	that contradicts itself and nobody expected?
	You, Helen, were born the daughter of Zeus:
	a winged father begot you in Leda's womb.
	And then you were shouted across Greece
	as traitor, faithless, lawless, godless.
	I do not know what is certain among mortals any more.
	The word of the gods I have found true.

Chorus.
	Fools, all of you who go after honour through war
	and the spear-points of a strong army,
	stupidly putting an end to human troubles that way.
	If a contest of blood is to decide it,
	strife will never leave the cities of men.
	That is how they came by their bedrooms in Priam's earth,
	when they could have settled your quarrel with words,
	Helen.
	And now they are in the keeping of Hades below,
	and fire like the lightning of Zeus has swept over the walls,
	and you bring sufferings on sufferings,
	miseries on miseries, and a song of grief.

(Theoclymenus comes in from hunting, with servants carrying nets and
leading dogs. He stops at the tomb.)

Theoclymenus.
Greetings, my father's tomb. I buried you here at the doorway,
Proteus, so that I could speak to you, and every time I go out of the
house and come back in, I, your son Theoclymenus, say a word to you,
father. You slaves, take the dogs and the hunting nets into the royal
house. I have called myself a fool over and over. Do we not punish
criminals with death? And now I hear that some Greek has landed in this
country in broad daylight and slipped past the guards, a spy, or a
thief on the hunt for Helen. He dies, if I can only catch him.

Ah. It seems I have arrived to find the whole business done. The
daughter of Tyndareus has left her seat at the tomb empty and been
shipped out of the country. Ho there. Undo the bars. Loose the horses
from their stalls, men, and bring out the chariots, so that the wife I
want does not get carried off out of this land for want of effort on my
part.

Wait. I see the people we are chasing, and they have not run. They are
here in the house.

(Helen comes out of the house in a black dress, with her hair cut
short.)

You. Why have you put black clothes on your body instead of white? Why
have you taken a knife to that noble head and cut off your hair, and
why are you wetting your cheeks with fresh tears, and weeping? Is it a
dream in the night that has persuaded you to groan like this, or have
you heard some rumour from inside the house that has broken your heart
with grief?

Helen.
My lord, and yes, now I call you by that name, I am destroyed. All that
was mine is gone, and I am nothing any more.

Theoclymenus.
What disaster are you lying under? What has happened?

Helen.
Menelaus, oh, how can I say it, is dead. My husband is dead.

Theoclymenus.
I take no pleasure in your words, though they are good luck for me. How
do you know? Did Theonoe tell you this?

Helen.
She says so, and so does a man who was there when he died.

Theoclymenus.
Someone has come who brings this news for certain?

Helen.
Someone has come. And may he go where I want him to go.

Theoclymenus.
Who is he? Where is he? I want to know this more exactly.

Helen.
That man, sitting huddled at the tomb there.

Theoclymenus.
Apollo! What a sight he is, in those filthy clothes.

Helen.
Oh. I think my husband must have looked like that too.

Theoclymenus.
Where is this man from, and from where did he put in to land here?

Helen.
He is a Greek, one of the Achaeans who sailed with my husband.

Theoclymenus.
What kind of death does he say Menelaus died?

Helen.
The most pitiful. In the wet waves of the sea.

Theoclymenus.
Where was he sailing, on what barbarian waters?

Helen.
He was thrown onto the harbourless rocks of Libya.

Theoclymenus.
And how did this man not die, if he shared the same oar?

Helen.
Sometimes worse men are luckier than their betters.

Theoclymenus.
Where did he leave the wreck of his ship before he came here?

Helen.
Where I hope it rots. But not Menelaus.

Theoclymenus.
Menelaus is finished. What boat did this man come in?

Helen.
Sailors happened on him and picked him up, he says.

Theoclymenus.
Then where is the evil thing that was sent to Troy in your place?

Helen.
You mean the image made of cloud? It has gone off into the air.

Theoclymenus.
Oh Priam, and land of Troy, how you were destroyed for nothing.

Helen.
And I had my share in the ruin of Priam's family.

Theoclymenus.
Did he leave your husband unburied, or did he put him under the earth?

Helen.
Unburied. Oh, the misery of it, on top of all my evils.

Theoclymenus.
Is that why you cut the curls of your golden hair?

Helen.
Because he is dear to me, whoever he is, and he is here.

Theoclymenus.
She is right to weep over this misfortune, if it is true.

Helen.
Oh yes, it is so easy to fool your sister.

Theoclymenus.
Hardly. Well, what now? Are you going to go on living at this tomb?

Helen.
Why do you mock me? Can you not leave the dead man alone?

Theoclymenus.
Because you are faithful to your husband, and you keep running from me.

Helen.
Not any more. Begin my wedding now.

Theoclymenus.
It has been a long time coming, but I am glad of it all the same.

Helen.
Do you know what you should do? Let us forget the past.

Theoclymenus.
On what terms? One favour deserves another.

Helen.
Let us make peace. Be reconciled with me.

Theoclymenus.
I let my quarrel with you go. Let it fly away on wings.

Helen.
Then by your knees, since you are a friend to me now.

Theoclymenus.
What are you hunting, reaching out to me like a suppliant?

Helen.
I want to bury my dead husband.

Theoclymenus.
What? Is there a tomb for the absent? Are you going to bury a shadow?

Helen.
It is the custom among Greeks, when someone dies at sea.

Theoclymenus.
To do what? The sons of Pelops are clever at that kind of thing.

Helen.
To hold the funeral with empty woven robes.

Theoclymenus.
Then hold your funeral. Raise the tomb wherever in the land you like.
