Helen
(Part 4 of 4)

Helen.
That is not how we bury sailors who have died at sea.

Theoclymenus.
How, then? I know nothing of the customs of the Greeks.

Helen.
We take everything the dead are owed out to sea, and give it to the
water.

Theoclymenus.
Then what am I to give you for the dead man?

Helen.
This man knows. I do not. I never had to learn, in my lucky days.

Theoclymenus.
Stranger, the news you brought was welcome, at least.

Menelaus.
Not to me. And not to the dead man.

Theoclymenus.
How do you bury men who have died at sea?

Menelaus.
Each according to what he can afford.

Theoclymenus.
Then never mind the cost. Name what you want, for her sake.

Menelaus.
First, blood is shed for the powers below.

Theoclymenus.
The blood of what? Tell me, and I will do it.

Menelaus.
Decide that yourself. Whatever you give will be enough.

Theoclymenus.
Among us barbarians the custom is a horse or a bull.

Menelaus.
Whatever you give, give nothing that is low-bred.

Theoclymenus.
Our herds are rich. We are not short of those.

Menelaus.
Then a bed is carried out, made up and spread, with no body on it.

Theoclymenus.
It will be done. What else does custom require?

Menelaus.
Weapons of beaten bronze. He loved the spear.

Theoclymenus.
What we give will be worthy of the house of Pelops.

Menelaus.
And whatever else the earth brings up that is beautiful.

Theoclymenus.
And then? How do you let it all down into the swell?

Menelaus.
There must be a ship, and men to work the oars.

Theoclymenus.
How far from the land does the ship stand off?

Menelaus.
Far enough that the wash of the oars can barely be seen from the
shore.

Theoclymenus.
Why is that? Where did Greece get this custom from?

Menelaus.
So the waves cannot throw the pollution back onto the land.

Theoclymenus.
You will have a fast Phoenician ship.

Menelaus.
That would be good. And it would please Menelaus.

Theoclymenus.
Can you not do all this well enough without her?

Menelaus.
This is work for a mother, or a wife, or children.

Theoclymenus.
So it is her task, you say, to bury her husband.

Menelaus.
It is. Piety says the dead are not to be robbed of what is theirs.

Theoclymenus.
Let her go, then. It is in my interest to keep a wife who honours the
gods. Go into the house and choose the ornaments for the dead man. And
I will not send you away from this country empty-handed either, since
you have done her this kindness. You brought me good news, and for
that you will have clothes instead of the rags you stand in, and food,
enough to get you home to your own country. I can see the state you
are in.

And you, poor woman, stop wearing yourself out over what cannot be
helped. Menelaus has met his fate. A dead husband cannot come back to
life.

Menelaus.
That is your part now, young woman. You must love the husband you have
and let go of the one who no longer exists. That is the best thing for
you, as things have turned out. And if I reach Greece and come through
alive, I will put an end to the bad name you had before, if you are
the kind of wife to your husband that you ought to be.

Helen.
I will be. My husband will never have cause to complain of me. You
will be close enough to see it for yourself. But go inside now, you
poor man, and take a bath and change your clothes. I am not going to
put off doing good to you. You will do what is due to my dearest
Menelaus with a better heart if you get from me what you deserve.

(Theoclymenus, Helen and Menelaus go into the house.)

Chorus.
	Once the mother of the gods, the mountain mother,
	ran on racing feet
	through the wooded valleys,
	along the running streams of the rivers
	and the deep-thundering waves of the sea,
	aching for her daughter who was gone,
	the girl whose name is not spoken.
	The clattering rattles cried out
	a piercing sound
	when the goddess yoked wild beasts to her chariot
	and two goddesses ran with her, quick as the wind,
	after the girl who had been snatched
	out of the circling dances of the young women:
	Artemis with her bow,
	and the grim-eyed one, Athena,
	in full armour with her spear.
	But Zeus, looking down
	from his seat in heaven,
	was bringing about another fate.

Chorus.
	And when the mother gave up the racing,
	far-wandering labour of hunting
	for her daughter, stolen by a trick,
	she crossed the snow-fed lookouts
	of the nymphs of Mount Ida
	and threw herself down in her grief
	among the rocks and the snowbound thickets.
	And for mortals she would not let the ploughed fields
	of the earth bear crops, and they lay brown and bare,
	and she was killing off the race of men.
	She sent up no fresh pasture,
	no leafy curling shoots for the flocks,
	and the life was going out of the cities.
	There were no sacrifices to the gods,
	and on the altars the cakes lay unburnt.
	She stopped the dewy springs
	from throwing up their clear water,
	in grief for her child,
	an avenger.

Chorus.
	And when she had put an end to the feasts
	for gods and the race of men alike,
	Zeus spoke, softening
	the mother's hateful anger:
	"Go, holy Graces, go,
	and take the grief out of Demeter,
	who is furious over her girl,
	with a great shout of joy,
	and you Muses, with the songs of the dancers."
	Then Aphrodite, most beautiful of the blessed gods,
	first took up the bronze with its deep voice
	and the drums with their tight-stretched hide.
	And the goddess laughed,
	and took into her hands
	the deep-booming pipe,
	delighted with the noise.

Chorus.
	Child, you burned in the gods' inner rooms
	offerings that were not right and not holy,
	and you brought on yourself the anger
	of the great mother
	by not honouring the goddess's rites.
	The dappled fawnskin robes
	have great power,
	and the green ivy wound
	around the sacred wands,
	and the whirling of the bull-roarer
	spinning its circle in the air,
	and hair streaming loose for Dionysus,
	and the goddess's all-night festivals,
	and the moon that rides high
	over those nights.
	You trusted in your beauty alone.

(Helen comes out of the house.)

Helen.
Inside the house, friends, everything is going our way. The daughter
of Proteus is in the theft with us. When her brother questioned her,
she said nothing about my husband being here. For my sake she told him
he is dead and under the earth, and does not see the light of day.

And my husband has snatched a piece of luck as fine as any. The
weapons he was supposed to let down into the sea, he is carrying
himself. He has put his good arm through the shield strap and taken
the spear in his right hand, as if he were helping with the honours
for the dead. He has fitted his body out with weapons ready for a
fight, so that when we step onto the oared ship his one hand can set
up trophies over countless barbarians. And I have taken the clothes
the shipwreck left him in and dressed him in fresh ones, and given his
skin the bath it has waited so long for, in water from the river.

But I must be quiet. The man who thinks he has my wedding safe in his
hands is coming out of the house. And I ask you for your good will,
and to keep your mouths shut, so that if we save ourselves we may one
day save you too.

(Theoclymenus comes out of the house, with slaves carrying the
offerings.)

Theoclymenus.
Move along in order, slaves, as the stranger told you, carrying the
gifts for the burial at sea. And you, Helen, if you do not think I am
talking nonsense, listen to me and stay here. You will do the same
service to your husband whether you are there or not. I am afraid some
sudden longing will come over you and persuade you to throw yourself
into the swell of the sea, struck down by love for your first husband.
You grieve for him too much, for a man who is not even here.

Helen.
My new husband, I cannot help honouring my first marriage bed and the
man I lay beside as a bride. Because I loved my husband, I could even
die with him. But what thanks would he have from me if I died with
him, dead as he is? Let me go myself and give the dead man his funeral
gifts. And may the gods give you what I wish for you, and this
stranger too, for the help he is giving. And you will have in me the
kind of wife you ought to have in your house, since you are doing this
good to Menelaus and to me. All this is leading somewhere, to some
good fortune. Now, whoever is to give us the ship we will carry these
things in, appoint him, so that I have your kindness in full.

(He turns to one of his men.)

Theoclymenus.
You. Go and give these people a Sidonian ship with fifty oars, and men
to row it.

Helen.
And this man, who is arranging the funeral, will be in command of the
ship?

Theoclymenus.
Certainly. My sailors are to obey him.

Helen.
Give the order again, so they understand you clearly.

Theoclymenus.
I give it again. And a third time, if you like.

Helen.
May it bring you good. And me too, for my plans.

Theoclymenus.
Now do not spoil your skin with too much crying.

Helen.
This day will show you how grateful I am.

Theoclymenus.
The dead are nothing. All this is work for nothing.

Helen.
There is something to what I say, both down there and up here.

Theoclymenus.
You will find me no worse a husband than Menelaus.

Helen.
I have no complaint of you. All I need is luck.

Theoclymenus.
That is in your hands, if you give me your good will.

Helen.
I do not need lessons now in how to love the people I owe.

Theoclymenus.
Do you want me to work alongside you, and see the expedition off
myself?

Helen.
Certainly not. Do not turn slave to your own slaves, my lord.

Theoclymenus.
Well then. I let the customs of the house of Pelops be. My house is
clean: Menelaus did not breathe his last here. Let someone go and tell
my chieftains to bring wedding gifts to my house. The whole land must
ring with songs of blessing for the wedding of Helen and me, so that
everyone envies it. And you, stranger, go, and give these things into
the arms of the sea for the man who was once her husband, and then
hurry back to the house with my wife, so that you can share her
wedding feast with me and set out for home, or stay here and live
well.

(Theoclymenus goes into the house.)

Menelaus.
Zeus, they call you father, and a wise god. Look at us, and turn our
troubles aside. We are dragging our fortunes up a cliff of rock. Put
your shoulder to it with us. Touch us with only your fingertip and we
will reach the place we want to be. We have laboured enough already,
in the labours we went through before. Gods, I have called on you many
times, and you have heard hard things from me as well as good. I am
not owed bad luck for ever. I am owed a straight step forward. Grant
me this one favour, and you will make me a lucky man for the rest of
my life.

(Menelaus and Helen go out towards the shore.)

Chorus.
	Phoenician ship of Sidon,
	swift oar, mother of the foam the rowers make,
	dear to the beat of the blades,
	leader of the dance
	of the lovely dancing dolphins,
	when the sea lies windless
	and the grey-eyed daughter of the Sea,
	Calm, says this:
	"Let out the sails,
	leave them to the sea breezes,
	and take up your oars of pine,
	sailors, sailors,
	and carry Helen to the good harbours
	and the shores where the house of Perseus stood."

Chorus.
	Perhaps you will find the daughters of Leucippus
	beside the swell of the river,
	or in front of the temple of Athena,
	when at last you join the dances again,
	or the revels for Hyacinthus
	and their night-long joy:
	Hyacinthus, whom Apollo killed
	with the discus, throwing for the longest cast,
	and so the son of Zeus declared
	a day of ox sacrifice in the land of Sparta.
	And you may find the calf
	you left at home, Hermione,
	for no torch has yet been lit
	to light her to her wedding.

Chorus.
	If only we could fly through the air
	the way the cranes, the birds of Libya, go,
	in their long ranks,
	leaving the winter rain behind,
	following the whistle
	of their oldest leader, the shepherd of the flock,
	who cries out as he flies
	over the dry plains and the fields that bear the crops.
	Long-necked birds, winged ones,
	who run with the racing clouds,
	go, under the Pleiades in the middle of the sky
	and Orion of the night,
	and shout the news as you settle
	on the banks of the Eurotas,
	that Menelaus has taken the city of Dardanus
	and is coming home.

Chorus.
	And you, come at last, driving your horses
	down the road through the sky,
	sons of Tyndareus,
	under the whirling of the bright stars,
	you who live in heaven,
	Helen's saviours.
	Come over the grey-green swell and the dark blue waves,
	the white-crested surf of the sea,
	sending the sailors
	fair winds from Zeus.
	And throw off your sister
	the bad name of a barbarian's bed,
	the punishment she was given
	for the quarrel on Ida,
	though she never went to the land of Troy,
	to the towers Apollo built.

(A Messenger, one of the Egyptian sailors, comes running in.
Theoclymenus comes out of the house to meet him.)

Messenger.
My lord, the worst has happened to this house. You are about to hear
strange new troubles from me.

Theoclymenus.
What is it?

Messenger.
Set to work courting another woman. Helen has left the country.

Theoclymenus.
Lifted on wings, or walking on her own feet?

Messenger.
Menelaus has carried her off by sea, out of the land. He was the man
who came to announce his own death.

Theoclymenus.
That is a terrible thing to say. What ship took her away from this
country? I cannot believe what you are telling me.

Messenger.
The one you gave to the stranger. And he has gone with your own
sailors, to put it briefly.

Theoclymenus.
How? I want to know. I never dreamed one pair of hands could get the
better of all those sailors you were sent out with.

Messenger.
When the daughter of Zeus left this royal house and set out for the
sea, she stepped along on delicate feet and mourned, very cleverly,
for the husband who was right beside her and not dead at all. When we
came to the wall of your dockyard, we hauled down the Sidonian ship
for her first voyage, fitted with her fifty benches and her full count
of oars. Then one job followed another. One man set the mast, another
set the oars, the blades in his hands; the white sails were made
ready; the steering oars were let down on their straps.

And in the middle of this work, watching for exactly this, it seems,
Greeks who had sailed with Menelaus came along the shore, dressed in
the rags of shipwrecked men, good-looking men but filthy to look at.
The son of Atreus saw them coming and spoke to them, putting on a
false show of pity for everyone to hear. "Poor men, how did you get
here? What Achaean ship was wrecked under you? Have you come to help
bury the son of Atreus, who is lost, and whose empty grave this
daughter of Tyndareus is honouring, without a body?" And they shed
tears to order, and went on board the ship carrying the offerings that
were to go into the sea for Menelaus. We were suspicious, and we said
to each other that there were a great many of these extra passengers.
But we kept our mouths shut all the same, out of respect for your
orders. When you told the stranger to command the ship, you threw the
whole thing into confusion.

The rest of the offerings we got aboard easily enough; they were
light. But the bull's hoof would not go straight up the gangplank. He
bellowed, rolling his eyes round, and arched his back, and glared
along his horns, and would not let us touch him. Then Helen's husband
called out, "You men who sacked the city of Troy, come on, pick up the
bull's body on your young shoulders, the way Greeks do, and heave him
into the bow, and have a sword ready to hand at the same time, for the
victim's throat, for the dead man." They came at his order, lifted the
bull clean off the ground, carried him aboard and set him down on the
benches. And Menelaus stroked the horse's neck and forehead, and
coaxed him up into the ship.

At last, when the ship had taken everything, Helen climbed the rungs
of the ladder with her fine ankles and sat down in the middle, between
the rowers' benches, and Menelaus, the man who was dead by all
accounts, sat close beside her. The others sat down along the right
and the left sides in equal numbers, man beside man, with swords
hidden under their clothes, and the water filled with the noise of
oars as we heard the voice of the man calling the stroke.

When we were neither very far from the land nor very near, the
helmsman asked, "Do we sail farther out, stranger, or is this far
enough? The command of the ship is yours." And he said, "This is
enough for me." He took his sword in his right hand and went forward
to the bow, and stood over the bull for the sacrifice, and with no
dead man in his mind at all he cut its throat and prayed. "Poseidon of
the sea, who live in the salt water, and you holy daughters of Nereus,
bring me and my wife safe out of this country to the shore of
Nauplia." And the jets of blood spurted into the swell, a good omen
for the stranger.

Then someone said, "There is treachery in this voyage. Row back. You,
give the order to the right side. You, turn the steering oar." But the
son of Atreus stood up from the bull he had killed and shouted to his
friends, "Why are you waiting, you pick of the land of Greece? Cut the
barbarians' throats, kill them, throw them off the ship into the sea."
And the man calling the stroke shouted the opposite order to your
rowers: "Come on, one of you grab a spar from the stern, another break
up a bench, another pull an oar out of its socket, and bloody the
heads of these foreign enemies." They were all on their feet at once,
some with the ship's timbers in their hands, others with swords, and
the ship ran with blood. And Helen was cheering them on from the
stern: "Where is the glory you won at Troy? Show it to these
barbarians." In the rush men fell, and men got up again, and you would
have seen others lying there dead. Menelaus in his armour watched for
wherever his friends were in trouble, and there he brought his sword
in his right hand, so that men dived off the ship, and he swept the
benches clean of your rowers. Then he went to the helmsman and told
him to steer the ship straight for Greece. They raised the mast, and a
fair wind came.

They are gone, out of the country. I escaped the killing by letting
myself down into the sea beside the anchor, and when I was at the end
of my strength a fisherman with his line pulled me out and put me
ashore to bring you this news. There is nothing more useful to human
beings than a sensible refusal to believe.

Chorus.
I would never have believed, my lord, that Menelaus could be here
without your knowing it or ours. But he was, and he stood right in
front of us.

Theoclymenus.
Caught by a woman's tricks. God help me. My marriage has run away from
me. If the ship could be caught by chasing it, I would go to the
trouble and have those strangers in my hands soon enough. As it is, I
will punish the sister who betrayed me. She saw Menelaus in this
house, and she did not tell me. She will never fool another man with
her prophecies again.

(He starts towards the house with his sword drawn. A Servant of
Theonoe's blocks the doorway and takes hold of his clothes.)

Servant.
You. Where are you going, master? What killing are you off to?

Theoclymenus.
Where justice tells me. Out of my way.

Servant.
I am not letting go of your clothes. You are in a hurry to do
something terrible.

Theoclymenus.
You are a slave. Are you going to give orders to your masters?

Servant.
Yes. Because I am in my right mind.

Theoclymenus.
Not to my way of thinking. Not unless you let me...

Servant.
No. We will not let you.

Theoclymenus.
Kill a sister who is the worst of women...

Servant.
The most god-fearing of women, you mean.

Theoclymenus.
Who betrayed me...

Servant.
A fine betrayal, doing what is right.

Theoclymenus.
Giving my bride to another man.

Servant.
To the man with the better right to her.

Theoclymenus.
And who has a right to what is mine?

Servant.
The man who received her from her father.

Theoclymenus.
But fortune gave her to me.

Servant.
And what had to be took her away.

Theoclymenus.
It is not for you to judge my affairs.

Servant.
It is, if what I say is better.

Theoclymenus.
So I am the one being ruled here. I am not the ruler.

Servant.
Ruled when it comes to doing right. Not to doing wrong.

Theoclymenus.
You seem to be in love with dying.

Servant.
Kill me. You will not kill your sister while I have any say in it.
Kill me instead. For a slave of the right kind, dying for his masters
is the finest end there is.

(The Dioscuri, Castor and Polydeuces, appear in the air above the
house.)

Castor.
Hold back the anger that is carrying you where it should not,
Theoclymenus, king of this land. We are the two sons of Zeus, and we
are calling you: the twins Leda bore, along with Helen, who has fled
from your house. You are angry over a marriage that was never fated to
be yours. And your sister Theonoe, the daughter of the Nereid goddess,
is doing you no wrong when she honours what the gods have ordered and
the just commands of her father. It was right that Helen should live
in your house up to now, up to this present time. But once the
foundations of Troy were torn up, and she had lent her name to the
gods for their purposes, it was right no longer. Now she has to be
yoked in her own marriage again, go home, and live with her husband.

So keep your black sword away from your sister, and believe that in
this she has acted with good sense and kept herself in hand. We would
have saved our sister long ago, before all this, since Zeus made us
gods. But we were weaker than what was fated, and than the gods, who
decided things should go this way.

That is what I have to say to you. To my sister I say this. Sail on
with your husband. You will have a fair wind. We, your two brothers,
your saviours, will ride the sea beside you and bring you home. And
when you round the last turn and come to the end of your life, you
will be called a goddess, and share the drink offerings with the
Dioscuri, and receive the gifts men give to guests, along with us.
That is the will of Zeus. And the place where the son of Maia, Hermes,
first set you down on your journey through the sky, when he took you
from Sparta and stole your body away so that Paris should not have
you, the island that lies like a sentry along the coast of Attica,
will be called by your name, Helen, among men from now on, because it
took you in when you were stolen from your home. As for Menelaus the
wanderer, the gods have fixed it that he will live on the island of
the blessed. The gods do not hate the well-born. It is the nameless
multitude whose troubles are greater.

Theoclymenus.
Sons of Leda and Zeus, I let go my old quarrel over your sister. And
my own sister I will not kill now. Let Helen go home, if the gods
think it right. Know this, both of you: the same blood that made you
made a sister who is the best of women and the most self-controlled.
Go, then, and fare well, for the sake of Helen's noble mind, a thing
not to be found in many women.

(The Dioscuri disappear into the sky above the house.)

Chorus.
	Many are the shapes of what the gods do,
	and many the things they bring about that no one expected.
	What we counted on did not happen,
	and for what no one counted on, a god found a way.
	That is how this business ended.
