An Essay on the Principle of Population

As It Affects the Future Improvement of Society, with Remarks on the
Ideas of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet, and Other Writers

Thomas Malthus

London, 1798


Preface

This essay started as a conversation with a friend about Mr. Godwin's essay on avarice and extravagance in his Enquirer. Our discussion turned to the broader question of whether society can be perfected, and I originally sat down just to put my thoughts on paper more clearly than I felt I could express them in conversation. But as I dug deeper into the subject, some ideas came to me that I didn't recall encountering before. And since I believed that even the smallest bit of light on a topic of such wide interest might be welcomed with an open mind, I decided to put my thoughts into a form worth publishing.

This essay could undoubtedly have been made much more thorough by gathering a larger collection of facts to support the general argument. But a long and nearly total interruption from other pressing obligations, combined with a desire -- perhaps an unwise one -- not to delay publication much beyond my original timeline, prevented me from giving the subject my undivided attention. I trust, however, that the evidence I have presented will amount to a substantial case for the truth of my views on the future improvement of humanity. As I see it right now, little more seems necessary than a straightforward explanation, paired with even the most basic survey of society, to establish my argument.

It is an obvious truth, noted by many writers, that population must always be kept down to the level of available food and resources. But no writer that I can recall has looked closely into the specific ways this balance is maintained. And it is precisely this examination of those mechanisms that presents, in my view, the strongest obstacle to any dramatic future improvement of society. I hope it will be clear that in discussing this important subject, I am driven solely by a love of truth -- not by any bias against any particular group of people or set of ideas. I can honestly say that I read some of the grand visions for society's future improvement in a spirit very different from wanting to find them unrealistic. But I have not achieved such mastery over my own reasoning that I can believe what I wish to believe without evidence, or reject what may be unwelcome when the evidence supports it.

The picture I have painted of human life has a melancholy tint to it, but I am confident that I have drawn these dark shades from a genuine conviction that they truly belong in the picture -- not from a cynical eye or a naturally gloomy temperament. The theory of the mind that I have sketched out in the final two chapters explains, at least to my own satisfaction, why most of the evils of life exist. Whether it will have the same effect on others, I must leave to the judgment of my readers.

If I should succeed in drawing the attention of more capable thinkers to what I believe is the principal difficulty standing in the way of society's improvement, and should then see this difficulty removed -- even in theory -- I will gladly take back my current views and rejoice in being proven wrong.

                                     7 June 1798
