CHAPTER 4

The state of civilized nations -- Europe is probably much more populous now than in the time of Julius Caesar -- The best measure of population -- A probable error in one of the criteria Hume proposes for estimating population -- The slow growth of population in most European states today -- The two principal checks to population -- The first, or preventive check, examined with regard to England.


When we look at the next stage of human society as it relates to our question -- the stage of mixed farming and livestock, which in varying proportions is where the most civilized nations have always remained -- we can draw on what we see around us every day: actual experience and facts within reach of any observer.

Despite the exaggerations of some ancient historians, no reasonable person can doubt that the population of the major countries of Europe -- France, England, Germany, Russia, Poland, Sweden, and Denmark -- is much greater now than it ever was in earlier times. The obvious reason for those exaggerations is the terrifying spectacle that even a thinly populated nation presents when its people gather together and move all at once in search of new land. If you add to that fearsome sight a series of similar migrations arriving at intervals, it is no surprise that the frightened nations of Southern Europe came to imagine the North as a region absolutely teeming with people. A closer and fairer view of the subject today lets us see that this conclusion was as absurd as if someone in England, who kept running into herds of cattle being driven down from Wales and the North, immediately concluded that those regions must be the most productive parts of the whole kingdom.

The reason most of Europe is more populous now than in earlier times is straightforward: the labor of its inhabitants has made these countries produce a greater quantity of food. I believe it can be stated as an undeniable principle that -- taking a large enough area to account for imports and exports, and allowing some variation for whether luxury or frugal habits prevail -- population always maintains a regular proportion to the food the land is made to produce. In the long-running debate about whether ancient or modern nations were more populous, if it could be clearly established that the average agricultural output of the countries in question, taken as a whole, is greater now than it was in the time of Julius Caesar, the dispute would be settled immediately.

When we are told that China is the most fertile country in the world, that nearly all its land is under cultivation, that much of it yields two crops a year, and furthermore that the people live very frugally, we can conclude with certainty that the population must be enormous -- without needing to dig into the habits and customs of the lower classes or the incentives for early marriage. But these inquiries are extremely important. A detailed history of the customs of the poorest Chinese people would be invaluable for understanding how the checks to further population growth actually operate -- what forms of vice and what kinds of hardship prevent the population from growing beyond what the country can support.

Hume, in his essay on the populousness of ancient and modern nations, mixes an inquiry into causes with an inquiry into facts. In doing so, he does not seem to see -- with his usual sharpness -- how very little some of the causes he points to could actually help him judge the real population of ancient nations. If any conclusion can be drawn from those causes, it should perhaps be the exact opposite of what Hume concludes, though I should certainly speak with great caution when disagreeing with a thinker who, on subjects like these, was the least likely of anyone to be fooled by surface appearances. Here is my reasoning: if I find that at a certain period in ancient history, the incentives to start a family were strong, that early marriages were therefore very common, and that few people remained single, I would conclude with certainty that population was growing rapidly -- but by no means that it was already very large. Quite the contrary: I would infer that it was still thin, and that there was room and food for many more people. On the other hand, if I find that at some period the difficulties of supporting a family were very great, that few early marriages took place, and that a large number of both men and women remained single, I would conclude with certainty that population growth had stalled -- and probably because the actual population was already very large relative to the fertility of the land, leaving scarcely any room or food for more. Hume acknowledges that the number of footmen, housemaids, and other people who remain unmarried in modern nations is, if anything, an argument against their population being large. I would draw exactly the opposite conclusion, and see it as evidence that these nations are full -- though this inference is not certain, because there are many thinly populated countries that are nonetheless standing still in their growth. To put it precisely, then: the proportion of unmarried people at different periods, in the same or different countries, can tell us whether population at those times was increasing, stagnant, or declining -- but it cannot tell us the actual size of the population.

There is, however, one detail noted in most accounts of China that seems hard to square with this reasoning. It is said that early marriage is widespread across all levels of Chinese society. Yet Adam Smith assumes that China's population is stationary. These two facts appear impossible to reconcile. It certainly seems very unlikely that China's population is growing rapidly. Every acre of land has been cultivated for so long that it is hard to imagine any significant yearly increase in average production. Perhaps the supposed universality of early marriage has not been firmly established. But if we accept it as true, the only way to explain the contradiction -- given what we currently know -- seems to be this: the excess population that early marriage inevitably produces must be kept down by periodic famines and by the practice of abandoning unwanted children, which in times of hardship is probably far more common than anyone ever admits to Europeans. On this horrifying practice, it is hard to avoid pointing out that there can be no stronger proof of the suffering humanity has endured from lack of food than the existence of a custom that so violates the most basic instinct of the human heart. It appears to have been widespread among ancient nations and, ironically, probably tended to increase population rather than reduce it.

When we look at the major states of modern Europe, we find that although they have grown considerably since the days when they were nations of shepherds, their growth today is very slow. Instead of doubling their numbers every twenty-five years, they need three or four hundred years -- or more -- to accomplish that. Some may be completely stagnant, and others may actually be shrinking. The cause of this slow growth cannot be traced to any weakening of sexual desire. We have every reason to believe that this natural drive still exists in full force. So why don't its effects show up as rapid population growth? A close look at the state of society in any one European country -- which can stand as an example for all the rest -- will answer this question. Anticipating the difficulties of raising a family acts as a preventive check, while the actual hardships suffered by the poorest members of society -- hardships that leave them unable to give their children proper food and care -- act as a positive check on the natural increase of population.

England, as one of the most prosperous states in Europe, can fairly be taken as our example, and the observations we make will apply with little variation to any other country where population growth is slow.

The preventive check appears to operate to some degree through all levels of society in England. There are men even in the highest class who are discouraged from marrying by the thought of the expenses they would have to cut back on and the pleasures they would have to give up if they had a family. These concerns are admittedly trivial, but this kind of cautious foresight takes on much weightier considerations as we move down the social ladder.

A man with a good education but an income only just large enough to let him move in the circles of a gentleman must feel absolutely certain that if he marries and has a family, he will -- if he continues to socialize at all -- find himself on the same level as modest farmers and the lower tier of shopkeepers. The kind of woman an educated man would naturally choose as a partner would be someone raised with the same tastes and values, someone accustomed to the social world of her own class -- a world entirely different from the one she would be reduced to by marriage. Can a man really bring himself to place the woman he loves in a situation so out of step with her tastes and expectations? A drop of two or three rungs on the social ladder -- especially at the level where education ends and ignorance begins -- is not some imagined or far-fetched hardship, but a real and serious one. If social life is worth having, it surely must be the kind shared among equals, where respect flows both ways and favors are given as well as received -- not the kind a dependent endures with his patron, or a poor person with a rich one.

These considerations undoubtedly keep a great number of people in this class from following their hearts into an early attachment. Others, driven by stronger passion or weaker judgment, break through these barriers. And it would be harsh indeed if the fulfillment of something as wonderful as genuine love did not, at least sometimes, more than outweigh all the troubles that come with it. But I am afraid we have to admit that the more common results of such marriages tend to justify the caution of the prudent rather than prove them wrong.

The sons of shopkeepers and farmers are urged not to marry, and they generally find it necessary to follow this advice until they have established themselves in some business or found a farm that can support a family. These milestones may not come until they are well along in years. The scarcity of available farms is a widespread complaint in England, and competition in every line of business is so fierce that not everyone can hope to succeed.

The laborer who earns eighteen pence a day and lives with some degree of comfort as a single man will think twice before dividing that small income among four or five mouths when it barely seems enough for one. He would willingly accept worse food and harder work for the sake of living with the woman he loves, but if he thinks about it at all, he must realize that if he ends up with a large family and any bad luck whatsoever, no amount of thrift, no possible effort of his physical strength, could save him from the heartbreaking sight of watching his children go hungry -- or from losing his independence and having to turn to the parish for support. The love of independence is a feeling that surely no one would want to see wiped from the human heart. And yet the parish relief system in England, we have to admit, is a system more likely than any other to gradually erode that feeling -- and in the end may destroy it completely.

The servants who live in the households of wealthy families face even stronger barriers to marriage. They enjoy the necessities and even the comforts of life in nearly the same abundance as their employers. Their work is easy and their food generous compared with that of the laboring class. And their sense of dependence is softened by the knowledge that they can always leave and find a new employer if they feel mistreated. So there they are, comfortably settled for the present -- but what are their prospects if they marry? Without skills or savings for business or farming, and unaccustomed to and therefore unable to earn a living through daily manual labor, their only option seems to be a run-down tavern -- which is hardly an enchanting vision of a happy later life. The great majority, therefore, put off by this unappealing picture of their future, resign themselves to staying single where they are.

If this sketch of English society is close to the truth -- and I do not think it is exaggerated -- then it should be clear that the preventive check to population operates in this country, with varying force, through every class of society. The same observation holds true for all long-established nations. The effects of these restraints on marriage are, unfortunately, all too visible in the vices they produce in nearly every part of the world -- vices that continually drag both men and women into deep and inescapable unhappiness.
