CHAPTER 6

New colonies -- Why they grow so fast -- The North American colonies -- An extraordinary example of growth in the frontier settlements -- How quickly even old nations bounce back from war, plague, famine, or natural disasters.


It has been widely observed that all new colonies established in healthy regions, where there was plenty of space and food, have consistently grown at astonishing rates. Some of the colonies founded by ancient Greece -- city-states that sent settlers to places like Sicily and southern Italy -- surpassed their parent states in population and power in a remarkably short time. And without dwelling on such distant examples, the European settlements in the New World offer overwhelming proof of a point that, as far as I know, no one has ever seriously disputed: an abundance of rich land, available for little or nothing, is such a powerful driver of population growth that it overwhelms every other obstacle.

No colonies could have been worse managed than Spain's settlements in Mexico, Peru, and Quito. The tyranny, superstition, and corruption of the mother country were exported in generous quantities to her colonies. The Crown extracted exorbitant taxes. The most arbitrary restrictions were placed on colonial trade. And the colonial governors were every bit as greedy and extortionate on their own behalf as they were on behalf of their king. Yet even under all these handicaps, the colonies grew rapidly. The city of Lima, founded after the Spanish conquest, was described by the explorer Ulloa as containing 50,000 inhabitants about fifty years ago. Quito, which had been nothing more than a small Indigenous village, was described by the same author as equally populous in his time. Mexico City is said to have held 100,000 inhabitants -- which, even allowing for the exaggerations of Spanish writers, is thought to be five times larger than it was in the time of Montezuma.

In the Portuguese colony of Brazil, governed with almost equal tyranny, the population of European descent was estimated at 600,000 about thirty years ago.

The Dutch and French colonies, though ruled by exclusive trading companies -- which, as Adam Smith rightly observed, is the worst form of government imaginable -- still managed to thrive despite every disadvantage.

But the English colonies in North America -- now the powerful nation of the United States of America -- made by far the most rapid progress of all. In addition to the abundant good land they shared with the Spanish and Portuguese settlements, they enjoyed a much greater degree of liberty and equality. Although they faced some restrictions on foreign trade, the colonists were given complete freedom to manage their own internal affairs. Their political institutions encouraged the breakup and distribution of property. Land that a proprietor left uncultivated beyond a set time period could be claimed by anyone else. In Pennsylvania, there was no right of primogeniture -- the rule that gave everything to the eldest son. And in the New England provinces, the eldest child received only a double share. There were no tithes in any of the states and almost no taxes. And because good land was so extraordinarily cheap, the most profitable use of capital was in agriculture -- which happened to be the activity that both provided the most healthy work and produced the most valuable goods for society.

The result of all these favorable conditions combined was a rate of population growth probably unmatched in history. Across all the northern colonies, the population was found to double every twenty-five years. The original number of settlers in the four New England provinces in 1643 was 21,200. (I take these figures from Dr. Price's two volumes of Observations, not having Dr. Stiles' pamphlet, from which he quotes, at hand.) After that initial settlement, it appears that more people actually left these provinces than arrived. Yet by 1760, the population had grown to half a million. They had therefore been doubling their own numbers every twenty-five years the entire time. In New Jersey, the doubling period appeared to be just twenty-two years, and in Rhode Island it was even shorter. In the frontier settlements, where the inhabitants devoted themselves entirely to farming and luxury was unheard of, the population doubled every fifteen years -- a truly extraordinary rate of increase. Along the seacoast, which would naturally have been settled first, the doubling period was about thirty-five years. And in some of the port towns, the population had stopped growing entirely.

(In cases like this, the productive power of the land appears fully capable of meeting the demands for food that people can place on it. But we would be making a mistake if we concluded that population and food ever actually increase at the same rate. One still grows geometrically -- that is, by multiplication -- and the other arithmetically -- that is, by addition. Where there are few people and a great quantity of fertile land, the earth's capacity to produce more food each year can be compared to a large reservoir of water fed by a moderate stream. The faster the population grows, the more hands are available to draw water from the reservoir, and so an increasing quantity will be taken every year. But the sooner, of course, the reservoir will be drained, and only the modest stream will remain. Once acre after acre has been added until all the fertile land is occupied, the yearly increase in food will depend on improving the land already under cultivation -- and even that moderate stream will gradually diminish. But population, if it could be supplied with food, would keep growing with undiminished energy. The increase from one generation would fuel an even greater increase in the next, and the next -- without any limit.)

These facts seem to show that population increases in exact proportion to the removal of the two great checks upon it -- misery and vice -- and that there is no truer measure of a people's happiness and innocence than how rapidly they multiply. The unhealthiness of cities, where some people are forced to live by the nature of their work, must be counted as a form of misery. And even the slightest discouragement to marriage, arising from the prospect of struggling to feed a family, can fairly be classified under the same heading. In short, it is hard to imagine any check on population that does not fall under the category of either misery or vice.

The population of the thirteen American states before the Revolutionary War was estimated at about three million. Nobody imagines that Great Britain is less populous today because of the small group of original emigrants who produced those numbers. On the contrary, a certain degree of emigration is known to actually benefit the population of the mother country. It has been specifically noted that the two Spanish provinces that sent the most emigrants to America actually became more populous as a result. So here is the question: whatever the original number of British emigrants who multiplied so rapidly in the North American colonies, why doesn't an equal number produce an equal increase in the same time period back in Great Britain? The great and obvious answer is the lack of room and food -- or in other words, misery. And that misery is an even more powerful check than vice becomes clear enough from the remarkable speed with which even old nations recover from the devastation of war, plague, or natural disaster. After such catastrophes, these countries are temporarily placed in something like the situation of new colonies -- and the result is always exactly what you would expect. As long as the surviving population's willingness to work has not been crushed by fear or tyranny, the food supply will soon grow beyond what the reduced population needs, and the inevitable consequence is this: a population that had perhaps been nearly stagnant will immediately begin to grow again.

The fertile province of Flanders -- in what is now Belgium -- which had so often been the battleground for Europe's most destructive wars, always appeared just as productive and just as populous as ever after only a few years of peace. Even the Palatinate region of Germany recovered after the horrific devastation inflicted by Louis XIV. The effects of the catastrophic plague that struck London in 1666 were no longer detectable just fifteen or twenty years later. The traces of the most devastating famines in China and India are, by all accounts, erased remarkably quickly. It is even debatable whether Turkey and Egypt are, on average, much less populous because of the plagues that periodically sweep through them. If their populations are smaller today than in earlier times, the cause is probably the tyranny and oppression of their governments -- and the resulting discouragement of agriculture -- rather than the losses from plague. The most tremendous upheavals of nature -- volcanic eruptions and earthquakes -- have only a minor effect on a country's long-term population, so long as they do not occur so frequently that they drive the inhabitants away or crush their spirit of industry. Naples and the countryside around Vesuvius remain densely populated despite that volcano's repeated eruptions. And Lisbon and Lima are now probably in much the same state, population-wise, as they were before their last great earthquakes.