CHAPTER 7

A probable cause of epidemics -- Excerpts from Suessmilch's tables -- Periodical returns of sickly seasons should be expected in certain cases -- The ratio of births to deaths over a short period is an inadequate measure of a country's real average population growth -- The best measure of a permanent increase in population -- Extreme frugality of living as one of the causes of the famines in China and India -- The harmful tendency of one clause in Pitt's Poor Bill -- The only proper way to encourage population growth -- The causes of national happiness -- Famine, the last and most dreadful way nature keeps a surplus population in check -- The three propositions considered as established.


Thanks to careful attention to cleanliness, the plague seems to have been completely driven out of London at last. But it is not unlikely that overcrowding and unwholesome or insufficient food should be counted among the underlying causes that produce sickly seasons and epidemics. I was led to this thought by looking over some of the tables compiled by Suessmilch, which Dr. Price excerpted in one of his notes to the postscript on the controversy about England and Wales's population. These tables are considered very accurate, and if such records were kept everywhere, they would shed great light on the different ways population is held in check and kept from outgrowing the means of subsistence in any country. I will quote part of the tables along with Dr. Price's remarks.


  IN THE KINGDOM OF PRUSSIA AND DUKEDOM OF LITHUANIA

                                              Proportion   Proportion
                   Births  Burials Marriages of Births to of Births to
                                              Marriages     Burials
  10 Yrs to 1702   21,963  14,718   5,928      37 to 10    150 to 100
  5 Yrs to 1716    21,602  11,984   4,968      37 to 10    180 to 100
  5 Yrs to 1756    28,392  19,154   5,599      50 to 10    148 to 100

"N.B. In 1709 and 1710, a pestilence carried off 247,733 of the inhabitants of this country, and in 1736 and 1737, epidemics prevailed, which again checked its increase."


Notice that the greatest proportion of births to deaths came in the five years right after the great pestilence.


  DUCHY OF POMERANIA

                                              Proportion   Proportion
  Annual Average   Births  Burials Marriages of Births to of Births to
                                              Marriages     Burials
  6 yrs to 1702   6,540     4,647   1,810      36 to 10    140 to 100
  6 yrs to 1708   7,455     4,208   1,875      39 to 10    177 to 100
  6 yrs to 1726   8,432     5,627   2,131      39 to 10    150 to 100
  6 yrs to 1756  12,767     9,281   2,957      43 to 10    137 to 100

"In this instance the inhabitants appear to have nearly doubled in fifty-six years, no very bad epidemics having once interrupted the increase, but the three years immediately following the last period (to 1759) were so sickly that births fell to 10,229 and deaths rose to 15,068."


Isn't it likely that in this case the population had grown faster than the food supply and the living conditions needed to keep people healthy? Under this assumption, most people would have been forced to eat worse and live more crowded -- more of them packed into each house -- and it is surely plausible that these were among the natural causes that produced those three sickly years. These causes can produce such an effect even if the country, taken as a whole, is not extremely crowded or densely populated. Even in a thinly settled country, if population increases before more food is grown and more housing is built, people will inevitably be squeezed for both room and subsistence. If marriages in England over the next eight or ten years were more productive than usual, or even if a greater number of marriages than usual took place with the same number of houses, you would need to fit seven or eight people in a cottage instead of five or six. That overcrowding, combined with the necessity of living on less, would probably have a very harmful effect on the health of ordinary people.


  NEUMARK OF BRANDENBURG

                                              Proportion   Proportion
  Annual Average   Births  Burials Marriages of Births to of Births to
                                              Marriages    Burials
  5 yrs to 1701    5,433    3,483  1,436      37 to 10    155 to 100
  5 yrs to 1726    7,012    4,254  1,713      40 to 10    164 to 100
  5 yrs to 1756    7,978    5,567  1,891      42 to 10    143 to 100

"Epidemics prevailed for six years, from 1736 to 1741, which checked the increase."


  DUKEDOM OF MAGDEBURG

                                              Proportion   Proportion
  Annual Average   Births  Burials Marriages of Births to of Births to
                                              Marriages    Burials
  5 yrs to 1702    6,431   4,103   1,681      38 to 10    156 to 100
  5 yrs to 1717    7,590   5,335   2,076      36 to 10    142 to 100
  5 yrs to 1756    8,850   8,069   2,193      40 to 10    109 to 100

"The years 1738, 1740, 1750, and 1751 were particularly sickly."


For more on this subject, I refer the reader to Suessmilch's tables. The excerpts I have included are enough to show the periodic -- though irregular -- return of sickly seasons, and it seems highly probable that a shortage of living space and food was one of their main causes.

It is clear from the tables that these countries were growing rather fast for long-established states, despite the occasional epidemics. Agriculture must have been improving, and marriages were consequently being encouraged. The checks to population appear to have been more of the positive kind than the preventive kind. When the weight that holds population down is lifted somewhat -- because a country's food supply is growing and prospects look brighter -- it is highly likely that the upward momentum will continue beyond the conditions that first set it in motion. To be more specific: when a country's increasing production and increasing demand for labor improve workers' conditions enough to strongly encourage marriage, early marriage will probably become the custom and persist until the population has outgrown the increased food supply. At that point, sickly seasons appear to be the natural and necessary consequence. I would therefore expect that countries where food supply was increasing enough to encourage population growth from time to time -- but not enough to meet all the demand it created -- would be more prone to periodic epidemics than countries where population could more fully adjust itself to the average level of production.

The reverse observation will probably also prove true. In countries that are subject to periodic waves of sickness, population growth -- measured by the excess of births over deaths -- will be greater in the intervals between those episodes than it typically is, all else being equal, in countries not so afflicted by such outbreaks. If Turkey and Egypt have been roughly stationary in their average population over the past century, then in the intervals between their periodic plagues, births must have exceeded deaths by a much greater margin than in countries like France and England.

The average ratio of births to deaths in any country over a five- or ten-year period will therefore prove to be a very unreliable measure of its real population growth. That ratio certainly shows the rate of increase during those five or ten years, but we cannot in any way conclude from it what growth had been like for the twenty years before, or what it would be for the twenty years after. Dr. Price observes that Sweden, Norway, Russia, and the Kingdom of Naples are all growing quickly. But the excerpts from records he provides do not cover long enough periods to prove the point. It is highly probable, however, that Sweden, Norway, and Russia really are growing in population -- just not at the rate that the birth-to-death ratios for the short periods Dr. Price selected would seem to indicate. (See Dr. Price's Observations, Vol. II, postscript to the controversy on the population of England and Wales.) For five years ending in 1777, the ratio of births to deaths in the Kingdom of Naples was 144 to 100. But there is good reason to think this ratio points to a growth rate much higher than what actually took place in that kingdom over the course of a hundred years.

Dr. Short compared the church records of many villages and market towns in England over two periods: the first running from Queen Elizabeth's reign to the middle of the last century, and the second from various years at the end of the last century to the middle of the present one. From comparing these records, it appears that in the earlier period, births exceeded deaths in the ratio of 124 to 100, but in the later period, only 111 to 100. Dr. Price thinks the earlier records are unreliable, but in this case they probably do give roughly accurate proportions. There are, at any rate, many reasons to expect a greater excess of births over deaths in the earlier period than in the later one. In the natural progress of any country's population, all else being equal, more good land will be brought under cultivation in the earlier stages than in the later ones. (I say "all else being equal" because a country's agricultural output will always depend enormously on the prevailing spirit of enterprise and how it is directed. The knowledge and habits of the people, along with other temporary factors -- especially the degree of political freedom and equality at the time -- will always have a powerful influence in sparking and directing that spirit.) A greater proportional yearly increase in production will almost always be followed by a greater proportional increase in population. But beyond this major factor -- which alone would naturally make the excess of births over deaths greater in Queen Elizabeth's time than in the mid-1700s -- I cannot help thinking that the occasional ravages of the plague during the earlier period must have tended to inflate this ratio further. If someone had taken a ten-year average during the intervals between outbreaks of that terrible disease, or simply thrown out the plague years as anomalies, the records would certainly show a birth-to-death ratio too high to represent the real average population growth. For a few years after the Great Plague of 1666, there was probably an unusually large excess of births over deaths -- especially if Dr. Price is right that England was more populous at the time of the Revolution (which happened just twenty-two years later) than it is today.

Mr. King, in 1693, stated that the ratio of births to deaths across the kingdom, excluding London, was 115 to 100. Dr. Short puts it at 111 to 100 in the middle of the present century, including London. The ratio in France for five years ending in 1774 was 117 to 100. If these figures are close to the truth, and if there are no major swings at particular periods, it would appear that the populations of France and England have adjusted themselves very closely to the average food production of each country. The discouragements to marriage, the resulting immoral habits, war, luxury, the silent but certain depopulation of large cities, and the cramped housing and inadequate food of many of the poor -- all of these prevent population from growing beyond the means of subsistence. And, if I may use an expression that certainly sounds strange at first, they eliminate the need for great and devastating epidemics to cut back what would otherwise be a surplus population. If a catastrophic plague were to kill off two million people in England and six million in France, there can be no doubt that once the survivors had recovered from the shock, the ratio of births to deaths would be far higher in both countries than it is at present.

In New Jersey, the ratio of births to deaths over a seven-year average ending in 1743 was 300 to 100. In France and England, taking the highest figure, it is only 117 to 100. As great and astonishing as this difference is, we should not be so amazed as to chalk it up to miraculous divine intervention. The causes are not remote, hidden, or mysterious. They are right in front of us, all around us, and open to the investigation of any curious mind. It is perfectly consistent with the most open-minded philosophy to suppose that not a stone can fall or a plant can grow without the direct hand of divine power. But we know from experience that these operations of what we call nature have been carried out almost invariably according to fixed laws. And since the world began, the causes of population growth and decline have probably been as constant as any of the laws of nature we know.

Sexual desire has appeared in every age to be so nearly the same that it can always be treated, in mathematical terms, as a constant. The great law of necessity that prevents population from growing beyond the food a country can either produce or acquire is so plain to see, so obvious to our understanding, and so completely confirmed by the experience of every age, that we cannot doubt it for a moment. The different methods nature uses to prevent or suppress a surplus population do not, it is true, seem quite so predictable or regular to us. But even though we cannot always predict the method, we can predict the outcome with certainty. If the ratio of births to deaths for a few years points to population growth far beyond the proportional increase in food produced or imported, we can be perfectly certain that -- unless emigration occurs -- deaths will soon exceed births, and that the growth observed over those few years cannot represent the real average population growth of the country. If there were no other depopulating forces at work, every country would without a doubt suffer periodic pestilences or famines.

The only true measure of a real and permanent increase in a country's population is an increase in its means of subsistence. But even this measure is subject to some slight variations -- variations that are, however, fully open to observation. In some countries, population appears to have been forced: that is, the people have been gradually accustomed to living on the smallest possible quantity of food. There must have been periods in such countries when population grew permanently without any increase in the means of subsistence. China seems to fit this description. If the accounts we have are to be trusted, the lowest classes are in the habit of surviving on the bare minimum of food and are glad to eat putrid scraps that European workers would rather starve than touch. The Chinese law that permits parents to abandon their children has mainly served to force population growth in this way. A nation in this condition is inevitably subject to famines. When a country is so heavily populated relative to its means of subsistence that its average production barely keeps its people alive, any shortfall from a bad growing season must be fatal. It is likely that the extremely frugal way the people of India are accustomed to living contributes in some degree to the famines of that region.

In America, where wages are currently so generous, the working classes could cut back considerably in a year of scarcity without being seriously distressed. Famine there seems almost impossible. But as America's population grows, we can expect that workers will eventually be rewarded much less generously. In that case, population will grow permanently without a proportional increase in the means of subsistence.

Across the different states of Europe, there must be some variation in the ratio between the number of inhabitants and the quantity of food consumed, owing to the different living habits that prevail in each state. The workers of southern England are so accustomed to eating fine white bread that they will let themselves go half-starved before they will stoop to living like Scottish peasants. They might in time, through the relentless pressure of hard necessity, be reduced to living even like the poorest Chinese -- and the country would then, with the same quantity of food, support a larger population. But to bring this about must always be an extremely difficult undertaking, and every friend of humanity will hope it remains an unsuccessful one. Nothing is so common as hearing about incentives that should be given to encourage population growth. If the human tendency to multiply is as powerful as I have described it, it may seem strange that this increase does not happen when it is so eagerly called for. The real reason is that the demand for a larger population is made without preparing the resources needed to support it. Increase the demand for farm labor by promoting cultivation, and you will consequently increase the country's food production and improve the condition of its workers. Once you do that, you need have no worries whatsoever about a proportional increase in population. Any attempt to achieve this goal in some other way is cruel, immoral, and tyrannical -- and in any state that enjoys a reasonable degree of freedom, it therefore cannot succeed. It may seem to be in the interest of rulers and the wealthy to force population growth, thereby driving down the price of labor and consequently the cost of armies, navies, and manufactured goods for export. But every such attempt should be carefully watched and firmly resisted by those who care about the poor -- particularly when it comes disguised in the appealing costume of charity and is therefore likely to be cheerfully and warmly embraced by ordinary people.

I completely clear Pitt of any underhanded motive in that clause of his Poor Bill which grants a shilling a week to every worker for each child above three. I admit that before the bill was introduced in Parliament, and for some time after, I thought such a provision would be highly beneficial. But further reflection has convinced me that if its goal is to improve the condition of the poor, it is destined to defeat the very purpose it aims to serve. It has no tendency that I can see to increase the country's food production, and if it tends to increase the population without increasing production, the necessary and inevitable result is clear: the same amount of food must be divided among more people. A day's labor will therefore buy a smaller quantity of food, and the poor in general will be worse off than before.

I have mentioned some cases where population may grow permanently without a proportional increase in the means of subsistence. But it is obvious that the variation between food and the number of people it supports is limited -- it cannot stretch beyond a certain point. In every country whose population is not actually declining, the food must necessarily be enough to sustain and perpetuate the workforce.

All other things being equal, we can say that countries are populous in proportion to the amount of food they produce, and happy in proportion to how generously that food is distributed -- or, put another way, how much food a day's labor will buy. Grain-growing countries are more populous than livestock countries, and rice-growing countries are more populous than grain-growing countries. England's land is not suited to rice, but it could all grow potatoes. Adam Smith observes that if potatoes were to become the favorite food of ordinary people, and if the same amount of land now devoted to grain were planted with potatoes instead, the country could support a much larger population -- and would very quickly have one.

A country's happiness does not depend, in absolute terms, on whether it is poor or rich, young or old, thinly settled or fully inhabited. It depends on how rapidly it is growing -- on how closely the yearly increase in food keeps pace with the yearly increase of an unchecked population. This gap is always smallest in new colonies, where the knowledge and industry of an established civilization are applied to the fertile, unclaimed land of a new one. In other cases, whether a country is young or old does not matter all that much. It is likely that the food of Great Britain is divided among its inhabitants just as generously today as it was two thousand, three thousand, or four thousand years ago. And there is reason to believe that the poor, thinly inhabited tracts of the Scottish Highlands are as hard-pressed by an overcrowded population as the rich and densely populated province of Flanders.

If a country were never overrun by a more advanced people, but left to its own natural progress in civilization -- from the time its total output might be reckoned as one unit to the time it might be reckoned as a million, over the course of many hundreds of years -- there would not be a single period when the mass of the people could be said to be free from hardship, either directly or indirectly, for want of food. In every state in Europe, for as far back as we have records, millions upon millions of human lives have been cut short by this simple cause -- even though in some of these states an outright famine may never have occurred.

Famine seems to be nature's last, most terrible resort. The power of population is so much greater than the power of the earth to produce subsistence for humanity that premature death must, in one form or another, visit the human race. The vices of humankind are active and capable agents of depopulation. They are the advance guard in the great army of destruction, and they often finish the dreadful work themselves. But should they fall short in this war of extermination, sickly seasons, epidemics, pestilence, and plague advance in their terrifying ranks and sweep away their thousands and tens of thousands. And should even that prove insufficient, gigantic, inevitable famine stalks in the rear and, with one mighty blow, levels the population with the food supply of the world.

Must it not then be acknowledged by any careful student of human history that in every age and in every state in which people have lived or now live:

That the increase of population is necessarily limited by the means of subsistence.

That population does invariably increase when the means of subsistence increase.

And that the superior power of population is held in check, and actual population kept equal to the means of subsistence, by misery and vice.
