CHAPTER 8

Wallace's error -- The mistake of assuming that population pressures are a distant problem -- Condorcet's Sketch of the Progress of the Human Mind -- When the oscillation Condorcet describes should actually be applied to the human race.


For anyone who draws the obvious conclusions from everything we have seen about the past and present state of humanity, it must be truly astonishing that all the writers on human perfectibility and the improvement of society who have noticed the population argument treat it so casually. They invariably present the difficulties arising from population pressure as something enormously far off -- almost immeasurably distant. Even Robert Wallace, a Scottish clergyman who took the argument seriously enough that he believed it would ultimately destroy his entire system of equality, did not seem to realize that any difficulty from this cause would arise until the entire earth had been cultivated like a garden and was physically incapable of producing any more food. If that were really the case -- if population pressure truly would not become a problem until every last acre on earth had been farmed to its limit -- and if a beautiful system of equality were otherwise workable, then I do not think our enthusiasm for pursuing such a plan should be dampened by worrying about such a remote difficulty. Something that far off could reasonably be left to providence. But the truth is this: if the argument laid out in this essay is correct, the difficulty is not remote at all. It is immediate and pressing. At every stage of agricultural progress, from the present moment all the way to the point when the whole earth might become like a garden, the suffering caused by lack of food would be constantly bearing down on all of humanity -- if people were truly equal. Even if the earth's total output were increasing every year, population would be increasing much faster, and the excess would inevitably be cut back by the periodic or constant pressure of misery and vice.

Condorcet's Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind was written, it is said, while he was under the shadow of the brutal persecution that would ultimately end in his death. If he had no hope of the work being published during his lifetime, and no expectation that it might rally France to his defense, then it stands as a remarkable example of a man's devotion to principles that his own daily experience was so fatally contradicting. To watch the human mind -- in one of the most enlightened nations on earth, after thousands of years of civilization -- debased by such a disgusting storm of passions: fear, cruelty, malice, revenge, ambition, madness, and folly that would have disgraced the most savage people in the most barbarous age -- that must have been a tremendous shock to his belief in the necessary and inevitable progress of the human mind. Nothing but the firmest conviction in the truth of his principles, despite all appearances to the contrary, could have withstood it.

This posthumous publication is only a sketch of a much larger work that Condorcet had planned to write. It necessarily lacks the detail and real-world application that are the only things that can truly prove any theory. A few observations will be enough to show how completely the theory falls apart when it is applied to the real world rather than an imaginary one.

In the final section of the work, which deals with the future progress of humanity toward perfection, Condorcet says that if we compare the actual population of the various civilized European nations with the size of their territories, and look at their farming methods, their industries, their division of labor, and their means of subsistence, we will see that it would be impossible to maintain the same food supply -- and therefore the same population -- without a large class of people whose only way to meet their needs is through their own labor. Having acknowledged the necessity of such a working class, and then considering how precarious the income of those families would be -- depending entirely on the life and health of the primary earner -- he says, quite rightly: "There exists, then, a necessary cause of inequality, dependence, and even misery, which constantly threatens the most numerous and active class of our societies." (To save time and avoid lengthy quotations, I will sometimes give the substance of Condorcet's ideas rather than his exact words, and I hope I will not misrepresent them. But I encourage the reader to look at the work itself, which will be entertaining even if it is not convincing.) The problem is stated accurately and well, and I am afraid that the solution he proposes will turn out to be ineffective.

Using calculations based on life expectancy probabilities and interest rates on money, Condorcet proposes that a fund should be established to provide assistance to the elderly -- funded partly by their own earlier savings, and partly by the savings of people who contributed to the same fund but died before they could collect the benefits. A similar fund would provide support to women and children who lost their husbands or fathers, and would give young people who were old enough to start a family enough capital to properly develop their skills and trades. These institutions, he notes, could be established in the name and under the protection of the state. Going even further, he says that through the right application of financial calculations, ways could be found to better preserve equality -- by preventing access to credit from being the exclusive privilege of the very wealthy, while still giving it an equally solid foundation, and by making industrial progress and commercial activity less dependent on big capitalists.

These kinds of institutions and calculations may look very promising on paper, but when applied to real life, they turn out to be completely useless. Condorcet himself admits that a class of people who support themselves entirely through their own labor is necessary in every society. Why does he admit this? The only reasonable explanation is that he understands the work needed to produce food for a large population will not get done without the pressure of necessity driving it. If institutions like these remove the spur to hard work -- if the lazy and the careless are put on the same footing as the active and industrious when it comes to their credit standing and the future support of their wives and children -- can we really expect people to show the kind of energetic effort to improve their condition that is currently the driving force behind public prosperity? And if some kind of investigation board were set up to examine each person's claims, to determine whether they had truly done their best, and to grant or deny assistance accordingly -- well, that would be little more than a larger-scale version of the English Poor Laws, and it would be completely destructive of the true principles of liberty and equality.

But even setting aside this major objection to these proposed institutions, and assuming for the moment that they would not discourage productive work, by far the greatest difficulty still remains.

If every man were guaranteed a comfortable provision for his family, almost every man would start one. And if the next generation were free from the "killing frost" of misery, population would increase rapidly. Condorcet seems fully aware of this himself, and after describing further improvements, he writes:

But in this process of industry and happiness, each generation will be called to more extensive enjoyments, and as a result -- by the physical nature of the human body -- to an increase in the number of individuals. Must there not eventually arrive a time when these equally necessary laws work against each other? When the increase in the number of people outpaces their means of subsistence, the inevitable result must be either a continual decline in happiness and population -- a truly backward movement -- or at best a kind of oscillation between good and evil. In societies that have reached this point, will not this oscillation be a constantly present cause of periodic misery? Will it not mark the limit beyond which all further improvement becomes impossible, and point to a ceiling that human perfectibility may approach over the centuries but can never break through?

He then adds:

No one can fail to see how very distant such a time is from us. But will we ever actually reach it? It is equally impossible to say yes or no about the future occurrence of an event that cannot happen until the human race has achieved advances that we can barely imagine today.

Condorcet's picture of what will happen when the number of people outgrows the means of feeding them is accurately drawn. The oscillation he describes will certainly happen, and it will without doubt be a constantly present cause of periodic misery. The only point where I differ from Condorcet is about when this picture applies to the human race. Condorcet thinks it cannot possibly apply until some extremely distant era. But if the ratio I have described between the natural increase of population and the increase of food is anywhere close to the truth, then the opposite conclusion follows: the time when the number of people outgrows their means of subsistence arrived long ago. This necessary oscillation -- this constantly present cause of periodic misery -- has existed ever since we have had any recorded history of humanity. It exists right now. And it will continue to exist forever, unless some fundamental change takes place in the physical nature of our species.

Condorcet, however, goes on to say that even if the period he considers so distant were ever to arrive, the human race and the advocates of human perfectibility need not be alarmed by it. He then proceeds to remove the difficulty in a way that, I have to confess, I do not understand. Having observed that by that time the ridiculous prejudices of superstition would have stopped casting their corrupt and degrading shadow over morality, he seems to be suggesting either some form of casual sexual relationships that would prevent reproduction, or something else equally unnatural. Removing the difficulty this way would surely, in most people's opinion, destroy the very virtue and moral standards that the advocates of equality and human perfectibility claim to be the ultimate goal of their vision.
