CHAPTER 9

Condorcet's conjecture about the biological perfectibility of the human body and the indefinite extension of human life -- The fallacy of arguing that because partial improvement has occurred and its upper limit is unknown, progress must be unlimited -- Illustrated by the breeding of animals and the cultivation of plants.


The last question Condorcet raises for examination is the biological perfectibility of human beings. He argues that if the evidence already presented -- evidence that will grow even stronger in his full work -- is enough to prove humanity's indefinite perfectibility assuming we keep the same natural abilities and physical makeup we have now, then how much more certain and far-reaching our hopes become if those abilities and that very physical makeup are themselves capable of improvement.

From advances in medicine, from healthier food and housing, from ways of living that strengthen the body through exercise without wearing it down through excess, from eliminating the two great causes of human degradation -- poverty and extreme wealth -- and from the gradual conquest of transmissible and contagious diseases through better medical knowledge made more effective by the progress of reason and social organization, Condorcet concludes that although humans will not literally become immortal, the span between birth and natural death will keep increasing without end, will have no fixed limit, and can properly be called "indefinite." He then defines this word to mean either a constant approach toward an unlimited extent without ever actually reaching it, or an increase that over vast stretches of time exceeds any quantity you could name.

But applying this term in either of these senses to the length of human life is deeply unscientific and completely unsupported by anything we observe in the laws of nature. Variations caused by different factors are fundamentally different from a steady, irreversible increase. The average human lifespan will certainly vary to some degree depending on healthy or unhealthy climates, wholesome or unwholesome food, virtuous or destructive habits, and other causes. But it is fair to question whether there has been even the tiniest real advance in the natural length of human life since we first had any reliable record of it. The common assumptions of every age have actually pointed in the opposite direction, and though I would not put too much weight on those assumptions, they do at least suggest there has been no obvious trend the other way.

Someone might say that the world is still so young, so completely in its infancy, that we should not expect any difference to show up this early.

If that is the case, it is the end of all science. The entire chain of reasoning from effects to causes falls apart. We might as well close the book of nature, since reading it would no longer be useful. The wildest and most improbable guesses could be put forward with as much confidence as the most rigorous and well-founded theories based on careful, repeated experiments. We might as well go back to the old way of doing philosophy and force facts to fit our systems, instead of building systems on facts. Newton's grand and consistent theory would be placed on the same footing as the wild and eccentric hypotheses of Descartes. In short, if the laws of nature are that fickle and unreliable -- if we can seriously claim they will change when for age after age they have appeared unchanging -- then the human mind would have no reason to investigate anything at all. It would have to sit in idle paralysis, or entertain itself with nothing but confused fantasies and extravagant daydreams.

The constancy of natural laws and of the relationship between cause and effect is the foundation of all human knowledge -- though far be it from me to say that the same power that designed and carries out the laws of nature could not change them all "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye." Such a change could certainly happen. All I mean to say is that it is impossible to predict it through reasoning. If we can claim that a change will occur without any prior observable symptoms or signs of it, then we might as well make any claim at all. It would be just as unreasonable to contradict someone who says the moon will crash into the earth tomorrow as someone who says the sun will rise at its usual time.

When it comes to the length of human life, there does not appear to have been -- from the earliest ages of the world to the present moment -- even the smallest lasting sign or indication that lifespans are getting longer. The observable effects of climate, habits, diet, and other factors on how long people live have given people the excuse to assert that human life can be extended indefinitely. And the sandy foundation this argument rests on is this: because the limit of human life is undefined -- because you cannot mark its precise boundary and say "this far exactly, and no further" -- therefore its length can keep increasing forever and may properly be called indefinite or unlimited. But the fallacy and absurdity of this argument become clear enough from a brief look at what Condorcet calls the organic perfectibility, or degeneration, of plants and animals, which he says can be considered one of the general laws of nature.

I am told that it is a principle among cattle breeders that you can breed for any quality to any degree of refinement you like, and they base this principle on another one: that some of the offspring will possess the desirable traits of the parents to an even greater degree. In the famous Leicestershire breed of sheep, for example, the goal is to produce animals with small heads and small legs. Following these breeding principles, it is obvious that you could keep going until the heads and legs shrank to almost nothing -- but this is such a clear absurdity that we can be quite sure the premise is wrong and that there really is a limit, even though we cannot see it or say exactly where it is. In this case, the point of greatest improvement -- the smallest possible head and legs -- may be called undefined, but that is very different from unlimited, or from "indefinite" in Condorcet's sense of the word. Though I may not be able to mark the exact limit beyond which no further improvement is possible, I can very easily name a point it will never reach. I would not hesitate to say that even if the breeding continued forever, the heads and legs of these sheep would never become as small as the head and legs of a rat.

It cannot be true, therefore, that among animals some of the offspring will always surpass their parents in the desired traits, or that animals are indefinitely perfectible.

The transformation of a wild plant into a beautiful garden flower is perhaps even more dramatic and striking than anything that happens among animals. Yet even here, it would be the height of absurdity to claim that the progress is unlimited or indefinite.

One of the most obvious signs of improvement is the increase in size. The flower has gradually grown larger through cultivation. If the progress were really unlimited, it could be enlarged infinitely -- but this is such a ridiculous idea that we can be quite sure there is a limit to improvement among plants just as there is among animals, even if we do not know exactly where it is. Gardeners who compete for flower prizes have probably often tried applying stronger fertilizer without success. At the same time, it would be wildly presumptuous for anyone to say they had seen the finest carnation or anemone that could ever be grown. But you could say, without the slightest chance of being proven wrong, that no carnation or anemone could ever be cultivated to the size of a large cabbage -- and yet there are perfectly real quantities much larger than a cabbage. No one can say they have seen the largest ear of wheat or the largest oak that could ever grow. But anyone could easily, and with perfect certainty, name a size they would never reach. In all these cases, then, a careful distinction should be made between unlimited progress and progress whose limit is merely undefined.

Someone might argue that the reason plants and animals cannot grow indefinitely larger is that they would collapse under their own weight. My answer: how do we know that, except from experience? From experience of how strong these organisms actually are. I know that a carnation, long before it reached the size of a cabbage, would not be supported by its stalk -- but I only know this from my experience of the weakness and fragility of carnation stalks. There are plenty of substances in nature, of the same size, that could support a head as large as a cabbage.

The reasons why plants die are at present completely unknown to us. No one can explain why one plant is annual, another biennial, and another lives for centuries. The whole matter -- in plants, in animals, and in the human race -- comes down to experience. And I conclude that human beings are mortal only because the unvarying experience of every age has proven the mortality of the materials our visible bodies are made of:

"What can we reason, but from what we know?"

Sound reasoning will not let me change my view about human mortality on earth until it can be clearly shown that the human race has made, and is making, a definite move toward an unlimited lifespan. And the main reason I brought up those two particular examples from animals and plants was to expose and illustrate, as best I could, the fallacy of the argument that infers unlimited progress simply because some partial improvement has occurred and the upper limit of that improvement cannot be precisely determined.

That plants and animals can be improved to a certain degree, no one can possibly doubt. Clear and definite progress has already been made. And yet, I think it is obvious that it would be absurd to say this progress has no limits. In human life, although there are wide variations from different causes, it is doubtful whether any biological improvement in the human body can be clearly identified since the world began. The foundations on which the argument for human biological perfectibility rests are therefore unusually weak and can only be considered pure speculation. That said, it does not seem at all impossible that with careful attention to breeding, some degree of improvement -- similar to what we see among animals -- might take place among humans. Whether intelligence could be passed on through breeding may be debatable, but size, strength, beauty, complexion, and perhaps even longevity are to some extent hereditary. The mistake is not in thinking a small degree of improvement is possible, but in failing to distinguish between a small improvement whose limit is undefined and an improvement that is truly unlimited. However, since the human race could not be improved this way without condemning everyone with undesirable traits to a life without children, it is unlikely that selective breeding would ever be widely adopted. Indeed, I know of no well-directed efforts of this kind, except among the ancient Bickerstaff family, who are said to have been very successful in lightening the skin and increasing the height of their line through prudent marriages -- particularly through that very shrewd match with Maud the milkmaid, which corrected some serious defects in the family's constitution.

I do not think it is necessary, in order to more fully demonstrate how unlikely it is that humans will ever approach immortality on earth, to emphasize the enormous additional pressure that longer lifespans would place on population.

Many people, I have no doubt, will think that trying seriously to refute something as absurd as the idea of human immortality on earth -- or even the perfectibility of humanity and society -- is a waste of time and words, and that such baseless theories are best answered by simply ignoring them. I freely admit, however, that I disagree. When paradoxes of this sort are put forward by clever and talented people, ignoring them does nothing to show them their mistakes. Priding themselves on what they see as proof of the reach and scope of their own intellects and the breadth of their vision, they will interpret the silence as merely a sign of intellectual poverty and narrow-mindedness among their contemporaries -- and simply conclude that the world is not yet ready to receive their brilliant truths.

On the other hand, a fair and open investigation of these subjects -- carried out with a genuine willingness to accept any theory that sound reasoning supports -- may actually convince them that by constructing improbable and baseless theories, far from expanding the boundaries of human knowledge, they are shrinking them. Far from advancing the development of the human mind, they are holding it back. They are throwing us almost back into the infancy of knowledge and weakening the foundations of the very method of inquiry that has driven science's remarkable recent progress. The current mania for sweeping and unrestrained speculation seems to be a kind of intellectual intoxication, arising perhaps from the great and unexpected discoveries that have been made in recent years across various branches of science. To people made giddy by such successes, everything seemed within the grasp of human powers. Under this illusion, they confused subjects where no real progress could be demonstrated with those where progress had been clear, certain, and widely acknowledged. If they could be persuaded to sober up with a little rigorous and disciplined thinking, they would see that the cause of truth and sound inquiry can only suffer when wild flights of fancy and unsupported claims are substituted for patient investigation and well-documented evidence.

Condorcet's book can be considered not only as a sketch of one celebrated thinker's opinions, but as representative of the views held by many of the intellectual leaders in France at the beginning of the Revolution. As such, even though it is merely a sketch, it deserves serious attention.
