CHAPTER 12

Godwin's conjecture about the indefinite prolongation of human life -- The flawed reasoning drawn from the effects of mental stimulants on the body, illustrated through various examples -- Conjectures not grounded in any evidence from the past should not be considered philosophical conjectures -- Godwin's and Condorcet's conjecture about humanity approaching immortality on earth as a striking example of the inconsistency of skepticism.


Godwin's conjecture about humanity's future approach toward immortality on earth seems rather oddly placed in a chapter that claims to be removing the objection to his system of equality based on the principle of population. Unless he assumes that sexual desire will decline faster than the human lifespan increases, the earth would end up more overcrowded than ever. But setting that difficulty aside for Godwin to deal with, let's examine a few of the signs from which the probability of human immortality is supposedly inferred.

To prove the power of the mind over the body, Godwin observes: "How often do we find that a piece of good news cures an illness? How common is the observation that health problems which would plague an idle person are forgotten and eliminated in someone who is busy and active? I walk twenty miles in a half-hearted, unenthusiastic mood and end up extremely exhausted. I walk twenty miles full of passion, with a purpose that consumes my whole soul, and I arrive as fresh and alert as when I started. An emotion triggered by some unexpected word, or by a letter delivered to us, causes the most extraordinary changes in our bodies -- it speeds up circulation, makes the heart race, ties the tongue, and has been known to cause death through extreme anguish or extreme joy. There is nothing, indeed, that a physician is more aware of than the power of the mind in helping or hindering recovery."

The examples Godwin mentions are mainly instances of mental stimulants affecting the body. No one has ever doubted for a moment the close, though mysterious, connection between mind and body. But it shows a complete misunderstanding of how stimulants work to assume either that they can be applied continuously with equal force, or that if they could be applied that way for a while, they wouldn't exhaust and wear out the person. In some of the cases Godwin mentions, the strength of the stimulus depends on its novelty and unexpectedness. By its very nature, such a stimulus cannot be repeated often with the same effect, because repetition would strip away the very quality that gives it its power.

In the other cases, the argument leaps from a small, limited effect to a sweeping, universal one -- a type of reasoning that turns out to be deeply misleading in countless situations. The busy, active person may to some degree counteract -- or, closer to the truth, may simply ignore -- those minor physical complaints that consume the attention of someone with nothing else to think about. But this does nothing to prove that an active mind will enable a person to ignore a raging fever, smallpox, or the plague.

The person who walks twenty miles driven by a purpose that consumes his soul doesn't notice his mild physical fatigue when he arrives. But double his motivation and send him out for another twenty miles. Quadruple it and start him on a third round. Keep going, and eventually the length of his walk will depend on his muscles, not his mind. Powell, motivated by ten guineas, would probably have walked farther than Godwin motivated by half a million. An extraordinarily powerful motive acting on a body of moderate strength might make a person kill himself through sheer exertion, but it would not make him walk a hundred miles in twenty-four hours. Stating the case this way reveals the fallacy of assuming that the person wasn't really tired at all during his first twenty-mile walk just because he didn't appear to be, or perhaps barely felt any fatigue himself. The mind cannot focus intensely on more than one thing at a time. The twenty thousand pounds so consumed his thoughts that he paid no attention to any slight soreness in his feet or stiffness in his legs. But if he had truly been as fresh and alert as when he first set out, he would have been able to do the second twenty miles just as easily as the first, and then the third, and so on -- which leads to an obvious absurdity. When a spirited horse is nearly half exhausted, with the stimulus of the spur and proper handling of the bit, he can be pushed so hard that he would appear to a bystander as fresh and high-spirited as if he hadn't gone a mile. In fact, the horse himself, in the heat and excitement produced by this stimulus, probably wouldn't feel any fatigue. But it would be completely absurd to argue from this appearance that if the stimulus were kept up, the horse would never get tired. The cry of a pack of hounds will make some horses, after a forty-mile ride on the road, appear as fresh and lively as when they first set out. If they were then taken hunting, their riders would at first notice no decline in their strength and spirit. But toward the end of a hard day, the previous fatigue would take its full toll, and they would tire sooner. When I've taken a long walk with my gun and had no luck, I've often come home feeling quite uncomfortable from exhaustion. On another day, covering nearly the same distance with plenty of game, I've come home feeling fresh and alert. The difference in how tired I felt upon arriving on those different days may have been dramatic, but on the following mornings I've found no such difference. I haven't noticed that I was any less stiff in my limbs, or any less footsore, on the morning after the day of good sport than on the other morning.

In all these cases, mental stimulants seem to work by diverting attention away from physical fatigue, rather than by genuinely counteracting it. If the energy of my mind had truly counteracted my body's fatigue, why would I feel tired the next morning? If the stimulus of the hounds had overcome the fatigue of the journey in reality as completely as it did in appearance, why would the horse tire sooner than if he hadn't traveled those forty miles? I happen to have a very bad toothache as I'm writing this. In the heat of composition, I forget about it every now and then for a moment or two. Yet I can't help thinking that the process causing the pain is still going on, and that the nerves carrying that information to the brain are, even during those moments, demanding attention and space for their signals. The flood of other mental activity may perhaps block them out or overpower them for a time, until a sudden sharp stab of extraordinary intensity routs all other thoughts, shatters the vividness of my arguments, and rides triumphant through the brain. In this case, as in the others, the mind seems to have little or no power to counteract or cure the disorder -- it merely has the ability, when strongly engaged, to focus its attention on other things.

I don't mean to say, however, that a sound and vigorous mind has no tendency whatsoever to keep the body in good shape. The connection between mind and body is so close and intimate that it would be very strange if they didn't support each other's functions. But if anything, the body probably has more effect on the mind than the mind has on the body. The mind's first job is to serve the body's needs. When those needs are fully met, an active mind is indeed inclined to wander further -- to explore the fields of science, or play in the realms of imagination, to fancy that it has "shuffled off this mortal coil" and is seeking its true element. But all these efforts are like the futile sprinting of the hare in the fable. The slowly plodding tortoise -- the body -- never fails to catch up with the mind, no matter how far and wide it has roamed. And the brightest, most energetic intellects, reluctant as they may be to heed the first or second summons, must ultimately surrender control of the brain to the demands of hunger, or sink with the exhausted body into sleep.

It seems safe to say that if a medicine could be found to make the body immortal, there would be no worry about the mind failing to keep up. But the immortality of the mind by no means implies the immortality of the body. On the contrary, the greatest conceivable mental energy would probably exhaust and destroy the body's strength. A moderate level of mental activity seems to benefit health, but very intense intellectual exertion tends, as people have often observed, to wear out the body that houses it. Most of the examples Godwin has offered to prove the power of the mind over the body -- and the resulting likelihood of human immortality -- are actually of this latter type. If such stimulants could be applied continuously, far from leading to immortality, they would very quickly destroy the human body.

Godwin next considers the probable increase of voluntary control that humans might gain over their physical functions, and he concludes by noting that some people's voluntary power in this area extends to things that most people cannot control. But this is arguing against a nearly universal rule based on a few exceptions -- and those exceptions seem to be parlor tricks rather than powers that could serve any practical purpose. I've never heard of anyone who could regulate their pulse during a fever, and I strongly doubt that any of the people Godwin refers to have made the slightest noticeable progress in regularly correcting their body's disorders or extending their lives as a result.

Godwin says: "Nothing can be more unphilosophical than to conclude that, because a certain kind of power lies beyond what we can currently observe, it therefore lies beyond the limits of the human mind." I have to say, my idea of what counts as philosophical is very different from Godwin's on this point. The only distinction I can see between a philosophical conjecture and the pronouncements of the self-proclaimed Prophet Mr. Brothers is that one is based on patterns arising from what we have actually observed, and the other has no foundation at all. I fully expect that great discoveries are yet to be made in every branch of human knowledge, especially in physics. But the moment we abandon past experience as the basis for our predictions about the future -- and even more so if our predictions flatly contradict past experience -- we are cast adrift in a vast sea of uncertainty, and any guess is as good as any other. If someone told me that humans would eventually have eyes and hands in the back of their heads as well as the front, I would grant the usefulness of the addition but would give as my reason for disbelieving it that I see no indication whatsoever in the past from which I could infer even the smallest probability of such a change. If that is not considered a valid objection, then all conjectures are equal, and all equally philosophical. It seems to me that in the record of everything we have observed, there are no more genuine signs that humans will become immortal on earth than that they will have four eyes and four hands, or that trees will grow sideways instead of upward.

Someone will perhaps say that many discoveries have already been made in the world that were completely unforeseen and unexpected. I grant that this is true. But if someone had predicted those discoveries without being guided by any analogies or clues from past experience, they would deserve to be called a seer or a prophet, not a philosopher. The amazement that some of our modern discoveries would cause among the primitive inhabitants of Europe in the days of Theseus and Achilles proves very little. People who are almost entirely unfamiliar with what a machine can do cannot be expected to guess at its effects. I am far from saying that we currently have anything close to a full understanding of the powers of the human mind. But we certainly know more about this instrument than people did four thousand years ago, and therefore, though we can't claim to be fully competent judges, we are certainly much better equipped than ancient peoples to say what is or is not within its grasp. A watch would strike a person from an ancient society with as much astonishment as a perpetual motion machine. Yet one is a perfectly familiar piece of machinery to us, and the other has constantly eluded the efforts of the sharpest minds. In many cases, we can now see the causes that prevent unlimited improvement in inventions that at first seemed to promise it. The original inventors of telescopes probably thought that as long as they could keep increasing the size of the mirrors and the length of the tubes, the instrument's power and usefulness would keep growing. But experience has since taught us that the shrinking field of view, the loss of light, and the magnification of atmospheric distortion prevent the benefits that were expected from telescopes of extraordinary size and power. In many areas of knowledge, humanity has been almost constantly making progress. In others, our efforts have been consistently defeated. People in ancient times probably couldn't have guessed at the reasons for this enormous difference. Our additional experience has given us some insight into those reasons, and has therefore put us in a better position to judge -- if not what we should expect in the future, at least what we should not expect. And that negative knowledge, though it may sound modest, is a very useful thing to have.

Since the need for sleep seems to depend more on the body than the mind, it's hard to see how improving the mind can do much to overcome what Godwin calls this "conspicuous weakness." A person who, through intense mental stimulation, manages to go two or three nights without sleep proportionally drains the strength of his body. This decline in health and energy will soon disrupt his thinking, so that through these great efforts he has made no real progress whatsoever in eliminating the need for rest.

There is certainly enough of a range among the various historical figures we know about -- in the energy of their minds, their charitable pursuits, and so on -- to let us judge whether intellectual activity has any clear effect on how long people live. And it's certain that no such effect has been observed. Though no mental effort of any kind has ever produced anything that could remotely be interpreted as a step toward immortality, if either type of attention makes a difference, paying attention to the body seems to do more for longevity than paying attention to the mind. The person who eats moderate meals and exercises regularly with careful discipline will generally be found healthier than the person who, deeply absorbed in intellectual work, often forgets about physical needs for a time. The retired citizen whose thoughts barely rise above or extend beyond his little garden -- puttering around all morning among his flower beds -- will perhaps live just as long as the philosopher with the most sweeping intellect and the clearest vision of anyone in his generation. It has been consistently observed by those who have studied mortality records that women live longer on average than men. And though I would by no means claim that women's intellectual abilities are inferior, I think it must be acknowledged that, because of differences in education, there are not as many women as men who are driven to vigorous mental exertion.

Given all this -- and the vast diversity of human lives and characters that have existed over thousands of years -- since no clear difference in lifespan has been observed as a result of intellectual activity, human mortality on earth seems to be as firmly established, and on exactly the same grounds, as any of the most reliable laws of nature. A direct act of power by the Creator of the Universe could, of course, change one or all of these laws, either suddenly or gradually. But without some indication of such a change -- and no such indication exists -- it is just as unscientific to suppose that human life might be extended beyond any definable limit as to suppose that the earth's gravity will gradually turn into repulsion and that stones will eventually rise instead of fall, or that the earth will fly off at some point toward a more pleasant and warmer sun.

The conclusion of Godwin's chapter presents us, without question, with a very beautiful and appealing picture. But like some landscapes painted from imagination rather than from life, it lacks the hold on the heart that only nature and probability can give.

I can't leave this subject without pointing out that these conjectures by Godwin and Condorcet about the indefinite prolongation of human life are a very striking example of the soul's longing for immortality. Both of these men have rejected the light of revelation, which explicitly promises eternal life in another state. They have also rejected the light of natural religion, which to the ablest minds in every age has pointed toward the future existence of the soul. Yet the idea of immortality is so deeply natural to the human mind that they cannot bring themselves to throw it out of their systems entirely. After all their picky skepticism about the only plausible form of immortality, they introduce a version of immortality of their own -- one that is not only completely contradictory to every law of probability that philosophy recognizes, but is in itself extremely narrow, partial, and unjust. They assume that all the great, virtuous, and noble minds that have ever existed, or that may exist for thousands -- perhaps millions -- of years, will sink into oblivion, and that only a few beings, no greater in number than can live on the earth at one time, will ultimately be crowned with immortality. If such a doctrine had been put forward as a tenet of religious revelation, I am quite sure that all the enemies of religion -- probably including Godwin and Condorcet themselves -- would have unleashed the full force of their ridicule upon it as the most childish, the most absurd, the poorest, the most pitiful, the most outrageously unjust, and consequently the most unworthy idea of God that human foolishness could invent.

What a strange and telling proof these conjectures offer of the inconsistency of skepticism! For we should notice that there is a very important and fundamental difference between believing a claim that flatly contradicts our most consistent experience and believing a claim that contradicts nothing but simply lies beyond what we can currently observe and know. The natural world around us is so varied, and so many displays of extraordinary power present themselves to our view every day, that we can reasonably assume there are many forms and processes of nature that we have not yet observed -- or that perhaps we are not capable of observing with our current limited means of perception. The resurrection of a spiritual body from a physical body does not in itself seem like a more astonishing display of power than the sprouting of a blade of wheat from a grain, or an oak from an acorn. Imagine an intelligent being who had only ever encountered inanimate or fully grown objects and had never witnessed the process of growth. Suppose another being showed him two tiny pieces of matter -- a grain of wheat and an acorn -- invited him to examine them, to analyze them if he liked, and to try to figure out their properties and essence. And then suppose that being told him that however insignificant these little bits of matter might seem, they possessed such remarkable powers of selection, combination, arrangement, and something very close to creation, that when placed in the ground they would choose from all the dirt and moisture surrounding them exactly the parts best suited to their purpose. They would collect and arrange these parts with wonderful skill, judgment, and precision, and would rise up into beautiful forms bearing almost no resemblance to the tiny bits of matter first placed in the earth. I have very little doubt that the imaginary being I've described would hesitate more -- would demand better authority and stronger proof -- before believing these strange claims than if he had simply been told that a being of immense power, who had caused everything he saw around him and the very existence of which he himself was conscious, would, through a great act of power upon the death and decay of human creatures, raise up the essence of thought in a bodiless -- or at least invisible -- form, to give it a happier existence in another state.

The only difference, as far as our own judgment is concerned, that does not favor the latter claim is that the first miracle we have witnessed repeatedly, and the second miracle we have not witnessed at all. I fully acknowledge the enormous weight of this difference. But surely no one can hesitate for a moment in saying that, setting Revelation aside, the resurrection of a spiritual body from a physical body -- which may simply be one among the many processes of nature we cannot see -- is an event incomparably more probable than the immortality of humans on earth. The latter is not only something for which no symptoms or signs have ever appeared, but a direct contradiction of one of the most reliable laws of nature that has ever come within human observation.

When we look beyond this life, it's clear that we can have no guides other than authority, or conjecture, and perhaps an obscure and undefined feeling. What I'm saying here does not, in my view, contradict what I said earlier -- that it is unscientific to expect any specific event not suggested by some kind of pattern in the past. In venturing beyond "the bourne from which no traveler returns," we must necessarily leave that rule behind. But when it comes to events we expect to happen on earth, we can rarely abandon it and still call ourselves truly scientific. Analogy, however, as I see it, has a wide scope. For example, humanity has discovered many of the laws of nature. Analogy suggests we will discover many more. But no analogy suggests we will discover a sixth sense, or a new kind of power in the human mind entirely beyond anything we have ever observed.

The powers of selection, combination, and transformation that every seed displays are truly miraculous. Who can imagine that these extraordinary abilities are contained in those tiny bits of matter? To me, it seems far more philosophical to suppose that the mighty God of nature is present in full power in all these processes. To this all-powerful Being, it would be equally easy to grow an oak without an acorn as with one. The preparatory step of placing seeds in the ground is ordained simply for humanity's benefit, as one among the various stimuli necessary to awaken matter into mind. It is an idea consistent with the natural world around us, with the events of human life, and with God's successive revelations to humanity: that the world is a mighty process for the creation and formation of mind. Many vessels will inevitably come out of this great furnace in flawed shapes. These will be broken and cast aside as useless, while those vessels whose forms are full of truth, grace, and beauty will be carried into happier situations, nearer to the presence of the mighty maker.

I should perhaps apologize again to my readers for spending so long on a conjecture that many, I know, will consider too absurd and improbable to deserve the slightest discussion. But if it really is as improbable and as contrary to the genuine spirit of scientific inquiry as I believe it is, why shouldn't a fair examination show it to be so? A conjecture, however unlikely it may seem at first glance, when put forward by able and clever thinkers, at least deserves investigation. For my own part, I have no reluctance whatsoever to give the idea of probable human immortality on earth exactly as much credit as the evidence brought in its support deserves. Before we declare such an event utterly impossible, it's only fair to examine that evidence impartially. And from such an examination, I think we can conclude that we have even less reason to suppose human life can be extended indefinitely than to suppose that trees can be made to grow indefinitely tall, or potatoes indefinitely large. Though Godwin puts forward the idea of indefinitely prolonging human life merely as a conjecture, he has offered some evidence that, in his view, supports it. He must certainly intend for that evidence to be examined -- and that is all I have meant to do.
