CHAPTER 16

Adam Smith was probably wrong to treat every increase in a nation's income or capital as an increase in the money available to pay workers -- Cases where growing wealth does nothing to improve the condition of the working poor -- England has grown richer without a proportional increase in the funds available to support labor -- The condition of the poor in China would not be improved by an increase in manufacturing wealth.


The stated purpose of Adam Smith's inquiry is to explain the nature and causes of national wealth. But there is another investigation -- perhaps an even more interesting one -- that he occasionally mixes in with the first. I mean an investigation into the causes that affect the happiness of nations, and particularly the happiness and comfort of the lower classes, who make up the largest group in every country. I am well aware of how closely these two subjects are connected, and that the forces which tend to increase a nation's wealth also tend, generally speaking, to increase the happiness of the lower classes. But Adam Smith may have treated these two lines of inquiry as more closely linked than they really are. At the very least, he has not paused to notice those cases where a society's wealth may increase -- according to his own definition of "wealth" -- without doing anything to improve the comfort of its working people. I don't intend to get into a philosophical discussion about what true human happiness consists of. Instead, I will simply focus on two widely recognized ingredients: health, and access to the necessities and comforts of life.

There is little room for doubt that the comfort of the working poor depends on the growth of the funds set aside for supporting labor, and will be closely proportional to how quickly those funds grow. The demand for labor that such growth would create, by generating competition in the job market, would naturally drive up the value of labor. Until the additional workers needed could be raised, the increased funds would be distributed among the same number of people as before, and so every worker would live comparatively well. But Adam Smith may have been wrong to treat every increase in a society's income or capital as an increase in these funds. Such surplus capital or income will, of course, always be seen by the person who owns it as an additional fund from which they can hire more workers. But it will not be a real and effective fund for supporting additional workers unless the whole -- or at least a large part -- of this increase in the society's capital or income can be converted into a proportional quantity of food. And it will not be convertible into food when the increase has come merely from the products of labor rather than the products of the land. In this case, a gap opens up between the number of workers that the society's capital could employ and the number that its land can actually feed.

Let me explain with an example. Adam Smith defines the wealth of a nation as the annual produce of its land and labor. This definition clearly includes manufactured goods as well as agricultural produce. Now suppose a nation spent several years adding everything it saved from its yearly income to its manufacturing capital alone, and nothing to the capital invested in agriculture. Obviously, it might grow richer according to that definition without gaining the ability to support a greater number of workers -- and therefore without any increase in the real funds for supporting labor. There would still be a demand for labor, however, because each manufacturer would have the ability -- or at least think he had the ability -- to expand his existing operations or set up new ones. This demand would naturally raise the price of labor, but if the country's yearly stock of food was not increasing, the rise would soon turn out to be purely nominal, since the price of food would inevitably rise along with it. The demand for manufacturing workers might draw many people away from agriculture, which would tend to shrink the annual food supply. But let us assume that any such effect is offset by improvements in farming equipment, so that the total quantity of food stays the same. Meanwhile, improvements in manufacturing machinery would certainly take place, and this -- combined with the larger number of people employed in manufacturing -- would cause the total annual output of the country to increase significantly. The nation's wealth would therefore be growing year after year according to the definition, and it might be growing quite rapidly.

The question is whether wealth increasing in this way actually tends to improve the condition of the working poor. It is self-evident that any general rise in the price of labor, when the food supply stays the same, can only be a nominal rise, since it must very quickly be followed by a proportional rise in food prices. The increase in labor prices that we have been imagining would therefore have little or no effect in giving working people greater access to the necessities and comforts of life. In this respect, they would be in roughly the same situation as before. In one other respect, they would actually be worse off. A larger proportion of them would be employed in manufacturing, and fewer in agriculture. And this shift in occupations, I think everyone would agree, is very unfavorable in terms of health -- one essential ingredient of happiness -- not to mention the greater uncertainty of manufacturing work, which is subject to the whims of fashion, the disruptions of war, and other unpredictable forces.

It might be said, perhaps, that the scenario I have described could not actually happen, because a rise in food prices would immediately redirect some additional capital toward agriculture. But this is a process that may unfold very slowly. Keep in mind that a rise in the price of labor came before the rise in food prices, and would therefore slow down the beneficial effects on agriculture that higher food prices might otherwise have produced.

It might also be said that the additional capital of the nation could be used to import enough food to support those whom its capital could employ. A small country with a large navy and excellent internal transportation -- like Holland -- might indeed import and distribute an effective quantity of food. But food prices would have to be very high to make such importation and distribution worthwhile in large countries that are less fortunately situated.

A scenario exactly like the one I have described may never have actually occurred. But I have little doubt that cases closely approximating it can be found without too much searching. In fact, I am strongly inclined to think that England itself, since the Revolution of 1688, provides a very striking illustration of this argument.

The commerce of this country, both domestic and foreign, has certainly been advancing rapidly over the last century. The market value in Europe of the annual produce of its land and labor has without doubt increased considerably. But on closer examination, the increase turns out to have been mainly in the products of labor, not in the products of the land. So even though the nation's wealth has been advancing at a fast pace, the real funds available to support labor have been growing very slowly. The result is exactly what you would expect. The growing wealth of the nation has done little or nothing to improve the condition of the working poor. They do not, I believe, have greater access to the necessities and comforts of life than before, and a much larger proportion of them than at the time of the Revolution are employed in manufacturing and crowded together in cramped and unhealthy rooms.

If we could believe Dr. Price's claim that England's population has actually declined since the Revolution, it would appear that the real funds for supporting labor had been shrinking even as wealth was growing in other ways. For I think it can be laid down as a general rule that if the real funds for supporting labor are increasing -- that is, if the land can feed, as well as the capital employ, a greater number of workers -- then that additional population will quickly spring up, even despite the kinds of wars Dr. Price lists. Consequently, if a country's population has been stationary or declining, we can safely conclude that however much it may have grown in manufacturing wealth, its real funds for supporting labor cannot have increased.

It is hard to believe, however, that England's population has actually declined since the Revolution, though all the evidence agrees that its growth, if it has grown at all, has been very slow. In the debate this question has sparked, Dr. Price clearly appears to be more thoroughly in command of his subject and to possess more accurate information than his opponents. Judging simply from the arguments exchanged, I would say Dr. Price's position is closer to being proven than Mr. Howlett's. The truth probably lies between the two claims, but even this middle ground implies that population growth since the Revolution has been very slow compared to the growth of wealth.

Few people would be willing to believe that the country's food production has been decreasing, or even that it has been completely flat, over the last century. The enclosure of commons and wasteland certainly tends to increase the food supply. But it has been confidently argued that the enclosure of common fields has frequently had the opposite effect -- that large tracts of land which formerly produced great quantities of grain now employ fewer workers and feed fewer mouths after being converted to pasture. It is an acknowledged fact that pasture land produces less human food than grain land of equal natural fertility. And if it could be clearly established that the rising demand for high-quality meat, and its higher price as a result, has led to more good land being used for grazing each year, then the reduction in human food that this would cause might have offset the gains from enclosing wasteland and the general improvements in farming methods.

It hardly needs pointing out that the high price of meat today and its low price in earlier times were not caused by scarcity in the one case or abundance in the other, but by the different costs involved at different periods in preparing cattle for market. It is possible that there were actually more cattle in the country a hundred years ago than there are now. But there is no doubt that much more meat of superior quality is being brought to market today than ever before. When meat prices were very low, cattle were raised mainly on wasteland and, except for a few major markets, were probably slaughtered with little additional fattening. The veal sold cheaply in some remote counties today bears little resemblance, beyond the name, to what is sold in London. In the past, the price of meat would not even cover the cost of raising cattle on land that could be used for crops, let alone fattening them. But the current price will not only pay for fattening cattle on the very best land -- it will even justify raising many of them on land that could produce good harvests of grain. The same number of cattle -- or even the same weight of cattle at slaughter -- will have consumed very different quantities of food that could have fed humans, depending on the period. A fattened beast may, in some ways, be considered -- to borrow the language of the French economists -- an unproductive laborer: it has added nothing to the value of the raw food it consumed. The current system of grazing undoubtedly tends, more than the old system, to reduce the amount of food available for human consumption relative to the overall fertility of the land.

I would not want to be understood as saying that the old system either could have or should have continued. The rising price of meat is a natural and inevitable consequence of the general advance of farming. But I cannot help thinking that the current enormous demand for high-quality meat, the amount of good land that is consequently being used to produce it, and the large number of horses now kept for pleasure are the main reasons why the country's food supply has not kept pace with the generally increased fertility of the soil. A change in these habits would, I have little doubt, have a noticeable effect on the amount of food in the country, and therefore on its population.

The use of much of the most fertile land for grazing, the improvements in farming equipment, the growth of large farms, and especially the decline in the number of rural cottages throughout the country all point to the same conclusion: there are probably not as many people employed in agricultural labor now as at the time of the Revolution. Whatever increase in population has occurred must therefore be employed almost entirely in manufacturing. And it is well known that the failure of some industries -- simply due to the whims of fashion, like the adoption of muslin instead of silk, or of shoelaces and covered buttons instead of buckles and metal buttons -- combined with the restrictions on the labor market created by corporation and parish laws, has frequently thrown thousands of people onto charity for support. The enormous growth in the poor rates is in itself strong evidence that the poor do not have greater access to the necessities and comforts of life. And if we add to the fact that their condition in this regard is somewhat worse rather than better the further consideration that a much larger proportion of them are employed in large factories -- which are bad for both health and moral character -- it must be acknowledged that the growth of wealth in recent years has done nothing to increase the happiness of the working poor.

The fact that every increase in a nation's capital or income cannot be treated as an increase in the real funds for supporting labor -- and therefore cannot have the same beneficial effect on the condition of the poor -- becomes even clearer when the argument is applied to China.

Adam Smith observes that China has probably long been as rich as its laws and institutions will allow, but that with different laws and institutions, and if foreign trade were valued rather than looked down on, it could be much richer. The question is: would such an increase in wealth actually be an increase in the real funds for supporting labor, and therefore tend to give the lower classes in China a better standard of living?

It is obvious that if trade and foreign commerce were highly valued in China, then given its abundant labor supply and cheap wages, the country could produce manufactured goods for export in enormous quantities. It is equally obvious that because of the sheer bulk of food required and the immense extent of China's inland territory, it could not import enough food in return to make any meaningful addition to the country's annual food supply. It would therefore exchange its vast manufacturing output chiefly for luxury goods gathered from all parts of the world. As things stand now, no labor whatsoever is spared in the production of food. The country is somewhat overpopulated relative to what its capital can employ, and labor is therefore so abundant that no effort is made to economize on it. The result is probably the greatest production of food that the soil can possibly yield. It will generally be observed that labor-saving methods, though they may allow a farmer to bring a given quantity of grain to market more cheaply, tend to reduce rather than increase total output. In agriculture, therefore, such methods may in some ways be considered more of a private advantage than a public one.

A huge amount of capital could not be put to work in China producing goods for foreign trade without pulling so many workers out of agriculture that it would change this entire situation and, to some degree, shrink the country's food production. The demand for manufacturing workers would naturally drive up the price of labor, but since the quantity of food would not be increasing, food prices would keep pace with wages -- or even outpace them if the food supply were actually declining. The country would clearly be advancing in wealth. The market value of the annual produce of its land and labor would be growing year after year. Yet the real funds for supporting labor would be flat or even declining. Consequently, the nation's increasing wealth would actually tend to push down, not raise, the condition of the poor. In terms of their access to the necessities and comforts of life, they would be in the same or worse situation than before, and a large proportion of them would have traded the healthy work of farming for the unhealthy occupations of manufacturing.

The argument is perhaps easier to see when applied to China, because it is generally accepted that China's wealth has long been stationary. For any other country, it could always be debated which of two compared periods saw faster growth in wealth, since Adam Smith argues that the condition of the poor depends on the speed of wealth's increase at any given time. But it is clear that two nations might be growing at exactly the same rate in the market value of their annual output, yet if one had focused mainly on agriculture and the other mainly on commerce, the funds available to support labor -- and therefore the effect of that growing wealth on the people in each nation -- would be extremely different. In the nation that had focused on agriculture, the poor would live in plenty, and population would grow rapidly. In the nation that had focused on commerce, the poor would benefit comparatively little, and population would grow slowly.
