CHAPTER 18

The constant pressure of hardship on humanity, caused by the principle of population, seems to direct our hopes toward the future -- The idea of a "state of trial" conflicts with our understanding of God's foreknowledge -- The world is probably a vast process for awakening matter into mind -- A theory of how the mind is formed -- Stimuli from the body's needs -- Stimuli from the operation of general laws -- Stimuli from the difficulties of life created by the principle of population.


When we look at human life through the lens of the constant pressure that population places on subsistence, and see how little reason we have to expect perfection on earth, it seems to strongly point our hopes toward the future. And the temptations we are inevitably exposed to -- arising from the natural laws we have been examining -- seem to cast the world in the light it has often been seen in before: as a state of trial and a school for virtue, preparing us for a higher state of happiness. But I hope I will be forgiven if I offer a somewhat different view of humanity's situation on earth -- one that seems to me more consistent with the various natural phenomena we observe around us, and more in harmony with our ideas about the power, goodness, and foreknowledge of God.

It cannot be a worthless exercise for the human mind to try to "vindicate the ways of God to man" -- as long as we proceed with proper distrust of our own understanding and a fair sense of how little we can grasp of the reasons behind all we see. We should greet every ray of light with gratitude. And when no light appears, we should consider that the darkness comes from within ourselves, not from above, and bow with humble respect before the supreme wisdom of the one whose "thoughts are above our thoughts," "as the heavens are high above the earth."

In all our feeble attempts, however, to "find out the Almighty to perfection," it seems absolutely necessary that we should reason from nature up to nature's God -- and not presume to reason from God down to nature. The moment we allow ourselves to ask why some things are not otherwise, instead of trying to account for them as they are, we will never know where to stop. We will be led into the most absurd and childish errors, all progress in understanding the ways of Providence will grind to a halt, and the inquiry itself will cease to be a worthwhile exercise of the mind. Infinite power is so vast and incomprehensible an idea that the human mind must necessarily be overwhelmed by it. With the crude and simplistic conceptions we sometimes form of this attribute of God, we might imagine that he could call into existence countless billions of beings, all free from pain and imperfection, all outstanding in goodness and wisdom, all capable of the greatest joys, and as numerous as the points throughout infinite space. But when we turn from these wild and extravagant daydreams to the book of nature -- where alone we can read God as he truly is -- we see a constant succession of conscious beings, rising apparently from tiny specks of matter, going through a long and sometimes painful process in this world, but many of them achieving, before the end of it, such elevated qualities and powers as seem to suggest their fitness for some higher state. Shouldn't we, then, correct our crude and simplistic ideas about infinite Power by looking at what actually exists? Can we judge the Creator except by his creation? And unless we want to exalt God's power at the expense of his goodness, shouldn't we conclude that even for the great Creator, almighty as he is, a certain process may be necessary -- a certain time (or at least what appears to us as time) may be required -- in order to form beings with those elevated qualities of mind that will make them fit for his high purposes?

The idea of a "state of trial" seems to imply a previously existing soul that doesn't match what we actually observe in a human infant, and it suggests something like suspicion and a lack of foreknowledge that conflicts with how we want to think about the Supreme Being. I am inclined, therefore -- as I have hinted before -- to consider the world and this life as the mighty process of God, not for the trial but for the creation and formation of mind. It is a process necessary to awaken inert, chaotic matter into spirit -- to transform the dust of the earth into soul -- to draw an ethereal spark from a lump of clay. And from this perspective, the various impressions and stimuli that a person receives throughout life can be seen as the forming hand of the Creator, acting through general laws and awakening our sluggish existence, through the animating touch of the divine, into a capacity for higher enjoyment. The original sin of humanity is the inertia and disorder of the chaotic matter in which we are, so to speak, born.

There would be no point in getting into the question of whether mind is a substance distinct from matter, or simply a finer form of it. The question is perhaps, in the end, just a question of words. Mind is essentially mind, whether it is formed from matter or from anything else. We know from experience that soul and body are deeply united, and every observation suggests that they grow together from infancy. It would be a highly unlikely assumption to believe that a complete and fully formed spirit exists inside every infant, but that it is weighed down and held back during the first twenty years of life by the weakness -- or dullness -- of the organs enclosing it. Since we would all agree that God is the creator of mind as well as of body, and since both seem to be forming and developing at the same time, it should not seem inconsistent with either reason or revelation -- if it is consistent with what we observe in nature -- to suppose that God is constantly engaged in forming mind out of matter, and that the various impressions a person receives throughout life are the process by which this happens. The work is surely worthy of the highest attributes of God.

This view of humanity's condition on earth will seem quite plausible if, judging from what little experience we have of the nature of mind, we find upon investigation that the phenomena around us and the various events of human life seem especially designed to advance this great purpose -- and particularly if, on this assumption, we can explain, even to our own limited understanding, many of the roughnesses and inequalities of life that we so often complain about to the God of nature.

The first great awakeners of the mind seem to be the needs of the body. (It was my intention to explore this subject at considerable length as a kind of second part to this essay. A long interruption from other business has forced me to set that plan aside, at least for now. So here I will only sketch out a few of the main points that seem to me to support the general theory I have put forward.) The body's needs are the first stimulants that rouse the brain of a newborn into conscious activity. And such is the sluggishness of raw matter that, unless a particular course of stimuli generates other needs that are equally powerful, those original stimulants seem to remain necessary even afterward to sustain the activity they first sparked. A person in a primitive state would sleep forever under a tree unless roused from that stupor by the pangs of hunger or the bite of cold. The efforts such a person makes to avoid those hardships -- by finding food and building shelter -- are the very exercises that develop and keep in motion faculties that would otherwise sink into lifeless inactivity. From everything experience has taught us about how the human mind works, if the stimuli that arise from the body's needs were removed from the mass of humanity, we have far more reason to think people would sink to the level of animals -- from a lack of stimulation -- than that they would rise to the level of philosophers through the gift of leisure. In those countries where nature is most generous in what it produces on its own, you will not find the inhabitants most remarkable for sharpness of mind. Necessity has with great truth been called the mother of invention. Some of the noblest achievements of the human mind have been set in motion by the need to satisfy the body's wants. Need has often given wings to the poet's imagination, sharpened the flowing passages of the historian, and added precision to the investigations of the philosopher. And though there are undoubtedly many minds today that have been so thoroughly developed by the various stimulations of knowledge or social connection that they would not fall back into apathy if their physical needs were removed, it can hardly be doubted that these stimulants could not be taken away from the mass of humanity without producing a general and devastating stupor -- one that would destroy all the seeds of future progress.

Locke, if I remember correctly, says that the drive to avoid pain, rather than the pursuit of pleasure, is the great motivator of action in life -- and that when we look toward any particular pleasure, we will not be moved to act to obtain it until thinking about it for long enough creates something like a sensation of pain or restlessness at not having it. To avoid evil and pursue good seem to be the great duty and business of human beings, and this world appears to be especially designed to provide endless opportunities for exactly that kind of effort. And it is through this effort -- through these stimulations -- that the mind is formed. If Locke's idea is right, and there is strong reason to think it is, then evil seems to be necessary to create effort, and effort seems clearly necessary to create mind.

The need for food to sustain life probably produces a greater quantity of effort than any other need, physical or mental. The Supreme Being has ordained that the earth shall not produce food in large quantities until a great deal of preparatory labor and ingenuity has been applied to its surface. There is no connection we can comprehend between a seed and the plant or tree that grows from it. The Supreme Creator could undoubtedly cause plants of all kinds to spring up for the use of his creatures without the help of those tiny bits of matter we call seeds, or even without the assisting labor and attention of human beings. The processes of plowing and clearing ground, of collecting and sowing seeds, are surely not for God's assistance in his creation. Rather, they are made necessary preconditions for enjoying the blessings of life, in order to rouse people into action and train their minds to think.

To provide the most relentless stimulation of this kind, and to drive humanity to further the gracious designs of Providence through the full cultivation of the earth, it has been ordained that population should increase much faster than food. This general law -- as it has been shown in the earlier parts of this essay -- undoubtedly produces a great deal of suffering in specific cases. But a little reflection may perhaps convince us that it produces a great overall surplus of good. Strong stimuli seem necessary to create effort, and to direct that effort and develop the power of reason, it seems absolutely necessary that the Supreme Being should always act according to general laws. The constancy of the laws of nature -- the certainty with which we can expect the same effects from the same causes -- is the foundation of our ability to reason. If in the ordinary course of things the hand of God were frequently visible, or to put it more accurately, if God frequently changed his purposes (for the hand of God is indeed visible in every blade of grass we see), a general and fatal paralysis of the human faculties would probably follow. Even the body's needs would cease to motivate people to effort if they could not reasonably expect that well-directed work would be rewarded with success. The constancy of the laws of nature is the foundation of the farmer's industry and foresight, the tireless ingenuity of the craftsman, the skilled research of the physician and anatomist, and the careful observation and patient investigation of the scientist. To this constancy we owe all the greatest and noblest achievements of the mind. To this constancy we owe the immortal mind of a Newton.

Since the reasons for the constancy of the laws of nature seem obvious and compelling, even to our limited understanding -- if we return to the principle of population and consider people as they really are, inert, sluggish, and resistant to labor unless forced by necessity (and it is surely the height of foolishness to talk about people according to our wishful fantasies of what they might be) -- we can state with certainty that the world would never have been populated if not for the superiority of the power of population over the means of subsistence. As strong and constantly active as this stimulus is in driving people to cultivate the earth, if we still see that cultivation proceeds very slowly, we can fairly conclude that a weaker stimulus would have been insufficient. Even under the pressure of this constant motivation, people in a primitive state will inhabit countries of the greatest natural fertility for long periods before they turn to herding or farming. If population and food had increased at the same rate, humanity might never have emerged from the primitive state. But suppose the earth were once fully populated. An Alexander, a Julius Caesar, a Tamerlane, or a bloody revolution could irreversibly deplete the human race and defeat the great designs of the Creator. The devastation of a contagious disease would be felt for ages. An earthquake could depopulate a region forever. The principle by which population increases prevents the vices of humanity, or the accidents of nature -- the specific harms that arise from general laws -- from obstructing the high purpose of creation. It keeps the inhabitants of the earth always fully up to the level of the means of subsistence, and it constantly acts on people as a powerful stimulus, driving them to further cultivate the earth and enable it to support a larger population. But it is impossible for this law to operate and produce the effects apparently intended by the Supreme Being without causing harm in specific cases. Unless the principle of population were adjusted to the circumstances of each individual country -- which would not only contradict our universal experience of how the laws of nature work, but would also contradict our own reason, which recognizes the absolute necessity of general laws for the development of the intellect -- it is clear that the same principle which, aided by human industry, will populate a fertile region in a few years, must also produce hardship in countries that have been settled for a long time.

It seems, however, entirely probable that even the acknowledged difficulties caused by the law of population tend to advance rather than hinder the general purpose of Providence. They stimulate universal effort and contribute to that infinite variety of situations -- and therefore of impressions -- which seems on the whole favorable to the growth of mind. It is likely that too much or too little stimulation, extreme poverty or excessive wealth, may be equally unfavorable in this respect. The middle levels of society seem best suited to intellectual development. But it is contrary to every analogy in nature to expect that all of society can be a middle level. The temperate zones of the earth seem most favorable to the mental and physical energies of human beings, but not everything can be a temperate zone. A world warmed and lit by a single sun must, by the laws of matter, have some parts frozen by perpetual cold and others scorched by perpetual heat. Every piece of matter resting on a surface must have a top side and a bottom side -- all the particles cannot be in the middle. The most valuable part of an oak tree, to a lumber dealer, is neither the roots nor the branches. But these are absolutely necessary for the existence of the middle part -- the trunk -- which is what is actually wanted. The lumber dealer could not possibly expect to grow an oak without roots or branches. But if they could find a method of cultivation that caused more of the tree's substance to go into the trunk and less into roots and branches, they would be right to put such a system into general use.

In the same way, though we cannot possibly expect to eliminate wealth and poverty from society, if we could find a form of government that reduced the numbers at the extremes and increased the numbers in the middle, it would undoubtedly be our duty to adopt it. It is not unlikely, however, that just as with the oak -- where the roots and branches could not be greatly reduced without weakening the vigorous flow of sap in the trunk -- so in society, the extreme parts could not be reduced beyond a certain point without weakening the energetic effort throughout the middle portions, which is the very reason they are most favorable to the growth of intellect. If no one could hope to rise or fear to fall in society -- if hard work did not bring its reward and laziness its punishment -- the middle portions would certainly not be what they are now. In thinking about this subject, we should clearly focus on humanity as a whole, not on individual cases. There are undoubtedly many minds -- and statistically there should be many, given the odds when drawing from so large a pool -- that, having been stimulated early by a particular course of experiences, would not need the constant pressure of narrow motives to remain active. But if we were to survey the various useful discoveries, the valuable writings, and other praiseworthy achievements of humankind, I believe we would find that more were driven by the narrow motives that act on the many than by the seemingly nobler motives that act on the few.

Leisure is, without doubt, highly valuable to human beings. But taking people as they actually are, the odds seem to be that in the majority of cases it will produce harm rather than good. It has often been observed that talent is more common among younger sons than among eldest sons. But it can hardly be supposed that younger sons are, on average, born with greater natural ability. The difference, if there really is any noticeable difference, can only come from their different circumstances. Effort and activity are in one case absolutely necessary, and in the other merely optional.

That the difficulties of life help generate talent, everyday experience must convince us. The efforts people find it necessary to make in order to support themselves or their families frequently awaken abilities that might otherwise have lain dormant forever. And it has been commonly observed that new and extraordinary situations generally produce minds equal to grappling with the challenges they face.
