CHAPTER 19

The sorrows of life are necessary to soften and humanize the heart -- Social sympathy often produces people of higher character than those who merely possess talent -- Moral evil is probably necessary for the development of moral excellence -- Intellectual challenges are continually renewed by the infinite variety of nature and the obscurity surrounding metaphysical subjects -- The difficulties in religious revelation can be explained by this same principle -- The degree of evidence the scriptures contain is probably best suited to improving human abilities and the moral improvement of humanity -- The idea that mind is created through experience and challenge seems to account for the existence of both natural and moral evil.


The sorrows and hardships of life form another category of experiences that seem necessary -- through a particular sequence of impressions -- to soften and humanize the heart, to awaken social sympathy, to generate all the Christian virtues, and to provide the scope for generous acts of kindness. The general tendency of an unbroken stretch of prosperity is to degrade character rather than elevate it. A heart that has never known sorrow itself will rarely be truly alive to the pains and pleasures, the wants and wishes, of the people around it. It will rarely overflow with that warmth of brotherly love, those kind and generous feelings, that dignify the human character even more than the possession of the greatest talents. Talents, though undoubtedly a very prominent and fine feature of the mind, can by no means be considered the whole of it. There are many minds that haven't been exposed to the kinds of experiences that usually develop talent, yet have been brought vividly to life by the experience of social sympathy. In every level of society, among the lowest as often as the highest, you can find people overflowing with the milk of human kindness, radiating love toward God and their fellow human beings, and -- though without those particular powers of mind we call talents -- clearly holding a higher rank among living beings than many who possess them. Evangelical charity, meekness, piety, and that whole class of virtues known especially as the Christian virtues don't necessarily require exceptional ability. Yet a soul that possesses these generous qualities, a soul awakened and brought to life by these beautiful sympathies, seems to hold a closer communion with the heavens than sheer intellectual brilliance alone.

The greatest talents have often been misused and have produced evil proportionate to their powers. Both reason and revelation seem to assure us that such minds will be condemned to eternal death. But while on earth, these corrupted instruments played their role in the great mass of human experience by provoking the disgust and horror they inspired. It seems highly likely that moral evil is absolutely necessary for the development of moral excellence. A being who has only ever seen good can fairly be said to be driven by blind instinct. The pursuit of good in that case tells us nothing about whether the person has virtuous inclinations. You might say, perhaps, that infinite Wisdom wouldn't need anything so crude as outward action to know a person's character -- that God would know in advance whether the being would choose good or evil. That might be a plausible argument against the idea of life as a trial. But it doesn't hold against the idea that the mind in this world is in a state of formation. Under this view, the being who has witnessed moral evil and felt disapproval and disgust at it is essentially different from the being who has only ever seen good. They are pieces of clay that have received different impressions; they must, therefore, necessarily take different shapes. Or even if we grant that both end up with the same beautiful form of virtue, we have to acknowledge that one has gone through the further process needed to give firmness and durability to its substance, while the other is still vulnerable to damage and liable to be broken by any accidental blow. A passionate love and admiration for virtue seems to require the existence of something opposed to it. And it seems highly likely that the same beauty of form and substance, the same perfection of character, could not be produced without the impressions of disapproval that arise from witnessing moral evil.

When the mind has been awakened into activity by the passions and the body's physical needs, intellectual needs arise next. The desire for knowledge and the frustration of ignorance form a new and important class of experiences. Every part of nature seems specially designed to provide stimulants for this kind of mental effort and to offer inexhaustible food for the most relentless inquiry. Our immortal Bard says of Cleopatra:

  Custom cannot stale
  Her infinite variety.

The expression, when applied to any single person, might be considered poetic exaggeration, but it is precisely true when applied to nature. Infinite variety seems, indeed, to be nature's defining characteristic. The shadows blended here and there in the picture give spirit, life, and depth to her extraordinary beauties. And those rough patches and uneven surfaces, those supporting elements that hold up the grander features -- though they sometimes offend the fussy microscopic eye of short-sighted humanity -- contribute to the symmetry, grace, and fair proportion of the whole.

The infinite variety of nature's forms and processes, besides immediately awakening and improving the mind through the variety of impressions it creates, also opens up other rich sources of improvement by offering such a vast and extensive field for investigation and research. Uniform, unvarying perfection could not possess the same power to rouse the mind. When we try to contemplate the system of the universe -- when we think of the stars as the suns of other solar systems scattered throughout infinite space, when we reflect that we probably don't see a millionth part of those bright spheres that are beaming light and life to countless worlds, when our minds, unable to grasp the immeasurable idea, sink lost and overwhelmed in admiration of the mighty incomprehensible power of the Creator -- let us not petulantly complain that all climates aren't equally pleasant, that perpetual spring doesn't reign throughout the year, that God's creatures don't all enjoy the same advantages, that clouds and storms sometimes darken the natural world and vice and misery darken the moral one, and that all the works of creation aren't formed with equal perfection. Both reason and experience seem to tell us that the infinite variety of nature -- and variety cannot exist without lesser parts, or apparent flaws -- is admirably suited to furthering the high purpose of creation and producing the greatest possible amount of good.

The obscurity that surrounds all metaphysical subjects seems to me, in the same way, specially designed to add to that class of experiences that arise from the thirst for knowledge. It is likely that while on earth, humans will never achieve complete understanding of these subjects. But this is by no means a reason to stop pursuing them. The darkness surrounding these fascinating topics of human curiosity may be intended to furnish endless motivation for intellectual activity and effort. The constant struggle to dispel this darkness, even if it fails, strengthens and improves our ability to think. If the subjects of human inquiry were ever exhausted, the mind would probably stagnate. But the infinitely diverse forms and workings of nature, together with the endless food for thought that metaphysical subjects offer, prevent any chance that such a period will ever come.

It is by no means one of Solomon's wisest sayings that "there is nothing new under the sun." On the contrary, it is likely that if the present system were to continue for millions of years, continual additions would keep being made to the mass of human knowledge. And yet it may be worth asking whether what we could call the capacity of the human mind is increasing in any clear and decisive way. A Socrates, a Plato, or an Aristotle, however obviously they knew less than today's philosophers, don't appear to have been much below them in intellectual capacity. Intellect rises from a tiny spark, stays vigorous for only a certain period, and probably can't absorb more than a certain number of impressions while on earth. These impressions may be infinitely varied, and from these various combinations -- added probably to some difference in the original raw material of each mind -- arise the endless diversity of character we see in the world. But reason and experience both seem to assure us that the capacity of individual minds does not increase in proportion to the growing mass of existing knowledge. (It is likely that no two grains of wheat are exactly alike. Soil undoubtedly makes the main difference in the plants that spring up, but probably not all of it. It seems natural to assume some kind of difference in the original seeds that are afterwards awakened into thought, and the extraordinary differences in how receptive very young children are seems to confirm this idea.)

The finest minds seem to be formed more by efforts at original thinking -- by striving to create new combinations and to discover new truths -- than by passively absorbing other people's ideas. Suppose the day arrived when there was no further hope of future discoveries, and the mind's only task was to learn pre-existing knowledge without any effort to form new and original combinations. Even if the mass of human knowledge were a thousand times greater than it is now, one of the noblest stimulants to mental effort would have vanished. The finest feature of intellect would be lost. Everything connected to genius would be at an end. And it seems impossible that, under such circumstances, any individuals could possess the same intellectual energy as a Locke, a Newton, or a Shakespeare -- or even a Socrates, a Plato, an Aristotle, or a Homer.

If a revelation from heaven -- one that no person could doubt in the slightest -- were to dispel the mists that now hang over metaphysical subjects, were to explain the nature and structure of the mind, the essences of all substances, the way the Supreme Being operates in the works of creation, and the entire plan and design of the Universe, such an enormous gain in knowledge, obtained in that way, would in all likelihood tend to suppress future effort rather than energize it, and to clip the soaring wings of intellect.

For this reason, I have never considered the doubts and difficulties that surround some parts of the sacred writings as any argument against their divine origin. The Supreme Being could, undoubtedly, have accompanied His revelations to humanity with such a series of miracles -- and of such a nature -- as would have produced universal, overwhelming conviction and put an end at once to all hesitation and discussion. But as weak as our reason is when it comes to understanding the plans of the great Creator, it is still strong enough to see the most striking objections to such a revelation. From the little we know of how the human mind works, we must be convinced that an overwhelming conviction of that kind, instead of improving humanity and advancing moral development, would act like an electric shock to all intellectual effort and would nearly put an end to the existence of virtue. If the scriptural warnings of eternal punishment were brought home to every person's mind with the same certainty as that night will follow day, this one vast and gloomy idea would so completely take over the human mind that it would leave room for nothing else. Everyone's outward actions would look nearly the same. Virtuous behavior would tell us nothing about whether someone was actually virtuous inside. Vice and virtue would be blended together in one undifferentiated mass. And though the all-seeing eye of God might be able to tell them apart, they would necessarily look the same to human beings, who can only judge by external appearances. Under such a system, it is hard to see how people could be shaped to detest moral evil and to love and admire God and moral excellence.

Our ideas of virtue and vice may not be perfectly precise and well-defined. But few people, I think, would call an action truly virtuous if it was done purely and solely out of dread of an extreme punishment or expectation of a great reward. The fear of the Lord is very rightly said to be the beginning of wisdom, but the end of wisdom is the love of the Lord and the admiration of moral good. The warnings of future punishment found in the scriptures seem well suited to stop the wicked in their tracks and get the attention of the careless. But we see from repeated experience that they are not accompanied by evidence so powerful as to overpower the human will and make people lead virtuous lives while harboring vicious inclinations, purely out of dread of what comes after death. A genuine faith -- by which I mean a faith that shows itself in the virtues of a truly Christian life -- can generally be considered a sign of a generous and virtuous nature, one shaped more by love than by pure, unmixed fear.

When we reflect on the temptations that human beings must inevitably face in this world -- given the structure of our bodies and the workings of the laws of nature -- and on the resulting near-certainty that many vessels will come out of this mighty creative furnace in the wrong shape, it is completely impossible to believe that any of these creatures of God's hand could be condemned to eternal suffering. If we once accepted such an idea, our natural sense of goodness and justice would be completely overthrown, and we could no longer look up to God as a merciful and righteous Being. But the doctrine of life and mortality brought to light by the gospel -- the teaching that the reward of righteousness is everlasting life, but that the wages of sin are death -- is in every respect just and merciful, and worthy of the great Creator. Nothing could seem more consistent with our reason than that those beings who come out of the creative process of this world in lovely and beautiful forms should be crowned with immortality, while those who come out misshapen -- whose minds are not suited to a purer and happier state of existence -- should perish and be consigned to mix again with their original clay. Eternal condemnation of this kind may be seen as a form of eternal punishment, and it is not surprising that it should sometimes be depicted through images of suffering. But life and death, salvation and destruction, are set against each other in the New Testament far more often than happiness and misery. The Supreme Being would appear to us in a very different light if we thought of Him as pursuing the creatures who had offended Him with eternal hatred and torture, instead of merely returning to their original unconsciousness those beings that, through the operation of general laws, had not been formed with qualities suited to a purer state of happiness.

Life is, generally speaking, a blessing regardless of what comes after it. It is a gift that even the most wicked people would not always be eager to throw away, even if they had no fear of death. The limited pain that the supreme Creator inflicts while forming countless beings to a capacity for the highest happiness is but a speck of dust on the scale compared to the happiness that is given. And we have every reason to believe that there is no more evil in the world than what is absolutely necessary as one of the ingredients in this mighty process.

The clear necessity of general laws for the development of intellect will not be contradicted by one or two exceptions -- exceptions that are obviously not intended for narrow purposes, but designed to affect a great portion of humanity across many ages. Based on the view I have offered of how the mind is formed, the breaking of nature's general law through a divine revelation will appear as the direct hand of God mixing new ingredients into the mighty mass -- ingredients suited to the particular stage of the process, and designed to give rise to a new and powerful sequence of impressions tending to purify, elevate, and improve the human mind. The miracles that accompanied these revelations, once they had captured humanity's attention and made it a matter of the most intense debate whether the teaching came from God or from human beings, had done their job -- had fulfilled the Creator's purpose. These communications of the divine will were then left to make their way by their own inherent excellence, and by working as moral motivations, to gradually influence and improve -- not to overpower and paralyze -- the faculties of the human mind.

It would, undoubtedly, be presumptuous to say that the Supreme Being could not possibly have accomplished His purpose in any other way than the one He chose. But since the revelation of the divine will that we possess does come with some doubts and difficulties, and since our reason points out the strongest objections to a revelation that would force immediate, unquestioning, universal belief, we surely have good reason to think that these doubts and difficulties are no argument against the divine origin of the scriptures, and that the kind of evidence they contain is best suited to the improvement of human abilities and the moral betterment of humanity.

The idea that the impressions and experiences of this world are the instruments with which the Supreme Being shapes matter into mind -- and that the necessity of constant effort to avoid evil and pursue good is the main driver of these impressions and experiences -- seems to smooth many of the difficulties that arise when we contemplate human life. It appears to me to give a satisfying explanation for the existence of both natural and moral evil, and consequently for that portion of both -- and it is certainly not a small portion -- which arises from the principle of population. But even though, on this theory, it seems highly unlikely that evil should ever be removed from the world, it is also clear that this belief wouldn't serve the Creator's apparent purpose -- wouldn't work as powerfully as an incentive for effort -- if the amount of evil didn't decrease or increase along with human activity or laziness. The constant shifts in the weight and distribution of this pressure keep alive a constant expectation of throwing it off.

  "Hope springs eternal in the human breast,
  Man never is, but always to be blest."

Evil exists in the world not to create despair, but to inspire action. We are not meant to submit to it passively, but to exert ourselves to overcome it. It is not only the interest but the duty of every individual to use their utmost efforts to remove evil from themselves and from as wide a circle as they can influence. And the more they exercise themselves in this duty, the more wisely they direct their efforts, and the more successful those efforts are, the more they will probably improve and elevate their own minds -- and the more completely they appear to fulfill the will of their Creator.