Letter 25: The Destructive Spirit of Arbitrary Power

Sir,

The only purpose of government is the good of the governed. It follows that the greatest and best rulers are those who make their people great and happy, and the worst are those who make their people small, wicked, and miserable. In a free state, power is a trust, committed by all to one man or a few, to watch over everyone's security and pursue everyone's interest. When that security is not sought and that interest not served, we know what opinion the people will form of their governors.

It is the hard fate of the world that governors and governed should have different views and interests at all — and yet in most countries they do. Men who receive a trust freely bestowed on them by the people too often betray it: they become conspirators against their benefactors and turn the sword on the very hands that gave it. Over the greater part of the earth, people count themselves lucky if they can defend themselves against their defenders.

Look around this great world and see what an immense majority of the human race crouches under the yoke of a few tyrants — men by nature as low as the meanest of their subjects, and, by being tyrants, worse than the worst of them. As Mr. Sidney observes, they use their subjects like donkeys and mastiffs: to work and to fight, to be oppressed and killed for them. Even the good qualities and courage of such subjects become their misfortune, since they only strengthen the wicked hands of their brutal masters — and their own chains. Tyrants regard their people as their cattle, and use them worse the more they fear them. Thus most of mankind have become the wretched slaves of men who are, or ought to be, their own creatures. They maintain their haughty masters like gods, and their haughty masters often use them like dogs. A fine specimen of gratitude and duty!

Yet this cruel spirit in tyrants does not always come from the men themselves, for by nature they are like other men. It comes from the nature of the dominion they exercise. Good laws make a good prince, if he has a good understanding; but the best men grow mischievous when they are set above the laws. Claudius was a perfectly harmless man while he was a private man; when he came to be a tyrant, he proved a bloody one — almost as bloody as his nephew and predecessor Caligula, who had likewise been a very good subject, and who, once he became emperor of Rome, turned professed executioner of the human race.

There is something so wanton and monstrous in lawless power that scarcely any human spirit has ever been able to bear it; and the mind of man, which is weak and limited, ought never to be trusted with a power that is boundless. Tyranny is a state of war. Where it prevails, instead of the confidence and affection that flow between a lawful prince and his subjects, nothing is to be seen but jealousy, mistrust, fear, and hatred. An arbitrary prince and his slaves routinely destroy one another to be safe: they are forever plotting against his life, and he is forever shedding their blood and plundering them of their property.

He strikes at everything, because he fears everything.

I think it was the Emperor Justinian who said, "Though we are above the law, yet we live according to the law." With all respect to his Majesty, there was more polish than truth in the saying; for princes who think themselves above the law act almost constantly against all law — and Justinian himself is a famous case in point. Good princes never think themselves above it.

It is a heartbreaking observation that the power given for the protection of the world has, in so many places, been turned to its destruction.

"As if the law were in force for their destruction and not for their preservation — as if it had power to kill them but not to protect them: a thing no less horrid than if the sun should burn us without lighting us, or the earth serve only to bury us, and not to feed and nourish us,"

says Mr. Waller in one of his speeches in Parliament.

Despotic power has defaced creation and laid the world waste. In the finest countries of Asia, once full of people, you are now forced to travel by compass: there are no roads, no houses, no inhabitants. The sun is left to scorch up the grass and fruit it has raised, or the rain to rot them. The gifts of God are left to perish, for none of his creatures — neither man nor beast — remain to use and consume them. The Grand Seignior, the Ottoman sultan — who, if we may believe certain sanctified mouths not at all addicted to lying, is the vicegerent of heaven — frustrates the bounty of heaven; and, being the father of his people, has butchered nearly all of them. The comparatively few who have survived the miserable fate of their brethren are reserved as sacrifices to his cruelty, as occasion offers and his appetite prompts him. They live as the starving, wretched property of ravenous and bloody bashaws — his provincial governors — whose duty to their master, along with their own greed, obliges them to keep the people under them poor and miserable.

But neither bashaws nor armies could keep a people in such abject slavery if their priests and doctors had not made passive obedience a principle of their religion. The holy name of God is profaned, and his authority falsified, to fasten wretchedness upon his creatures and to protect the tyrant who does it. The most complete of all wickedness and the highest of all evils are sanctified by the teachers of religion, and made a part of it. Yes — Turkish slavery is confirmed, and Turkish tyranny defended, by religion!

Sir Paul Ricaut tells us that the Turks maintain "that the Grand Seignior can never be deposed or made accountable for his crimes, so long as he destroys fewer than a hundred of his subjects a day." It is counted martyrdom to die submissively by the hand of the tyrant, and some of his highest slaves have declared that they wanted only that honor to complete their happiness. They hold it their duty to submit even if their tyrant should "command a whole army of them to throw themselves from a rock, or to build a bridge with piles of their bodies for him to pass a river, or to kill one another to afford him pastime and pleasure."

Merciful God! Is this government? And do such governors govern by authority from thee?

What Monsieur de L'Estoille tells us is scarcely credible. He says he traveled in the Indies for more than twenty days together through lanes of people hanged upon trees by command of the king — who had ordered above a hundred thousand of them to be murdered and gibbeted this way, merely because two or three robberies had been committed among them.

It is one of the great evils of servitude that however severe the tyranny is, it is always flattered — and the more severe it is, the more it is flattered. The oppressors of mankind are flattered beyond all other men, because fear and servitude naturally produce flattery, and resort to it, as the best means of self-preservation; while liberty, having no need of it, scorns it. Sir Paul Ricaut ascribes the decay of the Ottoman Empire to the force of flattery, and calls the Turkish court a prison and a slave-pen.

Old Muley, the Lord's anointed of Morocco — who, it seems, is still alive — is thought to have butchered forty thousand of his subjects with his own hands. What a father of his people! And yet, his right to shed human blood being a genuine doctrine of the church of Morocco as by law established, the people are greedy to die by his hand, which, they are taught to imagine, dispatches them straight to paradise. Indeed — though I am told that every time he mounts his horse he slices off the head of the slave holding his stirrup, to show that he is as good an executioner as he is a horseman — there is a standing competition among his slaves over who shall be the happy martyr of the occasion; so that when several of them crowd to his stirrup at once for the gracious favor, his Majesty sometimes has the honor of cutting off two heads, and making two saints, with a single blow.

The exercise of despotic power is the unrelenting war of an armed tyrant upon his unarmed subjects. It is a war of one side only, and in it there is neither peace nor truce. Tacitus describes it: cruel and bloody orders, continual accusations, faithless friendships, and the destruction of innocents. In another place he says that

"Italy was one continual slaughterhouse, and most of its fair cities were defaced or overthrown. Rome itself was in many places laid in ashes, with the greatest part of its magnificent buildings. Virtue was despised, and barefaced debauchery prevailed. The solitary islands were filled with illustrious exiles, and the very rocks were stained with slaughter. But in the city itself cruelty raged still more fiercely: it was dangerous to be noble, a crime to be rich, capital to have held honors, and high treason to have refused them; and for virtue and merit there was sure and sudden destruction."

These were some of the ravages of absolute dominion! And as to the common people, the same author says they were debauched and dispirited, given up to idleness and to watching shows.

Oh, abject state of those who tamely groan
Under a blind dependency on one!

This is a sort of government too great and heavy a curse to wish even upon those who are foolish enough, or wicked enough, to argue for its lawfulness — or, what is the same thing, for submission to it. But surely, if ever any man deserved to feel the merciless grip of tyranny, it is the man who advocates for it. Phalaris, the tyrant of Agrigentum, acted justly when he broke in his brazen bull with the wretch who invented it.

Arbitrary power in a single person has made greater havoc in human nature, and thinned mankind more, than all the beasts of prey and all the plagues and earthquakes that ever were. Let those men consider what they have to answer for, who would countenance so monstrous an evil in the world, or would oppose those who oppose it. A bear, a lion, or a tiger may now and then pick off single men in a wood or a desert; an earthquake may sometimes bury a thousand or two inhabitants in the ruins of a town; and the pestilence may, once in many years, carry off a much greater number. But a tyrant will, out of a wanton personal passion, carry fire and sword through a whole continent, and deliver up a hundred thousand of his fellow creatures to the slaughter in one day — without remorse, and without further notice than that they died for his glory. I say nothing of the moral effects of tyranny, though it is certain that ignorance, vice, poverty, and vileness always attend it.

Whoever compares the world as it is now with what it once was — how populous then, how thin now — and considers the cause of this doleful alteration, will find just reason to fear that spiritual and temporal tyranny, if they go on much longer, will utterly extinguish the human race. Of Turkey I have spoken already. The great continent of America is almost unpeopled, the Spaniards having destroyed, it is thought, some forty million of its natives; and as for some kingdoms of Europe, especially toward the north, I do not believe they have half the inhabitants now that they had as recently as a hundred years ago.

Blessed be God, there are still some free countries in Europe that abound with people and with plenty — and England is the foremost. This demonstrates the inestimable blessing of liberty. Can we ever overrate it, or be too jealous of a treasure that includes in it almost every human happiness? Can we give too much encouragement to those who contend for it, and those who promote it? Liberty is the parent of virtue, pleasure, plenty, and security; and it is innocent as well as lovely. In every contest between liberty and power, power has almost always been the aggressor. Liberty, if it ever produces any evils, also cures them. Its worst effect, licentiousness, never does and never can last long. Anarchy cannot be of much duration; and where it is, it is the child and companion of tyranny — which is not government but the dissolution of it, as tyrants are the enemies of mankind.

Power is like fire: it warms, scorches, or destroys, according as it is watched, provoked, or increased. It is as dangerous as it is useful. Its only rule is the good of the people. But because it is apt to break its bounds, in all good governments nothing — or as little as possible — ought to be left to chance, or to the moods of men in authority. Everything should proceed by fixed and settled rules, and in any emergency new rules should be made. This is the constitution, and this the happiness, of Englishmen, as has been shown at large before in these letters.

We have a constitution that abhors absolute power; we have a king who does not desire it; and we are a people who will never suffer it. No free people will ever submit to it, unless it steals upon them by treachery or they are driven into it by violence. But a state can never be too secure against this terrible thing, this last of all human evils, which may be brought upon a people by many causes — even by some that at first sight seem to threaten nothing of the kind. And of all those causes, none is more ominous than a general distress, which certainly produces general discontent, the parent of revolutions; and where such a state of affairs may end, no man can ever foresee. Few revolutions are brought about without armies — a remedy almost always worse than the disease. What is got by soldiers must be maintained by soldiers; and we have already seen, in this paper, the frightful image of a military government — a government which, at its best, is violent and bloody, and eternally inconsistent with law and property.

It is therefore a dreadful wickedness to have any share in giving occasion for those discontents which are so apt to burst into rage and confusion. A state sometimes recovers from a convulsion and gains new vigor by it; but far more often it expires in it. Heaven preserve me from ever beholding contending armies in England! Armies are different things now from what they once were. Our armies were formerly nothing more than a number of the people, armed for the occasion; and armies of the people are the only armies that are not formidable to the people. That is why, in the many revolutions occasioned by the strife between the two royal houses of York and Lancaster, there was never any danger of slavery from an armed force. A single battle decided the contest; and the next day those popular soldiers went home and took up their ordinary arms — the tools of husbandry. But since that time, armies have not been so easily parted with. After the danger they were raised to meet was over, they have often been obstinately kept up, and by that means have created dangers just as great.

Some quacks in politics may venture public disturbances, in the belief that they will be able to prevent them by cunning or suppress them by force. But this shows their capacity as much as their wickedness. Not to mention the malignity of hearts that would risk public ruin to gratify a private appetite — how can any event be foreseen with certainty, when the measure of its cause cannot be certainly known? They can never gauge the degree of opposition; they cannot foreknow what circumstances may arise, or into whose hands things may fall. Cicero never dreamed, when he employed Octavius for the commonwealth, that his young champion of liberty would end as the tyrant of his country. Who could foresee that Cromwell would enslave the very people he was employed to defend? There is no trusting liberty in the hands of men who are obeyed by great armies.

From all this we may see what a fatal and crying crime it would be, in any free country, to break the confidence between the prince and his people. When loyalty is once turned into indifference, indifference will soon be turned into hatred; hatred will be repaid with hatred; resentment may produce tyranny, and rage may produce rebellion. There is no mischief that this mutual mistrust and aversion may not bring forth. The blackest traitors, therefore, are those who are the first authors of so terrible an evil — and so are those who would endeavor to protect them.

Henry III of Castile said that he feared the curses of his people more than he did the arms of his enemies. In that saying he showed as much wisdom as humanity: for while he was loved at home, he had nothing to fear from abroad, and the curses of his subjects were the likeliest means of bringing the arms of his enemies upon him.

I am, etc.

G
