Letter 31: The Weakness and Inconsistencies of Human Nature

Sir,

The study of human nature has been a principal pleasure and occupation of mine ever since I was capable of studying anything — a study as useful as its discoveries are, for the most part, melancholy. It cannot help but gall a good-natured man to find that there is nothing so terrible or destructive that human nature is not capable of it. And yet a man who knows little of human nature will never know much about the affairs of the world, which everywhere take their motion and their direction from the moods and passions of men.

It shows how violently human nature bends toward evil that even the Christian religion has not been able to tame the restless appetites of men — appetites forever pushing them into outrages and violence, in direct opposition to the spirit and plain declarations of the gospel, which commands us to do unto all men what we would have all men do unto us. The general practice of the world is an open contradiction of this excellent, this divine rule, and an open contempt for it — a rule which alone, if it were only observed, would restore honesty and happiness to mankind. Instead, in their present state of corruption, men are forever dealing treacherously or brutally with one another, out of a badly judged fondness for themselves.

Worse still: the peaceable, the generous, the forgiving Christian religion is made the cause of perpetual hatred, feuding, quarrels, violence, devastation, and oppression. The apostles — for all their poverty, their selflessness, their love of mankind — are made to justify their pretended successors in the Church of Rome, in grabbing for themselves the wealth and power of the earth, and in bringing mankind under a yoke of servitude more terrible, more expensive, and more severe than anything all the arts and delusions of paganism could ever impose. So much more force do the destructive villainies and forgeries of men carry with a corrupt world than the benevolent and heavenly precepts of Jesus Christ.

The truth — and it is a melancholy truth — is that where human laws do not tie men's hands from wickedness, religion too seldom does; and the most certain security we have against violence is the security of the laws. That is why the making of laws presumes all men to be naturally wicked; and the surest mark of virtue is obedience to laws that are virtuous. If we want to find virtue in a nation, then, we must look for it in the nature of its government. The name and model of its religion is no sure symptom of its virtue, and no sure cause of it either. The Italians profess the Christian religion, and the Turks are all infidels: are the Italians therefore more virtuous than the Turks? Nobody, I think, will say that they are — at least not those Italians who live under absolute princes. On the contrary, it is certain that the subjects of the Great Turk are no more miserable than the subjects of the Pope; and they are no more wicked either.

Of all the passions belonging to human nature, self-love is the strongest, and the root of all the rest — or rather, the different passions are only different names for the several operations of self-love. Self-love, says the Duke de La Rochefoucauld — the great French maxim-maker — is the love of one's self, and of everything else for one's own sake. It makes a man the idolater of himself and the tyrant of others. Man, he observes, is a mixture of contradictions: imperious and pliant, sincere and false, fearful and bold, merciful and cruel. He can sacrifice every pleasure to the getting of riches, and all his riches to a single pleasure. He is devoted to his own preservation, yet sometimes eager for his own destruction. He can flatter the men he hates, and destroy the men he loves.

This is a picture of mankind; and those who call it a false one ought to show that they deserve a better. I have sometimes thought it scarcely possible to assert anything about mankind — however good, or however evil — that will not prove true. They are naturally innocent, yet fall naturally into the practice of vice. The greatest instances of virtue and villainy are found in one and the same person; and perhaps one and the same motive produces both. The keeping or breaking of a few frivolous customs will unite men in strict friendship and alliance, or set them cutting one another's throats.

Men never regard one another simply as men and rational beings, on the footing of their common humanity; they are bonded or divided by the force of words and habits. Considerations that are a disgrace to reason! Not being born in the same climate, or on this side of a certain river or a certain mountain; not wearing the same kind of clothes, or making the same sounds, or holding the same thoughts and tastes — these are all so many causes of intense hatred, and sometimes of mortal war. Whatever men think or do, especially once they have found a good name for it, is wisest and best in their own eyes, however foolish or bad it may be. Nor is that all: we insist on plaguing our neighbors if they will not give up, on our bare authority, their own thoughts and practices in favor of ours.

It fills me with concern to consider how men use one another, and how wretchedly their passions are employed. They hardly ever find proper objects for their passions. They will hate a man for what he cannot help and what does them no harm, yet bless and pray for villains who kill and oppress them. There never was so dreadful a tribunal under the sun as the Inquisition — a tribunal against which the most innocent man is not safe, and to which the most virtuous men are the most exposed; a tribunal where all the malice, all the calculating cruelty, all the bitterness, and all the fury and falsehood of devils are exercised, and all the tortures of hell are imitated and practiced. Yet this very tribunal is so dear to the people — though it terrifies them, enslaves them, and destroys them — that rather than part with it, they would part with everything else they have left. When Barcelona surrendered in the last war, the inhabitants made it a condition of their capitulation that the Inquisition should not be taken from them. And even here in England, we can remember a time when men were knocked down for saying that they had a right to defend their property by force when a tyrant tried to rob them of it against law. To such a pitch of stupidity and derangement can people be brought by those who lie about Almighty God, and falsify his word to feed worldly pride; such dupes, and such furies, are men to one another!

Everything is so perverted and abused — and the best things most of all — that a very wise man had only too much reason to say that truth does not do as much good in the world as the appearance and pretense of it does evil. Thus the saving of men's souls is so universally understood to be a great and glorious blessing that, for the sake of it, men have suffered, and still suffer, the deepest misery and bondage from the impostors who pretend to bestow it — in the dark parts of the world, which are by far the greatest parts of the world. Thus civil government is the defense and security of human society; yet Dr. Prideaux makes it a real question whether the benefit the world receives from government is enough to make amends for the calamities it suffers from the follies, mistakes, and misgovernment of those who manage it. And thus, to come home to ourselves: a scheme to pay off the nation's debts was so tempting, so popular, and so plausible, that almost everybody came into it — and the consequences speak for themselves.

The Roman senate could flatter and adore a Nero and a Caligula; the Roman soldiers could butcher a Piso and a Pertinax, virtuous men both. It is hard to say which was the guiltier: the senate while it worshipped tyranny, or the army while it destroyed virtue. So ready are men to spread public destruction for personal advantage and security! I can never think without horror and trembling of that dismal, that bloody maxim of Philip II of Spain: that he would rather be master of a kingdom ruined, miserable, and quiet, than of a kingdom rich, powerful, and turbulent. In pursuit of this maxim he made his kingdom a desert, by destroying and expelling the most industrious of its inhabitants, the Moors. But Philip was very devout, and would frequently wash a pilgrim's feet — that is, he was very civil and charitable to an idle religious drifter, and a cruel enemy to the general happiness of mankind.

This puts me in mind of the history of John Basilovitz — Ivan the Terrible — Grand Duke of Muscovy:

"No history of his time fails to speak of the unheard-of cruelties he exercised on all sorts of persons through his whole reign. They are so horrid that no tyrant ever did the like; and yet Bishop Paulus Jovius gives him the character of a good and devout Christian, though he does not deserve to be numbered even among men. It is true, he would often go to church, say the service himself, sing, attend the ceremonies of the church, and perform the functions of the monks; but he abused both God and man, and had no sentiments of humanity." — The Travels of the Ambassadors, pp. 73–74.

What a medley is here — devotion and cruelty in the same men! Nor are these examples unusual. Louis XI of France was a false, a wicked, and an oppressive prince, and one of the greatest bigots that ever lived; and some of the greatest saints in the Roman calendar were pernicious villains and bloody monsters. No sect of bigots, once they are on top, is willing to tolerate another; and all of them ground their ungodly severity on their zeal for religion — though their lack of charity is proof positive that they have no religion. It is certain that without universal charity and forbearance, a man cannot be a Christian.

It is astonishing, and affecting, to see how thoroughly the ideas of good and evil are confounded! The Turks place great devotion in releasing captive birds from their cages, in feeding hungry and mangy dogs and building hospitals for them, and in paying a religious reverence to camels. But at the same time that they treat birds and beasts like men and Christians, they treat men and Christians worse than they treat beasts. With them it is a lighter offense to deny bread to a poor Christian starving in his chains than to the dogs of the street, which are fit for nothing but breeding infection. They will load a poor Christian with irons and cover him with lashes, and think they do well and religiously in it — yet make it a matter of conscience not to overload a beast of burden.

In popish countries, wherever nature is left to itself, as much compassion is shown for the distressed as anywhere else. Even thieves, robbers, and murderers are accompanied to the gallows or the wheel with sighs and tears, especially from the tender sex. But when some unhappy innocent is going to be burned — cruelly and slowly burned — for his sincerity and piety, for speaking truth and reading the Bible himself or teaching it to others, nothing is to be seen but general joy, and nothing to be heard but loud cries of approval and consent; and all piety, all sympathy, is refused in the one case that calls for it most. Tell a Spanish lady of a popish priest hanged in England for sedition or murder, and she instantly falls into tears and agonies. Tell her of a kinsman of hers burned for denying transubstantiation, and she gives glory to God and feels a sensible joy.

And in Protestant countries, how many men are there who cheat, starve, and oppress others their whole lives long, in order to leave an estate at their death to religious uses — as if men were to be rogues for God's sake! I have heard of a man who, having given half his estate to mend highways for the good of his country, said he would gladly give the other half if England had never a ship, nor a merchant, nor a dissenter from the Church belonging to it. Strange inconsistency! By one act of his, two or three miles of causeway were kept in good repair — which was only a kindness to horses' hoofs. By another act of his, he would have made all England miserable and desolate.

The hardships and distresses of this year show all too plainly the rogueries and depredations of the last. Villainy was let loose among us, and every man tried to entrap and ruin his neighbor in order to enrich himself. Honesty was browbeaten and driven into corners; humanity was extinguished; all friendship was abolished; even the distinction of kindred and the ties of blood were thrown aside. A raging passion for immoderate gain had made men universally and intensely hard-hearted; they were everywhere devouring one another. And yet the directors and their accomplices, the acting instruments of all this outrageous madness and mischief, set up for wonderfully pious persons even while they were defying Almighty God and plundering men — and they set apart a fund of subscriptions for charitable uses. That is to say: they mercilessly made a whole people beggars, and charitably supported a few needy and worthless favorites. I do not doubt that if the villainy had gone on with success, their names would have been handed down to posterity with praise, as the names of other public robbers have been. We have historians and ode-makers now living who are very fit for such a task. It is certain that most people did, at one time, believe the directors to be great and worthy persons; and an honest country clergyman told me last summer, on the road, that Sir John was an excellent public-spirited person — for he had beautified his chancel.

On the whole, we must not judge one another by our fair pretensions and our best actions, since the worst men do some good, and all men make fine professions. We must judge men by the whole of their conduct, and by its effects. Thorough honesty requires great and long proof, since many a man long thought honest has at length proved a knave. And it is from judging without proof — or on too little proof, or on false proof — that mankind continues unhappy.

I am, etc.

G
