Letter 45: Of the Equality and Inequality of Men

Sir,

Men are naturally equal, and no one ever rose above the rest except by force or by consent. No man was ever born above all the rest, and none below them all; and so there has never been a man in the world so good or so bad, so high or so low, that he had no equal somewhere. Nature is a kind and generous parent. She plays no favorites; she hands out no special endowments or privileges to a chosen few. She sends nearly all her children into the world equipped with the basic tools of understanding and strength, and tells them to provide for themselves. She gives them heads to plan their own security and hands to carry out their own plans; and depending on how they use those faculties, and what opportunities they find, degrees of power and titles of distinction grow up among them — and their natural equality is lost.

That is how nature, their parent, deals with men. But fortune, their nurse, is not so kind or so even-handed. She acts on whim and caprice, and often cruelly; and working against justice as well as against nature, she regularly sets the fool above the wise man, and the best people below the worst.

This is why most of the world gets the whole subject wrong. People pay far more attention to fortune's noisy conduct and flashy results than to nature's quiet, regular workings; they confuse fortune with nature, and credit to natural merit and excellence what is really the work of scheming or of chance. Even that mistake, though, shows that reason and fairness are running in our heads: we are trying to find a just cause for things that are not just. And this is the source of the reverence we pay to men whom fortune has lifted high, though nature placed them low. The public rarely watches anyone rise without finding a reason for it in his talents — when the true reason will probably be found in his own baseness, or in another man's folly.

The same reasoning explains why whoever happens to lead a party is always praised by that party as superior to the rest of mankind, and why whoever happens to be the first man in his country will never lack flatterers calling him the first of his species. But events, and their own behavior, prove over and over that the highest are on a level with the rest, and often with the lowest. Men in high places are almost always seen in a false light. Most people view them from a great distance, and through a magnifying lens; some are dazzled by their splendor, many are cowed by their power. Whatever looks shining or terrifying looks great, and the eye and the imagination enlarge it further.

That nature has made men equal, we know and we feel; and once people start believing otherwise, there is no excess of folly and superstition they cannot be led into. This is how men have turned dead men into gods, and paid divine honors to others while they were still alive: they could see they were only men, and they worshipped them as gods anyway. And even those who never went quite that far have done just as much damage with their wild notions of inequality. They have made men — often wicked men — into deputy gods; and then they made this so-called power of God as irresistible in human hands as in his own, and far more frightening.

It is evident to common sense that there ought to be no inequality in society except for the sake of society. But these men have made one man's power and will the cause of every man's misery. They gave him, as far as they could, the power of God, without obliging him to practice the mercy and goodness of God.

Those who think themselves furthest above the rest are generally, thanks to their upbringing, below them all. They are ruined by their own conceit of greatness. They trust to their blood — which, naturally speaking, gives them no advantage at all — and neglect their minds, which alone, properly improved, set one man above another. It is not blood or nature but skill or accident that makes one man excel others. So Aristotle must either have been joking when he said that the man who naturally excels all others ought to govern them all, or he said it to flatter his pupil and prince, Alexander the Great. One thing is certain: no such man has ever yet been found in the world, and none will be found before the end of it. Alexander himself, for all the greatness of his spirit and his conquests, had men in his own army — perhaps among the common soldiers — naturally as great and as brave as he was, and many far wiser.

Whoever claims to be naturally superior to other men is claiming from nature what she never gave to any man. He is setting up as something more than a man — a role nature has nothing to do with. She has thrown her gifts into the common pool; and just as nature's highest functions fall to the humble as well as the great, her lowest functions are performed by the great as well as the humble. Death and disease are the portion of kings as much as of peasants; and the corpse of a monarch is no more exempt from stench and rot than the corpse of a slave.

Death knocks with the same foot at every door, as Horace says.

All the arts and contrivances men use to gain pre-eminence and advantage over one another are so many proofs — confessions, really — that they do not have that pre-eminence and advantage from nature. All their pomp, titles, and wealth are devices to make the world believe that the people who possess them are superior in merit to the people who lack them. But it is no great glory to the upper ranks of mankind that their boasted superior merit is so often the work of heralds, craftsmen, and money; or that many of them draw their entire stock of fame from ancestors who lived an age, or many ages, ago.

The founders of great families were not always men of virtue or ability; and even where they were, those who came after them, trusting to their blood, have frequently — almost invariably — disgraced the name. Such is the folly of the world, and the defect of society, that we let men be great by proxy: an evil that can scarcely ever be cured. The line of French kings their own historians contemptuously call les rois fainéants, the do-nothing kings, and the succession of the Roman Caesars — in both of which, for every one good prince, there were ten who were intolerable for folly or cruelty, and often for both — stand as familiar proofs of this truth; and every reader will find plenty more in his own memory.

I have been told of a prince who, while still a boy, whenever his tutor scolded him for doing something wrong or indecent, used to answer: Je suis roy — "I am King" — as if his rank had changed the nature of things, and he himself had become better than other men while behaving worse than they did. But he was only speaking from the spirit that had been poured into him from the cradle. I am King! What of it, Sir? The office of a king is not to do evil, but to prevent it. You have royal blood in your veins — but the blood of your page, without being royal, is every bit as good as yours. If you doubt it, have both drawn into a couple of bowls next time you are ill, and try to tell the difference; and learn from that little experiment that by nature you are no better than your people, though your fortune makes you liable to be worse, as many of your ancestors were.

If my father won an estate and a title by law or by the sword, then by his will or his patent I may enjoy what he acquired. But if I understand neither law nor the sword, I can derive no honor from either. My honor, in the reason of things, is purely nominal; and I am still by nature a plebeian, as all men are.

There is nothing moral in blood, or in title, or in position. Actions alone, and the causes that produce them, are moral. He is best, therefore, who does best. Noble blood prevents neither folly, nor lunacy, nor crime — in fact it frequently breeds or encourages them; and noblemen who act infamously derive no honor from the virtuous ancestors they dishonor. A man who does base things is not noble, nor great if he does small ones. A sober villager is a better man than a debauched lord; an honest mechanic is a better man than a crooked courtier.

Virtue is the one and only nobility, says Juvenal. Do you want to be counted upright, and to hold fast to justice in deed and word? Then first show me the goodness of your mind.

We cannot bring more natural advantages into the world than other men do; but we can acquire more virtue in it than we generally bother to acquire. To be great is not in every man's power; but to be good is in the power of all. In this, every man can stand on a level with every other, the lowest with the highest — and men might thus come to be morally, as well as naturally, equal.

I am, etc.

G
