Letter 63: Civil Liberty Produces All Civil Blessings

Sir,

I continue my reflections on liberty, to show that every civil virtue and every civil happiness — all moral excellence, all refinement, all the good arts and sciences — are the products of liberty; and that all wickedness, baseness, and misery are the immediate and necessary products of tyranny. Tyranny is founded on the destruction of everything valuable, desirable, and noble; so it must live by means that suit its nature, and remain at everlasting war with all goodness and every human blessing.

Establish liberty, and you establish and secure a fair distribution of property and an equal distribution of justice. As plunder is the child of oppression, justice is the offspring of liberty, and her handmaid: the guardian of innocence and the terror of vice. When fame, honor, and advantage are the rewards of virtue, virtue will be courted for the dowry she brings. Otherwise, like beauty without wealth, she may be praised, but will more probably be slandered, envied, and very often persecuted; while vice, when it pays, will be admired and pursued, like rich deformity and prosperous folly. Where virtue is all its own reward, she will rarely be thought any reward at all; few will pay a great price for what sells for nothing. So virtue, to be followed, must be endowed, and her credit is best secured by her interest — she must be strengthened and recommended by the public laws, and dressed in public encouragements, or she will be slighted and shunned.

Now the laws that encourage and increase virtue are the fixed laws of general and impartial liberty — laws which, being the rule of every man's actions and the measure of every man's power, make honesty and fairness everyone's interest. Where liberty is thoroughly established and its laws equally enforced, every man will find his profit in doing as he would be done by, and no man will take from another what he would not give up himself. Honor and advantage will follow the upright; punishment will overtake the oppressor. The property of the poor will be as sacred as the privileges of the prince, and the law will be the only bulwark of both. Every man's honest industry and useful talents, while they are employed for the public, will be employed for himself; and while he serves himself, he will serve the public. Public and private interest will secure each other; all will cheerfully give up a part to secure the whole, and be brave in defending it.

These certain laws, then, are the only certain beginnings and causes of honesty and virtue among men. There may be other motives, I admit; but they sway only particular men — few enough, God knows — and universal experience has shown us that they do not generally prevail, and can never be depended on. These laws can be produced by liberty alone, and only by such laws can liberty be secured and increased. And to make laws certainly good, they must be made by mutual agreement, and aim at the general interest.

But tyranny must stand on force; and since the laws of tyranny are nothing but the fickle will and unsteady appetite of one man — which may change by the hour — there can be no settled rule of right and wrong in the shifting moods and sudden passions of a tyrant. He may sometimes punish crimes, though more out of rage than justice; but he is far more likely to persecute and oppress the innocent, and to destroy thousands cruelly for every one he protects justly. History shows us princes who, falling out with a favorite, put to death everyone who spoke well of him — and afterwards everyone who did not. Princes who executed some of their ministers for mistreating one or two of their barbers and buffoons, and executed others of their ministers for treating a whole country well. Princes who destroyed a whole people for the crimes or the virtues of one man; who, having killed a favorite in a fit of passion, then — to revenge themselves on people who had never provoked them — destroyed in the same senseless fury a hundred servants who had no hand in it, along with all who did; and these last would themselves have been destroyed had they refused. Princes who destroyed millions in a single mad project or expedition. Princes who handed over cities and provinces to the revenge or greed of some vile mistress or eunuch, to be plundered, massacred, or burned as he or she saw fit to direct. Princes who, to gratify the ambition and plunder of a few sorry servants, lost the hearts of their whole people, and cut themselves off from their good subjects in order to protect those men in their crimes — men whose only service to them had been destroying their reputation and shaking their throne.

Such are arbitrary princes, whose laws are nothing but sudden fury, or lasting folly and wickedness in ever-changing shapes. Fine rules these, for governing mankind and making them happy! Rules that are no rules, since they cannot be depended on for a moment, and generally change for the worse — if worse is possible. A subject worth twenty thousand pounds today may, by a sudden edict issued from the dark counsel of a traitor, be a beggar tomorrow, and lose his life without ever having forfeited it. The property of a whole kingdom shall be great, or small, or nothing, at the mercy of a secretary's pen — a pen guided by a child, or a dotard, or a foolish woman, or a favorite buffoon, or a gambler, or whoever happens to be on top that day. The next day will overturn yesterday's whole scheme, though not for the better; and the same men, in different moods, will be the authors of both. So in arbitrary countries, a law two days old is an old law; and no law is allowed to stand except those found by long experience to be so thoroughly bad, so completely destructive, that human malice and all the arts of a tyrant's court cannot make them worse — a court that never stops squeezing, killing, and oppressing until it has wound human misery up so high that it can go no higher. This is such plain fact that I appeal to all history and all travel writing, and to everyone who reads them: in arbitrary countries, in Europe and out of it, do the people not grow thinner every day, and their misery greater? And are countries not peopled and rich in exact proportion to the liberty they enjoy and allow?

It has long been my opinion, and grows on me more and more, that in enslaved countries the people must either throw off their cruel and destroying government and set up another in its place, or within a few ages the human race there will be extinct. Indeed, if free states had not repaired and prevented, in many places, the havoc done by tyrants, the earth would long since have been a desert — as the finest countries in it are at this day, by exactly that means. The gardens of the world, the fruitful and lovely countries of lower Asia, once filled by liberty with people, refinement, and plenty, are now gloriously peopled with owls and grasshoppers — and perhaps, here and there at vast distances, with inhabitants no more valuable and even less happy: a few dirty huts of slaves groaning, starving, and perishing under the fatherly protection of the Sultan, a prince of the most orthodox stamp.

The laws of tyrants, therefore, are not laws at all, but wild acts of will, counseled by rage or folly and executed by dragoons. And since these laws are evil, every sort of evil must combine to support them. While the people have any common sense left, they will easily see whether they are justly governed and well or ill used; whether they are protected or plundered. They will know that no man ought to direct the affairs of all without their consent; that no consent can give him unlimited power over their bodies and minds; and that the laws of nature can never be entirely repealed by man-made laws — that, on the contrary, entering society and submitting to government means parting with natural liberty in some instances only in order to be protected in the enjoyment of it in others.

So for any man to hold arbitrary power, he must hold it without consent; or if it was rashly given at first, those who gave it soon repent when they feel its effects. In truth, every prince who holds such power, by keeping up great armies in time of peace, effectively confesses that he rules without consent and dreads his own people — whose worst enemy he undoubtedly is. An arbitrary prince, then, must preserve and exercise his power by force and terror; and even that will not do without calling in the auxiliary aids and faithful allies of tyranny: imposture and constant oppression. Let his people be ever so low and miserable — if they are not also blind, he is not safe. He must keep established deceivers to mislead them with lies, and to terrify them with the wrath of God if they stir hand or foot — or so much as a thought — to mend their miserable condition; as if the good God were the sanctifier of every villainy, the patron of the worst of all villains! He must keep a band of standing cut-throats to murder every man who would sacrilegiously defend what is his own. And both his cut-throats and his deceivers must go shares with him in his tyranny.

Men will naturally see their interest and feel their condition. They will quickly find that the sword, the rack, and the sponge are not government, but the height of cruelty and robbery; and they will never submit to them except under the united powers of violence and delusion. Their bodies must be chained and their minds enchanted and deceived; the sword must hang constantly over their heads, and their spirits be kept low with poverty, before they can be brought to serve the wanton and brutish pleasure of the most dignified and lofty oppressor. So God must be slandered, his creatures must be fettered, frightened, deceived, and starved, and mankind made base and ruined — all so that one of the worst of them may live riotously and safely among his whores, butchers, and buffoons.

Men, therefore, must cease to be men, and sink by stupidity and tameness into cattle, before they can become quiet subjects to such a government — a government which is a compound of all the villainy, falsehood, oppression, cruelty, and plunder on the face of the earth. And there cannot be a more provoking, impudent, shocking, and blasphemous claim than to assert that this whole assembly of horrors, or the author of them, is of God's appointment.

If such kings are by God appointed, Satan may be the Lord's anointed.

And whoever spreads such doctrine ought, by all the laws of God, reason, and self-preservation, to be put to death as a general poisoner and an advocate for public destruction.

All men admit that it is a prince's duty to protect his people; and some have said that it is the people's duty to obey him while he butchers them. An admirable conclusion, full of sweet consolation! His whole business and office is to defend them and do them good — therefore they are bound to let him destroy them. Was there ever such impudence in an enlightened country? It suits perfectly the doctrines and followers of Mahomet: but shall Englishmen, who make their own laws, be told that they have no right to the common air, to the life and fortune God has given them, except by permission of an officer of their own making — an officer who is what he is only for their sake and security, and who has no more right to these blessings, or to do evil, than any one of them? And shall we be told this by men who are eternally the first to violate their own doctrines? Shall such men, after this, have the face to teach us any doctrine, or to recommend to us any single virtue, when they have thus given up all virtue and truth, and every blessing that life affords? For there is no evil, misery, or wickedness that arbitrary monarchies do not produce, and must produce; nor do they, nor can they, produce any certain, general, or widespread good.

I showed in my last letter that an arbitrary prince cannot protect his people even if he wants to; I add here that he dares not. It would disgust the instruments of his power and the sharers in his oppression, who consider the people's property the perquisites of their office, and who claim the privilege of being little tyrants as payment for making him a great one. Every kindness to his subjects becomes a grievance to his servants; and he must push his tyranny to its full height for their sakes, or they will do it for him. The instances are rare, if there are any at all, of an absolute monarch protecting his people in earnest against the depredations of his ministers and soldiers without its costing him his life — Roman history supplies many examples. For this the emperor Pertinax was murdered; so was Galba.

Machiavelli has told us that it is impossible for such a prince to please both the people and his soldiers: the one will not be satisfied without protection, nor the other without plunder. To satisfy the people, he must give up his power; to satisfy his soldiers, he must give up his people. So to remain what he is, and to protect himself from the violence of his own followers, he must countenance all their villainies and oppressions, and be himself no more than an imperial thief at the head of a band of thieves — a character for which he is generally well qualified by the base and cruel maxims of that kind of power, and by the vile education almost always given to such a prince by the worst and most infamous of all men, his supple and lying sycophants.

Even the Christian religion can do little or no good in lands of tyranny, now that miracles have ceased; instead it is made to do infinite harm, corrupted and perverted into a deadly engine in the hands of a tyrant and his impostors, used to rivet his subjects' chains and to confirm them as thorough wretches, slaves, and ignorants. Indeed, I cannot say that such countries have the Christian religion among them at all; they only use its lovely name to countenance abominable falsehoods, nonsense, and heavy oppression, and to defend a furious and implacable bigotry — which is the direct character and spirit of Mahometanism, and destroys the very genius and first principles of Christianity. All this will be shown further hereafter. I shall conclude with observing that arbitrary monarchy is a constant war upon heaven and earth — against the souls, as well as the bodies and properties, of men.

G
