Letter 138: Cato's Farewell

Sir,

For nearly four years, under this title and one other, I have carried on a weekly paper with a success no writer has yet matched — if the number of my readers and the sale of these pages are any measure. And in doing it I could have had no possible object but the good of my country and of mankind. I set out to show them the advantage and the beauty of civil and religious liberty, and the ugly deformity of priestcraft and tyranny. I have defended Almighty God, and the religion he taught us, against the superstition, folly, and wickedness of men who would prostitute that religion to their own ambition and greed, and build a visionary empire on the plain and simple precepts of Christianity. I have tried to clear away all the rubbish, grimace, and pageantry under which religion has so long been smothered and oppressed, by showing the world — and, I think, proving — that true piety consists in nothing but honoring God and doing good to men; not in postures, bowings, and cant, and not in barren and useless speculation. And I think I have shown, beyond any answer yet given, that civil governments were instituted by men, and for the sake of men, and not for the pride and lust of governors; that men therefore have a right to expect protection and liberty from their governments, and a right to oppose robbery and tyranny wherever they are practiced; and in showing this I have vindicated our present establishment, which can pretend to no other title.

I have done all this in the open, in the face of the world. I have defied the merciless and detestable advocates of superstition and slavery, and called on them to show that I have broken any rule of morality or religion, or harmed the peace and happiness of society in any respect; and not one of them has yet dared to enter the lists against me. From this I may reasonably hope that I have cleared away many of the prejudices planted by education and custom, and set many of my countrymen free from the wild, wicked, and servile notions that craft and delusion had worked deep into their minds. And so I now lay down this paper with cheerfulness. I am reliably informed it will be carried on by an able hand, under another name and on various subjects; and it is likely enough that I will join in the undertaking so far as to lend my help now and then, when the occasion calls for it. At the least, I have not resolved not to.

Some of these papers — especially those signed Diogenes — have given unintended offence to men whose persons I honor and whose opinions I revere. I care nothing for the persons or the narrow notions of bigots, who will renounce any opinion the moment it turns out to be rational, and would rather make nonsense of a thing than fail to make a mystery of it. It has become a constitutional principle with me that God gave us our understandings in order to use them, and that we cannot offend him by carrying them as far as they will carry us. But the main question handled in those papers is a matter of pure speculation, understood by few and capable of being understood only by few. Believing it or disbelieving it cannot touch human society one way or the other. True or false, the actions of men will be the same: they will be moved by the motives that work upon them, and will pursue whatever they take to be their advantage on the whole, at the time and in the circumstances they are then in — whether they are compelled to that choice, or make it freely without being compelled.

What led me into that line of thought was an observation that runs through almost the whole world: that the bulk of mankind, in every age and every country, cling violently to the opinions, customs, and even the habits they have been used to; that sounds, shows, prejudices, vain and idle terrors, phantoms, delusions — sometimes even diet and medicine — sway them more, and work harder on them, than true and strong reasons ever do; and that all animals of the same species act in the same manner, and have the same passions, sensations, and affections, with very little variation. I could account for none of this except by supposing these operations to be mechanical: the results of each creature's constitution, as habit alters and shapes it, and as different occasions and motives set it to work.

For the rest, I saw with real concern the mischief that the leaders and deceivers of religious parties and factions do to the world — hurling God's judgments at one another; impiously fencing off his providence and his mercies for themselves alone; claiming the common events of nature as favors to their own side, and reading the very same events as declarations of his wrath against their enemies. By that unholy presumption they have raised and inflamed implacable hatred, animosity, and uncharitableness among men of the same nation, who are all brothers. I have therefore shown that the Almighty dispenses his favors to all his creatures; that his sun shines on the just and the unjust alike; and that it is the highest and most daring insolence for any sort of men to pry into the secret dispensations of his providence and pretend to unriddle them — to know his mind before he unfolds it, to throw such firebrands of contention and wrath about the world, and to make the condition of men, already miserable enough by the lot of nature, more miserable still.

I saw the evils and the barbarous consequences that flow from the idle, foolish stories of witches, spirits, and apparitions — first poured into our tender minds by nurses, chambermaids, and old women, and afterwards continued and improved upon by tutors and priests. The wisest and bravest men often carry those impressions with them to their graves, and are never easy until they get there. Whole numbers of people dare not be alone, or go about their necessary business after dark, but live in constant dread of phantoms and non-entities; and multitudes of innocents have been murdered, under the appearance of justice, as Satan's confederates. I have therefore shown that these fairy tales have no foundation in nature, in reason, or in religion; that they are inconsistent with the mercies, and even with the very being, of the great and good God; and that to tell or believe them is to hand the Devil an empire at the Almighty's expense.

It is certain that the capacities of men would carry them much further than they are allowed to go, if they were not cramped by custom, by narrow education, and by narrow principles taken from the very men who design and draw advantage from their ignorance. I have grieved to see men of large and extensive genius — men who seemed made by nature to carry human knowledge many degrees beyond where it has yet gone, and to free their country and mankind from the servile, wicked notions drilled into them by prating pedants and babbling impostors — I say, I have grieved to see such capacities spent entirely on whims, idle speculations, empty notions, fairy-dreams, and party distinctions; all of it tending to shrink and embitter the mind, to stifle and oppress the faculties, and to turn men into the dupes and machines of ambitious, proud, and greedy churchmen, or of corrupt statesmen. Nor can I see how this great evil will ever be cured until we change the education of our youth: let gentlemen be bred by gentlemen, and not by monks and pedants. Let the pedants dream on, by all means, with their bellies full of college ale and their heads full of college distinctions; but they ought not to be trusted with the education of our nobility and gentry until they have some of their own.

And now let me repeat, once more, that I could not possibly have taken up this undertaking — so troublesome to myself, and, I hope, of some benefit to my countrymen — with any view to my own personal advantage. I hope no one thinks so meanly of my understanding as to believe I meant to win favor with any of the powers of this world by attacking vice, corruption, and folly wherever and in whomever I found them. I knew what I was walking into. I knew I would have to walk over burning ploughshares; that I must provoke numerous and powerful societies and parties; that I must disturb nests of hornets, and sometimes venture too near the lion's den — sometimes within reach of Jove's own thunder. I knew that men in possession of reverence would not bear being told they did not deserve it; that those who rioted in power, and fattened on the public's misfortune, would hear very unwillingly that their power was a trust held for the public's advantage and not their own; that every motive of honor, virtue, and religion obliged them to serve and protect the people out of whose industry and wealth they were so richly rewarded; and that they deserved the severest punishment if they did otherwise. I had all this before my eyes. But armed with innocence, and animated by love of God and mankind, I resolved to brave the danger, in defiance of the worst that could happen to me, in the service of my country — and I have braved it. I now have the pleasure of seeing great numbers of my fellow subjects approve my endeavors and embrace my opinions. And so I here lay down this paper, and with it the most virtuous and noble subject that can employ the human soul: the subject of religion and government.

I am, etc.

T and G
