Front Matter

Introduction

Two things are expected of a lecturer who undertakes a course of Christmas lectures at the Royal Institution. In the first place his discourses must be illustrated to the utmost extent by experiments. In the second, however simple the language in which 'scientific facts and principles are described, every discourse must sound at least some note of modernity, must reflect some wave of recent progress in science.

So in undertaking a course of lectures in Optics the lecturer in the present instance ventured to proceed on certain lines which may, perhaps, seem strange to the sedate student whose knowledge of optics has been acquired on the narrower basis of the orthodox textbook. The ideas developed in the first lecture arose from the conviction that the time-honoured method of teaching geometrical optics — a method in which the wave -nature of light is steadily ignored — is fundamentally wrong. For the sake of students and teachers of optics he has added to Lecture I. an Appendix, in which the newer ideas are further developed. Other Appendices have been added to the later Lectures, with the aim of filling up some of the gaps left in the subjects as treated in the lecture theatre.

Now that the electromagnetic nature of all lightwaves has been fully demonstrated, no apology is needed for bringing into the fifth Lecture a few of the experimental points upon which that demonstration rests. That these fundamental points can be given without any great complication of either thought or language is in itself the strongest argument for making that demonstration an essential feature at an early stage in the teaching of the science.

Many of the ideas which must be grasped, for example that of the polarisation of light, are popularly supposed to be extremely difficult ; whereas the difficulty lies not in the ideas themselves so much as in the language in which they are generally set forth. In an experience lasting over a good many years, the author has found that the main points in the phenomena of polarisation are quite easily grasped by persons of ordinary intelligence — even by children — provided they are presented in a modern way devoid of pedantic terms, and illustrated by appropriate models. A similar remark would equally apply to other parts of optics, such as interference and diffraction, which are barely alluded to in the present lectures. Many branches are necessarily omitted altogether from so brief a course : amongst them the entire subject of spectrum analysis, the construction and theory of optical instruments, and the greater part of the subject of colour vision. No attempt was made to include these topics, and no apology is needed for their omission. Whatever value these discourses may possess must depend upon the things they include, not upon those which they do not.

LONDON, January 1897.
