How light-waves travel — Experiments with the ripple-tank — How shadows are cast — How to make light -waves converge and diverge — Measurement of brightness of lights — Reflexion of light by mirrors — Formation of images — Regular and irregular reflexion — Diffuse reflexion by paper and rough surfaces — Multiple images — Refraction of light — Lenses — The eye as an optical instrument — Some curious optical experiments — Inversion of images — The magic mirror of Japan — English magic

LIGHT, as is known both from astronomical observations and from experiments made with optical apparatus, travels at a speed far exceeding that of the swiftest motion of any material thing. Try to think of the swiftest thing on the face of the earth. An express train at full speed, perhaps, occurs to you. How far will it go while you count up to ten ? Counting distinctly I take just over 5½ seconds. In that time an express train would have travelled 500 feet ! Yet a rifle-bullet would have gone farther. There is something that goes quicker than any actual moving thing. A sound travels faster. In the same time a sound would travel a mile. Do you say that a sound is only a movement in the air, a mere aerial wave? That is quite true. Sound consists of waves, or rather of successions of waves in the air. None of you who may have listened to the delightful lectures of Professor M'Kendrick in this theatre last Christmas will have forgotten that ; or how he used the phonograph to record the actual mechanical movements impressed by those air-waves as they beat against the sensitive surface of the tympanum.

But this Christmas we have to deal with waves of a different kind — waves of light instead of waves of sound — and though we are still dealing with waves, yet they are waves of quite a different sort, as we shall see.

In the first place, they travel very much faster than waves of sound in the air. During that 5½ seconds, while an express train could go 500 feet, or while a sound would travel a mile, light would travel a million miles ! A million miles ! How shall I get you to think of that distance ? An express train going 60 miles an hour would take 16,666⅔ hours, which is the same thing as 694 days 10 hours 40 minutes. Suppose you were now — 29th December 1896, 3 o'clock — to jump into an express train, and that it went on and on, not only all day and all night, but all through next year, day after day, and all through the year after next, month after month, until November, and that it did not stop till 24th November 1898 at 20 minutes before 2 o'clock in the morning ; by that time — nearly two years — you would have travelled just a million miles. But the space that an express train takes a year and eleven months to travel, light travels in 5½ seconds— just while you count ten !

And not only are the waves of light different from those of sound in their speed — they are different in size. As compared with sound-waves they are very minute ripples. The invisible waves of sound are of various sizes, their lengths differing with the pitch of the sound. The middle c of the pianoforte has a wave-length of about 4 feet 3 inches, while the shrill notes that you can sing may be only a few inches long. A shrill whistle makes invisible ripples about half an inch long in the air. But the waves of light are far smaller. The very largest waves of all amongst the different kinds of visible light — the red waves — are so small that you could pack 39,000 of them side by side in the breadth of one inch ! And the waves of other colours are all smaller. How am I to make you grasp the smallness of these wavelets ? What is the shortest thing you can think of? The thickness of a pin ? Well, if a pin is only a hundredth part of an inch thick it is still 390 times as broad as a ripple of red light. The thickness of a human hair? Well, if a hair is only a thousandth part of an inch thick it is still 39 times as big as the size of a wave of red light.

Now, from the facts that waves of light travel so fast, and are so very minute, there follow some very important consequences. One consequence is that the to-and-fro motions of these little ripples are so excessively rapid — millions of millions of times in a second — that there is no possible way of measuring their frequency : we can only calculate it. Another consequence is that it is very difficult to demonstrate that they really are waves. While a third consequence of their being so small is that, unlike big waves, they don't spread much round the edges of obstacles.

You have doubtless all often watched the waves on the sea, and the ripples on a pond, and know how when the waves or the ripples in their travelling strike against an obstacle, such as a rock or a post, they are parted by it, pass by it, and run round to meet behind it. But when waves of light meet an obstacle of any ordinary size they don't run round and meet on the other side of it — on the contrary, the obstacle casts a shadow behind it. If the waves of light crept round into the space behind the obstacle, that space would not be a dark shadow.

Well, but that is a question after all of the relative sizes of the obstacle and of the waves. Sea waves may meet behind a rock or a post, because the rock or the post may not be much larger than the wave-length. But if you think of a big stone breakwater — much bigger in its length than the wave-length of the waves, — you know that there may be quite still water behind it ; in that sense it casts a shadow. So again with sound-waves; ordinary objects are not infinitely bigger than the size of ordinary sound-waves. The consequence is that the sound-waves in passing them will spread into the space behind the obstacle. Sounds don't usually cast sharp acoustic shadows. If a band of musicians is playing in front of a house, you don't find, if you go round to the back of the house, that all sound is cut off. The sounds spread round into the space behind. But if you notice carefully you will observe that while the house does not cut off the big waves of the drum or the trombone, it does perceptibly cut off the smaller waves of the flute or the piccolo. And Lord Rayleigh has often shown in this theatre how the still smaller sound-waves of excessively shrill whistles spread still less into the space behind obstacles. You get sharp shadows when the waves are very small compared with the size of the obstacle.

Footnote: Note that the scientific term "wave-length " means the length from the crest of one wave to the crest of the next. This, on the sea, may be 50 feet or more. In the case of ripples on a pond, it may be but an inch or two. Many people would call it the breadth of the waves rather than the length.

Perhaps you will then tell me that if this argument is correct, you ought not, even with light-waves, to get sharp shadows if you use as obstacles very narrow obstacles, such as needles or hairs. Well, though perhaps you never heard it, that is exactly what is found to be the case. The shadow of a needle or a hair, when light from a single point or a single narrow slit is allowed to fall upon it, is found not to be a hard black shadow. On the contrary, the edges of the shadow are found to be curiously fringed, and there is light right in the very middle of the shadow caused by the waves passing by it, spreading into the space behind and meeting there.

However, all this is introductory to the subject of shadows in general. If we don't take special precautions, or use very minute objects to cast shadows, we shall not observe any of these curious effects. The ordinary shadows cast by a bright light proceeding from any luminous point are sharp-edged ; in fact, the waves, in ordinary cases, act as though they did not spread into the shadows, but travelled simply in straight lines.

Let me try to illustrate the general principle of the_ travelling of ripples by use of a shallow tank l of water, on the surface of which I can produce ripples at will. An electric lamp placed underneath it throws up shadows of the ripples upon a slanting translucent screen, and you can see for yourselves how the ripples spread from the centre of disturbance in concentric circles, each circle enlarging, and the ripples following one after another at regular distances apart. That distance is what we call the "wave-length."

[Figure 1]

Footnote: Ripple-tanks for illustrating the propagation of waves have long been known. Small tanks were used at various times by Professor Tyndall. See also Professor Poynting, F.R.S., in Nature May 1884, p. 119.

If I use the tip of my finger to produce a disturbance, the ripples travel outward in all directions at an equal speed. Each wave-front is therefore a circle. If, however, I use to produce the disturbance a straight wooden ruler, it will set up straight wavelets that follow one another in parallel ranks. These we may describe as plane waves, as distinguished from curved ones. Notice how they march forward, each keeping its distance from that in front of it.

Now, if you have ever watched with care the ripples on a pond, you will know that though the ripples march forward, the water of which these ripples are composed does not — it merely rises up and down as each ripple comes by. The proof is simple. Throw in a bit of cork as a float. If the water were to flow along, it would take the cork with it. But no ; see how the cork rides the waves. It is the motion only that travels forward across the surface — the water simply swings to- and - fro, or rather up and down, in its place. Now that this has once been brought to your attention, you will be able to distinguish between the two kinds of movement — the apparent motion of the waves as they travel along the surface, and the actual motion of the particles in the waves, which is always of an oscillatory kind.

Here is a model of a wave-motion that will make the difference still clearer. At the top a row of little white balls (Fig. 2) is arranged upon stems to which, in regular order one after the other, is given an oscillatory motion up and down. Not one of these white particles travels along. Each simply oscillates in its own place.

[Figure 2]

Yet the effect is that of a travelling wave, or rather set of waves. The direction in which the wave travels is transverse to the displacements of the particles. The length from crest to crest of the waves is about 4 inches. Their velocity of travelling depends, of course, on the speed with which I turn the handle of the apparatus. The amplitude of the displacement of each of the balls is not more than one inch up or down from the centre line.

Perhaps now you will be able to think of the little wavelets of light, marching in ranks so close that there are 40,000 or 50,000 of them to the inch, and having a velocity of propagation of 185,000 miles a second.

Now let me state to you two important principles of wave-motion — all-important in the right understanding of the behaviour of waves of light.

(1) The first is that waves always march at right angles to their own front. This is how a rank of soldiers march — straight forward in a direction square to the line into which they have dressed. It was so with the water-ripples that you have already seen.

(2) The second principle is that every point of any wave-front may be regarded as a new source or centre from which waves will start forward in circles. Look at the sketch (Fig. 3). From P as a centre ripples arc travelling outward in circles, for there has been a disturbance at P. Now if there is placed in the way of these ripples a screen, S, or obstacle, with a hole in it, all the wave-fronts that come that, way will be stoppe'd or reflected back, except that bit of each wave-front that comes to the gap in the screen. That particular bit will go on into the space beyond, but will spread at equal speed in all directions, giving rise to a new but fainter set of ripples which will be again of circular form, \ \ \ i having their centre however not at P but at the gap in the screen. This too I can readily illustrate to you in my ripple-tank.

Footnote: Always, that is to say, in free media, in gases, liquids, and non-crystalline solids. In crystals, where the structure is such that the elasticity differs in different directions, it is possible to have waves marching obliquely to their own front.

[Figure 3]

The first of these two principles is really a consequence of the second, and of another principle (that of "interference") which concerns the overlapping of waves. Of these we may now avail ourselves to find how waves will march if we know at any moment the shape of the wave -from. Suppose (Fig. 4) we knew that at a certain moment the wave-front of a set of ripples had got as far as the curved line FF, and that we wanted to know where it would be an instant later. If we know how fast the wave travels we can think of the time taken to travel some short space such as half an inch. Take then a pair of compasses and open them out to half an inch. Then put the point of the compasses at some part — say a — of the curve FF, and strike out the piece of circle as shown at a'. That is where the disturbance would spread to in that short interval of time if the bit of wave-front at a had alone been allowed to spread forward. But the bit at b is also spreading, so we must strike another arc, using b as centre, and another at c, and another at dt and so on, using the same radius for all of them. And now we see that if all these bits, instead of acting each separately, are acting at the same time,' the wavelets from each will overlap and give us one large enveloping curve at GG ; the effect being the same as though the wave-front FF had itself marched forward to GG. Those parts of the wavelets that tend to spread cross-ways in the overlapping balance one another; for instance, part of the wavelet from a tends to cross downwards in front of c, while a part of the wavelet from e tends to cross upwards to an equal amount. These sideway effects cancel one another, with the result that the effect is the same on the whole as though the bit of wave at c had simply marched straight forward to c .
