[Figure 4]

Perhaps you will say that if this is true then when light-waves meet an obstacle some light ought to spread round into the shadow at the edges. And so it does as has already been said. But, owing to the exceeding smallness of the light-waves compared with the dimensions of ordinary objects, the spreading is so slight as to be unnoticed. In fact, except when we are dealing with the shadows of very thin objects, like hairs and pins, or with mere edges, the light behaves as though it simply travelled in straight lines.1

Our next business is to show how ripples can be made to diverge and converge. If we take a point as our source of the ripples, then they will of themselves spread or diverge from that point in all directions in circles, each' portion of each wave-front having a bulging form. If we take as the source a flat surface, so as to get plane waves, they march forward as plane waves without either diverging or converging. If, however, we can in any way so manage our experiments as to get ripples with a hollow front instead of a bulging front, then the succeeding ripples will converge as they march. This is shown in Fig. 5. Suppose FF is a hollow wavefront marching forward toward the right. Think of the bit of wave-front at a. After a short interval of time it would spread (were it alone) to a. Similarly b would spread to b'y and so on, so that when all these separate wavelets overlap, the effect is the same as though there the wave-front FF had marched to GG, closing in as it marches. After the lapse of another equally short interval it will have closed in to HH. It is clear that, on the principle that waves always march at right angles to their own front, they tend all to march inwards and meet at a new centre somewhere at Q. Suppose you ranged a row of soldiers in a curve like FF, and told each soldier to march straight forward between his comrades. If each soldier were to march at right angles to the curved line, they would all be marching toward a common centre, and would close in against one another !

Footnote: This is all that is meant by the old statement that light travels in "rays." There really are no rays. The harder one tries to isolate a "ray" by itself, by letting light go first through a narrow slit or pinhole, and then passing it through a second slit or pinhole, the more do we find it impossible ; for then we notice the tendencies to spread more than ever. If the word "ray" is to be retained at all in the science of optics, it must be understood to mean nothing more than the geometrical line along which a piece of the wave-front marches.

[Figure 5]

Now it is obviously easy to make waves of light diverge — they do so of themselves if the source of light be a point. We shall see later how to make them converge ; but, meantime, we will use what we know about divergence to help us to measure the relative brightness of two lights.

Here is a little electric glow-lamp. The shopman who sold it to me says that when it is supplied with electric current at the proper pressure, it will give as much light as sixteen candles. I switch on the current and it shines. I light a standard candle, so that you can compare the brightness for yourselves. Do you think that the glow-lamp is really sixteen times as bright as the candle? Your eye is really a very unreliable judge 3 of the relative brightness. We must, therefore, find some way of balancing the brighter and the less bright lights against one another. The instrument for doing this is called a photometer, But before we can understand the photometer we must first think about the degree of illumination which a light produces when it falls upon a white surface. I take here a piece of white cardboard one inch square. If I hold it close to my candle it catches a great deal of the light, and is brightly illuminated. If I hold it farther away it is less brightly illuminated. We can, therefore, alter the illumination of the surface by altering the distance. But we cannot use this principle for calculations about brightness until we know the rule that connects the distance with the degree of illumination ; and that rule depends upon the way in which light spreads when it starts from a point.

Footnote: Electric pressure, or "voltage," is measured in terms of the unit of electric pressure called the "volt." The usual electric pressure of the conductors which branch from the supply-mains into a house is 100 volts.

Footnote: The standard candle prescribed by the regulations of the Board of Trade as the legal standard of light in Great Britain is a sperm candle burning 120 grains of spermaceti per hour.

Footnote: This unreliability of the eye to form a numerically correct judgment is partly dependent on the physiological fact that the sensation is never numerically proportional to the stimulus. Though the stimulus be 16 times as great, the sensation perceived by the brain is not 16 times as great. The rule (Fechner's law) is that the sensation is proportional to the natural logarithm of the stimulus. The natural logarithm of 16 is 2.77 ; that is to say, the light that is 16 times as bright as 1 candle only produces a sensation 2.77 times as great. A single light of 100 candle brilliancy only produces a sensation 4.6 times as great as that of 1 candle. Besides this the iris diaphragm of the eye automatically reduces the size of the pupil when a brighter light shines into the eye, making the eye less sensitive.

[Figure 6]

Suppose we think of the whole quantity of light that is spreading all round from a point. Of all that amount of light what fraction will be caught by this square inch of cardboard when I hold it a foot away? Not very much. But now think of that same amount of light as as it goes on spreading. Fig. 6 shows you that by the time that the light has travelled out from the centre to double the distance it will have spread (according to the law of rectilinear propagation discussed above) so that the diverging beam is now twice as broad each way. It will now cover a cardboard square that is 2 inches eacri way, or that has 4 square inches of surface. So if the same amount of light that formerly fell on 1 square inch is now spread over 4 square inches of surface, it follows that each of those 4 square inches is only illuminated one quarter as brightly as before. If you had a bit of butter to spread upon a piece of bread — and then you were told that you must spread the same piece of butter over a piece of bread of four times the surface, you know that the layer of butter would be only the quarter as thick ! And so again, if I let the light spread still farther, by the time it has gone three times as far it will have spread over nine times the surface, and the degree of illumination on any one square inch at that treble distance will be only one-ninth part as great as at first. This is the so-called law of " inverse squares," and is simply the geometrical consequence of the circumstance that the light is spreading from a point. Now we are ready to deal with the balancing of two lights. By letting two lights shine on a piece of cardboard, or rather on two neighbouring pieces, and then altering the distance of one of the lights until both pieces of card are equally illuminated, we can get a balance of effects, and then calculate from the squares of the distances how bright the lights were. The eye, which is a very bad judge of relative unequal brightnesses is really a very fair judge (and by practice can be trained to be a very accurate judge) of the equality of illumination of two neighbouring patches. But we must make our arrangements so that only one light shines upon each patch. One simple way of doing this is to let each light cast a shadow of a stick on a white surface, so that each light shines into the shadow cast by the other. If you alter the distances till the shadows are equally dark, then you know that the illumination of each is equal. But a better way is to arrange matters that the two illuminated patches are actually superposed. Here is a very simple and effective way of doing it. Two pieces of white cardboard, A and B (Fig. 7), forming a V-shape, are set upon a stand, between the two lights that are to be compared. One light shines upon the surface of A, and the other upon the surface of B. Through A are cut a number of slots or holes, so that the illuminated surface of B is seen through the slots in A. If the illumination of A is duller than that of B the slots will seem dark between the brighter bars of the front card ; but if the illumination of A is brighter than that of then the slots will seem bright between dull bars. By moving one of the lights nearer or farther away, the respective illuminations can be altered until balance is obtained; and then the relative values are calculated from the squares of the distances. With this photometer let us now test our electric lamp to see if it is really worth sixteen candles. I put it on the photometer bench and move it backward and forward till the lights balance. You see it balances when rather less than four times as far away as the standard candle. It is, therefore, of not quite sixteen candle-power.

[Figure 7]

Footnote: The fact that a candle flame is not a mere point introduces a measurable error in photometry. It cannot be too clearly understood that the law of inverse - squares is never applicable strictly except to effects spreading from points. This criticism applies also to the use or misuse of the law of inverse-squares in magnetism and electricity.

Another very simple and accurate photometer is made by taking two small slabs of paraffin wax (such as candles are made of) and putting them back to back with a sheet of tin-foil or black paper between them. They are then placed (as in Fig. 8) on the graduated bench between the lights whose brightness is to be compared together, and set in such a way that one light shines on one paraffin slab, and the other light on the other slab, as in Fig. 9. If the illuminations on the two sides FlG- 9- balance the edgjs of the slabs will seem equally bright. But if the illumination on one face is stronger than that on the other then that paraffin slab which is more highly illuminated will seem brighter at its edge than the other. This is because of the translucent or semi-opaque property of paraffin wax, which results in a diffusion of the light laterally. With this photometer it is very easy to balance the brightness of two lights, even if their tint be not quite identical. In Germany, they employ as standard, instead of a sperm candle, the little Hefner lamp filled with a chemical liquid known as amyl-acetate. But it has — as you see — the serious disadvantage of giving out a light which is unfortunately of a redder tint than most of our other lights. To be quite suitable, the lamp that we choose as a standard of light ought to be not only one that will give out a fixed quantity of light, but one that is irreproachable in the quality of its whiteness : it should be a standard of white light. Perhaps now that acetylene gas is so easily made it may serve as a standard, for as yet none of the proposed electric standards seem quite satisfactory.

[Figure 9]

Footnote: This form of photometer is a modification by Mr. A. P. Trotter, M.A. , of Cape Town, of the relief photometer invented in 1883 by the author and Mr. "C. C. Starling. To prevent error arising from internal reflexion the back of the card A should be blackened. By setting the support at a fixed distance from the standard light on the left side, and altering, as needed to obtain balance, the distance of the light of which the brightness is to be measured, it is possible to make the instrument direct-reading ; the scale to the right of the support being graduated so as to read not the actual distances but their squares. For instance, if the distance of the middle slot from the standard light be 1 metre, then on the other side the graduation must read 1 at 1 metre ; 4 at 2 metres ; 9 at 3 metres, and so forth. Accuracy of reading is promoted by the circumstance that when balance has been found for the middle slot of A the slots to the left of the middle will look darker, and those to the right brighter than the central one.

Footnote: This paraffin slab photometer is the invention of Dr. Joly, F.R.S., of Dublin. It is an exceedingly satisfactory instrument.

[Figure 11]

[Figure 10]

Footnote: Either of these two forms of instrument is preferable to the old-fashioned "grease-spot" photometer of Bunsen. But both are surpassed in accuracy by the precision-photometer of Brodhun and Lummer, which can, however, only be described here very briefly. It gives determinations that can be relied on to within one-half of one per cent. The two lights to be compared are caused to shine on the two opposite faces of a small opaque white screen, W (Fig. 10). The eye views these two sides, as reflected in two small mirrors, Ml and M2, by means of a special prisrn-combination, consisting, as shown, of two right-angled prisms of glass, A and B, which are cemented together with balsam over only a small part of their hypotenuse surfaces ; the light from Ml can pass direct through this central portion to the eye, but the uncemented portions of the hypotenuse surface of B act by total internal reflexion and bring the light from M2 to the eye. The eye, therefore, virtually sees a patch of one surface of W surrounded by a patch of the other surface of W, and hence can judge very accurately as to whether they are equally illuminated or not.

Let us pass on to the operation of reflecting light by means of mirrors. A piece of polished metal such as
