silver, or a silvered glass, will reflect the waves of light, and so, though in an inferior degree, will any other material if only its surface be sufficiently smooth. By sufficiently smooth I mean that the ridges or scratches or roughnesses of its surface are decidedly smaller than the wave-length of the light. If the scratches or ridges on a surface are in width less than a quarter of the wavelength (in the case of light, therefore, less than about 1/200000 inch) they do not cause any breaking up of the waves ; and such surfaces are, for optical purposes, quite "smooth." Indeed that is the usual way of polishing things. You scratch them all over with some sort of very fine powder that makes scratches finer than 1/200000 of an inch.

Now the rebound of waves when they beat against a polished surface, whether that surface be a flat one or a curved one, can be studied by applying the same principles of wave-motion that we have already learned. In Fig. ii we have light starting from a point at P and spreading. If a smooth obstacle, SS, is placed in the path of these waves they will meet it, but some parts of the wave-front will meet it before other parts. Think of the bit of the wave-front that meets the mirror at a. If it had not been stopped, it would after a brief moment of time have got as far as a. But having bounded back from the surface it will set up a wavelet that will spread backwards at the same rate. Therefore, draw with your compasses the wavelet a", using as radius the length a a. The next bit of the wave -front b reaches the surface of the mirror a little later. The length from thence to b' is therefore a little shorter than a a. So take that shorter length as radius and strike out the wavelet b" . Completing the set of wavelets in the same way we get the final curve of the reflected wave, which you see will now march backwards as though it had come from some point Q on the other side of the mirror. In fact, if the mirror is a flat one, Q will be exactly as far behind the surface as P is in front of it. We call the point Q the " image " of the point P. This reflexion of ripples as though they had come from a point behind the mirror I can show you by aid of my ripple-tank. I put in a flat strip of lead to serve as a reflector — see how the waves as they come up to it march off with their curvature reversed, as though they had started from some point behind the reflecting surface.

Again I can show you the same thing with a candle and a looking-glass. You know that we can test the direction in which light is coming by looking at the direction in which a shadow is cast by it. If I set up (Fig. 12) this little dagger on a whitened board I can see which way its shadow falls. If now I place a candle beside it on the board at P it casts a shadow of the dagger on the side away from P. Next, set up a piece of silvered mirror glass a little farther along the board. We have now two shadows. One is the direct shadow which was previously cast ; the other is the shadow cast by the waves that have been reflected in the mirror, and you see by the direction in which this second shadow falls that it falls just as if the light had come from a second candle placed at Q, just as far behind the mirror --'as P is in front/ Let us put an actual second candle at Q, and then -take away the mirror, and you see the second shadow in the same place and of the same shape as before. So we have proved by direct experiment that our reasoning about the waves was correct. Indeed, you have only to look into a flat mirror, and examine the images of things in it, to satisfy yourselves about the rule. The images of objects are always exactly opposite the objects, and are each as far behind the mirror as the object is in front. Probably you have all heard of the savage prince captured by sailors, who, when he was taken on board ship and shown a mirror hanging on a wall, wanted to run round to see the other savage prince whom he saw on the other side!

[Figure 12]

If instead of using flat mirrors we use curved ones, we find different rules to be observed. That is because the curved surfaces print new curvatures on the wavefronts, causing them to alter their lines of march. There are, as you know, two sorts of curvatures. The surface may bulge out — in which case we call it convex ; or it may be hollowed — in which case we call it a concave surface.

In my ripple tank I now place a curved piece of metal with its bulging side toward the place where I make the ripples. Suppose now I send a lot of plane ripples to beat against this surface ; the part of the wave-front that strikes first against the bulging curve is the earliest- to be reflected back. The other parts strike the surface later, and when reflected back have fallen behind ; so that the ripples come back curved — the curved mirror has, in fact, imprinted upon the ripples a curvature twice as great as its own curvature. This can be seen from Fig. 13, where we consider the straight ripples marching to meet the bulging reflector. The middle point M of the bulging surface meets the advancing wave first and turns that bit back. If there had been no obstacle the wave would, after a short interval of time, have got as far as A. But where will it actually go to ? The bit that strikes M will go back as far as B ; the bit marked a will go on a little, and then be reflected back. Take your compasses again and measure the distance it still has to go to a, and then turning the compasses strike out the arc a. Do the same for the bits marked b and c, and you will find the overlapping wavelets to give you the new outline of the reflected wave, which marches backwards as though it had started from the point marked F. This point F is half-way between M and the centre of curvature of the surface. The centre is marked C in the drawing.

So, again, if I use as reflector a hollow or concavecurved surface, it will imprint upon the waves a concave form, the imprinted curvature being twice as great as the curvature of the reflecting surface. But now we come upon a new effect. See in my ripple-tank how, when the straight ripples beat against the concave surface, so that the middle part of the wave-front is the last to rebound, all the other parts have already rebounded and are marching back, the returning ripples being curved inwards. In fact, you see that, being themselves now curved ripples with hollow wave-fronts, they converge inwards upon one another, and march back toward the point F. A bit of the wave -front at P marches straight until it strikes the mirror at R. Then instead of going on to Q it is reflected inward and travels to F, toward which point other parts of the wave also travel. Here then we have found a real focus or meeting point of the waves; not, as in the preceding cases, a virtual focus from which the waves seemed to come. We have then learned that, for ripples at least, a concave mirror may produce a real convergence to a point.

[Figure 14]

Let us at once show that the same thing can be done with light-waves by using a concave silvered mirror.

From my optical lantern, with its internal electric lamp, my assistant causes a broad beam of light to stream forth. The air is dusty, and each little particle of dust catches a portion of the beam, and helps you to see which way it is marching. In this beam I hold a concave silvered mirror. At once you see how by printing a curvature upon the waves it forces the beam to converge (Fig. 15) upon a point here in mid-air. That point is the focus. You will further notice that by turning the mirror about I can shift the position of the focus, and concentrate the waves in different places at will.

[Figure 15]

If I replace the concave mirror by a convex one, I shall cause a divergence of the waves. No longer is there any real focus, but the waves now march away as if they had come from a virtual focus behind the mirror at F (Fig. 16), precisely as we saw for the ripples in the ripple-tank.

We have now got as far as the making of real images by so changing the shapes of the wave-fronts and their consequent lines of march as to cause them to converge to focal points. Let us try a few more experiments on the formation of images. Removing from the optical lantern all its lenses, let us simply leave inside it the electric lamp. You know that in this lamp there are two pencils of carbon, the tips of which do not quite touch, and which are made white-hot by the flow of the electric current between them. I cover up the opening in front of the lantern by a piece of tin-foil, and in this I now stab a small round hole with a pointed stiletto. At once you see thrown on the screen an image (Fig. 17) of the two white-hot tips of the carbon pencils. The positive carbon has a flat end, the negative tip is pointed. That image is inverted as a matter of fact, and its formation on the screen is a mere consequence of the rectilinear propagation of the light. If I stab another hole we shall have another image. This time I have pierced a square hole, but the second image is just the same as the first, and does not depend on the shape of the hole. I pierce again a three-cornered hole — still another image. If I pierce a whole lot of holes I get just as many images, and they are arranged in a sort of pattern, which exactly corresponds to the pattern of holes I have pierced in the tin-foil.

[Figure 17]

[Figure 16]

Now if I wanted to produce one single bright image instead of a lot of little images scattered about, I must in some way manage so to turn these various beams that they shall all converge upon the same region of the screen. In other words, the formation of bright images can be effected by using some appliance which will imprint a convergence upon the waves. You know that a concave mirror will do this. Very well, let me use a concave mirror. See how, when we choose one of the proper curvature to converge the light upon the screen, it blends all the images together, and gives us one bright image. We may remove our tin-foil cap altogether, so as to work with the whole beam, and we get a still more brilliant image of the carbon points.

Substituting for the arc-lamp a group of little coloured electric glow-lamps, I cause their beams to be reflected out into the room by my concave mirror, and here, by trying with a hand -screen of thin translucent paper, you see how I can find the real image of the group of lamps. This image is inverted ; and being in this case formed at a distance from the mirror greater than that of the object, it is magnified. If the object is removed to a greater distance the image comes still nearer in ; and is then of diminished size, though still inverted.

So far we have been dealing with the regular reflexion that takes place at properly polished surfaces. But if the surfaces are not properly polished — that is, if their ridges or scratches or roughnesses are not sensibly smaller than the size of waves, then, though they may still reflect, the reflexion is irregular. White paper reflects in this diffuse way. You do not get any definite images, because the slight roughnesses of the texture break up the wave-fronts and scatter them in all directions. That is why a white sheet of paper looks white from whichever aspect you regard it. If the substance is one which, like silk, has a definite fibre or grain that reflects a little better in one direction than in another, then the quantity of light reflected will depend partly upon the direction in which the grain catches the light, and partly upon the angle at which the light is inclined to the surface. This is easily demonstrated by examining the appearance of a piece of metal electrotyped in exact facsimile of a piece of silk fabric. Here is such a piece. It was deposited in a gutta-percha mould cast upon a piece of figured silk brocade ; it reproduces the exact shimmer of silk, because it reproduces the grain of the silk in its operation of partial reflexion. If silk is woven with warp of one colour and weft of another, the different colours are better reflected at certain angles —hence the effect produced by "shot" silk.

To illustrate the property of diffuse reflexion let me show you two simple experiments. Here is a piece of mirror. Upon it I paint with Chinese white the word LIGHT. The letters look white on a dark background. But if I use it to reflect upon the wall a patch of light from the electric lamp the letters come out black. The light that fell on those parts-was scattered in all directions — so those parts looked white to you, but they have diffused the waves instead of directing them straight to the wall as the other smooth parts of the surface do.

Let me prove to you how much light is really reflected from a piece of paper. I have merely to shine my lamp upon this piece of white paper, and hold it near the cheek of this white marble bust for you to see for yourselves what an amount of light it actually reflects upon the object. Exchanging the white paper for a piece of red paper, — that is to say of paper that reflects red waves better than waves of any other colour, — and you see how the red light is thrown back upon the bust, and brings an artificial blush to its cheek.

Footnote: Made at the Technical College, Finsbury, by Mr. E. Rousseau, instructor in electro -deposition. His process of casting, in a molten compound of gutta-percha, the matrices, which are afterwards metal- Ksed to receive the deposit in the electrotype bath, is distinctly superior to the commercial process of taking moulds in a hydraulic press. On one occasion he took for me a mould of a Rowland's diffraction grating, having 14,400 parallel lines to the inch. Like the original it showed most gorgeous diffraction colours.

If light is reflected from one mirror to another one standing at an angle with the first, two or more images may be formed, according to the position of the mirrors. Here (Fig. 18) are two flat mirrors hinged together like the leaves of a book. If I open them out to an angle equal to one-third of a circle — namely, 120° — and then place a candle between them, each mirror will make an image, so that, when you peep in between the mirrors, there will seem to be three candles. If I fold the mirrors a little nearer, so that they enclose a quadrant of a circle
