[Figure 18]

— or are at right angles — then there will seem to be four candles, one real one and three images. If I shut the angle up to 72° — or one-fifth of a circle — then there will seem to be five candles. Or to 60° — one-sixth of a circle — then there appear six candles. This is the principle of the toy called the Kaleidoscope, with which some most beautiful and curious combinations of patterns and colours can be obtained by the multiplication of images. Even with two such mirrors as these some quaint effects are possible. When nearly shut up, a single light between them seems to be drawn out into a whole ring of images. Open them out to 72° or to a right angle, and try the effect of putting your two hands suddenly between the mirrors. Ten hands or eight hands (according to the angle chosen) simultaneously appear as if by magic. Place between the mirrors a wedge of Christmas cake, and shut up the mirrors till they touch the sides of the wedge, — you will see a whole cake appear.

It is now time to pass on to another set of optical effects which depend upon the rate at which the waves travel. I have told you how fast they travel in the air — 186,400 miles a second, or (if you will calculate it out by a reduction sum) one foot in about the thousandmillionth part of one second. Well, but light does not go quite so fast through water as through air — only about three-fourths as fast ; that is, it goes in water only at the rate of about 138,000 miles a second, or only about nine inches in the thousand-millionth part of a second. And in common glass it goes still slower. On the average — for glasses differ in their composition, and therefore in the retardation they produce on light-waves —light only goes about two-thirds as fast as in air. That is, while light would travel one foot through air, it would only travel about eight inches through glass.

Now as a consequence of this difference in speed it follows quite simply that if the waves strike obliquely against the surface of water or of glass that part of the wave-front that enters first into the denser medium goes more slowly, and the other part which is going on for a little longer time though air gains on the part that entered first, and so the direction of the wave-front is changed, and the line of march is also changed. Let us study it a little more precisely. If waves of light proceeding from a point P strike against the top surface of a block of glass, as in Fig. 19, how will the retardation that they experience on entering affect their march ? Suppose that at a certain moment a ripple has got as far as FF', If it had been going on through air it would, after a very short interval of time, have got as far as GG'. But it has struck against the glass, and the part that goes in first instead of going as far as G' will only get two-thirds as far. So once more take your compasses, and strike off a set of arcs for the various wavelets, in each case taking as the arc two -thirds of the distance that the light would have had to go if after passing the surface it could have gone on to GG'. The overlapping wavelets build up the new wave-front HG', which you notice is a flatter curve, and has its centre somewhere farther back at Q. In fact, the effect of the glass in retarding the wave is to flatten its curvature and alter its march, so that in going on through the glass it will progress as though it had come not from P, but from Q, a point 1½ times as far away. Consider the bit of wave-front that has been marching down the line PG'. When it enters the glass its line of march is changed — instead of going on along G'A it goes more steeply down G'B, as though it had come from Q. This abrupt change of direction along a broken path, caused by the entrance into a denser * medium, is known by the . term refraction. Glass refracts more than water does ; heavy crystal glass (containing lead) refracts more than the light sorts of glass used for windowTpanes and bottles; while many other substances have a still higher refractivity.

[Figure 19]

Now, we can use this property of the refracting substances to produce convergence and divergence of lightwaves, because, as you see, when we want to imprint a curvature on the wave-fronts, we can easily do this by using the retardation of water or of glass. Suppose we wanted to alter a plane-wave so as to make it converge to a focus, what we have got to do is to retard the middle part of the wave-front a little, so that the other parts shall gain on it. It will then be concave in shape, and therefore will march to a focus. What sort of a piece of glass will do this ? A mere window-pane will not. A thick slab will not, seeing it is equally thick all over. Clearly it must be a piece of glass that is thicker at one part than another. Well, suppose we take a piece of glass that is thicker in the middle than at the edges, what will it do ? Suppose that, as in Fig. 20, we have some plane-waves coming along, and that we put in their path a piece of glass that is flat on one face and bulging on the other face. Think of the time when a wave-front has arrived at GG. A moment later where will it be ? The middle part that strikes at M will be going through glass to B. This distance MB we know will be only two-thirds as great as the distance to which it would go in air. Had it gone on in air it would have gone as far as A, the length MA being drawn 1½ times as great as MB. The edge parts of the wave-front go almost wholly through air, and will gain on the middle part. So the new wave-front, instead of being flat through HAH, will be curved concavely in the shape HBH ;

Footnote: " Denser," in its optical sense, means the same thing as more retarding. Compare with what is said on p. 62 in the Appendix to this Lecture.

and as a result the wave will march on converging to meet at F in a real focus. It would be the same if the piece of glass were turned round the other way, with its bulging face toward the light ; it would still imprint a concavity on the advancing wave and make it converge to a focus. This is exactly how a burning-glass acts.

With my ripple -tank I am able to imitate these effects, but not very accurately, because the only way I have of slowing the ripples is to make the water shallower where retardation is to be produced. This I do by inserting a piece of plate glass cut to the proper shape. Where the ripples pass over the edge of the submerged piece of glass they travel more slowly. Where they meet the edge obliquely the direction of their march is changed — they are refracted. Where they pass over a lensshaped piece they are converged toward a focus.

It is, however, more convincing to show these things with light-waves themselves. Let me first show you refraction upon the optical circle by the aid (Fig. 21) of a special apparatus 2 for directing the beam toward the centre at any desired angle. Placing a large optical circle with its face toward you and its back to the lantern, I can throw the light obliquely upon the top surface of a piece of glass, the under surface of which has been ground to a semi-cylinder (Fig. 22). The refracted beam emerges at a different angle, its line of march having been made more steeply oblique by the retardation of the glass. If you measure the angles not in degrees but by the straight distances across the circle, you will find that, for the kind of glass

Footnote: From Fig. 20 it is easy to see that the curvature of the impressed HAH is just half (if MB = ⅔ MA) of the curvature of the glass surface. Hence it follows that the focal length of the planoconvex lens (if of glass having a refractivity of 1½) is equal to twice the radius of curvature of the lens-surface. In the case of doubleconvex lenses, each face imprints a curvature upon the wave as it passes through. See Appendix to Lecture I. p. 65.

Footnote: This apparatus, which can be fitted to any ordinary lantern, consists of three mirrors at 45° carried upon an arm affixed to a

I am using, the proportion between the length CD (the sleeve that fits the condenser-tube, as in Fig. 21. The beam after three reflexions comes radially back across the axis of the condensers ; and by turning the arm around in the condenser-tube can be used at any angle.

[Figure 21]

sine of refraction) and the length AB (the sine of incidence) is always just the proportion of 2 to 3, whatever the obliquity of the incident beam. When the incident beam falls at grazing incidence most of it is reflected and never enters the glass, and the part that does enter is refracted down at an angle known as the critical or limiting angle.

With this same optical circle I am able to show you another phenomenon, that of total internal reflexion. If I send the light upwards through the glass hemisphere (Fig. 23), at an angle beyond that of the critical angle, none of it will come up through the surface; all will be reflected internally at the under side, the top surface acting as a polished mirror. You can see the same effect with a tumbler full of water with a spoon in it.

[Figure 23]

This same phenomenon of total reflexion can be beautifully illustrated by the luminous cascade or fairy fountain. I allow water to stream out of a nozzle, and shine light in behind through a window into the cistern from which the water flows. It falls in a parabolic curve, the light following it internally down to the place where the jet breaks (Fig. 24) into drops.

Total reflexion can also be illustrated by shining light into one end of a solid glass rod, along which, though it is of a bent and crooked shape, the light travels until it comes to the other end.

Returning now to the use of lenses to cause the waves to converge and diverge, we will adjust our lantern to send out a straight beam, and then interpose in the path a lens made of glass thicker in the middle than at the edges. At once it is observed — thanks to the dust in the air — to make these waves converge to a focus at F (Fig. 25). This is again a real focus. A lens that is thus thicker in the middle than at the edges is called a convex lens.

[Figure 24]

Had we taken a piece of glass that is thinner in the middle than at the edges — a concave lens — the effect would be the opposite. Since the thin middle retards the mid parts of the wave-front less than the thick glass edges retard the edge parts, the middle part of the wave-front will gain on the outlying parts, and the wave will emerge as a bulging wave, and will therefore march as if diverging from some virtual focus.

[Figure 25]

[Figure 26]

You will not have failed to note that this property of lenses to converge or diverge light depends on the fact that light travels slower in glass than in air • and you will perhaps wonder what would be the effect if there were no change in the speed of travelling. Well, that is a very simple matter to test. If the action of the lens depends upon the difference of speed of light in the glass and in the surrounding medium, what ought to be the result of surrounding the glass lens with some other medium than air ? Suppose we try water. The speed of light in water is less than in air — it is more nearly like that in glass. And if the action depends on difference of speed, then a glass lens immersed in water ought to have a less action than the same glass lens in air. Try it, and you see at once that when immersed in water a magnifying glass does not magnify as much as it does in air. A burning-glass does not converge the rays so much when immersed in water; its focus is farther away. Nay, I have here a lens which you see unquestionably magnifies. I immerse it in this bath of oil — and behold it acts as a minifying lens — it makes the beam diverge instead of converge ! Carry the argument on to its logical conclusion. If the effect of the medium is so important, what would be the effect of taking a lens of air (enclosed between two thin walls of glass) and surrounding it by a bath of water or oil ? If the reasoning is right, a concave air lens in oil ought to act like a convex glass lens in air, and a convex air lens in oil like a concave glass lens in air. Let us put it to the test of experiment. Here is a concave air lens.

[Figure 27]

In air it neither converges nor diverges the light — the speed inside and outside the lens is the same — therefore there is no action. But plunge it in oil (Fig. 27) and, see, it brings the beam to a focus (F) exactly as a convex glass lens in air would do.

Let me sum up this part of my subject by simply saying that lenses and curved mirrors can change the march of light-waves by imprinting new curvatures on the wave-fronts. Indeed, speaking strictly, that is all that any lens or mirror, or combination of lenses or of mirrors, can do.

Now the human eye, that most wonderful of all optical instruments, is a combination of lenses within a cartilaginous ball, the back of which is covered on its inner face with an exquisitely fine structure of sensitive cells, through which are distributed ramifications of the optic nerve. All that that nerve can do is to feel the impressions that fall upon it and convey those impressions to the brain. All else' must be done on the one hand by the lens-apparatus that focuses the waves of light on the retina, or on the other hand by the brain that is conscious of the impressions conveyed to it. With neither the nerve-structures nor with the brain are these lectures concerned. We have merely to treat of the eye as a combination of lenses that focuses images on the retina.
