Consider a diagram (Fig. 28) of the structures of the human eyeball. The greater part of the refractive effect- is accomplished by a beautiful piece of transparent horny substance known as the crystalline lens (L2), which is situated just behind the iris or coloured diaphragm of the eye. The pupil, or hole through the iris, leads straight toward the middle of this crystalline

C the cornea. R the retina. N the optic nerve. LI aqueous humour. L2 the crystalline lens. LS vitreous humour. i the iris diaphragm. b the blind spot.

y the yellow spot, or macula lutea.

[Figure 28]

lens. But it is immersed in a medium, or rather between two media, a watery medium (LJ in front and a gelatinous one (Lg) behind; the latter filling up the -rest of the globe of the eyeball. The crystalline lens has therefore a less magnifying power than it would have if it were immersed in air. It acts very much as a lens in water. But the watery liquid in front of it also acts as a lens, since it occupies the space in front of the crystalline lens and between it and the trans-

| t i n parent cornea, the bulging window of the eye. Taken together these form a lens - combination adapted to form images upon that back-screen or retina, R, where are spread out the sensitive nerve structures. All that the eye can do as an optical instrument can be imitated by optical combinations of lenses. An ordinary photographic camera may be regarded as a sort of artificial eye. In front is a combination of lenses the function of which is to focus images upon a back screen, or upon a plate which is made chemically sensitive. To make the analogy more complete one ought to think of the eye as a kind of camera in which the hollow body is rilled up with a thin transparent watery jelly, and in which also the space between the front lens and the one behind it is full of water.

Apart from the complication introduced by the watery and gelatinous media, it is very easy to imitate the optical arrangements of the eye by lenses. Any photographic camera will serve indeed for the purpose. Its lens combination throws upon the screen at the back real images of the objects placed in front.

As in the camera, so in the eyeball, the images thrown on the back are inverted images. If you have not thought of this before it seems hard to believe it : nevertheless it is true. You have all your lives had the images inverted. Your brains, while you were yet babies learned to associate the impression received on the lower part of the retina with objects high above you. However you may explain or doubt, the facts are simply what they are : the images are upside-down at the back of your eyeball.

Beside the general proof afforded by camera-images, there are two extremely simple proofs of this fact. The first any of you can try at home ; all the apparatus it needs being a common pin and a bit of card. It depends upon the circumstance that if you hold a small object close to a lens a shadow of it may be cast right through the lens without being turned upside down. Here is -a lens — it will form inverted images of objects if it focuses them on a screen. But hold a small object close to the lens (Fig. 29) and shine light through it ; the shadows are actually cast right side up on the screen. Now take a visiting-card and prick a pinhole through it with a largesized pin. Place this hole about an inch from the eye and look through it at a white cloud or a white surface strongly illuminated. Then hold the pin upright, as in Fig. 30 between the eye and the pinhole. It may require a little patience to see it, as the pin must be held exactly in the right place. You know you are holding it with the head up, yet you see it with its head down, looking as in Fig. 31. Now if in the case where you know that its shadow is being thrown upright on the back of your eye you feel the shadow upside down, it follows that when you feel any image right way up it must really be an inverted image that you are feeling.

[Figure 30]

The other proof has the merit of being direct and objective, but does not succeed with every eye — some persons have the cartilaginous walls of the eyeballs too thick. Stand in front of a mirror, close one eye — say the right — and hold a candle in the hand on the same side. Hold the candle about at the level of the closed eye so that its light just falls across the bridge of the nose into the open eye.

[Figure 29]

Then if you look very carefully you will see, right in the extreme corner of the eye, shining dimly through the cartilaginous white wall, a small image of the candle flame — and it is inverted. If you raise the candle higher, the image goes down; if you lower the candle, the image rises.

[Figure 31]

Leaving lenses let me show you a couple of interesting experiments depending on the property of refraction that we have been discussing. In passing through the earth's atmosphere obliquely, as they do when the sun is low down near the horizon, the sun's rays are refracted, and he seems to be a little higher up in the sky than he really is. Indeed, under certain circumstances, the sun can be seen above the horizon at a time when it is absolutely certain that he has really set ; his rays in that case come in a curved path over the intervening portion of the globe. Now the circumstances in which this can occur are these — that the successive strata of the air must be of different densities ; the densest below, next the earth, and the less dense above. To demonstrate this I will take a glass tank into which there have been carefully poured a number of solutions of chloride of calcium in water of different densities — the densest at the bottom. You note that the beam of light sent into the trough takes a curved path (Fig. 32). In fact, the light turns round a corner. The difference of refractivity that accompanies difference of density is well shown by a very simple experiment upon heated air. You all know that when air is heated it rises, becoming less dense. You all know that, when cooled, air becomes more dense, and tends to fall. But did you ever see the hot air rising from your hand, or even from a hot poker? Or did you ever see the cold air descending below a lump of ice? This is exceedingly easy to show you. All I require is a very small luminous point. We will take the light of an arc-lamp, shining through a small hole in a metal diaphragm close to it, and let it shine on the white wall. Now I let this hot poker cast its shadow on the screen, and you see torrents of hot air, which rising, cast their shadows also. Here is a lump of ice. The cold air streaming down from it casts its shadow. Even from my hand you see the hot air rising. A candle flame casts quite a dense shadow, and when I open a bottle of ether you see the ether vapour — which is ordinarily quite invisible — streaming out of the neck and falling down. Even a jet of escaping gas reveals itself when examined by this method.

[Figure 32]

Another curious experiment consists in using as a lens a piece of glass which has been ground so as to be curved only one way — say right and left — but not curved in the other way. If this lens is thicker in the middle part from top to bottom, as in Fig. 33, than it is at the two edges, it will magnify things from right to left, but not from top to bottom ; hence it produces a distortion. I throw upon the screen the portrait of a well-known old gentleman. Then if I interpose in front of him one of these "cylindrical " lenses, his face will be distorted. And if I then turn the lens round the distortion will alternately elongate his features and broaden them. There are also cylindrical lenses of another kind, thinner in the middle than at the edges. These produce a distortion by minifying.

[Figure 33]

Finally, I return to the point which I endeavoured to explain to you a few minutes ago, that all that any lens or mirror can do is to impress a curvature upon the wave-fronts of the waves.

The most striking proof of this is afforded by that now rare curiosity the magic mirror of Japan. In old Japan, before it was invaded and degraded by Western customs, many things were different from what they now are. The Japs never sat on chairs — there were none to sit upon. They had no looking-glasses — their mirrors were all of polished bronze ; and, indeed, those interesting folk had carried the art of bronze-casting and of mirror polishing to a pitch never reached in any other nation before them. The young ladies in Japan when they were going to do up their hair used to squat down on a beautiful mat before a lovely mirror standing on an elegant lacquered frame. Fig. 34 is photographed from a fine Japanese drawing in my possession. You may have seen pretty little Yum-yum in the " Mikado " squat down exactly so before her toilet-table. Here (Fig. 35) is one of these beautiful Japanese mirrors, round, heavy, and furnished with a metal handle. One face has been polished with care and hard labour ; the other has upon it in relief the ornament cast in the mould — in this case the crest of the imperial family, the kiri leaf (the leaf of the Paullonia imperialis) with the flower-buds appearing over it. The polished face is very slightly convex; but on looking into it none of you young

[Figure 35]

[Figure 34]

— Japanese Girls with Mirrors.

ladies would see anything but your own fair faces, or the faces of your friends around you, or the things in the room. Certainly you would see nothing of the ornament on the back. It is merely — so far as you or the former owner of the mirror is concerned — a mirror.

But now take this mirror and hold it in the light of the sun, or in the beams of an electric lamp, and let it reflect a patch of light upon the white wall, or upon a screen. What do you see ? Why, in the patch of light reflected from the front of the mirror, you see (Fig. 36) the pattern that is on the back. This is the extraordinary "magic " property that has made these mirrors so celebrated.

Another mirror has at the back a circle in high relief, with a fiery dragon in low relief sprawling around it. The face is beautifully polished, and shows no trace of the pattern at the back. But when placed in the beams of the arc -lamp it throws a patch of light on the wall, in which the circle stands out as a brilliant line, whilst the dragon is invisible. It is quite usual for the parts in high relief to produce this "magical" effect, while those in low relief produce none.

For many years it was supposed that these mirrors were produced by some trick. But the extraordinary fact was discovered by Professor Ayrton in Japan that the Japanese themselves were unaware of the magic property of the mirrors. It results, in fact, from an accident of manufacture. Not all Japanese mirrors show the property : those that show it best are generally thin, and with a slightly convex face. It was demonstrated by Professor Ayrton, and I have since accumulated some other proofs, that the effect is due to extremely slight inequalities of curvature of surface.

These arise accidentally in the process of polishing;

The mirrors are cast in moulds. To polish their faces they are laid down on their backs by the workman, who scrapes them violently with a blunt iron tool, using great force. Fig. 37 is taken from a Japanese print in the British Museum. During this process they become slightly convex. The polishing is completed by scouring with charcoal and scrubbing with paper, after which they are " silvered " by application of an amalgam of tin and mercury. Now during the violent scraping with the iron tool the mirror bends, but the thin parts yield more under the pressure than the thick parts do ; hence the thick parts g:t worn away rather more than the thin parts, and remain relatively concave, or at least loss convex.

[Figure 37]

Footnote: These differences of curvature of surface can be proved (i) by aclual measurement, in some cases by spherometer , (2) by placing a convex lens in front to correct the general convexity and then observing directly, as in Foucault's method for testing figure of mirrors ; (3) by reflecting in the mirror the image of a number of fine parallel lines, whose distortion reveals the inequalities of curvature ; (4) by taking a mould in gutta-percha, and reproducing the polished surface by electrotype, which is then silvered. The silvered type will act as a magic mirror. In some cases the "silvering" wears off the surface unequally, remaining last on the parts that are slightly concave. The front then shows faintly to the eye the pattern on the back.

Amongst the proofs that these very slight inequalities of curvature can thus reveal themselves by imprinting a convergivity or a divergivity upon the reflected waves, let me show you this glass mirror, silvered in front and quite flat, but having a star engraved on its back. By merely blowing air against the back to bend it, the star becomes visible in the patch of light reflected from the face. Here the thin parts yield more than the thick ones. Again, simply heating a piece of looking-glass locally, by applying a heated iron stamp to the back of it, will cause the glass to expand in the heated region, and exhibit the pattern of the stamp in the patch of light reflected on the wall by the mirror.

Lastly, I have to exhibit some magic mirrors made by a former pupil of mine, Mr. Kearton — English magic mirrors — which have no pattern upon them, either back or front, but yet show images in the light they reflect upon the wall. Here is one that shows a serpent ; here another with a spider in his web ; another with a man blowing a horn. These are made by etching very slightly upon the brass mirror with acid (an immersion of three seconds only is ample), and then polishing away the etched pattern. After polishing for twenty minutes the pattern will have disappeared entirely from sight. But you may go on polishing for an hour more, and still the minute differences of curvature that remain will suffice, — though quite undiscoverable otherwise — to produce a magic image in the patch of reflected light. Though so excessively minute these differences of curvature of the mirror print their form upon the wavefronts of the light, and alter the degree of convergency or divergency of the beam.
