THE method of teaching Geometrical Optics upon the lines of the wave-theory, which is the key-note to this Lecture, has been followed systematically by the author for fifteen years in his regular courses of instruction in Optics to students attending his lectures in Physics. The treatment of the subject before the audience attending the Christmas course at the Royal Institution, many of whom were juveniles, was necessarily simplified and popularised ; but the essential features of the method remain.

The author also published a brief notice of this method of teaching the subject in 1889 in a paper entitled "Notes on Geometrical Optics," read before the Physical Society of London, and printed in the Philosophical Magazine (October 1889, p. 232).

As the development of the method in the present lecture is so slight, the author deems it expedient to add as an Appendix a few further points showing the application to the establishment of formulae for lenses and mirrors. These are, in fact, established much more readily on this basis than by the cumbrous methods that are consecrated by their adoption in every text-book of Geometrical Optics.

Basis of the Method

In treating optics from the new standpoint, we have to think about surfaces instead of thinking about mere lines. Waves march always at right angles to their surfaces ; a change in the form of the surface alters the direction of march. The wave -surface is to be considered instead of the " ray." The curvature of the surface therefore becomes the all-important consideration. All that any lens or mirror or any system oj lenses or mirrors can do to a wave of light is to imprint a curvatitre upon the surface of the wave. If the wave is initially a plane-wave, then the curvature imprinted upon it by the lens or mirror will result in making it either march toward a point (a real focus) or march as from a point (a virtual focus). If the wave possesses an initial curvature, then all that the lens or mirror can do is to imprint another curvature upon its surface, the resultant curvature being simply the algebraic sum of the initial and the impressed curvatures. As will be seen, in the new method the essential thing to know about a lens or mirror is the curvature which it can imprint on a plane wave : this is, indeed, nothing else than what the opticians call its " power " ; the focal power being inversely proportional to the so-called focal length. Another but less vital point in the method, is the advantage of using instead of the so-called index of refraction a quantity reciprocally related to it, and here denominated the velocity-constant. The use of the index of refraction dates from a time anterior to the discovery that refraction was a mere consequence of the difference of velocity of the waves in different media. The index of refraction is a mere ratio between the sines (or originally the cosecants) of the observed angles of incidence and refraction. The uselessness of clinging to it as a foundation for lens formulae is shown by the simple fact that, in order to accomplish the very first stage of reasoning in the orthodox way of establishing the formulae, we abandon the sines and write simply the corresponding angles, as Kepler did before the law of Snell was discovered. The elementary formulae of lenses are, in fact, where Kepler left them. It is now common knowledge that the speed of light, on which refraction depends, is less in optically dense media than in air. The speed of light in air is not materially different from one thousand million feet per second, or thirty thousand million centimetres per second. If we take the speed of light in air as unity, then the numeric expressing the speed in denser media, such as glass or water, will be a quantity less than unity, and will differ for light of different wave-lengths. It is here preferred to take the speed of light in air, rather than in vacua, as unity, because lenses and optical instruments in general are used in the air. The numeric expressing the relative velocity in any medium is called its " velocity-constant " ; it is the reciprocal of the index of refraction. The velocityconstant, for mean (yellow) light, for water is about 0.75 ; that of crown glass 0.65 ; that of flint glass from 0.61 to 0.56, according to its density.

The Newtonian definition of curvature as the reciprocal of the radius has a special significance in the present method of treating optics : for some of the most important of lens and mirror formulas consist simply of terms which are reciprocals of lengths, that is to say of terms which are curvatures. The more modern definition of curvature as rate of change of angle per unit length of the curve (Thomson and Tait's Natural Philosophy, vol. i. p. 5) is equivalent to Newton's ; for if in going along an arc of length δs, the direction changes by an amount δθ, the curvature is δθ/δs. But the angle δθ = δs/r, where r is the radius of curvature; hence the curvature = δs/rδs = 1/r.

There is, however, another way of measuring curvature, which, though correct only as a first approximation, is eminently useful in considering optical problems. This way consists in measuring the bulge of the arc subtended by a chord of given length.

Consider a circular arc AP, having O as its centre. Across this arc draw a chord PP' of any desired length. The diameter AB bisects it at right angles in M. The short line MA measures the depth of the curve from arc to chord. If the radius is taken as unity the line MA is the versed-sine of the angle subtended at B by the whole chord, or is the versed-sine of the semi-angle subtended at the centre. In Continental works it is frequent to use the name sagitta for the length of this line MA ; and as this term is pre- JB ferable to versed -sine, and can be used generally irrespective of the size of radius, it is here adopted. The proposition is that, for a given chord, the sagitta is (to a first degree of approximation) proportional to the curvature. For it follows from the construction that

[Figure 38]

    MA . MB = (PM)²

assuming PM as unity,

    MA = 1/MB = 1/(2r − AM)

But, for small apertures, AM is small compared with 2r, and may be neglected in the denominator, whence, to a first approximation,

    MA = ½ · 1/r

Twice the sagitta represents numerically the curvature. The error is less than one per cent when the semi-angle subtended at the centre is 10° ; less than two per cent when if. is 15°; less than five per cent when it is 25°.

If the method of reckoning curvatures by means of the sagitta required justification, that is afforded by the fact that the practical method of measuring the curvatures of lenses and mirrors by the spherometer consists essentially in applying a micrometer-screw to measure the sagitta of the arc subtended by a fixed chord, the diameter of the contact circle drawn through the three feet of the instrument. In this case, as indeed in all cases where accuracy, not approximation, is desired, the basis for calculation of the correction exists in the actual size of the diameter of the contact circle, which is a fixed parameter for all measurements made with the instrument. The "lens measurer" used by opticians to test the curvatures of spectacle-lenses is a very simple micrometer which reads off directly the sagitta of the curve against which it is pressed, and indicates on a dial the value in terms of formula [10] on p. 65.

Footnote: Though the sagitta is numerically half the curvature, since all the formulas of first approximation are homogeneous and of the first degree as regards sagittae and curvatures, the numerical factor ½ disappears in passing from sagittae to curvatures, or vice versd.

The sign of the curvature remains to be defined. In the case of actual waves of light, the sign adopted will be + for the curvature of waves which are converging upon a real focus ; — for those which are diverging either from a luminous source or from a virtual focus. This agrees with the practice of the ophthalmists and of the opticians, who always describe a converging lens as positive. A positive lens is one which imprints a positive curvature upon aplajie wave which traverses it.

The unit of curvature, whether of the wave-surface itself or of the surface of any mirror or lens, will be taken so as to accord with modern ophthalmic and optical practice as the dioptrie ; that is to say, the curvature of a circle of one metre radius will be taken as unity. The dioptrie, originally proposed by Monoyer as the unit of focal power of a lens, was formally adopted in 1875 by the International Medical Congress at Brussels, and its great convenience has led to its universal adoption for the enumeration of the focal powers of lenses. That lens which has a focal length of one metre is said to have a focal power of one dioptrie. In other words, such a lens prints a curvature of one dioptrie upon a plane wave which is incident upon it. For the present proposal to extend the use of the term from focal powers (i.e. imprinted wavecurvatures) to the curvatures of curved surfaces in general, the writer is responsible.

In adopting a notation which embodies the new method it is obviously advisable to choose one which lends itself most readily to the existing and accepted notations. In the great majority of books on optics, the recognised symbol for focal length is/; that for radius of curvature r. And in the Cambridge text-books for many years the distances from lens or mirror of the point-object and the point-image have respectively been designated by the letters u and v. Now it is the reciprocals of these which occur in the expressions for the curvatures of surfaces or of waves. The symbols adopted respectively for the four reciprocals are accordingly /% R, U, and V. The accepted symbol for the index of refraction is the Greek letter //, ; for the velocity-constant, which is its reciprocal, we take the letter h. The following is a tabular statement of the symbols and their meanings : — -

    Symbol   Meaning                                 Current
                                                     notation
    ---------------------------------------------------------
      F      Focal curvature, or focal power of a      1/f
             lens or mirror (= dioptries, if the
             metre is taken as the unit of length)
      R      Curvature of surface                      1/r
      U      Curvature of incident wave; that is,      1/u
             the curvature it has acquired by
             travelling from its point of origin
             (the "incident focus") to incidence
      V      Curvature of resultant wave; that is,     1/v
             the curvature with which the wave
             emerges from the lens
      h      Velocity-constant of the medium; that     1/μ
             is, the velocity of light in that
             medium compared with the velocity in
             air, taken as unity

Expansion of Curvatures

If the curvature R of a wave at any point is known it is easy to calculate the curvature at any other point at distance d farther from or nearer to the centre, the formula for the new curvature R′ being as follows:

    R′ = R · 1/(1 ± Rd)                         [1]

The + sign must be taken where the new point is farther from the centre than the point for which the curvature R is specified ; the — sign when it is nearer the centre. This proposition is of use in dealing with thick lenses, and with thin lenses at a given distance apart.

As a preliminary to lens formulae, it is convenient to consider certain cases of refraction.
