[Figure 45]

cinnamic ether. An annular slit in a plate of tin-foil is fixed against the end of the cone ; and the whole prism is placed in a nearly parallel beam of light issuing from the lantern. Beyond it is a lens to focus the light.

Footnote: This liquid is excellent for direct-vision prisms, for it has exactly the same mean refractive index as one kind of the light crown glasses made at Jena. Figs. 46 and 47 depict the direct vision prism with parallel end-faces designed by the author in 1889, and constructed by Messrs. R. and J. Beck. A prism A of this glass

[Figure 46-47]

with a refracting angle of 135° is immersed in a glass cell filled with cinnamic ether. Yellow light, as shown in Fig. 47, goes straight through, while red light is thrown to one side and violet to the other. This prism is very suitable for projecting the spectrum on the screen.

Thus we project upon the white screen in almost exactly true proportions a rainbow. Note the order of the colours, red along the outer edge, then orange, a trace of yellow, green, peacock, blue, and lastly violet along the inner edge. This is the cprrect order as in the natural rainbow. But you often see it incorrectly depicted by artists — they put the colours in the wrong order, or with the red along the inner edge and the violet along the outer.

My assistant will now give us upon the screen the bright spectrum which we saw before, in order that we may study the effects of the different kinds of light on coloured stuffs. Here is a piece of blue drapery, and here a piece of scarlet. What is the effect of putting these into the spectrum, first into one kind of light, and then into another? If we put the blue stuff into the red or orange or yellow light it looks simply black. But in the blue part of the spectrum it looks blue, in the violet part it looks violet, in the green part it looks green. Clearly the surface of it is incapable of reflecting back either red, orange, or yellow, while it is capable of reflecting back green, blue, and violet. In fact, when ordinary daylight falls on it, it absorbs some of the waves and destroys them, while it reflects back to our eyes some others of the waves, and give's us on the whole a blue effect from the green, blue and violet waves mixed together and reflected back. The red stuff, when placed in the red part of the spectrum, looks red, and in the orange and yellow parts it looks dull orange and dull yellow ; while in all the other parts of the spectrum it looks black. This red stuff then absorbs and suppresses all the violet, blue, peacock, and green rays, and reflects back only those at the red end of the spectrum. But, of course, it would only look red if there was some red light present. And the blue stuff would only look blue if there was some blue light present. The colour is really not in the stuff, it is in the light that the stuff reflects.

To prove this let us see how these red and blue stuffs appear when we shine upon them some light that has neither red, nor blue, nor green, nor violet in it, but has yellow only. The monochromatic lamp which Professor Tyndall used to employ here (Fig. 48) has been lit. It consists of an atmospheric gas-burner, into the dim flame of which salt is projected, making a splendid yellow flame devoid of every other kind of light. I hold these blue and red stuffs in the light of the yellow flame. The one appears simply black, the other a dull gray. A set of stripes of gay colours painted upon a board appear simply dull grays and blacks, except the yellow stripe, which seems brighter than all the others. Even gaily-coloured flowers seem merely black or gray ; while the complexion of the human countenance appears simply ghastly.

Footnote: The salt is contained in an annular pan at the top of an external tapering chimney of sheet iron. This annular pan has a gauze bottom, through which on tapping the chimney the salt falls in fine powder into the flame.

[Figure 48]

Now if Newton's view is correct that white light consists of the lights of various colours mixed up together, it ought to be possible to make white light by taking lights of all the various colours and mixing them together. Do not try to mix together pigments out of your paint box — they won't make white paint when* mixed. That is because pigments are not lights — they are darknesses rather than lights. Think for an instant what you do when you want to paint a card crimson. You take a piece of white card, and paint over it a pigment which darkens it, so that it sends back to your eyes crimson only, and absorbs the other parts of the white light. No, you must not mix pigments — you must mix lights, and mix them in the correct proportions.

Now there are several ways of doing this ; and first of them we will take the spectrum colours 'and recombine them to produce white light. We take the spectrum light as it issues obliquely from the prism, and reflect it upon the screen with a piece of silvered mirrorglass. By simply waggling the mirror -glass upon its stand, we cause the spectrum to oscillate rapidly across the screen. The colours then all blend by rapid superposition, and we obtain a white band bordered by colour only at the ends.

Another way to recombine the spectrum is to employ a cylindrical lens (Fig. 33, p. 49), so placed in the path of the diverging coloured rays that it collects them back to a focus on the screen, and gives us back the image of our slit as a white streak.

An independent plan, suggested by Newton, is to paint upon a circular card (Fig. 49), in narrow sectors, the various tints in proportions ascertained by experiment to give the best result; and then, putting this upon a small whirlingtable, spin it round so fast that the colours all blend in the eye, giving, when well illuminated against a black background, the effect of white. A similar arrangement can be made for use in the lantern, the sector-disk being painted in transparent tints, or coloured by affixing narrow wedges of coloured transparent gelatine. This method of colour - mixing by whirling round before the eye surfaces tinted with the colours desired to be mixed, is capable of extension to other cases. Suppose we wish, for example, to mix red and green, or blue and orange together, we have only to paint a round disk (Fig. 50) with the colours desired to be mixed, either in semicircles, quadrants, or in any other desired proportion, and place them upon a whirling machine to see the effect.

[Figure 49]

Footnote: The Colour-whirler actually shown was lent by Messrs. Harvey and Peak, who use strips of brilliantly tinted paper pasted upon a card in such a way as to repeat the gamut of colours from red to violet five times around the circle. If the colours are thus repeated the card does not require to be whirled very fast to produce white.

[Figure 50]

[Figure 51]

The arrangement which I now show offers an improvement in several respects. Upon the whirlingtable is fixed a light cylinder of wood, which is slightly tapered toward the top, so that over it may easily be slipped a paper sleeve or tube upon which the colours are painted. I have here several of these paper tubes. The colours (in most cases coloured paper being cut to shape and pasted on) to be mixed are arranged in two sets of narrow triangles, as shown in the figure. When these are whirled, one gets combinations in all proportions. For instance, if red and green are the two colours chosen, one end of the revolving surface is full red, the other full green, and the colours gradually fade one into the other. About the middle, one obtains a curious gray, which if seen by daylight looks rather greenish ; but by gas-light or lamp-light looks rather reddish owing to the greater relative prevalence of red waves in artificial light. This change of apparent tint is similar to that observed in the rare gem called the alexandrite, which is green by day and deep red by night. Returning from the operations of colour-mixing by rotation, I return to the property of the prism to analyse mixed lights by spreading out the constituent colours as a spectrum. Newton tried an experiment to see whether if you took light of one tint alone you could split it up still further by passing it through a second prism. I introduce across the path of the spectrum on its way to the screen a diaphragm of cardboard, having a narrow slit in it. I push it along so that the slit allows waves of but one particular colour — say green — to pass. Now, if I interpose beyond this slit a second prism, I find that it turns the beam of green light round at an angle, and widens it out a little more, but it does not split it up into any other colours : it is still a green beam. So it would be with any other. When once you have procured a simple tint by dispersing away the other colours to right and left, the prism effects no further analysis 2 of colour.

Footnote: A gem of the emerald species found in a mine in Siberia belonging to the Imperial Russian family.

Footnote: In this sense every pure spectrum tint is a primary tint, and the number of such tints incapable of further analysis is infinite. Each kind of light of a given wave-length is thus a simple tint. But the eye possesses three different sensations of colour, each of which is physiologically a primary sensation. These three primaries are, a red, a rather yellowish gi'een, and a blue-violet. Any other tint than these excites more than one sensation. For instance, a pure spectrum yellow excites both the red and the green sensations ; therefore yellow cannot be called truly a primary. In the same way peacock tint excites the green and the blue-violet sensations.

Now let us try a few experiments in the analysis of colours by the prism. There are many well-recognised tints, known by familiar names, which are not to be seen in the simple colours of the spectrum, for the simple reason that they are compound colours. In the spectrum there is no purple ; for purple is a mixture of red from one end of the spectrum with violet or blue from the other end. Pink does not exist in the spectrum — for pink is red, diluted by admixture with white, that is to say, with a little of every other colour. Neither is there any chocolate colour, which is red or orange diluted with black, that is to say, a little red or orange spread where there is no light of any other colour. Buff, olive, russet, bistre, slate, and many other colours are also compounds. Well, whatever they are, the pnsm can analyse them. Here is a piece of gelatine, such as you may get off a Christmas cracker, stained a beautiful purple. Why does it look purple ? What kinds of light does it actually allow to pass through it that it should look purple ? I have merely to interpose it in the path of the white light for you to see the beautiful purple colour on the screen. Now placing the prism in front of it you see the purple spread out into its. constitutents. There is red at one end ; there are violet and blue at the other. But in between, where orange, yellow, green, and peacock colours should come, there is darkness. The purple stain in the gelatine cuts off all these and lets the others go by. Here is another piece of gelatine stained with magenta — you see it lets more red and a little violet and blue go through. Here is a small glass tank containing the pale purple liquid known as Condy's fluid (permanganate of potash) ; on interposing it across the beam of light through the prism you see (Fig. 52) that it cuts off the yellow and greenish yellow, but transmits red and orange at one end of the spectrum, and at the other violet, blue, peacock, and some green. Here are some coloured liquids in bottles (Fig. 53) ; red liquid (amyl alcohol dyed with anilinered) floating on the top of a green liquid (cupric chloride dissolved in dilute hydrochloric acid) without mixing. The red — as you see when I expose it to analysis in the spectrum — is a good red — it cuts off every tint except red. The green is also a fairly good green — it cuts off everything except green, peacock, and a trace of blue. What will happen if I now shake up the two solutions and mix them ? I obtain a mixed liquid l that cuts off everything, and is simply black. Many other experiments of an instructive kind may be tried with coloured liquids, their apparent tints depending on the kinds of light they absorb and transmit respectively. Any liquid which merely absorbs green will look reddish, since in the balance of colours it transmits, the complementary red will preponderate. Similarly any liquid (or glass) which merely absorbs the blue part of the spectrum will look yellow. It is even possible to find a liquid, which though it looks yellow to the eye really transmits nothing but green and orange, which when mixed have the same effect on the eye as yellow. This proves that the sensation of yellow, though it may be excited by a simple spectrum tint of a particular wave-length, can also be excited by a mixture of other tints, and is therefore not a primary colour-sensation as red, green, and blue-violet are.
