[Figure 52-53]

Footnote: The liquids named possess the very convenient property of separating from one another in a very few minutes. In preparing the experiment a little trouble and care is required to get the solutions to balance. By adding first a little of the red liquid and then a little green as may be required, and trying the effect of shaking up, the liquids may be adjusted. Various other colour-combinations are possible in this v/ay.

And this brings me to another point, viz. that while yellow light can be thus made by mixing together orange and green lights, it is found to be absolutely impossible to produce green 2 by mixing together any two other pure lights. Blue light and yellow light, as remarked above, do not when mixed produce green, but white. This is so fundamental a matter that it is worth while to illustrate it by further experiment.

My assistants have two lanterns. From each of them there is now thrown upon the screen a round white disk of light. In front of one lantern is interposed a film of blue gelatine — and that disk turns unmistak- ably blue. In front of the other lantern is interposed a film of yellow gelatine, and the second disk of light on the screen becomes bright yellow. Now one of the lanterns is turned a little aslant so as to make one of the disks overlap the other (Fig. 54). Where they overlap and the lights mix we have — not green — but white ! I put in the lantern a colour-whirler, having a disk covered over half with blue and half with yellow gelatine, and on whirling it round the blue and yellow mix, and make white.

Footnote: Mixed solutions of chromic chloride and potassium bichromate.

Footnote: Just as also it is impossible to produce red light by mixture of any other two simple lights, or to produce blue-violet by admixture of any other two simple lights. These three — red, green, and blueviolet being the three primary colour sensations.

[Figure 54]

Here is an experiment that any boy might make at home. A cardboard disk is divided into twelve sectors, six of which are covered with blue paper, and the alternate six with yellow (Fig. 55). I put a pin through the centre, and spin it round by hand — and behold blue and yellow are mixed, and FlG' 55' make white.

[Figure 55]

We give the name of " complementary " tints to any pair of tints which thus mixed together make white. That is to say, if any two tints are so related that each contains the constituents that are wanting in the other, then we describe them as the complement one of the other. Here is a table of some tints which experience shows to be complementary one to the other : — Table II — Complementary Tints

    Crimson is complementary to     Moss green
    Scarlet          "              Peacock
    Orange           "              Turquoise
    Yellow           "              Blue
    Primrose         "              Violet
    Green-yellow     "              Purple

There are other cases also not set down on the list. Now seeing that the sensation of white is not excited unless all three primary sensations l (red, green, violet), are stimulated at the same time, it is clear that when two colours are found that are complementary to one another, by no possibility can both be primary colours. One may be, but in that case the other will be a mixture of the two other primaries. If primary red is one of the two complementary tints the other will be a bluish -green or peacock colour made up of primary green and primary blue-violet mixed.

Probably most of you are aware of the subjective colours that are seen on closing the eyes after looking at a bright light. These are connected with the fatigue of the nerve, and with the residual nervous stimulation. But closely connected with them are the "contrast" colours that are seen on a gray background after the eye has been fatigued by looking at any coloured object. The tints of these "contrast" colours are approximately, though not accurately, the complementaries of the respective colours that have excited them. Thus after staring intently for some time at a bright green disk, the after-image against a 'gray wall is of a reddish tint. There are many ways of showing these tints. I will give you as an example that used here in this theatre by the late Professor Tyndall. Against the white wall, half -lit with daylight, I hold up on the end of a stick a cardboard disk about a foot in diameter covered with bright blue paper (Fig. 56). The beams of an electric lamp are directed upon it to make its tint more brilliant. You must look at it fixedly while I count thirty in a distinct voice. When I come to "thirty" I will drop the disk ; but you must continue to look at the same region of the wall, where you will see — now that I drop the disk, — a yellow image or ghost, of the same size as the blue disk. In like manner if I hold up a red disk you will, when your eye is fatigued, see a green or peacock coloured ghost. The reason of the contrast tint is that if you have fatigued the eye, or any region of the retina of the eye, with red waves, that region will be less sensitive for red than it is for the other colours. Hence if gray (i.e. diluted white) is presented in view, the retina at the fatigued region is more sensitive to all the other tints present than it is to red, and will therefore on the whole receive an impression in which green predominates.

Footnote: The red that is primary is a full red. The green that is primary a rather yellowish-green, the violet a rather bluish-violet.

[Figure 56]

[Figure 57]

Another way to see the contrast tints is to stretch upon a ring of cardboard a sheet of semi-transparent coloured tissue paper, and then upon this as a background gum a smaller ring of white cardboard. Diffuse daylight should be allowed to fall from the front upon the white card, making it gray. By lights suitably placed behind the coloured tissue is lit up. The eye therefore sees the gray ring between an inner and an outer circle of colour.

And after looking for a very few seconds will pronounce the gray card to have become of a complementary tint. Thus if the tissue paper is orange in hue the gray card ring takes a bluish-peacock' colour by contrast.

But the persistence of impressions in the eye is not limited to phenomena of colour. All ordinary visual impressions last a perceptible time, the images of brightly lighted objects, even when only viewed for a thousandth of a second will take a whole tenth of a second to die away. If, then, you can present to the eye a second impression before the first one has died away, the effect is the same as though both had been present at one time. A familiar toy depending on this principle, and called the thaumatrope, consists of a bit of white card held between two strings on which it can be twirled. On one side there is painted say a horse ; on the other his rider. On blowing against the card to twirl it you seethe rider (Fig. 58) mounted on his horse. We may try this experiment in a new Way. On one side of a vertical card is painted in outline a birdcage. On the other side, a bird. By a band and pulley we spin the card rapidly ; and lo ! you see the bird within its cage.

[Figure 58]

[Figure 59]

I hold in the lant .n a small disk of sheet metal having a number of holes pierced in it ; giving on the screen a lot of bright points of light. Then on making this disk vibrate on the end of a spring, or rotate about a pin, each little white hole is transformed apparently into a luminous line, moving about on the screen.

Another optical illusion depending chiefly upon the persistence of vision is afforded by the strobic circles which I devised in 1877. On giving these black and white patterns a small " rinsing " motion, the circles and toothed wheels seem to rotate on their axis.

The latest of optical illusions and one not easy to explain, is Benham's colour-top. A number of narrow black-lines are drawn as arcs of circles of various lengths, upon a white surface, half of which (Fig. 61) is coloured black. On revolving this disk, and viewing it by a sufficiently strong light, the arcs of some of the circles appear coloured. The rotation must be neither too slow nor too quick. On reversing the rotation the order of the colours reverses. The effect appears to be due to the intermittent stimulation.

[Figure 60]

[Figure 61]

Footnote: See recent paper in Proceedings of the Royal Society, by Mr. Shelford Bidwell, F.R.S., whose explanation is that when the particular nerve- fibres which give the red sensation are excited at any part of the retina, the immediately adjacent parts of the same nerve-fibres are for a short period sympathetical!y affected, so that a red border seems for an instant to grow around the image of a white object suddenly seen. In the same way, when the image of a white object is suddenly cut off there is a sympathetic reaction giving a transient blue border around the disappearing image.

Another example of effects produced by persistence of the optical impressions in the eye is afforded by an old toy, the zoetrope, or wheel of life; in which the. semblance of motion is given to pictures by causing the eye to catch sight, in rapid sequence, through moving slits, of a series of designs in which each differs slightly from the one preceding. Thus if you want to make the sails of a windmill seem to go round, the successive pictures must represent the sails as having turned round a little during the brief moment that elapses between each picture being glimpsed and the next being seen. These intervals must be less than a tenth of a second, so that the successive images may blend properly, and that the movement between each picture and the next may be small. Mr. Muybridge has very cleverly applied this method to the study of the movements of animals. Anschiitz's moving pictures, illuminated by intermittent sparks, were the next improvement. And the latest triumph in this development of the subject has. been reached in the animatogmph, which the inventor, Mr. R. Paul, has kindly consented to exhibit.

The animatograph pictures are photographed upon a travelling ribbon of transparent celluloid ; the time which elapses between each picture being taken and the next being about one -fiftieth of a second. A scene lasting half a minute will, therefore, be represented by about 1500 pictures, all succeeding one another on a long ribbon. If these pictures are then passed in their proper order through a special lantern, with mechanism that will bring each picture up to the proper place between the lenses, hold it there an instant, then snatch it away and put the next in its place, and so forth, the photograph projected on the screen will seem to move. You see in a street scene, for example, the carts and omnibuses going along; the horses lift their feet, the wheels roll round, foct passengers and policemen walk by. Everything goes on exactly as it did in the actual street. Or you see some children toddling beside a garden seat. A big dog comes up, and the boy jumps astride of him, but falls off (Fig. 62), and rises rubbing his bumps. Or a passenger steamer starts from Dover pier : you see her paddles revolve, the crowd on the pier wave farewells with handkerchiefs or hats, the steamer wheels round, you see the splash of foam, you note the rolling clouds of black smoke proceeding from her funnel, then she goes out of sight round the corner. The reality of the motions is so great that you feel as though you had veritably seen it all with your own eyes. And so you have. You have just as truly seen the movements of the scene as when you have listened to the phonograph you have heard the voice which once impressed the record of its vibrations. Of all the animatograph pictures those that appeal most to me are the natural scenes, such as the waves rolling up into a sea-cave and breaking on the rocks at its mouth, and dashing foam and spray far up into its interior. Nothing is wanting to complete the illusion, save the reverberating roar of the waves.

[Figure 62]

Note. — Since the delivery of these lectures, Mr. Shelford Bidwell, F.R.S., has pursued the subject of the curious colour - effects mentioned at the foot of p. 96, and has reached some extraordinary results. A cardboard disk 8 inches in diameter is half-covered with black velvet, the other half being left white or gray. A sector of 45° is cut away at the junction of the black and white portions, and this disk, suitably balanced, is mounted upon a revolving apparatus to rotate with a speed of about 6 to 8 turns per second. Behind it, so as to be visible at each turn through the gap where the sector has been cut away, is placed a coloured picture, and a bright lamp is placed a few inches in front to illuminate it. The direction of rotation is such that the open sector is preceded by black and followed by white. On thus viewing a picture by intermittent vision, each part appears of a pale colour complementary to its actual tint. A red rose with green leaves appears a green rose with reddish leaves. A blue star on a yellow ground appears as a yellow star on a bluish ground. Black printing on a white paper appears whitish printing on a grayish paper, and so forth.
