Meaning of polarisation — How to polarise waves of light — Illustrative models — Polarisers made of glass, of calc-spar, and of slices of tourmaline — How any polariser will cut off polarised light — Properties of crystals — Use of polarised light to detect false gems — Rubies, sapphires, and amethysts — Polarisation by double refraction — Curious coloured effects, in polarised light, produced by colourless slices of thin crystals when placed between polariser and analyser — Further study of complementary and supplementary tints — Exhibition of slides by polarised light — Effects produced on glass by compression, and by heating.

SCIENTIFIC men often fall into the habit of using long and difficult words to express very simple and easy ideas. The natural consequence is, that people are often led to think that there is something difficult about a really easy subject, whereas the main difficulty is to understand the meaning of the words selected to describe it.

The word "polarisation," used in optics, is one of these terms. It sounds very learned and difficult, but the idea it is intended to express is really very simple. Let me try to give you the idea before we try to fit any name to it.

In my first lecture I endeavoured to give you some simple notions about waves and the way they travel. I asked you particularly to distinguish between the oscillatory motions of the particles and the forward travelling of the waves themselves. Let us return to the motions of the particles. Suppose any particle or group of particles to have motion given to it, a rapid " to-and-fro "- in other words, let it be supposed to vibrate. Then if it is surrounded by a suitable medium, and its vibrations occur with a sufficiently great frequency, it will set up waves in the surrounding medium which will start off from it, travelling away at a definite speed depending on the rigidity and density of the medium. In the case of a compressible surrounding medium such as air, the vibrating body (if vibrating between the limits of frequency appropriate for sound — that is to say, between about 30 per second and 38,000 per second) will compress the air in front of itself as it moves forward, and rarefy the air behind it as it moves back, with the result that it sends off waves of condensation and rarefaction. If, as in Fig. 64, the oscillating

O| body is a sphere moving rapidly up and down along the short path AB, it will tend alternately

B to condense and rarefy the air above and below

•1G' 64' it, and these compressions and rarefactions will travel off upwards and downwards, spreading a little as they go. But hardly any waves of compression and rarefaction will travel off sideways from the oscillating sphere, because in oscillating up-and-down it does not either condense or rarefy the air at its sides. The wave in this case would be described as a longitudinal wave, meaning one which is propagated along the line in which the particular motion exists — in this case vertical. If you want to know more about the travelling of sound-waves, you must read Professor TyndalPs delightful book On Sound ; or if you are deep students you will study Lord Rayleigh's two mathematical volumes on the Theory of Sound.

But now, suppose that you have to deal not with a medium like air that is compressible, but with a medium like jelly that is incompressible, and in which the density is small compared with the rigidity that it opposes to any rapid shear. If in this case you set up an oscillation with a sufficiently great frequency, waves will be /*'\ /'"\ set up which will travel off at a high rate, but *g not in the line of the FlG- 6smotion. On the contrary, they will travel off sideways in all directions in ripples. Let Fig. 65 represent a sphere embedded in the middle of a great block of surrounding jelly, and that it is made to oscillate upand-down as before, but with a great rapidity. It cannot move up without tending to tear or shear the jelly all around its girth, nor can it move down without tending to tear or shear the jelly downwards ; and these shearing stresses travel outward in all directions, so that a particle at a will, as these waves or ripples in the solid jelly reach it, tend also to move up and down. In any medium, whether a jelly or not, if the particles are in such relation to one another that the movement of any of them tends to set up a shearing stress, then that medium will, like the jelly, propagate the disturbances sideways. The waves in such cases would be described as transverse waves — meaning waves which are propagated in directions at right angles to the direction in which the to-and-fro displacements are executed.

Now the waves of light are of the transverse kind ; and though they can pass through air, are not waves of the air as sound-waves are. Waves of light can cross the most perfect vacuum ; they travel thousands of millions of miles in the vacuous space between the stars. They are waves of another medium which, so far as we know, exists all through space, and which we call, using Sir Isaac Newton's term, the ether. If you ask me what the ether is made of, let me frankly say I do not know. But if light consists of waves, and if those waves can travel across the millions of miles that separate the stars from the earth, then it is clear that they must be waves of something ; they are not air- waves nor water-waves, because interstellar space is devoid both of air and of water. They are waves of a medium which, though millions of times less dense than water or air, has yet a property that resists being torn or sheared asunder ; exceeding the resistance to shear even of hard-tempered steel. Though it is not a jelly, since things can move through it more freely than you or I can move through the air, yet it resembles the jelly in this property of resistance to shear, and propagates vibrations transversely to the direction of their displacements. Though we know neither the density of the ether (though it must be very small) nor its rigidity to shear (which must be very great), we do know something which depends on the ratio of these two properties, namely, the velocity of propagation of those ether-waves which we call " light " (see Appendix, p. 156).

Well, now having got this notion about transverse waves, let us go back to the wave-motion model which we used in the first lecture. It has, as you will remember (Fig. 2, p. 8), a row of little white particles, along which row the wave is propagated from left to right, though each little particle moves up and down. It is, therefore, a model of a transverse wave ; the direction of travel of the wave is at right angles to the direction of the displacements.

But if a wave is to travel along a line of march, from A to B, we may fulfil the condition of transverse vibration in other ways. The small to-and-fro motions must be executed across the line of march ; and they may be across the line of march without being vertical — they may be horizontal, or oblique. If I turn my wave-motion model on its side, the little white particles now move horizontally toward you and from you, but the wave still travels from left to right.

If I stretch across the room a long indiarubber cord, holding one end of it in my hand, I can throw it into transverse vibrations. If I move my hand rapidly upand-down, I produce up-and-down vibrations. If I move my hand right-and-left, I get right-and-left vibrations. If I move my hand obliquely to-and-fro, I produce oblique vibrations ; and the cord transmits them all.

Now, all that the word polarisation means is that the motions are being executed in some particular transverse direction. If the vibrations are polarised vertically, that means that they are up-and-down waves that are travelling along. If I say that the light is polarised horizontally, all I mean is that the motions are executed right-and-left across the line of march. Can anything be simpler?

[Figure 66]

Here is a lump of jelly. It will serve excellently to show how a polarised vibration is propagated. I stick into it horizontally two pins with silvered heads — one at one side, the other at the other. If I give a sudden displacement to one pin it quivers, and the jelly carries on the motion to the other. And note, if I strike one so as to make it quiver up-and-down, the other quivers upand-down — here we have a vibration polarised vertically. If I make one quiver right-and-left the other quivers right-and-left — here we have a vibration polarised horizontally. If I make one quiver circularly round and round, the other quivers round and round also ; giving an illustration of a circularly polarised vibration.

[Figure 67]

Now let us go to the waves of light themselves. If you look at a beam of white light you cannot by the eye l tell whether it is polarised to move up-and-down, or right-and-left. In fact you cannot tell whether it is polarised at all. Naturally, if the waves are so excessively small, and vibrate so many millions of millions of times a second, your eye cannot catch their motions.

The fact is that light of any natural kind, whether from the sun, an electric lamp, a flame, or any other source, is non-polarised; that is to say, it consists of vibrations which are not specially directed either up-anddown or right-and-left, or in any other one direction. Natural light, given out by hot bodies, is absolutely miscellaneous. Not only does it consist, as we saw in the last lecture, of a lot of different colours — that is, of different wave-lengths, mixed up together — but it consists of waves whose direction of transverse vibrations are also all jumbled up. At one instant they may be upand-down; then they change to right-and-left, or to oblique, or circular, or elliptical, or possibly to something still more complex. Just think how the light starts from the white-hot tip of the carbon pencil in my electric lamp. The particles of white-hot carbon are in fierce vibration, jostling against one another, and in jostling impart vibrations to the ether — setting up ether-waves. When any one particle gets a sudden jolt it quivers, and gives out a vibration, which we may represent by the curve (Fig. 68), with a lot of little wavelets each like its fellow, perhaps several thousands of them before they die away. Each such vibration would die away like the note of a piano -string struck and left to itself. But perhaps before the motion has died away another jolt sets it off vibrating in a new direction, again to die away. Suppose millions of these little particles, all jostling, and vibrating, and sending out trains of wavelets. It is clear that one ought to expect the utmost admixture of wave-sizes and directions of vibration in the resultant light.

[Figure 68]

Footnote: Not as thrown on the screen. But the eye can be trained to detect the plane of polarisation, for example, of light from the blue sky, which is naturally polarised in directions at right angles to the position of the sun. The training consists in being able to recognise certain appearances called " Haidinger's brushes" which result from the feeble polarising properties of the refracting structures of the eye.

Then, you understand, that as natural light is not polarised in any particular direction, if we want to get polarised light we must do something to it to polarise it. But how ?

Footnote: According to the researches of Fizeau, at least 50,000, on the average, in ordinary light. Prof. Michelson's more recent experiments, in which he has obtained interference between two waves the paths of which differed by more than 20 cm. or 1,000,000 wavelengths, prove that the average number of wavelets in each train must be reckoned in millions.

TABLE III. — POLARISERS

Nature of Apparatus.

    How it works                    Apparatus
    ---------------------------------------------------------
    By reflection                   Black glass at about 57°
                                    Delezenne's polariser
    By refraction                   Glass sheet at about 57°
                                    Bundle of thin glass sheets
                                      set obliquely
    By double refraction            Rhomb of Iceland spar (p. 120)
                                    Double-image prism (p. 125)
    By double refraction,           Slice of tourmaline
      with absorption
    By double refraction, with      Nicol's prism and its modern
      internal reflection             varieties

In Table III. I have set down some eight different ways of polarising, which we will presently consider in their order. But before we deal with any of them, let us go back to the vibrations of cords and see how they can be polarised.

Here (Fig. 69) is an indiarubber cord passing through a wooden box with vertical partitions. These partitions limit the movements and only allow vertical vibrations to pass through. If I vibrate the cord in any way, it is only the vertical components of the vibration that succeed in getting through. The waves, after passing through the box, come out polarised in a vertical plane. If I turn the box over on its side (Fig. 70) it will now transmit only horizontal components of vibration. What will happen, then, if I pass the cord through a second box, as in Fig. 70 ? That depends on the positions of the boxes. If the first one P is set with its partitions vertical, it will polarise the waves vertically, and as these waves travel on they will come to the second box marked

[Figure 70]

[Figure 69]

A. If this also has its partitions vertical, the vertical waves will get through it also. If both boxes are turned over on their side, then the first one will polarise the waves horizontally, and the horizontally polarised waves will pass through both boxes. But if I have the first box P set vertically and the second box A horizontally (Fig. 71), P will polarise the vibrations so that they will not get through A, but will be cut off. However P is placed it will polarise the waves ; if A is turned so as to cross the waves they will be cut off.

[Figure 71]

Upon the lecture table is another model which illustrates the same set of facts more fully. If you understand it you will have no difficulty in understanding the optical apparatus that we are going to use. In this apparatus the vibrations of a thin silk cord — best seen by those in front of the table — are produced by attaching one end to the prong of a tuning-fork, the vibrations of which are maintained by an electromagnetic attachment. To the distant end of the cord is attached a small weight, which has been so adjusted that the cord is thrown into stationary waves. In brief, the vibrations of the cord are tuned to those of the fork. To polarise the vibrations, the motions of the cord are confined by means of a pair of glass plates mounted in wooden cylinders (Figs. 72, 73). At the first nodal point of the cord the first pair of glass plates acts as a polariser, P ; the cord beyond that point vibrating in the plane thus imposed upon it. A pointer fixed upon the wooden cylinder shows the direction of the plane of polarisation. The second pair of glass plates is set at the second nodal point to act as an analyser A. The vibrations of the cord are made vertical by the polariser P, and when the plane of the analyser A is also vertical (as in Fig. 72) the vibrations which pass through the polariser pass through the analyser also. But, if (as in the previous experiment with the boxes) the analyser is turned round a quarter, so that the slit between the glass plates lies across the vibrations (as in Fig. 73) the vibrations are no longer transmitted. To recapitulate, the vibrations are transmitted when the polariser and analyser are parallel to one another : but are cut off and extinguished when polariser and analyser are crossed. Hence, by turning round the analyser to such a position that it cuts off the vibrations we can ascertain with accuracy * the direction of the vibrations proceeding from the polariser.

[Figure 72]

Footnote: Concerning the term, "plane of polarisation," see remarks in Appendix to this Lecture, p. 158.

But why should we linger longer upon mere models when we can operate with light -waves themselves? My assistant throws upon the screen a beam of white light from the electric lamp within the optical lantern. He now places in the path of the beam a large polariser, P (Fig. 74). What this polariser is, I will presently explain. He now S2ts it so that it polarises the light, allowing to fall upon the screen those waves only whose vibrations are executed in a vertical plane. The white disk of light on the screen consists, in fact, of up-anddown light only. Your eye would not tell you whether the light was vibrating up and down, or even that it was polarised at all. To ascertain that the waves are really polarised we must have recourse to an analyser. This analyser, A, is itself simply a smaller polariser. In order that you may see it the better it is mounted (see Fig. 75) by thin strings upon a ring - support, the shadow of which you see on the screen. If this is also set in the proper position to transmit up-anddown vibrations, the polarised light will come through it, both polariser and analyser being clear as glass. If now the analyser A is turned round one quarter it will, though clear as glass, entirely cut off the up-and-down vibrations, with the result (Fig. 76) that no light gets through it. This cutting off of the light by turning 'the analyser one quarter round proves that the light was polarised. When the planes of polariser and analyser are parallel to one another — both vertical, or both horizontal, — then we have the "bright field" of transmitted light. When the planes of polariser and analyser are crossed — one vertical, the other horizontal — then the light is cut off, and we have the "dark field."
