[Figure 74]

Footnote: The model will enable the orientation of the plane of the vibrations to be determined to within about half a degree of angle. That is, if the analyser is as much as half a degree out of the crossed position, the vibrations are not completely extinguished.

There is a gem called the tourmaline which, when cut into thin slices, has the property of polarising light. This gem l is often found of a dark green colour, but also of brown, dark blue, and even ruby tint. Into the beam of ordinary white light now cast upon the screen there is now introduced a thin slice of brown tourmaline (Fig. 77). It looks dark, for it cuts off more than half the light. But such light as succeeds in getting through is polarised — the vibrations being parallel to the longer dimension of the slice. A second thin slice of tourmaline is now introduced, and superposed over the first. When they are parallel to one another light comes through both of them (Fig. 78). But if one of them is now turned round, so that they are crossed, as in Fig. 79, no light can get through the crossed crystals. The one cuts off all horizontal vibrations and horizontal components of vibration, the other cuts off all vertical vibrations and vertical components of vibration. Hence, when crossed, they. produce a "dark field." One acts as polariser, the other as analyser.

[Figure 75-76]

Footnote: The dark green tourmaline is also sometimes called the Brazilian emerald, though it is of entirely different composition from an emerald. The bishops of the South American Catholic churches wear tourmalines in their episcopal rings, instead of emeralds.

Let us return to the big polariser (Fig. 74) which we used in the previous experiment, and which was as clear as glass. It is made of Iceland spar, a natural crystal, which once was common but now is rare and expensive. As imported from the mine in Iceland this spar possesses the peculiar property known as "double refraction": when you look through it you see everything double. Here is a fine specimen mounted in a tube. Look at your finger through it ; you will see two fingers. It is a substance which splits the waves of light into two parts, giving two images ; and, moreover, polarises the light in the act of splitting it, so that each part is polarised. *We do not, however, want both images ; we want only one. What do we do ? We adopt the method proposed eighty years ago by William Nicol, a celebrated Scotch philosopher, and construct out of a crystal of the spar a "polarising prism," or Nicol prism. Here are several

[Figure 77-78-79]

[Figure 80]

Nicol prisms of various sizes ; and also several modern modifications l of the Nicol prism. Here also is a large wooden model to illustrate Nicol's method.

Footnote: In Foucault's modification, a film of air is interposed between the two wedges of crystal. In Hartnack's prism a film of linseed oil is interposed, and the ends of the wedges are squared off. I have myself from time to time suggested several modifications which are

[Figure 81-82]

improvements upon the original Nicol prism. In one of these, the natural end- faces of the prism are sliced away parallel to the crystallographic axis so as to leave terminal faces that are " principal planes" (Fig. 81), and the crystal is then sliced with an oblique cut

Selecting a piece of Iceland spar of suitable proportions we slice it across (with a piece of copper wire, used as a saw, and some emery powder) in an oblique direction from one of its two blunt corners to the other ; polish the surfaces, thus dividing the prism into two wedges. These are then cemented together again with Canada balsam (a resinous cement); and the polarising prism is complete. Its operation upon light is as follows. When the waves enter through one endface they are split into two parts which take slightly different directions, and strike at different angles upon the film of balsam. As a consequence one of the two beams when it meets the film of balsam is reflected off sideways, as from an oblique mirror, while the other goes through the prism and emerges at the other end-face. Consequently only one of the two beams gets through the prism, the other being suppressed or reflected out of the way. that is also a principal plane, and these wedges are then reunited with Canada balsam or linseed oil. In a cheaper modification — a "reversed Nicol" — the natural end-faces are cut off (Fig. 82) so as to reverse the shape, and the oblique cut is then made along a reversed diagonal and is nearly in a "principal plane." In a third modification the end-faces are first trimmed off obliquely as principal planes of section through one of the natural edges of the end - face ; an oblique cut is then given (as in Fig. 83) between two of the terminal arretes, from FM to GN, and the two pieces are then transposed ; and they are finally reunited by balsam along two of their natural faces.

[Figure 83]

Prisms made in Nicol's way

[Figure 84]

have usually oblique end-faces of diamond shape. The vibrations which pass through are those executed in the direction parallel to the shorter diagonal (Fig. 84); while those which are suppressed are those parallel to the longer diagonal. The large polariser used in front of the lantern (Fig. 74, p. 118) is simply a large Nicol prism.

Footnote: In consequence of the dearth of spar, large Nicol prisms can only be procured at extravagant prices. In 1888 Mr. Ahrens constructed for me a large reflecting polariser, having a clear aperture of 2⅞ inches. For projection purposes it is quite equal to a Nicol prism of equal aperture, and is much less costly. In this reflecting polariser, which is constructed on a principle suggested by Delezenne, the light is first turned to the proper polarising angle (about 57°) by a large total-reflexion prism of glass cut to a special shape. It is then reflected back parallel to its original path by impinging upon a mirror of black glass covered by a single sheet of the thinnest patent plate glass to increase the intensity of the light. Fig. 85

[Figure 85]

Fig. 85 shows the design of this prism. Compared with a large Nicol prism it has one disadvantage : it cannot be conveniently rotated, so that it polarises the light in a fixed plane. To obviate this defect, I devised an "optical rotator" to place on the end of the prism. This consists simply of two plates, q₁ and q₂ of ' ' quarterwave " mica ; the first of them being mounted with its axis fixed at 45° to the plane of polarisation ; the second q₂ being mounted in a revolving frame .which can be turned to any desired position. The effect of rotating this plate is to rotate the plane of polarisation.

Let us devote a little further attention to this phenomenon of the double-refraction that thus yields us two beams of light that are polarised in different planes. Here is another wave-motion model (Fig. 86) constructed to show two sets of waves which are polarised in planes mutually at right angles to one another. Here are two waves of silvered beads, both 01 which, when I turn the handle of the model, will march along. Both have the same wave-length, both march at the same pace and toward the same end. But there is this difference between them : in one the displacements are polarised at 45° one way ; in the other the displacements are at 45° the other way. Of course there is some mechanism inside the box to make them move thus ; but they illustrate what is meant by saying that there can be two waves polarised at right angles to one another.

[Figure 86]

But the point still remains why should the spar so act on the light as to split it into two oppositely polarised beams? Let us first prove that the spar really does this. Here is a piece of spar mounted as a doubleimage prism. In front of the lantern is placed first a metal diaphragm having a round hole in it, the image of which is focused on the screen, giving a circular white spot. Now interposing the double-image prism we see that it splits the light into two parts, diverting half the light away from the original spot, and producing a second one which (with -this size of aperture in the diaphragm) overlaps the first. On rotating the double-image prism it is seen that the ordinary image remains stationary, whilst the extraordinary image revolves around it. Now to prove that they are each polarised, I interpose a Nicol prism. On rotating it, it is observed to cut off first one of the two spots and then the other. If the Nicol prism is set so as to transmit only vertical vibrations, while the double-image prism is rotated it is observed that when, as in Fig. 88, the two images are in the position vertically above one another, the ordinary is cut off, while the extraordinary is transmitted. On turning round the doubleimage prism the ordinary image gradually appears, while the extraordinary fades away, until when the prism has been turned one quarter round the ordinary image is transmitted, and the extraordinary cut off, as is evident from Fig. 89. If the prism is turned to 45° both images are equally bright, the directions of the resolved vibrations being as shown by the fine lines in Fig. 90.

Footnote: That is a prism of spar mounted in such a way as to throw both the images upon the screen. There are several modes in which such may be constructed. The usual mode is to take a wedge of spar cemented to a corresponding wedge of glass. The " extraordinary " beam (that is to say, the beam whose vibrations are executed in planes parallel to the crystallographic axis) goes straight through the " ordinary " beam, and emerges obliquely, giving a displaced image. If the prism is made of two wedges of spar cut at different angles and crossed, the " ordinary " image is the central one while the "extraordinary" image revolves.

[Figure 88-89-90]

Now, having proved that the spar does split the light into two beams in which the vibrations are moving in different ways, we have yet to consider how it effects this. The resolution of oblique movements into two components at right-angles to one another is an important principle in mechanics, and one which is best illustrated for our purpose by means of a model. Suppose that there is a displacement taking place obliquely, it can always be resolved into two parts — a part which is up-and-down, and a part which is right-and-left in direction. The model (Fig. 91) is fixed upon a board, on the corner of which is drawn a little diagram. Suppose the oblique motion to be from A to B, then you can resolve that oblique motion into two parts — a vertical part marked AV, and a horizontal part marked AH. Every schoolboy knows the problem called the " parallelogram of forces," according to which when two forces act on one point at the same time, they combine into a single oblique resultant along the diagonal of the parallelogram of which the two component forces are sides. Well our present problem is simply the converse to that. Here in the model are two wooden slides, with crossheads. One can slide up-and-down only : the other right-and-left only. Running in grooves in the two cross-heads is a roller fixed to the end of a third bar of wood, which can be set in any oblique position, and then slid along obliquely by hand. If I set this third bar horizontal and slide it along, all the movement it gives is horizontal — there is no vertical component. If I set it vertical and slide it up and down, it simply moves the vertical slide up and down. But if I set it obliquely, and slide it along, then part of its motion produces a movement of the vertical slide, while the horizontal component of its motion produces a movement of the horizontal slide. How much of the motion will be vertical, and how much horizontal, will depend obviously on the angle at which the original motion is imparted. Now there is one particular angle at which the resolved portions would be equal to one another. What is that angle ? If I set the bar which produces the displacement exactly midway, at 45°, that displacement will be resolved into two equal components. You will remember that at 45° the double-image prism yielded two images of equal brightness.

[Figure 91]

Such a resolution into two parts can be produced on oblique waves of light by any of the crystals here, such as Iceland spar, quartz, mica, or selenite, provided the crystal possesses a particular kind of structure. The condition is that the crystal shall possess a greater optical rigidity — a greater stiffness that is — in one direction than in another. You know what one means when one talks about the grain in a piece of wood — how much easier it is to split in one direction than in another. But this grain, which depends on the fibrous structure, manifests itself in other ways than by ease of cleavage. A piece of wood is. harder to bend along the grain than across it. And so with some crystals : they possess an invisible structure, a grain so fine that we cannot see the fibres or lines of structure ; but that grain manifests itself in various ways. There are differences in ease of cleavage, and also differences in rigidity in different directions. This particular crystal — Iceland spar — has a greater rigidity in one direction than in another, and, as a result, any wave of light passing obliquely into it is split into two portions, one having vibrations parallel to the axis of greatest rigidity, and another portion having vibrations parallel to the axis of least rigidity ; therefore at right angles to the former. That is why it splits the light into two parts, and why those parts are each polarised. Some crystals, namely, diamonds and garnets, are equally rigid in all directions, and therefore these do not show any double refraction, nor do they polarise the light.

Footnote: The word rigidity is here preferred, though in many treatises it would be spoken of as "elasticity." To say that the crystal possesses different " elasticities " in different directions — which is quite correct — would convey to many people an erroneous idea, because of the incorrect way in which the word " elastic " is often used. Elastic does not mean that a thing can be easily stretched. The hardest hard steel is more perfectly elastic than a bit of indiarubber, but it certainly is not so stretchable. In saying that it has elasticity we mean that however little we may succeed in compressing or stretching it, it returns back, when released, to its former shape or size. In scientific treatises that substance is regarded as having the highest co-efficient of elasticity which requires the greatest stress to produce a given deformation or strain. When we are dealing, as in the case of transverse displacements, with motions tending to shear (see p. 107 above) the medium, the particular elasticity to be considered is the elasticity which resists shearing, and for this the term rigidity is entirely appropriate. In all this optical work we are of course dealing not with the mechanical elasticity, but with the optical elasticity, that is to say, with the elasticity of the ether within the substance. It is this which in the crystals in question is regarded as greater in one direction than in another. The greater the rigidity the higher is the velocity of propagation of the wave whose displacements are in that direction. See Appendix to Lecture III. p. 156.

Here, again, is a model to illustrate the splitting of the waves. Two thin flexible strips of ebonite, O and E (Fig. 92), are inserted into saw-cuts in the end of a cylinder of wood. In the other end I can fix a third strip, A. Notice, if you please, that O is set with its edge vertical, and is capable of vibrating right and left ; while E is set with its edge horizontal, and can vibrate up and down only. Holding the wooden cylinder in my left hand, I apply my right hand to give a vibratory movement to the strip A at the other end. If I waggle A from right and left, then O vibrates from right and left. If I waggle A up and down, then E vibrates up and down, while O is quiet. If now I impart to A an oblique l motion, both O and E vibrate, the oblique motion being resolved into a vertical part and a horizontal part.

[Figure 92]

Returning to the waves of light themselves, let us "now see some of the beautiful effects which result from these operations of splitting the vibrations into two parts, of recompounding them after passing, through a slice of crystal, and then of analysing — that is to say, resolving — the light that falls upon the screen.

Footnote: The end of the cylinder into which A is fixed is capable of being turned round on a joint at J, the cylinder being made in two parts fitting on one another.
