Suppose the polarised light to fall on a thin slice of crystal that has its axis set obliquely across the beam. Then the vibrations in going through the crystal are split, as I have explained, into two parts, one vibrating parallel to the axis, the other part at right angles : and they do not take the same time to traverse the crystal film because of the difference between the rigidity in the two directions. And as the wave-lengths of different colours are different, the waves of various colours, though they traverse the same actual thickness, emerge in different states. When the two components of a wave of any given colour recombine on emergence, they will recombine to form a vibration in some new direction, and that resultant direction — whether oblique or elliptical— will be different for different colours. Hence it follows that the analyser will cut off more of one colour than of another; and the light which comes through the analyser will be the total of all the resolved parts of each kind of light. If, for instance, the thickness of the crystal is such that the yellow light on emerging recombines to form a nearly vertical vibration, then the analyser when horizontal will cut off the yellow, and the resultant light that comes through — the total of all the other parts — will be of a dark violet hue. Just as the colours in the Newton's rings depend on the thickness of air film between the glasses, so do these colours of the film of crystal in the polariscqpe depend on the thickness of the film (see p. 139).

The next object to be shown you is a slice of selenite that is exceedingly thin at one end, and thick at the other, being tapered as a very thin wedge. It exhibits most magnificently the Newton's tints up to the end of the third order. It will serve as a standard of comparison for other slices. For instance, there is now placed in the apparatus a uniform piece of crystal. It shows in the dark field the red of the second order. I therefore know that it is precisely of the same thickness as the wedge is at the place where the wedge shows the same red tint. This red turns to a vivid green when the analyser is rotated so as to give the bright field. So again a slice which in the dark field gives a violet of the second order changes in the bright field to the complementary primrose tint.

I now take two prepared pieces of mica, which will be exhibited to you first separately and then together. One of them shows the blue of the second order, a tint which by reference to the table is the same as that produced by an air film 13 millionths of an inch thick. The other shows a yellow of the second order, corresponding to an air film 18 millionths of an inch thick. Now guess what will happen if they are both put in together. Will blue and yellow make green ? Not by any means. If superposed (with their axes both at 45° to the right) they will have the same effect as a piece of mica would have if its thickness was equal to that of the two added together : or it will act as a film of air in the Newton's rings 31 millionths of an inch thick, giving a tint which, by the table, you see to be a rose red. My assistant slides one crystal over the other (Fig. 97) and you observe in this case the unexpected, though predicted, result that blue and yellow added in this way make pink. Let one of the crystals now be turned about so as to put its axis 45° to the left, so that it will act negatively, giving the same result as if we had subtracted one thickness from the other. What tint ought it to give ? Subtracting 13 millionths (blue) from 18 millionths (yellow), we obtain the answer that it ought to give the same tint as an air film 5 millionths of an inch thick, which tint is a grayish white. Look for yourselves and see how on the screen where the blue (reversed) crystal overlaps the yellow crystal, the resultant tint is a grayish white.

[Figure 97]

The next object is a wedge combination made of twenty-four very thin pieces of mica set to overlap one another, so as to form a wedge in steps. It, like the smooth wedge of selenite, gives the Newton tints of the first three orders ; in this case, however, not gradating finely into one another, but presenting sudden changes from the tint of one thickness to the tint of the next. Where the crystal shows the nearest approach to white, namely, at a point half way along the first order, it corresponds to an air film having a thickness of one-half of the length of the wave of yellow light. Hence such a crystal is called a half-wave plate. If it is placed (with axis also at 45°) upon one of the other slices of crystal in the polariscope, it is observed to raise all the tints by an amount corresponding to an addition of 11 millionths of an inch to the corresponding thickness of air film, and changes each to almost exactly 1 its complementary tint. Whitish in the dark field, it is nearly black — a very dark purple — in the light field. The next slide to be put in the polariscope is an illustration of this principle. In the dark field you see a white swan which, when I turn the analyser to give us the bright field, changes to a black swan. The space, in the slide, within the outline of the swan, is covered with a piece of half-wave selenite. I possess another slide in which a baker's boy attired in white clothes, with a sack of flour on his back, changes to a chimney-sweep bearing a bag of soot.

Footnote: Not precisely exactly, as it cannot be an exact half-wave plate for all different colours. It is selected so as to be an exact half- wave plate for that tint that is brightest to the eye, namely, yellow, or yellow-green.

A slice of crystal half as thick as the half-wave plate is called a quarter- wave plate. It produces a retardation of one quarter of a wave 1 (for yellow light) between the two components of vibration that traverse the slice.

Here is a beautiful object. A thin slice of selenite has been ground so as to be hollow on one face like a concave lens, thin in the middle, thicker at the edges. As a result it shows Newton's rings in a far more splendid manner than Newton's delicate air film ever showed them. Along with this concave selenite I now introduce a slide made up of twelve sectors of quarter-wave crystal, set with their axes alternately at 45° to the right and 45° to the left. They seem to dislocate the Newton's rings, pushing the alternate segments in or out by one quarter of a whole "order" of tints. Beyond these objects, and next the analyser, I now introduce upright 2 a quarter-wave plate. And now, on rotating the analyser we have the strange appearance of all these dislocated rings of colour marching inwards to disappear at the centre, though succeeded in turn by other rings. Revolving the analyser in the opposite sense causes the rings to seem to grow at the centre and march outwards.

Footnote: The quarter- wave, if set with axis at 45°, to produce as mentioned a difference of phase of a quarter between the two components, produces circularly polarised light. In all positions of the analyser light still comes through, nearly equally ; there is no dark field. Also, if a quarter-wave is placed, along with other polarising objects (such for example as the concave selenite next described), but is set with its axis vertical, instead of at 45°, and is inserted between the polarising object and the analyser, it produces great varieties of tint, each tint in changing to its complementary going, while the analyser is turned, through an intermediate series of tints.

Footnote: See preceding note.

Here is another object of great beauty, a butterfly in form, cut out of selenite ; and here also is a heart's-ease ; and here some daisies which, though pale yellow in the dark field, turn to purple Michaelmas daisies in the bright field. To pretty devices like these there is no end.

We may now apply our knowledge to a further study of complementary and supplementary tints. A few minutes ago I showed you (Fig. 87, p. 125) how the double-image prism as analyser gives us two polarised images, which, when the polarised light passes through a circular aperture of suitable size, overlap one another. If with the same arrangement I cover the aperture with a thin slice of mica or selenite, and superpose a vertical quarter-wave plate, our two overlapping disks on the screen are seen to give us two complementary colours, as though we had two analysers, one of which had been turned through 90°. As we turn the double-image analyser the two images revolve around one another exactly as they did previously. But as they revolve they change their colour in regular successions. And in every position, whatever tint one image shows, the other shows the complementary tint; while in every position the patch of light where they overlap is white. But that is because we take the white light of the electric lamp and are resolving it into two complementary constituents. Now if I interpose a piece of coloured glass to colour the beam, we shall resolve that coloured light into two constituents which we may describe as "supplementary" to one another. Blue glass, as we found last lecture, lets some green and violet pass as well as blue ; and here again you see the fact revealed. Red glass on the contrary is fairly monochromatic; for though we split its light into two supplementary beams, both are red, scarcely differing in hue from one another.

[Figure 87]

Natural crystal patterns, produced on glass by pouring upon it some crystallisable solution which is then allowed to dry, form objects of great beauty. Here, for example, is a plate prepared from a solution of antipyrin. It produces an effect like frost on the windowpane. But the delicate traceries and plumes, when placed in the polariscope, show the most gorgeous play of colours, as you see. And here are some crystals of sulphate of copper, and some of pyrogallic acid, which are equally curious.

Now there are in nature sundry substances besides crystals which possess different rigidities in different directions. Thin slices of wood, for example, and bone, and horn, and many other animal and vegetable structures. Here is a thin slice of horn. It is nearly transparent and colourless. But if put into the polariscope, with its grain inclined at 45° to the vertical, you see at once the remarkable streak of colour which it produces. Here again is a quill-pen flattened out and mounted as a polariscope object. It is really quite gorgeous in its hues.

Here is a very interesting object, the natural lens from the eye of a codfish. Having a fibrous and radial structure it shows a black cross in the dark field.

Glass, under ordinary circumstances, is devoid of any difference in rigidity between one direction and another. Nevertheless, if it is suddenly heated or suddenly cooled, the unequal expansion of its parts produces differences in rigidity which make themselves visible in the polariscope. Here, for example, is a small square piece of glass, which at present shows no colour or any other effect when placed in the polariscope. But if it is dropped into a heated brass frame which will quickly warm its edges before the central part of it has time to expand, its structure will be put under unequal stresses, and the resulting strains will show themselves in the strange patterns of colours which you now see growing into sight upon the screen.

If a hot piece of glass is suddenly chilled, so that the outer part cools and contracts before the inner part has time to cool, the piece may acquire and remain in a state of permanent strain. Such glass, usually described as "unannealed," is very liable to break with almost explosive violence. Here is a square piece of glass, of no colour in itself, but which has been suddenly chilled. Its state of permanent strain is at once revealed by the peculiar pattern and the dull tints that seem to form around a distorted cross radiating from its centre. A second square of glass which has been still more suddenly cooled shows the same black cross (Fig. 98), but the tints in the corners of the square run up into the second order. Here again is a short cylinder of glass which was suddenly chilled all round its outside. The peripheral surface has contracted upon the inner part and compressed it with an enormous force. As a result you see not only the black cross indicative of a radial disposition of the axes of elasticity, but a number of concentric rings coloured with the now familiar succession of Newton's tints right up to the fourth order.

[Figure 98]

Footnote: The extreme case is presented by "Rupert's drops," which are drops of melted glass suddenly cooled by dropping them into water. When examined in polarised light (best when immersed in a small glass tank filled with oil to obviate surface reflexions) they show fine colours.

And now I am going to squeeze a piece of glass mechanically, by gripping it in a strong brass frame and then forcing a point against its side by turning a strong screw. In the dark field the glass itself shows neither light nor colour, until I put on the screw. But so soon as compression is applied a luminous pattern at once seems to grow, stretching off in two patches at about 45° on each side of the point where the screw point has been forced against the glass. Tightening the screw makes the internal strain greater, and the pattern more brilliant. Loosening the screw releases the strain, and the glass resumes its ordinary colourless state. So, you see, you can use polarised light not only to detect false gems from real, not only to tell glass from crystal, but also to ascertain whether any piece of glass is likely to break or not. Any piece of glass that has been too suddenly cooled, that is, has not been properly annealed by slow cooling down from the furnace heat, can always be detected by the colours it shows when placed in the polariscope between polariser and analyser.

For such purposes a very simple polariscope, such as any ingenious boy might construct for himself, is quite sufficient. Here (Fig. 99) is such a polariscope, made entirely of glass. The polariser is simply a flat piece of window-glass, 9 inches long by 5 inches wide, blackened with black varnish on its under side, and laid down on a simple frame of wood. Two other pieces of glass are cut of the size 8¼ by 5 inches. One of these is of clear window-glass, the other of ground glass. Across the lower part of the clear piece, and at 1⅝ inch from its edge, is cemented a strip of glass 5 inches long by 1 inch broad, to serve as a ledge on which to support the objects when being looked at. These two pieces of glass are joined at the top by a hinge of paper or cloth cemented to them ; and they stand up, like a roof, over the piece of blackened glass, being kept in their places on the baseboard by two strips of wood which are fastened to the board 9¾ inches from one another. The baseboard should be 17 inches long by 5 inches wide. Daylight or lamp-light is allowed to strike upon the ground glass, and thence passes down to the blackened glass, is reflected at an incidence of about 57° to its surface, and so passes as a polarised beam through the piece of clear glass on its way to the eye. As analyser, seeing that Nicol prisms are expensive, a cheap substitute must be found. One that is quite good enough for many purposes, may be made by taking a bundle made of eight or ten very thin slips of glass, each about 1½ inch long and ⅝ inch wide, and fixing them with sealing wax obliquely across a small wooden tube or box with open ends. They should be fixed in the wooden tube so that the glass slips are inclined at about 33° to the direction in which the light is to pass through the tube.

[Figure 99]

With quite simple apparatus you can verify and repeat many of the experiments that have now been shown before you. There are many others, equally beautiful, that I have not shown ; for in a single lecture one can only deal very incompletely with this fascinating and complicated subject of polarisation. I have not shown you how quartz crystals possess a special property of rotating the polarised light, nor have I told you how solutions of sugar and sundry other liquids are found also to produce an optical rotation. Indeed, the regular way adopted in sugar factories to measure the amount of sugar in a watery syrup is to put some of it into a polariscope and measure how much it turns the direction of the vibrations. Lastly, I have said nothing about the remarkable discovery with which Faraday crowned his researches in this place, namely, that the polarised waves of light can be rotated by a magnet. Let me hope that some day you may learn of these marvellous discoveries, to which the things you have seen to-day constitute a first step.

Footnote: The very thin glass used for "covers" for microscopic objects is suitable. It is usually supplied only in round cover-disks. But any good optician could procure rectangular slips of the size named.
