ON p. 34 it is remarked that light- waves travel slower in denser media; and on p. 129 it is explained how in a double-refracting crystal the waves are split into two sets which travel with different velocities. It is expedient to enter further into the question of the velocity of propagation of light-waves. If it is assumed as a fundamental point that the velocity of propagation of a wave is equal to the square-root of the elasticity of the medium divided by its density (or, as expressed in symbols, v = √(E/D), which is Newton's law), then it is only possible to account for the co-existence of two different velocities by supposing that displacements in different directions either evoke a different elasticity or call into operation a different density. But, since the medium of which the waves constitute light is the ether, one has to deal, in the case of the transmission of light through crystals, with the ether as it exists in the crystal. If we assume that the ether acts as an incompressible homogeneous elastic solid, then the ordinary theory of elasticity suffices as a theory of the ether. For long this " elastic-solid theory " of the ether has held sway, and has received elaborate mathematical treatment at the hands of Green, Fresnel, MacCullagh, Neumann, Cauchy, and others. On this view the ether particles within crystals are arranged differently in different directions, symmetrically with respect to three rectangular axes, and therefore the properties of the ether as a medium for transmitting waves will be modified by the presence of the crystalline matter.

But here a difference of view may arise ; for it may be held (with Fresnel) that the presence of the crystalline matter modifies the density of the ether without altering its elasticity ; or it may be supposed (with MacCullagh and Neumann) that the presence of the crystalline matter modifies the elasticity in different directions without affecting its density. In either case the assumptions lead to equations that fit the fundamental facts of double-refraction and polarisation. But there arises this difference that whereas the theory of Fresnel supposes the displacements to occur at right angles to the so-called " plane of polarisation," that of MacCullagh treats them as executed in that plane. As to the actual direction in which- the displacements are executed, the properties of tourmaline suffice (apart from other proofs) to determine the fact that in the extraordinary wave, which is transmitted, the displacements are executed parallel to the principal axis of the crystal, while in the ordinary wave, which is absorbed, the displacements are at right angles to that axis. The simple proof being (see Philosophical Magazine, August 1881) that tourmaline is opaque (at least in thick slices) to all light travelling along the principal axis of crystallisation ; hence it absorbs those vibrations which are transverse to that axis. (Compare p. 119 above.)

But the elastic-solid theory is not the only possible theory of light. Instead of supposing the ether to be itself modified in arrangement or properties by the presence of crystalline matter we might suppose it to be itself isotropic, having equal elasticity and density in every direction, but that in its motions it communicates some of its energy to the particles of matter through which the wave is travelling. If the particles of gross matter thus load the ether their vibration will during the passage of the wave take up some of the energy and retard the rate at which the group of waves can travel. We should then have a difference between the velocity of propagation of the individual waves themselves and the velocity of propagation of the group of waves ; and in that case the velocity of propagation of the group — the apparent velocity of light — would be slower than the velocity of the waves themselves, and would be different for waves of different frequency. This is in fact the phenomenon of dispersion. In the case of crystalline media the retardation and the dispersion would be different in different directions, and would depend upon the direction of the displacements with respect to the axes of the crystal. But as to the connection between the molecules of matter and the ethereal medium involved in such theories, very little is known, and there is room for many different hypotheses as to the nature of such connection. Helmholtz, Kelvin, Lommel, Sellmeier and others have made various suggestions of which an admirable account is to be found in Glazebrook's " Report on Optical Theories," British Association Report ', 1885.

The electromagnetic theory of light which Maxwell founded upon the basis of the experimental work of Faraday has now definitely superseded all the purely mechanical theories. Some account of this theory is given in the Appendix to Lecture Five, p. 230.

The only other point that need claim attention here is the use of the term " plane of polarisation." This term, which is variously defined by different writers, is used to denote a plane with respect to which the polar properties of the wave can be described. It must necessarily contain the line along which the wave is being propagated (that is, the "ray" lies in this plane) ; but, so far as the orientation of this plane around the ray is concerned, its definition with respect to the polar properties is purely a matter of convention. The following is Herschel's definition (Encyclopedia Metropolitana, article "Light," p. 506) — "The plane of polarisation of a polarised ray is the plane in which it must have undergone reflexion, to have acquired its character of polarisation ; or that plane passing through the course of the ray perpendicular to which it cannot be reflected at the polarising angle from a transparent medium ; or, again, that plane in which, if the axis of a tourmaline plate exposed perpendicularly to the ray be situated, no portion of the ray will be transmitted." If we refer to the Nicol prism (Fig. 84, p. 123) we shall see that, according to the convention thus laid down by definition, the plane of polarisation of the light that emerges is parallel to the longer diagonal of the end-face •; and the vibrations are executed at right angles to this. To avoid periphrasis in these Lectures the author speaks of the plane in which the vibrations are executed as the plane in which the wave is polarised (see descriptions of Figs. 69-73, pp. 113-117).
