The spectrum stretches invisibly in both directions beyond the visible part — Below the red end are the invisible longer waves that will warm bodies instead of illuminating them — These are called the calorific or infra-red waves. Beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum are the invisible shorter waves that produce chemical effects — These are called actinic or idtra-violet waves — How to sift out the invisible ultra-violet light from the visible light — How to make the invisible ultra-violet light visible — Use of fluorescent screens — Reflexion, refraction, and polarisation of the invisible ultra-violet light — Luminescence : the temporary kind called Fluorescence, and the persistent kind called Phosphorescence — How to make " luminous paint" • — Experiments with phosphorescent bodies — Other properties of invisible ultra-violet light — Its power to diselectrify electrified bodies — Photographic action of visible and of invisible light — The photography of colours — Lippmann's discovery of true colour-photography — The reproduction of the colours of natural objects by trichroic photography — Ives's photochromoscope.

ALL kinds of light in the visible spectrum are comprised between the extreme red at one end and the extreme violet at the other. Their wave-lengths vary between about 32 millionths of an inch (extreme red) and 15 millionths of an inch (extreme violet). But besides the waves of various colours, between those limits, which are visible, there are other waves that bring no sensation to our eyes, which are invisible, and yet are lightwaves. In brief, the spectrum extends in both directions invisibly, both below the extreme red and beyond the extreme violet.

Perhaps you raise the objection that if such waves are invisible they cannot be waves of light. Well, if you were to lay down as a definition beforehand that the term " light " must be applied only to the waves that are visible to the human eye, there is nothing more to be said. But what if there are other eyes, or other processes that will enable these waves to be observed ? Further, if it is found that these invisible waves agree with the visible waves in other important respects, if, in fact, it is found that they can be reflected, refracted, polarised, and diffracted, then we are bound to regard them as light. They may have wave-lengths that are larger than that of the red waves, or smaller than that of the violet waves, and so our eyes, with their limited range of perception, may fail to be sensitive to them. Nevertheless if in their physical properties they agree with the visible kinds, then the fact that to us they are invisible simply demonstrates the imperfection of our eyes. Had we lived all our lives behind screens of red glass we should never have known anything of green or blue waves : we should have been blind to waves of these particular kinds. But though we should never have seen them that would not prove that they were not waves of light.

Now that part of the invisible spectrum which consists of waves of too large a size — of too great a wave-length — to affect our eyes possesses another property, namely, that of warming the things upon which it falls. Some of the visible waves, particularly those toward the red end of the spectrum, share the same property, but to a less extent. The longer invisible waves are called variously the calorific or infra-red waves. We shall deal with these in the next lecture. At the other end of the spectrum, beyond the violet, we have again waves which are invisible by reason of being of too small a size to affect our sense of sight; and these possess several remarkable properties. They are active in producing certain chemical effects, notably those known as photochemical or photographic. They produce certain physiological effects also on animal and vegetable tissues. They actively provoke in certain bodies the property of shining in the dark, or phosphorescence. Lastly, they have certain electrical properties. These short waves are known by the various names of actinic, photographic, or ultra-violet waves. The last of these terms is much to be preferred. Some of these chemical effects are also produced by visible light, especially by the blue and violet waves. Fig. 100 is a diagram which gives a general idea * of the distribution of these effects for waves of different lengths. The greatest luminosity to the eye is possessed by waves having a wave-length of about 22 millionths of an inch or 0.00055 °f a millimetre. The greatest heating effect occurs with* waves of about 40 millionths of an inch, or 0.001 of a millimetre. The greatest chemical 1 effect occurs with waves of about 16½ millionths of an inch, or about 0.00041 of a millimetre.

[Figure 100]

Footnote: A table of wave-lengths and frequencies of all kinds of light from the lowest infra-red up to the highest ultra-violet has been added as an Appendix to this Lecture.

Now, it is desirable for purposes of experiment to separate the waves which can produce one of these effects from those which produce another. If we desire to sift out the ultra-violet waves from all other kinds, there are several courses open to us. Firstly, we may use prisms which will disperse the waves and sort them out into a spectrum according to their sizes. Secondly, we may accomplish the same thing by using a diffraction grating to produce a spectrum. Or, thirdly, we may employ, as a means of sifting, sheets of different substances that have the power of absorbing waves of one sort while transmitting those of another. This last process we found excellent when applied to visible light, for by using a red-coloured glass we were able to cut off all the other colours and leave only the red. Unfortunately no perfect filter-screen exists that will cut off all the visible light and yet transmit the ultra-violet waves. Glass tinted a deep violet colour with manganese, or with manganese and cobalt, may serve to cut off most of the visible light while transmitting a fair proportion of ultraviolet waves, mixed with some violet light. For many purposes this is good enough. But, unfortunately, every kind of glass cuts off the extreme part of the ultra-violet light. Even the lightest crown glass, though moderately transparent to waves from 15 millionths to 11 millionths of an inch long is totally opaque to all waves smaller than 11 millionths ; while dense flint glass (containing lead) is opaque to everything beyond the wave-length of 13.3 millionths of an inch. Hence, for experiments on ultraviolet light it is expedient not to use glass lenses or prisms, provided some more transparent medium can be found. Happily both quartz and fluor-spar are much more transparent to ultra-violet waves than glass is. Quartz transmits them down to about 8.1 millionths of an inch, and fluor-spar down to 8 millionths. My lantern is on this occasion provided with condensing lenses of quartz. When we want a spectrum we will use a quartz prism and a focusing-lens also cut from quartz crystal.

Footnote: This is on the assumption that the effect is measured by a particular chemical reaction, viz. the darkening of chloride of silver. If a different reaction, say, for example, the darkening of ferroprussiate salts (" blue-prints ") were taken as a basis of measurement, the maximum effect would be found to occur at some other point in the spectrum.

Let me now proceed to demonstrate some of the photographic properties of light-waves. Here is a piece of ordinary " printing-out " paper, that is paper which has been covered with a sensitive film impregnated with chloride or bromide of silver, which, when exposed for a sufficient time to light, turns nearly black. Over this sheet of sensitised paper I place some stencil-plates cut out in sheet-zinc ; and then expose it to the white light that comes from an electric arc-lamp on the table. In half a minute the paper will have darkened sufficiently for you to see that where the light-waves have fallen upon the exposed parts they have produced the chemical action, and have printed the patterns of the stencils. In this experiment all kinds of rays — calorific, visible, and actinic — have been allowed to fall on the paper; but which of them were the agents in producing the effect ? That is easily tested. We turn on the light in the optical lantern, using the quartz lenses and prism to produce a spectrum for us. Then along the whole length of the visible spectrum, and to a distance into the invisible spectrum at both ends, we stretch out a long strip of sensitised photographic paper. It must be left there for several minutes, during which time we may investigate another point.

Here is another sheet of sensitised paper. Over it I lay a sheet of opaque tin-foil, through which there have been cut a number of holes. Over these holes are laid a number of thin slices of various materials: (i) window glass ; (2) flint glass ; (3) red glass ; (4) green glass ; (5) blue glass ; (6) quartz ; (7) fluor-spar ; (8) rocksalt ; (9) ebonite. I now slide the whole arrangement under the beams of the arc-lamp, which is set to throw its whole light downwards. If any of these materials cuts off the active waves we shall find it out at once, for the paper will be darkened only under those substances that are transparent to the photographic rays.

Two minutes' exposure suffices for our simple test. On bringing out the sheet you will note that ebonite (which is black) and red glass have alike stopped off the whole of the photographic rays. Green glass has stopped off the greater part of them, and the flint glass has evidently not transmitted them all. But under the blue glass, the quartz, the rock-salt, the fluor-spar, and the window glass the paper seems to have darkened about equally. With a more refined test we should discover differences between these also. One fact we have proved, which is of practical importance, namely, that red light does not affect a photographic film though it affects our eyes. Every photographer knows this ; for he takes advantage of it in using ruby glass or redcoloured tissue to cover the windows of his "dark-room," or to screen the lamp by whose light he works in preparing and developing his plates.

Meantime our long strip of sensitised paper has been exposed to the spectrum, and now, examining it, we see that it has sensibly darkened at the violet end and beyond the end of the visible violet to some distance into the region where our eyes see nothing; in short, the photographic spectrum lies mostly beyond the violet, the most active waves being shorter than any that are visible. But we must not forget that with other chemical preparations the range of sensitiveness can be changed. To Captain Abney science owes the introduction of emulsions of bromide of silver in films of gelatine, prepared in such a way as to be sensitive not only to violet light or ultra-violet, but also to green, to yellow, and even to red waves.

Another chemical effect which light-waves can produce is to cause mixed hydrogen and chlorine gases to enter into combination. These gases (prepared by electrolysis of hydrochloric acid) may be kept mixed, but not chemically combined with one another, in glass bulbs for any length of time, provided they are kept in the dark. If exposed to the diffused light of a room they slowly combine. But if exposed to direct sunlight or to the light of the arc-lamp they combine with extraordinary violence and explode the bulb. Again, the question arises: which part of the light is it that produces the effect ? Certainly not the red waves, for these bulbs of mixed gas may be exposed freely if protected by red glass and will not explode. The active kind of waves is in this case also the ultra-violet kind.

A thin glass bulb containing the mixed gases is now taken by my assistant from a tin box, where it has been kept in the dark. To prevent accidents he places it in an empty lantern (Fig. 101), into the nozzle of which we will direct, from outside, the beams of an electric arc -lamp. To cut off the bulk of the ordinary light I interpose first a sheet of violet glass, which allows only violet and ultra-violet to pass. Then, interposing a quartz lens, I concentrate the beam upon the bulb, when — bang

[Figure 101]

- — it explodes, demonstrating the activity of waves of this sort.

Perhaps it may have struck some of you that if so great a photographic activity is possessed by waves that are invisible to our eyes, it ought to be within the limits of possibility to photograph things that are invisible. And so it is. It is now some twenty years since a lecture was delivered in this theatre on the photography of the invisible by the veteran chemist, Dr. J. Hall Gladstone, who succeeded in photographing images of things quite invisible to the eye. Behind me, against the wall, stands a drawing-board covered with a white sheet of cartridge paper. The light of the arc-lamp shines on it. You see merely a white surface. The photographer, Mr. Norris, has brought his camera here and he will now take a photograph of it. When he develops the photograph you will find that the photograph will reveal the fact that an inscription has been written upon the sheet, which, though invisible to you, can be photographed by the camera.1

Since photographic action serves to detect these ultra-violet waves, even in the absence of all kinds of visible light, it may be used in the further exploration of the properties of these invisible waves. We might apply photographic plates to prove the possibility of the re- flexion and refraction of these waves, as well as of their interference and polarisation. There exists, however, another and more ready method of investigation, to which we will now proceed.

Footnote: The inscription was written on the sheet with colourless sulphate of quinine dissolved in a solution of citric acid. This substance fluoresces, and in the act of fluorescing destroys the ultra-violet light, which would otherwise be reflected from the parts of the paper so treated. The parts where the sulphate of quinine has been applied consequently come out in the photograph darker than the untouched surface of the paper.
