of my hand appears as a black silhouette. In this case the luminescence is at first of a fine blue tint. In a few minutes as it fades out it becomes whiter ; but it will go on all night giving out a faint light, and even then will not have yielded up its whole store of luminous energy. Even after having been kept six weeks in darkness a sheet of luminous paint will still emit waves that will fog a photographic plate. If one takes a sheet of luminous paint that has been exposed to light, and of which the phosphorescence has already died away, one finds that merely warming it will cause it to shine more brightly, though afterwards it is darker. Here is such a sheet. I place my hand against the back, and you note that where my hand has warmed it it shines more brightly. If one makes the converse experiment of chilling a sheet of luminous pain1,, while it is phosphorescing, one finds its light dimmed1, but it grows brighter while being warmed. Professor Dewar has made the curious discovery, that when cooled to a temperature of about 200° below zero in liquid air, many substances become phosphorescent that are not so at ordinary temperatures. Thus he has shown in this theatre how such things as feathers, ivory, and paper become highly phosphorescent on being cooled to these low temperatures and then illuminated. They seem when chilled to acquire the power of absorbing luminous energy and storing it for subsequent emission when warmed. The analogies between these properties and those of luminous paint are most suggestive. A sheet of luminous paint which has been exposed and cooled becomes a veritable lamp of Aladdin. One has but to warm it by the hand and it shines.

Here we touch upon the third sort of luminescence named in our list (p. 175), namely Thermo-luminescence. This term is applied to the property possessed by various minerals, particularly by the green sorts of fluorspar, to shine in thejdark on being heated. Over a large atmospheric gas-burner a* square of sheet-iron has been heated to near redness. Upon this hot surface, invisible in the darkness, I scatter out of a pepper-box some fine fragments of crushed fluor-spar. As they heat up they shine like little glow-worms. They shine brightly for a few minutes, then fade, but would continue for several hours to emit a faint glow. After having been once thus heated they seem to have lost their store of luminous energy, for on a second heating they do not again luminesce.1

The term Tribe-luminescence, which stands next on the list, relates to the production of luminescence by friction. There is a very simple experiment that can be tried at home without any apparatus. Crush a lump of sugar in a perfectly dark room. In the act of being crushed it emits a pale luminescence. So do crystals of uranium nitrate if shaken up in a bottle, or triturated in a mortar. Let me show it to you on a larger scale.

Footnote: Many other minerals have similar powers. In some cases the power of thermo-luminescing can be revivified by fresh exposure to light, or by stimulation by an electric spark or by kathode rays. Wiedemann has found artificial substances that are thermoluminescent, and in particular a preparation of sulphate of calcium having intermingled as a "solid solution" a small percentage of sulphate of manganese.

Here is a large specimen of quartz crystal weighing nearly a hundred pounds. One of its faces is almost flat. Taking a smaller crystal of quartz in my hand I rub it to and fro upon the larger crystal. You can all see the brilliant flashes that are emitted in the operation. "Reserving for discussion in my final lecture the use of electric discharges to produce luminescence, we will return to the properties of the ultra-violet light. One effect which they possess above all other kinds of light is that of producing diselectrification of electrified bodies, a phenomenon discovered by the late Professor Hertz. But there is this peculiar limitation. If the electrified surface is that of a metal surrounded by air, then when ultra-violet light falls upon it it will produce diselectrification if the surface is negatively electrified, but not if the electrification is of positive sign.1

The fundamental point is easily shown. Here is an electroscope made with two leaves of aluminium mounted on either side of a central blade of aluminium, and enclosed (Fig. 104) in a thin glass jar. To the top of the stem is affixed a disk of sheet zinc which has been freshly cleaned with a little sodiumamalgam. It is bent back at 45°, at which incidence the results are most favourable. I hold near the zinc disk a rubbed glass rod, and touch the disk while it is under the influence of the positive charge of the glass. The electroscope thus acquires by influence a negative electrification, and the aluminium leaves stand out at a sharp angle. Now throwing a beam of ultraviolet light upon the disk, the leaves are seen to collapse rapidly. If the electroscope is positively electrified, the leaves do not fall down when the beam of ultra-violet light is directed upon the disk. Even the longer waves of visible light are active on a clean surface of sodium or potassium. The different kinds of light-waves have different photo-electric powers as well as different photochemical powers.

Footnote: I have, however, found that a surface of peroxide of lead surrounded by an atmosphere of hydrogen is diselectrified if the electrification is positive.

[Figure 104]

At the beginning of this lecture I dwelt upon the photographic actions of light-waves, and I return now to this topic in order to speak of the problem which has of late aroused such keen interest amongst scientific photographers, namely, the photography of colours. Many have been the attempts to produce true photographs of things in their natural colours. All hope of this was vain so long as photographers worked with chemically prepared plates that were more sensitive to the invisible light than to the visible kinds. Further, in the old collodion processes the greater sensitiveness of the chemicals to blue and violet waves, and their relative insensitiveness to orange and red light, caused all photographs to represent coloured objects untruly in their relative luminosity. It was an old complaint that blues photographed like white, and reds came out like black. The first steps towards remedying this arose in the discoveries of Vogel and of Abney that by staining the film or by giving to it in its preparation as an emulsion a fine granulation, its sensitiveness toward the longer visible waves might be increased. Thus were introduced the orthochromatic plates which gave as photographs a more accurate representation in black and white of the relative luminosities of objects ; the ideal orthochromatic plate being one which should have the same relative sensitiveness toward the light of each part of the visible spectrum as our eyes have. Even before these discoveries the theory of the trichroic method of reproducing colour by photography had been enunciated by Clerk Maxwell. In the theory of colourvision originated by Thomas Young, all colour-sensations are referred to three simple or primary colour-sensations, and it can be shown that no more than three are needed to account for the various phenomena of colourvision. These three primary sensations are the sensation of red, the sensation of green (a full green inclining to yellowish-green), and the sensation of blue-violet (a violet inclining toward blue). A red light stimulates but one of these sensations in the nerves of the eye. A yellow light stimulates two, namely, red and green, and is not therefore itself a primary sensation. Now if we could take three photographs of an object, each photograph corresponding only to the light of each primary sort, and if we could then illuminate each photograph with its own kind of light and superpose them, we ought to get a reproduction of the natural colours of the object. That, briefly, is the three-colour method.

Footnote: Discourse at Royal Institution, 17th May 1861.

Footnote: The reader should consult Captain Abney's treatise on Colourvision.

The true photography of colours was only discovered a year or two ago by Professor Lippmann, whose exceedingly precious and beautiful results are individual pictures, incapable of being multiplied or reproduced. By placing at the back of the transparent sensitive film a mirror of mercury, each train of waves is reflected back during the exposure; and where the reflected waves meet the advancing waves of the train they set up stationary nodes that are spaced out through the thickness of the film at distances apart corresponding to the exact wave-lengths of the various lights. At these nodes the chemical action takes place, and produces a permanent picture which, when viewed by reflected light, shows all the natural colours of the object that has been photographed. I am, by the kindness of my colleague, Professor Meldola, able to show here, and to project on the screen, a Lippmann photograph of the spectrum in which all the colours show in their natural tints. More recently Professor Lippmann has shown in this theatre the remarkable colour-pictures which he has produced of landscapes, still-life subjects, and even of the human figure.1

Returning to the three-colour method of registering and reproducing by photography the natural colours of objects, I am happy in conclusion to be able by the kindness of Mr. Ives to show you the remarkable results which he has attained with his photochromoscope. Starting from Young's theory of the three primary sensations, Mr. Ives sought to construct colour filters which should transmit for each of the three primaries all those waves of the spectrum which excite that sensation, and in proportion to their power of exciting that sensation in the eye. Thus the filter for red should transmit not simply red light, but should transmit all those waves of whatever colour that are competent to excite the red sensation, but transmit them only in proportion as they are competent to excite the red sensation. To select the proper tints as colour filters is a matter of no small skill and experience. Through three such screens — one for red, one for green, one for blue -violet — three photographs (negatives) are taken simultaneously side by side upon a single orthochromatic plate. From these three negatives (which are of course colourless themselves) three positives are printed. These also are colourless, but they show differences according to the colours of the different parts of the object photographed. Fig. 105 is a triple chromogram of a butterfly. Its wings beside, having definite patches of red and white on a black background, have all over them a beautiful sheen of brilliant blue. The uppermost image of the three is that which is to be placed in the blue-violet light. The second figure is that for the green light, while the lowest is for the red light. Those parts which are to show as white, when combined, are white in all three images. Each image is itself, like the printed cut, colourless; a mere black and white transcript on glass.

Footnote: Since the delivery of these lectures two new processes of colour-photography have been announced. In one of these by M. Chassagnes certain chemicals are said to be used to treat the photographic films, by virtue of which they become capable of absorbing pigments at those parts of the picture which have been impressed by light of the corresponding tint. Another process by Mr. Benetto produces coloured transparencies by direct photography.

Now let these three colourless pictures be placed in an instrument so arranged that blue-violet light falls through

[Figure 105]

the first, green through the second, and red through the third of these separate photographs, and let them then be recombined by suitable mirrors so that the eye shall view them simultaneously, the primary colours will recombine and give the object in all the glory of the natural tints.

[Figure 106]

The instrument (Photochromoscope or Kromskop) which Mr. Ives has designed for recombining these triple photographs stands upon the table. Fig. 106 gives a diagram of its construction. Mr. Ives has also brought a lantern photochromoscope, by means of which he will now project on the screen a few of those beautiful photographs. The lantern itself has three nozzles, through which the red, the green, and the blue-violet pictures are separately projected on the screen, and by their overlapping give the colour-combinations. He first shows us separately the three-coloured disks or circles of light, red, green, and blue-violet. Then he moves the nozzles so that the three disks partially overlap as in Fig. 107. Where red and green mix they give us yellow; where green and blue - violet overlap they give us a peacock blue; where blue -violet and red overlap they give us purple ; where all three overlap at the centre they give us white. Note how the tint produced by the overlap of two gives us the complementary to the third. Thus the yellow is the complementary to the blue-violet ; the peacock is complementary to the red ; and the purple is of a tint complementary to the green.

Footnote: A, B, and C are red, blue-violet, and green glasses against which the three corresponding transparent photograms are respectively placed. Two of the pictures at A and B are illuminated directly by light from above, the third C is illuminated by an oblique reflector. The red picture is viewed by rays which are reflected at the front surface of D an oblique transparent glass sheet. The blue-violet picture at B sends its light down upon another oblique transparent sheet at E, which reflects it through the sheet D to the eye. The green picture at C is viewed through both the transparent reflectors D and E. The lens F collects the rays for the eye, which thus views the three pictures as if they were superposed and at equal distance away. The instrument is made binocular, so the eyes see as it were a single image in its natural colours, and in solid relief.

[Figure 107]

Those three photographs of the butterfly are now introduced into the chromoscope -lantern, and are brought to accurate superposition. The blue shimmer on the insect's wings is shown with marvellous fidelity. No painter could hope to produce by pigments such a natural picture. Here is a photograph of a basket of fruit. Note the yellow lemon. On examining the separate colour-pictures one sees that this yellow is made up of the red and green lights mixed. Here is a gorgeous bouquet of flowers. The colours are superb. Here is a cigarbox showing the natural brown tint of the wood ; and beside it a piece of cloisonne enamel, with all the delicate shades of dull tints in their due relations. And lastly, here is a box of sweetmeats, so naturally photographed that one feels them to be really edible. After that we need no further proof that by the proper selection of the primary tints the dream has at last been realised of registering and reproducing by photography the colours of natural objects.
