THE INVISIBLE SPECTRUM (iNFRA-RED PART)

How to sift out the invisible infra-red light from the visible light — Experiments on the absorption and transmission of invisible infra-red light — It is cut off by transparent glass, but transmitted by opaque ebonite — Use of radiometer — Use of thermopile and bolometer — "Heat-indicating" paint — Experiments on the reflexion, refraction and polarisation of invisible infrared Hght — Discovery by Hertz of propagation of electric waves — Hertzian waves are really gigantic waves of invisible light — Experiments on the properties of Hertzian waves ; their reflexion, refraction and polarisation — Inference that all 1 light-waves, visible and invisible, are really electric waves of different sizes.

TODAY we deal with those waves of invisible light which lie beyond the red end of the spectrum. They are invisible to us because their wave-lengths are longer than any to which the nerve-structures of our eyes are sensitive ; or, to put it in the inverse way, because their vibrations are of a frequency lower than any within our range of optical perception.

Just as the ultra-violet waves have a shorter wave-length and a higher frequency than the visible waves, and have to be detected by their chemical, luminescent, and diselectrifying effects, so the infra-red waves of larger wave-length and lower frequency have to be detected and investigated by other physical effects than that of sight. The chief physical effect produced by these long infra-red waves is that of warming the things upon which they fall. For this reason they are sometimes called the calorific waves ; and the invisible light of this kind is sometimes * called "radiant heat."

But if, as I shall have to show you, this so-called radiant heat possesses (save in respect of visibility) all the physical properties of light ; if we can reflect it, and refract it, disperse it, diffract it, and polarise it, then we are logically compelled to admit that it is really a kind of light.

In brief, the spectrum extends both ways beyond the visible part ; beyond the violet are the chemical waves, and below the red are the heat waves.

If you find, as every one finds, that the light from the sun or from a flame warms the things on which it shines, it is natural to ask which of all the waves mixed up together in the beam give the warmth. To answer that question let us have recourse to the test of a carefully considered experiment. First let us spread, out the rays into a spectrum, and then explore which part has the greatest warming effect.

The first explorations of the spectrum were made by putting into the different parts of the spectrum the bulb (blackened) of a thermometer. This showed that the heating effect is mainly at and beyond the red end of the spectrum.

Footnote: Another term used by some writers is "the radiation." This use of the term is to be deprecated ; for the word radiation ought not to be used in two senses. If it is rightly used to mean the act of radiating, then some other term ought to be used to denote that which is radiated, namely, the waves.

The spectrum which is once again thrown on the screen (Fig. 108) is produced as on previous occasions by employing in the lantern an electric arc-lamp, in front of which is placed a slit, a lens to focus an image of the slit, and a prism to disperse the mixed waves into their proper places according to their wave-length.

Our spectrum to-day is neither so brilliant nor so extended as you have seen it on former occasions ; the cause for this circumstance being that (for reasons you will presently appreciate) we are obliged to abandon the use of glass lenses and glass prisms, and substitute lens and prism of rock-salt. This material is less refractive and less dispersive, hence the narrowness of the rainbowcoloured band.

And now we have to make good by experiment the proposition that I have advanced that the heating effect is due to the longest waves — those at the red end and beyond the red end of the spectrum.

But as an ordinary thermometer would not be convenient I adopt another method, using instead a sort of electric thermometer — the thermopile. If you want to know all about this instrument, you must refer to treatises on electricity. All I need say now about it is that it is an apparatus, Fig. 109, which is exceedingly sensitive to heat, and which, when the face of it is warmed, generates an electric current. The electric current is led into a galvanometer which reflects a spot of light upon the scale against the wall. So, you may take it that that spot of light will indicate by its position whether the face of the thermopile is warmer or colder than the air of the room. If it is warmer the spot will move to the right ; if colder, to the left.

[Figure 109]

The spectrum now falls upon a small brass screen with a slit in it, behind which is the thermopile ; and at present the part of the spectrum that enters through the slit and falls on the face of the pile is the ultra-violet part. The spot of light is still at zero, showing that the ultra-violet light does not appreciably warm the face of the pile. I now explore the spectrum by pushing the thermopile gently along. The slit now lies in the violet — yet there is no heating effect. The blue, the peacock, the green, and the yellow are successively explored — yet the spot of light remains at the zero. These waves do not produce appreciable heating. Another move forward, and the orange waves enter the slit and fall on the face of the pile — the spot begins to move. The orange waves warm slightly. I push on into the red, and the spot moves gently across about a quarter of the scale. - Red waves heat more than orange ones. Pushing on beyond the end of the visible red (Fig. 108) the effect increases. At a point about as far beyond the end of the red as the red is beyond the green of the spectrum, the heating effect is much greater — the spot flies across the scale. Clearly the waves which have the greatest calorific power are those some little way in the invisible infra-red region : or in other words the waves that heat most are waves having a wave-length somewhat greater than that of the largest waves of the visiHle spectrum. Taking the size of the extreme red waves at 32 millionths of an inch, we may put down these more powerful invisible waves as about 40 to 45 millionths of an inch in length.

The invisible infra-red spectrum has often been explored, and by many explorers. Langley, using a different electric instrument of his own invention, termed a bolometer has succeeded in observing waves whose length was 592 millionths of an inch, or which have a wave-length twenty times as great as those of red light. Professor Rubens has independently measured infra-red waves as large as 0.002400 centimetre, or about 944 millionths of an inch in length. Hence, if set down in a scale of wave-lengths, the infra-red spectrum stretches out to about fifty times the extent of the visible spectrum. In the language adopted for describing musical intervals, while the range of visible light is about one octave (the extreme violet having about double the frequency of the extreme red), the infra-red waves are known to go down more than five octaves below, and the ultra-violet waves ascend to about two octaves above the visible kinds of waves (see the Table on pp. 190, 191).

Our thermopile has been placed at that part of the spectrum, a little beyond the end of the visible red, where we found the greatest heating effect. To increase the effect somewhat, I will open the slit a little, thus permitting a larger amount of these longer waves to fall upon the face of the instrument. Having \ thus adjusted our arrangements so as to be sensitive to the heat-waves, we will try an experiment or two to find whether these longer waves which produce the heating effect are able to penetrate through the various materials which we have tried for ordinary light. In the first place, take a piece of window-glass, and try whether the heat-waves will pass through it. On interposing it in front of the slit we notice, by the indication given by the galvanometer and thermopile, that though it cuts off much of the heat it does not cut it off entirely. Substituting a piece of red glass, we find that it also cuts off some of the effect, but a blue glass cuts it off much more. Now I take a piece of flint glass, which contains lead : you note that it cuts off the waves much more. Here is a slice of quartz crystal ; it does not cut off the effect as much as the glass did. Again, here is a slice of calc-spar of the same thickness. It cuts off the heat-waves more completely than any of the materials I have yet tried. Lastly, here is a slice, also of the same thickness, of rock-salt ; that is to say, a slice of a big crystal of common salt sawn off and polished. The rock-salt hardly cuts off the heat-waves at all.

Here then are four substances — glass, quartz, calc-spar, and rock-salt — all transparent alike to ordinary light. Quartz, as we saw in the last lecture, is exceedingly transparent to the ultra-violet kind of invisible light ; that is to say, to the shortest waves. But to-day we prove that rock-salt is the one that is most transparent to the infra-red kind of invisible light. Naturally, seeing that this fact was discovered half a century ago, we now apply the discovery in the construction of our apparatus. The lenses and the prism I am using to-day for these experiments are made neither of glass nor of quartz, but of rock-salt. And as rock-salt possesses a very poor dispersive power for the visible kinds of waves, it produces, as you have seen, but a poor spectrum of colours as compared with the spectrum that would be produced by the use of a prism of glass or quartz of the same size.

We might have used as an exploring apparatus, instead of our thermopile, another instrument, the radiometer (Fig. 110). Rather more than twenty years ago the celebrated chemist Crookes made the discovery that when light falls on movable things, such as the vanes of a lightly - poised mill, in a glass bulb from which the air has been mostly exhausted, so as to leave a fairly perfect vacuum, the vanes of the mill are driven round. Apparently the blackened vane of the mill tends to retreat from the light. Why, we must presently consider. My present point is that it is possible to use this apparent repulsion to measure the intensity of the radiation that falls upon the instrument. Place the radiometer in one part of the spectrum ; it turns round slowly. Move it on into the red end ; it spins more quickly. But the effect is found to depend not merely upon the kind of waves, but also to some extent upon the nature of the surface of the vanes, and upon the degree of vacuum in the bulb. Some radiometers revolve most rapidly in the bright part of the spectrum to which our eyes are sensitive.

[Figure 110]

Whether we explore the spectrum with a thermometer, as Sir William Herschel did, or with a thermopile, or a bolometer, or a radiometer, we find that it consists of waves spread out in different directions, and that the different waves have different heating powers. And yet all these different waves, with their different powers, are emitted at one and the same time from the same source. If the thing that is heated is insufficiently heated it will not shine — that we all know. But even if not hot enough to shine visibly it will still emit some invisible waves. When you begin to warm a substance, at first it gives out only a few waves of very long wave-length. As you heat it more it gives out more of these heat-waves, and along with these heat-waves it also gives out some visible waves of shorter wave-length. If heated still hotter, so as to be whitehot, it gives out not only heat-waves of all sorts, but visible- waves from red to violet, and also with ultraviolet waves, all mixed up together.

In the next experiment we will employ a dark source of waves. In short, we will test the waves that are emitted from a vessel of hot water. Here is a beakerglass which I fill with boiling water from the kettle. You would not see that in the dark, would you ? In a perfectly dark room it would not give out any of those waves to which your eyes are sensitive. But if you were to hold your hand a few inches away from it you would feel a gentle warmth radiating from it. You can feel with the nerves of your hand that which the nerves of your eyes do not perceive, namely, the long waves or calorific radiations. But these long waves warm all things on which they fall. They do not, however, warm them all equally. The fact can be established in many ways. Black and dark substances absorb the waves that fall upon them. Bright and shiny bodies reflect most of the waves. What becomes of the waves that fall on black and dark bodies ? Their energy is not lost ; it is transmuted into sensible heat. Instead of wavemotions in the free space, we have molecular vibrations in the substance. The bright surface, such as polished metal, upon which the waves may fall, is not warmed by them, for the waves as they meet the surface are not broken up, but simply start off again in some new direction. Whenever waves break on a surface, and are destroyed or absorbed in the action of breaking, the result is heat. The so-called heat-waves, or infra-red waves, are not themselves hot. They do not heat the medium through which they travel as waves. But they are readily absorbed by the things they fall upon, and, being absorbed, they warm that on which they fall. A black surface is one which absorbs both the invisible and the visible waves. It heats more readily than a white or a bright surface.

Now here is a peculiar thermometer (Fig. 111), having two bulbs, full of air, joined together by a bent tube, containing a little coloured liquid to serve as an index : it stands up to the height marked a. If I put my hand on either bulb, and so warm the air inside it, the expansion of the air will depress the liquid in the tube below the bulb that is warmed. Were both warmed equally the liquid would not move. So this apparatus will indicate a difference of temperature, and is therefore called a differential thermometer. Next, note that one of the bulbs, B, has been painted dull black, the other, G, has been gilt with gold-leaf. I am going to put the beaker of hot water exactly in the middle between the two bulbs, where it can radiate equally to both of them. The gilt bulb, having a bright surface, reflects the waves, and is scarcely warmed at all by them. But the black bulb, having a more absorptive surface, will be warmed more than the bright gilt one ; and you will see the indicating liquid fall in the tube below B and rise in the tube below G. Had we employed a beaker half blackened and half gilt, we could have readily demonstrated another point, namely, that a hot black surface radiates out the heat-waves more readily than a hot bright surface does.

[Figure 111]

[Figure 112]

Now let us pass on to another experiment in which we again employ the thermopile. Here is a thermopile connected by wires to the galvanometer, with its reflected spot of light on the wall. It is arranged so that if the face of the thermopile is warmed the spot will move to the right and indicate to you the circumstance. In front of the conical mouth-piece of the thermopile stands an ordinary Bunsen burner, which, as you know, is a gas jet having openings at the foot to let atmospheric air mix with the gas. It gives a smokeless blue flame very different from the ordinary bright flame of gas. Though very hot, this flame radiates out but little light, neither does it, as a matter of fact, radiate off much heat. True, a column of hot air ascends from it straight up. But that is not what I am thinking of. The question is, Is it sending out heat sideways? Well, we can try. Opening the metallic shutter that closes the mouthpiece of the thermopile I let the light and heat, such as they are, radiate from the flame upon the face of the pile. At once the spot of light on the wall moves off to the right, showing that there are at any rate some waves present that can heat the pile. If I interpose for a moment a sheet of glass between the burner and the thermopile the spot of light comes back almost to its zero, showing that glass screens off nearly all the waves. I remove the screen, and the spot goes back to the right, showing that the heating effect has recommenced. Now comes the particular point of the experiment. If I stop up the holes at the foot of the burner where the air has been entering, the flame will at once burn brightly as an ordinary gas flame. The combustion will, as a matter of fact, be less perfect, for the flame will be sooty, and the total amount of heat produced in a given time will be less, because of the imperfection of the combustion. But also because of the imperfection of the combustion there are innumerable solid particles formed in the flame which get brilliantly heated, and emit light. They are better radiators of waves than the gaseous particles of the pale blue flame, and they radiate long waves better. To make the flame shine thus, I have but to stop up the air-holes with my finger and thumb ; and instantly the spot of light on the wall rushes to the right, even beyond the end of the scale, proving that the bright flame radiates more heat-waves to the pile. I take away my fingers, air is readmitted, the flame relapses to its former pale state, and the spot of light settles back to its former position. Every time I let the flame burn brightly it radiates more waves sideways.

You may use a radiometer instead of a thermopile to demonstrate the facts. The vanes of the mill turn fast when the flame is bright, and more slowly when, by admitting air to the flame, you improve the combustion.
