The next experiment I have to show you is with the same thermopile, only, instead of shining upon it with a flame, I will put a lump of ice in front of it. The spot of light on the wall now retreats, right beyond the zero mark, to the left, indicating that the face of the thermopile has been chilled. Perhaps you will say that this proves that the ice is radiating out cold. It may seem so. But that which is really occurring is this. " Cold " is a relative term meaning really "less hot." All things that are not in that unattainable state of absolute zero of temperature are more or less hot ; hot things more, cold things less. And everything tends to radiate its heat away — the hotter it is the greater its tendency. Ice is less hot than the other things in this room. The ice is colder than the thermopile. The thermopile itself is radiating out heat, some of which goes to the ice. The ice is also, though to a lesser degree, radiating out heat. Here then we have two things, a thermopile which is warm, and ice which is colder, radiating to one another unequally. The result of this unequal exchange is that the thermopile parts with more heat than the ice parts with, and therefore is cooled. But the effect is the same as if the cold were being radiated.

Now let us go to an experiment that I believe took its origin nearly a century ago in this Royal Institution. In the Royal Institution the emission of heat and the properties of heat-waves have ever been favourite topics of study. The founder of the Royal Institution, Count

Rumford, himself originated many experiments on the radiation of heat. It was he who discovered that heat could be radiated across a vacuum. Sir Humphry Davy, while Professor here, showed a most beautiful experiment in which heat-waves were reflected from one point of space to another by means of two paraboloidal mirrors of silvered metal. That experiment I propose to repeat, using the two mirrors which are believed to be the actual pair used by Sir Humphry, and often since used by Professor Tyndall.

One of the two curved mirrors is hung mouthdownwards at a height of some fifteen feet above the lecture-table. The other stands mouth -up wards on the table exactly beneath the first. The upper mirror is lowered for a moment. A red-hot iron ball is slung by a hook in the focus of the mirror, and it is hoisted up again into its position above the table. The ball being at the focus, the mirror collects the diverging waves and reflects them straight down in a parallel beam. It is a beam of invisible infra-red waves, accompanied by a few waves of visible ijfcd. This beam falls upon the second mirror (Fig. 113), which once more collects them and converges them to a focus, F. I put my hand at the place toward which the waves converge ; it is intolerably hot. I hold in the focus a bit of black paper, at once it smokes, and kindles into visible combustion. Other things can be lighted. Here is a cigar. Holding it in the focus it absorbs enough waves to warm it up ; and the ascending wreath of smoke proves that it has been kindled by the reflected and concentrated waves.

[Figure 113]

Our experiment has proved that heat-waves can be reflected. Our earlier experiments with the rock-salt prism proved that they can be refracted. Let us confirm these points by other experiments.

The red-hot ball, fast fading into dulness as it parts with its store of energy, has now been placed upon a stand on the table. Taking up the thermopile, which did such useful service just now, we will see what it can tell us about that red-hot ball. The distance between the two is some seven or eight feet. I have, however, only to turn the conical mouth-piece of the thermopile straight toward the ball, and at once the spot of light on the wall indicates that the thermopile has received some of the radiation. Waves that our eyes cannot see, this thermopile can see if only we turn it so as to look straight at the source of the waves. It acts as a kind of eye that is sensitive, not to visible light, but to infrared waves of invisible light. I turn the aperture of the pile on one side so that none of the heat-waves can enter it ; the spot of light on the wall settles down to its zero. Then, taking up a simple piece of tin-plate to serve as a mirror I reflect some of the heat-waves from the iron ball back into the mouth of the thermopile. As soon as the mirror is set at the proper angle the spot moves to the right, showing that we have reflected some of the heat-waves into the pile.

While we have a hot ball — best if we had one that was brightly red-hot — I can show some interesting experiments which turn upon the employment of certain heatindicating paints. Here is a specimen of heat-indicating paint of a scarlet colour that turns black when heated. Here is another of pale yellow tint which turns red even when quite gently warmed. Here is a paper screen mounted in a convenient frame. The front is painted over with yellow heat-indicating paint : the back has been blackened that it may the better absorb the heat-waves.

Footnote: These heat-indicating paints are double iodides of mercury with other metals. They were discovered nearly thirty years ago by Dr. Meusel. The scarlet paint that turns almost black at about 87° C. is the double iodide of mercury and copper. The yellow paint which turns red at about 45° C. is the double iodide of mercury and silver. To prepare the former, a solution of potassium iodide is added to a solution of copper sulphate until the precipitate is redissolved, when a concentrated solution of mercuric chloride is added precipitating the red double-iodide. To prepare the more sensitive yellow paint, add to a solution of silver nitrate a solution of potassium iodide until the precipitate (silver iodide) redissolves. To this solution add a concentrated solution of mercuric chloride until a bright yellow precipitate is formed. The precipitates are collected on filter paper, and should be washed with cold water. They may be mixed with very dilute gum-water to enable them to be used as paint. With these paints many interesting experiments can be performed in illustration of the propagation of heat by conduction and convexion as well as by radiation. One very simple experiment is worthy of mention. It is to show how hot water will float on cold water. A strip of paper painted with the yellow paint is pasted vertically against the outside of a tall glass beaker. This is half filled with cold water. A floating disk of wood is introduced to prevent undue agitation, and then the beaker is filled up by pouring in boiling water out of a kettle. The top half only of the strip of paper turns red.

Holding it a little way from the hot ball — an ordinary coal fire answers even better — I place my hand between the ball and the screen, against the back of it. In a few seconds the screen turns red all over except where it is protected by my hand, of which a shadow — a sort of heat-shadow — in yellow is temporarily photographed, or rather thermographed, upon the screen. As the screen cools it returns to its former yellow tint.

Here is another screen made of paper painted with scarlet heat-indicating paint. The back has been gilt all over, and then on the gilt surface a big letter S has been painted. I hold this with its gilt back to the hot ball ; and the gilt surface reflects away most of the heatwaves. Now you might suppose that the part where black paint has been put on over the top of the gold would be doubly protected against heat. But, no ! It . absorbs the waves and grows warm ; and the heat being conducted through the gold film causes the scarlet paint on the front of the screen to turn black. The letter painted on the back is visible on the front of the screen.

Here is a variation upon one of Professor TyndalPs observations. You will find it recorded in his book on heat how, on one occasion when a fire broke out in a street, the heat radiated across the street from the burning house, charred the window-frames and burned and blistered the paint on the sign-boards. But where the number of the house stood in gilt letters on the sign-board the mere film of metal had reflected away the waves, protecting paint and wood behind it from being charred. In illustration, here is a blackened sheet of paper upon which a triangle of gold-leaf has been pasted. The other surface of the paper has been coated with the scarlet heat -indicating paint. Exposing it to the radiation of the hot ball you see how the triangular space protected by the gold-leaf remains cool, while the rest absorbs heat, turning the scarlet to black.

Footnote: Heat a Mode of Motion , p. 263.

You will probably admit that we have now plenty of proofs that these invisible heat-waves are really a kind of invisible light : that the difference is one of degree rather than of kind. Consider yet again the process of incandescence in which such waves are emitted. Heat a body, beginning by gently warming it. At first its particles vibrate but moderately ; the waves they send out into the surrounding ether are few and of relatively great wavelength. As you warm the body more and more its particles vibrate more actively, they jostle together ; it gives out more waves and waves of shorter length and higher frequency. There are still the long waves, in fact there are more long waves than before, but there are some shorter waves in addition. Heat it still hotter. The lower kinds of waves still continue to be emitted, nay, are emitted more copiously, but some waves of a still higher kind now accompany them. Here is a thin platinum wire stretched between two supports. By leading into -it through a thicker copper wire an electric current I can heat it as little or as much as I choose. It is now warm, giving out a few dull waves. Increasing the current its temperature is raised, and now it gives out much more heat, and with the heat a few waves of the visible red sort. Every solid body when heated shows red as its first colour on heating. Never is the first glow of a blue or yellow hue. Increasing the temperature of the wire it emits orange light as well as red, and looks therefore bright red. The next increase brings in yellow along with orange and red : then green comes in to join the yellow, orange, and red. So soon as the wire is heated so hot as to give out all the different visible kinds, so soon we call the state a white heat. But no solid ever gets blue hot, because in all cases the emission begins at the bottom of the spectrum with red, the other colours chiming in until white is attained. Nor is white 2 attained until a certain proportion of the still higher ultra-violet waves are being also emitted. So then it appears that the process by which visible lightwaves are emitted is only a continuation of the process by which the invisible infra-red waves are emitted. What further proofs do you require as to the essentially kindred nature of the visible and invisible waves ? I have shown you that these infra-red waves behave as visible light- waves do in a number of respects. You have seen that we can refract them with a lens, disperse them with a prism, reflect them with a mirror, and absorb them with a black surface. Further, they travel at the same rate across space as the visible waves do. This we know from that which happens at the time of a total solar eclipse. At the moment when the sun's light ceases to be visible, his heat ceases also to reach us. When the light reappears the heat-waves are also restored. This one fact proves these heat-waves to be simply light of an invisible kind. But if you are not satisfied I will give you yet one further proof. You shall see that they can be polarised.

Footnote: Captain Abney has shown, however, that owing to the want of sensitiveness of the eye for red light, and its greater sensitiveness for green light, the tint of minimum visible luminosity of any hot body or indeed of any feebly illuminated body in a perfectly dark room is greenish. This is true even of a light seen through ruby glass if the eye has been kept some time in darkness.

Footnote: The whitest known artificial light is that of the arc-lamp ; it is the light of carbon incandescent at about 3500° C. This is a temperature considerably lower than that of the sun's surface, which emits a light having a relatively higher proportion of blue and violet and of ultra-violet waves. In fact, when seen in full sunlight the light of the arc-lamp is decidedly dull and reddish. No accurate definition of any standard of whiteness has ever been given.

Here, as in my third lecture (Fig. 93, p. 132), stand a pair of Nicol prisms, one to serve as polariser and the other as analyser. The lantern sends its beams through them. Receiving the visible light on a paper screen we note that when the analyser is set with its principal plane parallel to that of the polariser light is transmitted : but on rotating the analyser through a right angle all light is cut off. That is a purely optical experiment. Now let me take my thermopile — which I described to you as a sort of eye which is sensitive to the invisible heat-waves — and put it in the place where the paper screen was. At present the polariser and analyser are crossed, giving the "dark field" (p. 119). No light falls on the thermopile, nor any heat-waves, for, see, the spot of light from the galvanometer that indicates the state of the thermopile is at its zero point. Now I turn back the analyser and restore the bright field. At once the spot of light on the scale swings over to the right, telling us that the polarised heat, as well as the polarised light, is coming through the analyser. Turn the analyser back again, the visible waves are cut off, and so are the invisible ones, for the spot of light has returned. Now let me clinch the proof by working entirely with invisible waves to the exclusion of visible ones. Here is a sheet of opaque hard black indiarubber, of ebonite in fact. No visible light will come through it. But yet, you observe, when I have thus filtered out the invisible waves, and stopped off the visible ones, still there come through the polariser some waves which can warm the thermopile, and which can be cut off by turning the analyser to the position at right angles.

This material ebonite is a most interesting one from the circumstance that it can thus act as a wave -filter transmitting only the longer waves. Wave-filters (or ray -filters) were extensively used by Professor Tyndall in his lectures on radiant heat : but I do not think he was acquainted with the properties of ebonite. Here is one of the Crookes radiometers (Fig. 110, p. 199). I place it in front of the lantern but screen it at first by a thick sheet of metal so that it is all but at rest. The diffused light in the room suffices to make it turn slowly. I substitute for the metal sheet a sheet of ebonite which is equally opaque to ordinary light. Yet the little vanes now run merrily round.

TyndalPs filter for heat-waves consisted of a cell containing a dark solution of iodine in bisulphide of carbon. Here is one of the cells, kept cool by an outer jacket in which cold water circulates. Behind the wall at the back of the theatre is a powerful electric arc-lamp, the beams of which pass into the theatre through an aperture. This beam I propose to concentrate by a rock-salt lens, bringing it to a focus, after it has passed through the cell that niters out the invisible waves and stops the visible ones. First we make the experiment without the cell. All the waves visible and invisible come to a focus. Holding at the focus a bit of black paper it smoulders and then takes fire. Now interpose the cell. The visible light is cut off; but holding the bit of paper in the invisible focus it again begins to smoulder and finally breaks into visible burning.

And now I have to pass to the most important recent discoveries — discoveries dating only from 1888 — of some larger waves which are exactly like light -waves in the following respects : they can be reflected, refracted, absorbed, polarised, and diffracted. Yet they differ in the most striking way from any of the waves of light that we have hitherto considered. Their wave-lengths, instead of being measured by a few millionths of an inch, may be several inches, several yards, or even several hundreds of yards long. I refer to the electric waves predicted in 1864 by the late Professor Clerk Maxwell, and discovered experimentally in 1888 by the late Professor Hertz.

Hertz was occupied with researches upon electric sparks, which, under certain circumstances, were known to be oscillatory. That is to say, each spark might, under certain conditions, consist of a series of sparks flying backwards and forwards along the same path with great regularity and excessive rapidity. If, for instance, there were twenty successive oscillations, each lasting only one one hundred-millionth part of a second, the whole series would only last one five-millionth part of a second, and would, of course, seem to the eye as simply an instantaneous spark. In working with these oscillatory sparks Hertz was led to investigate the disturbances which they set up in the surrounding medium, and which are propagated as waves. To illustrate Hertz's work I must have recourse to a few diagrams. Fig. 114 illustrates the apparatus which is set up on the table. To produce the sparks we employ an induction-coil. The electric discharges produced by the coil are sent into the simple apparatus called by Hertzian oscillator. As you see it consists of two square sheets of metal, affixed upon two metal rods that nearly meet and are provided with two well-polished metal balls as terminals. There is a small gap between which the sparks are seen to pass. But each such spark is really a series of oscillations ; the electric discharge oscillating backwards and forwards, not simply across the gap Where you see the spark, but from one end to the other of the apparatus. Suppose the coil to make one of these metal wings (say A in Fig. 114) positive, while the other wing (B in Fig. 114) is negative. When the electric state has risen sufficiently high, the air in the gap is pierced by a spark.
