[Figure 114]

Footnote: It may be useful to note that since the velocity of propagation of electric waves in air (or vacuum) is identical with that of light (186,400 miles per second, or 30,000,000,000 centimetres per second), the wave-length can be deduced from the frequency by the rule that the product of frequency and wave-length is equal to that velocity. In the above example, if the period is one one hundred-millionth of a second, the frequency is one hundred million a second ; dividing 30,000,000,000 by 100,000,000 we get the wave-length 300 centimetres, or about ten feet as the wave-length.

[Figure 115]

The charge rushes from A to B, and in so doing overcharges B, making it positive, while leaving A negative. At once the charge surges back again from B to A, and again back to B, each oscillation lasting only about the one hundred-millionth part of a second. The frequency of the oscillations depends on the size of the apparatus. At every oscillation an electric wave is sent off from the apparatus into the surrounding space, and is propagated with the velocity of light. The wave is propagated with the greatest intensity in the directions at right angles to the metal rods along which the electricity is oscillating, and at right angles to the plane of the metal wings.

Fig. 115 gives a front view of the oscillator, and also of the apparatus called the resonator used by Hertz for detecting the waves. The model on the table is made of the same size as one of Hertz's smaller pieces of apparatus, the two metal wings being each 40 centimetres square, and the distance between them 60 centimetres. The wave-length of the waves emitted is rather less than 300 centimetres, or nearly 10 feet. The resonator or detector is a simple wire, bent into a ring so that its two ends nearly meet. Hertz demonstrated the fact that waves pass from the oscillator by holding the resonator some distance away from it, and observing the minute electric sparks which they set up in the small gap between the ends of the wire. But it is necessary that the resonator ring should be of the proper size, and that it should be held in the right position. The size (in this example 70 centimetres diameter) should be such that the natural period of oscillations of an electric current around the ring should agree with the period of the waves emitted by the oscillator. The position should be such that as the waves from the oscillator reach the resonator they set up secondary oscillations in the ring. If the resonator is set up vertically edgeways to the oscillator, no sparks are produced : the waves simply stream past the resonator. If, however, the resonator is held horizontally, and in the base-line shown in Fig. 114, sparks may be detected in the gap. Hertz put at the far end of the room where he was working a great sheet of metal to reflect back the waves, and then went about to different positions in the room exploring the space to find at what points sparks were produced. He found that when the waves are thus reflected back on themselves there are nodal points, just as there are nodal points in sound-waves and in lightwaves when reflected back. These nodal points were spaced out at distances apart exactly equal to half the wave-length, which thus could be precisely measured.

Before Hertz's time it was indeed known that there were oscillating sparks. Fig. 116 illustrates some experiments which I myself made in the year 1876 on this subject. I had an induction coil connected to send sparks across a small air-gap, A, to a condenser made of a dielectric, D, between two metal plates, P and Q. I found that if there was this spark-gap in the circuit of the coil I could draw secondary sparks at B from the outer plate of the condenser ; and by means of a small vacuum-tube and a rotating mirror I proved that these sparks were oscillatory in character. When these arrangements were made I was able to get sparks from insulated metal Objects in the room. These sparks could be traced all about the room. I had but to hold a knife or pencil-case to the

[Figure 116]

Footnote: Philosophical Magazine , September 1876.

[Figure 117]

door-knob or other piece of metal to draw sparks. I even did this : I took two door-keys and tied them on to a piece of wood, so as almost to touch one another, and with this detector I could get sparks while walking about to different parts of the room. But it never dawned upon me that these sparks were the evidence of electric waves crossing the space. That was Hertz's discovery. He did not go idly about the room noticing the sparks, but explored the positions where the sparks were to be detected, and holding his apparatus in the right position to detect them.

A word more about the electric oscillations themselves. Each sudden discharge of the induction coil — and to make them sudden the discharge balls must be well polished — sets up a set of oscillations, diagrammatically represented in Fig. 118 by the upper curve, which die away as time goes on. A mechanical analogy may be found in the vibrations of a spring. Bend it to one side and suddenly release it.

Footnote: A A A A A f\F \J \j \J v v v v

It flies backward and forward, the motion dying out after a certain number of swings. So trains of waves are set up, which also die away as they travel across space. But suppose they fall upon a proper resonator or detector, then they will set up, by their timed impulses, a sympathetic electrical vibration in that resonator, the oscillations thus set up beginning and increasing in strength as wave after wave arrives. This is represented graphically by the lower curve in Fig. 118. This corresponds, in fact, to the way in which the sound-waves from a tuning-fork, when they fall upon another tuning-fork, will set it into sympathetic vibration, provided it is tuned to the same note.

[Figure 118]

In Fig. 119 are represented the parabolic mirrors, each about 6 feet high, with which Hertz demonstrated the • FIG. 119.

[Figure 119]

reflexion of electric waves. At the focus of one of these mirrors there was placed vertically an oscillator, an arrangement to produce sparks vibrating up-and-down. The waves which resulted were, of course, waves of upand-down motion — polarised in a vertical plane — which were reflected in a beam straight across the room to the second mirror, which collected them and reflected them to a focus upon a detector, which in this case was straight, not circular, with a small spark-gap at its middle, where the minute sparks could be detected.

Many forms of oscillator or vibrator have been used by different experimenters to produce electric waves. Some of these are shown in Fig. 120. The first is one of those used by Hertz himself. Instead of flat wings of metal he used in this case cylindrical metal conductors. In another form, described as a dumb-bell oscillator, there were two large metal balls. In every case the spark-gap was arranged between two small highlypolished metal balls, midway along the length of the oscillator. The third shape is one devised by Professor

[Figure 120]

Righi for making short waves. Here there are three gaps, the central one being between two balls immersed in an oil vessel to prevent premature discharges. The lowest form in Fig. 120 is also of Professor Righi's devising. It represents his apparatus for producing exceedingly short waves — less, in fact, than an inch long — by the oscillations set up between two spheres to which sparks were communicated from two smaller terminal balls outside them.

The next diagram (Fig. 121) depicts two forms of oscillator used by Professor Oliver Lodge, of Liverpool. Here is a well-polished metal ball supported between two smaller balls that nearly touch it, one on each side. When a discharge is made through this central ball, an electric charge surges from side to side in it with great vigour, but the motion dies out after only about three or four such surgings, since it readily radiates its energy into space. It does not emit a long train of waves : the effect dying out after about 1½ or 2 complete oscillations. The wave-length of the emitted waves is about 1½ times the diameter of the ball. The other form, Fig. 121b, shows a metal cylinder which is sparked into at opposite ends of a diameter by two interior balls. This oscillator emits its energy less rapidly, and the oscillations last longer. It gives rise to a train of waves which are propagated chiefly straight out of the mouth of the cylinder.

[Figure 121-122]

Fig. 122 depicts one of the simplest ways of detecting such electric waves, and at the same time makes them evident to a whole audience. An ordinary gold-leaf electroscope is provided with a by-pass of wire arranged with a minute gap (adjustable by a screw) to break the continuity. If the gold leaves are carefully charged they will remain diverging, because their electric potential has not been raised sufficiently to cause a discharge across the gap. But if now an electric wave from a Hertz oscillator — especially from an oscillator set vertically to produce vertically polarised waves — falls on the electroscope, it sets up in the wire by-pass an electric surging that will overleap the gap with a minute spark. And, during the time that the spark bridges the gap the gold leaves discharge themselves and fall together.

A still more sensitive detector used by Lodge consists of a bit of glass tube filled loosely with iron filings (Fig. 123) and joined along with a weak voltaic cell in circuit with a galvanometer. Loose metal filings or powders form a very bad and incoherent conductor : hardly any current passes through them. But let an electric wave fall on the tube, instantly the filings become — as discovered by M. Branly — an excellent conductor. So there results a movement of the galvanometer, and of the spot of light reflected by it, proving that an electric wave has been detected by the tube.

[Figure 124]

Fig. 124 shows a set of the apparatus with which Professor Lodge repeated and verified the observations of Hertz as to the optical properties of these electric waves. Hertz had reflected them with parabolic mirrors 6 feet high, and refracted them with huge prisms of pitch. He found they could penetrate through wooden floors and stone walls. He polarised them and diffracted them. Lodge was able to repeat these results, but with an apparatus of less heroic dimensions. The sender consists of an oscillator, like Fig. 121b, having a 5-inch ball emitting 7 -inch waves, enclosed in a copper box furnished in front with a diaphragm perforated with apertures of various sizes to moderate the radiation to any desired degree. As detector, D, there is used a tube full of coarse iron filings put at the back of a copper hat, whose open end is turned in any direction in which waves are to be received. Wires pass from the detector to the galvanometer, G, and are enclosed in a metal tube to shield them from stray radiations. If the receiver is set obliquely to the sender so that no waves from the sender enter the receiver, the galvanometer will give no indications. But if the waves from the sender are reflected into the mouth of the receiver by holding in front, at the proper angle, a sheet of metal, at once the detector is affected, and the galvanometer reveals the fact. Similarly, as shown in the diagram, a prism of paraffin wax may be used to refract the electric waves into the mouth of the receiver. The picture also shows a grid of metal wires which can be used to polarise the electric waves.

[Figure 125]

Moje recent than the researches of Professor Lodge are those of Professor Righi, whose apparatus is shown in Fig. 125. It consists of two parts, a sender and a receiver. The sender, on the left, consists of a small oscillator (that shown at the bottom of Fig. 120), with three spark-gaps, the central gap being capable of fine adjustment. In Fig. 125 this gap is between the ball marked V, and one below it (not shown), enclosed in a small leather capsule filled with vaseline. This oscillator is set at the focus of a parabolic mirror, M, to reflect the waves out straight to the right across the central table C. The detector, D, which also is furnished with a parabolic mirror, is an optical one. It is made of a film of silver upon a slip of glass, the film being divided in two across the middle with a diamond cut. Across this narrow gap minute sparks pass, and are viewed through an eye-piece at D. The apparatus is quite small enough to be put upon an ordinary table, and presents quite the appearance of a piece of optical apparatus. Upon the central table can be mounted reflectors, prisms, lenses, grids, or any other apparatus. With these devices Professor Righi has tracked down the optical properties of the electric waves varying from 8 inches down to 1 inch in length. He has demonstrated interference fringes by Fresnel's mirrors, and with the biprism, with thin plates, and by diffraction. He has verified the laws of refraction, reflexion, total reflexion, polarisation, and of elliptical and circular oscillations. He also investigated the transparency of media and the selective transparency of wood according to its grain, a property which makes it polarise the electric waves just as tourmaline polarises light. In short, he has completed the proofs that these waves possess all the known properties of ordinary light. Other workers have occupied themselves in the same field. We are shortly to hear a discourse here l by Professor J. Chunder Bose, of Calcutta, upon the polarisation of the electric wave as studied by him, with an exceedingly elegant apparatus producing still shorter waves.

Footnote: Given Friday, January 29, 1897. Professor Bose's oscillator is depicted in Fig. 126 ; it is made of a small ball of platinum between two smaller balls. Single sparks are given to this from a small induction-coil. A cylindrical lens of ebonite in front of this oscillator renders parallel the emitted waves. The complete apparatus is shown in Fig. 127. The oscillator or sender S enclosed

[Figure 126]

in a metal tube projects from a box A, doubly cased in metal;

which contains the induction-coil and battery. The detector D consists of a number of small metal springs lightly pressing against one another, traversed by a current from a single cell C in the circuit of which is included the galvanometer G. The detector D is set up on a movable arm on an optical circle, so that the optical properties of the electric beam may be studied. M is a plane mirror, N a curved mirror for studying the laws of reflexion, P is a prism of ebonite, T a special apparatus for observing the total reflexion at films of liquid enclosed between two semi-cylinders of ebonite, H is a holder in which pieces of minerals can be clamped for observation. Professor Bose has found that many crystalline and fibrous minerals, such as epidote and asbestos, polarise the electric beam, since (like the tourmaline for short waves) these materials absorb the electric vibrations in directions parallel to certain axes of their structure. Even an ordinary book possesses a polarising structure for these waves; those that vibrate parallel to the leaves are absorbed more than those that vibrate across them.

But before I close I must show you at least some of these effects in actual experiment. Here, in a metal box, is a small induction coil actuated by a couple of battery cells. The spark which this makes is carried to a small oscillator, closely resembling Lodge's (Fig. 121). It is, in fact, a short piece of polished platinum tube, 4 millimetres in diameter, between two small beads of platinum. It emits waves about ½ inch long. I surround , it with a metal bonnet or tube to direct the waves straight out. The detector is simply a tube loosely filled with iron filings in circuit with a galvanometer, and a cell made with a bit of iron and a bit of copper dipping into salt water. It also is furnished with an outer metal tube to screen it from stray radiations. If I set the sender and receiver opposite one another, the receiver will respond whenever a spark is passed through the sender. After each such response, I have to give a gentle tap to the detector to shake up the filings and send the galvanometer index back to zero.

[Figure 127]

[Figure 128]

Now I set the receiver askew so that none of the waves from the sender shall get to the detector. Spark after spark is discharged across the oscillator, but there is no response. Then I hold a plate of metal as a mirror to reflect the waves, or I interpose at the proper angle a small prism of paraffin wax. At once the detector responds, proving that the waves have been turned round the corner, refracted by the prism.

If then it can be proved that these electric waves, though invisible, can be reflected, refracted, polarised, and absorbed, exactly as the visible waves of ordinary light, have we not good reason to regard them as one and the same phenomenon? By every test, in every physical property, save only the accident that our eye is not sensitive to them, they are nothing else than waves of light. But if that is so, are we not entitled logically to draw the converse inference that if light, ordinary light, behaves in the same way and has all the same properties on the small scale as these electric waves on the larger scale, then the little waves of ordinary light are also electric waves ? That, indeed, was the brilliant speculation, the daring theory propounded in 1864 by the late Professor Clerk Maxwell. Basing his ideas upon the investigations pursued in this institution by Faraday, who himself ventured first into this enchanted domain of electro-optics, Maxwell predicted the properties of electric waves in that famous memoir wherein he set forth the doctrine that light consists of electric vibrations in space. And the brilliant success of Hertz and those who have followed him in demonstrating by experiment the optical properties of these waves, is the abundant justification of Maxwell's prediction.
