DURING the first quarter of the present century the wavetheory of light successfully displaced the older corpuscular theory. Young, Fresnel, Arago, Biot, and Airy established the laws of physical optics upon an unimpregnable basis of undulatory theory, leaving Brewster • the sole surviving exponent of the material nature of light. But none of those who thus contributed to establish the wave-theory of light could do much to elucidate the nature of that wave-motion itself. If light consist of waves they must be waves in or of something : that something being provisionally called the ether. But as to the nature of the ether itself, or as to the particular motions of it that were propagated as waves, scarce anything was to be learned save that the ether itself behaved rather like an incompressible liquid or solid of extreme tenuity but great rigidity, and that the waves were of the kind classed as transversal (see p. 108).

In 1845 Faraday discovered the singular fact that the magnet exercises a peculiar action on light ; the plane of polarisation of a polarised beam being rotated when the beam passes along a magnetic field.

The existence of a relation between light and magnetism being thus established, Faraday proceeded to look for other relations, including the action of an electrostatic strain on polarised light, and the effect of reflecting polarised light at the polished pole of a magnet, neither of which, however, he succeeded in observing.

In 1846 he sent to the Philosophical Magazine some

"Thoughts on Ray Vibrations" in which he suggested that radiation of all kinds, including light, was a high species of vibration in the lines of force. "Suppose," he says, "two bodies A B, distant from each other and under mutual action, and therefore connected by lines of force, and let us fix our attention upon one resultant of force having an invariable direction as regards space ; if one of the bodies move in the least degree right or left, or if its power be shifted for a moment within the mass (neither of these cases being difficult to realise if A and B be either electric or magnetic bodies), then an effect equivalent to a lateral disturbance will take place in the resultant upon which we are fixing our attention ; for either it will increase in force whilst the neighbouring resultants are diminishing, or it will fall in force as they are increasing. . . . The propagation of light, and therefore probably of all radiant action, occupies time; and, that a vibration of the line of force should account for the phenomena of radiation, it is necessary that such vibration should occupy time also. . . . As to that condition of the lines of force which represents the assumed high elasticity of the aether, it cannot in this respect be deficient : the question here seems rather to be, whether the lines are sluggish enough in their action to render them equivalent to the aether in respect of the time known experimentally to be occupied in the transmission of radiant force."

In 1864 Clerk Maxwell, in a paper in the Philosophical Transactions on " A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field," wrote : — " The conception of the propagation of transverse magnetic disturbances to the exclusion of normal ones is distinctly set forth by Professor Faraday in his ' Thoughts on Ray Vibrations.' The electromagnetic theory of light, as proposed by him, is the same in substance as that which I have begun to develop in this paper, except that in 1846 there were no data to calculate the velocity of propagation." Maxwell then sets out new equations to express the relations between the electric and magnetic displacements in the medium and the forces to which they give rise. He not only accepts the idea of Faraday that a moving electric charge (as on a charged body in motion) acts magnetically as an electric current, — a proposition at that time unsupported by any experimental demonstration — but goes further and maintains that there is also a magnetic action produced during the production or release of an electric displacement in a dielectric medium : in fact, that displacement-currents in non-conductors produce, while they last, exactly the same magnetic action as the equivalent conduction -current would produce. He finds that if magnetic methods of measurement are adopted, the unit of electricity arrived at has a certain value, while if purely electrical methods are used the unit has a different value. The relation between these two units was found to depend on the "electric elasticity" of the medium, and to be a velocity ; namely, that velocity with which an electromagnetic disturbance is propagated in space. This velocity had already been determined as a ratio of units by Weber and Kohlrausch, who found it to be 3.19 x 10¹⁰ centims. per second. The velocity of apparent propagation of an electric disturbance along a wire had previously been roughly determined by Wheatstone at a somewhat higher figure. Commenting on Weber's result Maxwell proceeds : — " This velocity is so nearly that of light, that it seems we have strong reason to conclude that light itself (including radiant heat, and other radiations, if any) is an electromagnetic disturbance in the form of waves propagated through the electromagnetic field according to electromagnetic laws. If so, the agreement between the elasticity of the medium as calculated from the rapid alternations of luminous vibrations, and as found by the slow processes of electrical experiments, shows how perfect and regular the elastic properties of the medium must be when not encumbered with any matter denser than air. If the same character of the elasticity is retained in dense transparent bodies, it appears that the square of the index of refraction is equal to the product of the specific dielectric capacity and the specific magnetic capacity. Conducting media are shown to absorb such radiations rapidly, and therefore to be generally opaque." These two conclusions Maxwell himself attempted to verify, and pointed out an apparent exception in the case of electrolytes, which conduct and yet are transparent. In Maxwell's theory every electromagnetic wave must consist of two kinds of displacements both transverse to the direction of propagation, and at right angles to one another, one being an electrostatic displacement, the other a magnetic displacement. In this feature Maxwell's theory reconciles the conflicting views of Fresnel and MacCullagh respecting the relation of the displacements to the "plane of polarisation." It is now known that the electric displacements are at right angles to that plane and agree with the Fresnel vibrations ; whilst the magnetic displacements are in the plane of polarisation as required by the theory of MacCullagh. When, in 1874, Maxwell published his Treatise on Magnetism and Electricity, he had already attempted a further verification of the theory by means of a new determination of the ratio of the units. During the next ten years British physicists were busy following out the applications of the theory, and testing its truth in particular instances. Lord Rayleigh showed that it led much more readily than the old elastic-solid theory of light to the equations for double refraction, and to the explanation of the scattering of light (as in the blue of the sky) by small particles. FitzGerald applied it to the problems of the reflexion and refraction of light. J. J. Thomson undertook a new determination of the ratio of the units. Ayrton and Perry pursued a similar investigation by a new method. The same two observers also verified the relation of the optical and dielectric properties in the case of gases as required by the theory, and examined the anomalies presented by ice and ebonite. Poynting and Heaviside independently deduced -from Maxwell's theory the proposition that the energy of an electric current travels by the medium and not by the wire. Hopkinson investigated the relation between the refractive index of a number of substances and their dielectric inductivity ; and found some notable deviations from the values required by theory. Lodge added a number of important considerations, and produced mechanical models in illustration of Maxwell's ideas. The present author investigated the opacity of tourmaline in relation to its conductivity ; and found also, in accordance with Maxwell's views, that the conductivity of the double iodide of mercury and copper increases when it is raised to the temperature at which its opacity to light is suddenly augmented. Even more important, because independent of Maxwell's theory, Dr. Kerr in 1876 and 1877 discovered by direct experiment new relations between light and magnetism and between light and electrostatic strain, effects which Faraday had suspected, but sought in vain to discover. Lastly, FitzGerald had, in 1879 and 1883, suggested means of starting electromagnetic waves in the ether.

By the year 1884 all British physicists, except perhaps Lord Kelvin, who had just then been elaborating an independent spring-shell theory of the ether as an improvement on the elastic-solid theory, had accepted Maxwell's theory. Three years later Lord Kelvin gave his adhesion. On the Continent it was, however, barely recognised. In France it was quite ignored until Mascart and Joubert gave some account of it in their treatise on electricity. In Germany it was not quite so entirely neglected. Von Helmholtz appears to have been early drawn to study it, and himself evolved a new theory of dielectric action on similar lines. Later (in 1893) he applied the electromagnetic theory to explain anomalous refraction and dispersion (see Appendix to Lecture III., p. 100, above). It was von Helmholtz who first drew the attention of Hertz to the possibility of establishing a relation between electromagnetic forces and dielectric polarisation. Boltzmann had also attempted to verify Maxwell's theory with respect to the relation between the optical and dielectric properties of transparent substances. But, for the rest, Maxwell's theory was practically ignored. Boltzmann himself wrote in 1891 : "The theory of Maxwell is so diametrically opposed to the ideas which have become customary to us that we must first cast behind us all our previous views of the nature and operation of electric forces before we can enter into its portals." Wiedemann appears to have deemed the discrepancies observed by Hopkinson and Boltzmann as sufficient to call in question the validity of the theory, of which little notice is taken in the volumes of the 1885 edition of Die Lehre von der Elektricität. ( Fleming has in 1897 shown that these discrepancies disappear when the substances are cooled in liquid oxygen to about −180° C.)

In 1886 Lodge, investigating the theory of lightning conductors, carried out a long series of experiments on the discharge of small condensers, leading him to the observation of electric oscillations and of the travelling of electric waves as guided by wires. Hertz taking up the problem put to him by von Helmholtz, threw himself into investigating the influence of non-conducting media on the propagation of electric sparks. By March 1888 he had succeeded not only in producing electric oscillations and electric waves by the apparatus described above (Fig. 114, p. 215), but in demonstrating that these waves could be reflected and refracted like ordinary light.

The result of the publication of Hertz's work was immediate and widespread. To those continental physicists who had hitherto ignored Maxwell's theory, or who were unaware of the proofs accumulated by British physicists, Hertz's work was nothing short of a revelation. Scientific Europe precipitated itself upon the production of electric oscillations, as if eager to make up lost headway. The revelation was the more significant, since for those who had not accepted the ideas of Faraday and Maxwell as to action in the medium, it meant the abandonment of all the other electrical theories then extant which were based on the now untenable principle of action at a distance. None the less heartily was Hertz's work welcomed in England by those who were already disciples of Maxwell. They saw in it the crowning proofs of a theory which on other grounds they had already accepted as true. To adopt Oliver Lodge's words, by the end of 1888 the science of electricity had definitely annexed to itself the domain of optics, and had become an imperial science.

Since 1888 much has been done to complete the experimental verification of the complete analogy between electric waves and waves of light. Of these the more important are briefly noticed on pp. 221-229 above. Suffice it here to say that there is no known physical property possessed by waves of ordinary light that has not been found to be also correspondingly a property of the longer invisible waves produced by purely electric means. By reason of their greater wave-length they will pass through many substances opaque to ordinary light, such as stone and brick walls, and through fogs and mists.

A Hertz-wave Model

Subsequently to the delivery of these lectures, and while this volume was preparing for the press, the author devised a wave-motion model to illustrate mechanically the propagation of a wave from a Hertz oscillator to a Hertz resonator. This apparatus, which is depicted in Fig. 129, should be compared with Fig. 114, p. 215. In this model the " oscillator " is a heavy mass of brass hung by cords, and having a definite time of swing. The " resonator " is a brass circle hung at the other end of the apparatus by a trifilar suspension. They are adjusted by lengthening or shortening the cords so as to have identical periods of oscillation. Between them, to represent the intervening medium and transmit the energy in waves, is a row of inter-connected pendulums (on a plan somewhat similar to one suggested in 1877 by Osborne Reynolds) consisting each of a lead bullet hung by a V thread, the separate Vs overlapping one another so that no bullet can swing without communicating some of its motion to its next neighbour. On drawing the oscillator aside and letting it go it sets up a transverse wave which is propagated along the row of balls in a manner easily followed by the eye, and which, on reaching the resonator at the other end, sets it into vibration.

[Figure 129]
