Röntgen's Discovery — Production of light in vacuum tubes by electric discharges — Exhaustion of air from a tube — Geisslertube phenomena — The mercurial pump — Crookes's-tube phenomena— Properties of Kathode light — Crookes's shadows — Deflection of Kathode light by a magnet — Luminescent and mechanical effects — Lenard's researches on Kathode rays in air — Röntgen's researches — The discovery of X-rays by the luminescent effect — Shadows on the luminescent screen — Transparency of aluminium — Opacity of heavy metals — Transparency of flesh and leather — Opacity of bones — Absence of reflexion, refraction, and polarisation — Diselectrifying effects of Röntgen rays — Improvements in Röntgen tubes — Speculations on the nature of Röntgen light — Seeing the invisible.

So many erroneous accounts have appeared, chiefly in photographic journals, written by persons unacquainted with physical science, that it seems worth while in beginning a lecture on the subject of Röntgen's rays to state precisely how Röntgen's discovery was made, in the language in which he himself has stated it.

"Will you tell me," asked Mr. H. J. W. Dam in an interview with Prof. Röntgen in his laboratory at Wiirzburg, " the history of the discovery ? "

Footnote: McClure's Magazine, vol. vi. , p. 413.

"There is no history," he said. " I had been for a long time interested in the problem of the kathode rays from a vacuum tube as studied by Hertz and Lenard. I had followed theirs and other researches with great interest, and determined, as soon as I had the time, to make some researches of my own. This time I found at the close of last October [1895]. I had been at work for some days when I discovered something new. ' '

"What was the date ?"

"The 8th of November."

" And what was the discovery ? "

" I was working with a Crookes's tube covered by a shield of black cardboard. A piece of barium platinocyanide paper lay on the bench there. I had been passing a current through the tube, and I noticed a peculiar black line across the paper."

"What of that ?"

"The effect was one which could only be produced, in ordinary parlance, by the passage of light. No light could come from the tube because the shield which covered it was impervious to any light known, even that of the electric arc."

" And what did you think ? "

"I did not think; I investigated. I assumed that the effect must have come from the tube, since its character indicated that it could come from nowhere else. I tested it. In a few minutes there was no doubt about it. Rays were coming from the tube, which had a luminescent effect upon the paper. I tried it successfully at greater and greater distances, even at two metres.

It seemed at first a new kind of light. It was clearly something new, something unrecorded."

"Is it light ?"

" No." [It can neither be reflected nor refracted.]

" Is it electricity ?"

" Not in any known form."

"What is it?"

" I do not know. Having discovered the existence of a new kind of rays, I of course began to investigate what they would do. It soon appeared from tests that the rays had penetrative power to a degree hitherto unknown. They penetrated paper, wood, and cloth with ease, and the thickness of the substance made no perceptible difference, within reasonable limits. The rays passed through all the metals tested, with a facility varying, roughly speaking [inversely], with the density of the metal. These phenomena I have discussed carefully in my report 1 to the Wurzburg Society, and you will find all the technical results therein stated."

Such was Röntgen' s own account given by word of mouth. It is entirely borne out by the fuller document, in which in quiet and measured terms Röntgen described to the Wurzburg Society his discovery under the title "On a new kind of Rays," and which was the first announcement to the scientific world.

Now you will note that in the whole passage I have read describing the discovery, there is not a word about photography from beginning to end. Photography played no part in the original observation. No photographic plate or sensitised paper was employed. The discovery was made by the use of the luminescent screen, the acquaintance of which you made (if you did not know of it before) at my fourth lecture, when we were dealing with ultra-violet light. On that occasion I showed you a card partly covered with platino-cyanide of barium which has been in my possession since 1876. When exposed to invisible ultra-violet light it shone in the dark. No one who has ever used such a luminescent screen can blunder into mistaking it for a photographic plate. Such a screen — a piece of paper covered with the luminescent stuff 1 — was Röntgen using in his investigations. And as luminescent screens are not things to be found lying about by accident, it is evident that its presence on the bench in Röntgen' s laboratory on 8th November, 1895, when he was deliberately investigating the phenomena observed by Lenard, was in no sense accidental. That you may the better understand the precise nature of Röntgen's discovery, we will repeat the observation with the appliances now at our disposal.

Footnote: Ueber eine neue Art von Strahlen (Vorlaufige Mittheilung), von Dr. Wilhelm Konrad Röntgen. (Sitzungsberichte der Wtirzburger physik-medic. Gesellschaft, 1895.)

Before you stands a Crookes's tube, which I can at any moment stimulate into activity by passing through it an electric spark from a suitable induction-coil. It shines with visible light, the glass glowing with a beautiful greenish-gold fluorescence. To stop off all visible light, I place over the Crookes's tube this case made of black cardboard, which cuts off not only the visible rays of every sort', but also cuts off the invisible rays of the infra-red and ultra-violet sorts. On the table, just below the tube, lies a sheet of paper covered with platino-cyanide of barium — in fact, a luminescent screen. And, on passing the electric discharge through the shielded Crookes's tube you will all see that this luminescent sheet at once shines in the dark ; while across it — as those who are near may observe — there falls obliquely a dark line which is simply a shadow of a small support that stands between the tube and the screen. Something evidently is causing that sheet of luminescent paper to light up. Can the effect come from anywhere else than from the tube ? Try by interposing things, and see whether they cast shadows on the paper. The nearest thing at hand is a wooden bobbin, on which wire is wound. If I interpose it, it casts a shadow on the paper. But looking at the shadow one notices, curiously enough, that while the wire casts a decided shadow, the wood casts scarcely any. I hold up the screen that you may see the shadow more plainly. Yes ! there is something coming from that tube which causes the screen to light up, and which casts on the screen shadows of things held between tube and screen. This light — if light it be — comes from the tube. But is it light ? Light, as we know it, cannot pass through black cardboard. If it be light it is light of some wholly new and more penetrative kind. I move away, still holding the screen in my hand, to greater distances. Here, two metres away, the screen still shines, though less brilliantly. And, note, it shines whether its face or its back be presented toward the tube. The rays, having penetrated the shield of black cardboard that encloses the tube, can also penetrate the paper screen from the back, and make the chemically-prepared face shine. Let us follow Röntgen farther as he investigated the penetrative power of the rays. I interpose a block of wood against which a pair of scissors has been fixed by nails. You can see on the screen the shadow of the scissors ; the light passes through the wood, though not so brightly, for the wood intercepts some of the rays. Paper, cardboard, and cloth are easily penetrated by them. The metals generally are more opaque than any organic substance, and they differ widely amongst one another in their transparency. Thin metal foil of all kinds is more or less transparent ; but when one tries thicker pieces they are of different degrees of opacity. Ordinary coins are opaque. A golden sovereign, a silver shilling, and a copper farthing are all opaque, but the lighter metals such as tin, magnesium, and aluminium, notably the latter, are fairly transparent. Here is my purse of leather with a metal frame. I have but to hold it between the tube and the screen to see its contents — two coins and a ring — for leather is transparent to these rays. A sheet of aluminium about the twentieth of an inch thick, though opaque to every other previously-known kind of light is for this kind of light practically transparent. On the other hand lead is very opaque. Röntgen found opacity to go approximately in proportion to density. It is now found that those metals which are of the greatest atomic weight are the most opaque to Röntgen light. Uranium, the atomic weight of which is 240, is the most opaque ; whilst lithium, whose atomic weight is only 7, and which will readily float on water, is exceedingly transparent. In fact I have never yet got a good shadow from lithium. This relation extends not only to the metals themselves but to their compounds. Thus the chloride of lithium is more transparent than the chloride of zinc or than the chloride of silver. Finding that the denser constituents were the more opaque, and that while glass and stone are tolerably opaque such substances as gelatine and leather were comparatively transparent, it occurred to Röntgen that bone would be more opaque than flesh — and so it proved : for interposing the hand between the tube and the screen we find that while the flesh casts a faint shadow the bones cast a much darker one, and so we are able to see upon the luminescent screen, in the darkness, the shadow of the bones of the hand, and of the arm. This is truly seeing the invisible.

Footnote: It is interesting to note that Lenard's investigations of 1894 were conducted by the aid of a luminescent screen composed of paper impregnated with the wax-like chemical called pentadecylparatolylketone.

But now the investigation took another turn. So far there has been no mention of photography. But the peculiar penetrative light having been discovered, and the shadows having been seen on the luminescent screen, it was a pretty obvious step to register these shadows photographically. For, as was already well known in the case of ultra-violet light, the rays that stimulate fluorescence and phosphorescence are just those rays which are most active chemically and photographically. Hence it was to be expected that these new rays would affect a photographic plate. This Röntgen proceeded to verify. He obtained a photograph of a set of metal weights that were shut up in a wooden box. Also of a compass, showing the needle and dial through the thin brass cover. He then put his tube under a woodentopped table ; and laying his hand on the table above it, and poising over it a photographic dry-plate, face downwards, he threw upon the plate, by light which passed upwards through the table top, a shadow of his hand. So for the first time he succeeded in photographing the bones of a living hand. It was the photography of the invisible. But, note, even here there is no " new photography." The only photography in the matter is the well-known old photography of the dry-plate, which must first be exposed and afterwards developed in the dark-room.

And now, though it anticipates somewhat the course of this lecture, since the process of photographic development in the dark-room requires a little time, I will proceed to take a few photographs which will then be taken to the dark-room to be developed, and will afterwards be brought back and shown you upon the screen by means of the lantern.

[In the experiments which followed photographs were taken of the hands of a boy and of a girl, also shadows cast by sundry gems, including a fine Burmese ruby, a sham ruby, a Cape diamond, and an Indian diamond.]

Retracing our steps in the order of discovery I must at once take you back, nearly two hundred years, to the time of Francis Hauksbee, when, with the newly invented electric machine, and the newly perfected airpump, the first experiments were made on the peculiar light produced by passing an electric spark into a partial vacuum. About that time Europe was nearly as much excited — considering the state of knowledge and the slow means of communication — over the " mercurial phosphorus," as it was last year over the Röntgen rays. This " mercurial phosphorus" was simply a little glass tube, such as that (Fig. 130) which I hold in my hand. It contains a few drops of quicksilver; and the air that otherwise would fill the tube has been mostly pumped out by an air-pump, leaving a partial vacuum. I have but to shake the tube and it flashes brightly with a greenish light. The friction of the mercury against the glass walls sets up electric discharges, which flash through the residual air, illuminating it at every motion.
