[Figure 130]

While I have been talking to you an air-pump in the basement, driven by a gas-engine, has been at work exhausting a large oval-shaped glass tube. Only perhaps 1/300 part of the air originally in it remains. On sending through it from top to bottom the sparks from an induction coil, it is filled with a lovely pale crimson glow, which changes at the lower end to a violet-coloured tint. On reversing the connections so as to send the discharge upwards the violet -coloured part is seen at the top. It shows you, in fact, the end at which the electric discharge is leaving the tube. The pale glow of this primitive vacuum tube is rich in light of the ultra-violet kind, which, as you know, readily excites fluorescence. I have but to hold near it my platino-cyanide screen for you to observe the rich green fluorescence. My hand will cast a shadow on the screen if I interpose it, but there are no bones to be seen in the shadow. For here there is none of the penetrative Röntgen light : the fluorescence is due to ordinary ultraviolet waves, to which flesh and cardboard are quite opaque. If the tap is turned on to readmit the air you see how the rosy glow contracts first into a narrowing band, then into a mere line, which finally changes into a flickering forked spark of miniature lightning ; and all is over until and unless we pump out the air again. Another beautiful effect is shown by use of an exhausted glass jar, within which is placed a cup of uranium glass, as described fifty years ago by Gassiot. The discharge overflows the cup in lovely streams of violet colour, while the cup itself glows with vivid green fluorescence. Some thirty years ago vacuum tubes became an article of commerce, and were made in many complex and beautiful shapes by the skill of Dr. Geissler of Bonn, who devised a form of mercurial air-pump 1 for the purpose of extracting the air more perfectly; though the degree of vacuum, which sufficed to display the most brilliant colours when stimulated by an electric discharge, is far short of that which is requisite in the modern vacuum tubes of which I must presently speak. Here is a Geissler's tube showing wondrous effects when the spark discharge is passed into it. Strange flickering striations palpitate along the windings of the glass tubes which themselves glow with characteristic fluorescence. Soda-glass fluoresces with the golden-green tint, lead glass with a fine blue, and uranium glass with a brilliant green. The vjolet glow which appears in the bulb at one end of the tube surrounds the metal terminal by which the current leaves the tube, and is itself due to nitrogen in the residual air. Each kind of gas gives its own characteristic tint. And with any kind of gas within the tube the luminous phenomena are different at different degrees of exhaustion.

Footnote: See the author's monograph on The Development of the Mercurial Air-Pump, published in 1888, by Messrs. E. and F. N. Spon.

I have here a set of eight tubes, all of the same simple shape (Fig. 131), but they differ in respect of the degree of vacuum within them. Platinum wires have been sealed through the ends of each, one wire a to serve as the anoae. or place where the electric current enters, another wire k to serve as kathode or place where the current makes its exit from the tube. Both anode and kathode are tipped with aluminium, as this metal does not volatilise so readily under the electric discharge. The small sidetube s by which the tube was attached to the pump during exhaustion is hermetically sealed to prevent air from re-entering. The first tube of the set is full of air at ordinary pressure, and does not light up at all. The length between anode and kathode (about 12 inches) is so great that no spark will jump between them. In the second tube the air has been so far pumped away that only about 1/5 of the original air remains. Across this imperfect vacuum forked brush-like bluish sparks dart. The third tube has been exhausted to about 1/20 part ; that is to say, 19/20 of the air have been removed. It shows, instead of the darting sparks, a single thin red line, which is flexible like a luminous thread. In the fourth tube the residual air is reduced to 1/40 or 1/50 part; and you note that the red line has widened out into a luminous band from pole to pole, while a violet mantle makes its appearance at each end, though brighter at the kathode. In the fifth tube, where the exhaustion has been carried to about 1/500, the luminous column, which fills the tube from side to side, has broken up into a number of transverse striations which flicker and dance ; the violet mantle around the kathode has grown larger and more distinct. It has separated itself by a dark space from the flickering red column, and is itself separated from the metal kathode by a narrow dark space. The degree of exhaustion has been carried in the sixth tube to about 1/10000 : and now the flickering striations have changed both shape and colour. They are fewer, and whiter. The light at the anode has dwindled to a mere star ; whilst the violet glow around the kathode has expanded, and now fills the whole of that end of the tube. The dark space between it and the metal kathode has grown wider, and now the kathode itself exhibits an inner mantle of a foxy colour, making it seem to be dull and hot. The glass, also, of the tube shows a tendency to emit a green fluorescent light at the kathode end. In the seventh tube the exhaustion has been pushed still farther, only about 1/50000 part of the original air being left. The luminous column has subsided into a few greyish-white nebulous patches. The dark space around the kathode has much expanded, and the glass of the tube exhibits a yellow-green fluorescence. In the eighth tube only one or two millionths of the original air are present ; and it is now found much more difficult to pass a spark through the tube. All the internal flickering clouds and striations in the residual gas have disappeared. The tube looks as if it were quite empty : but the glass walls shine brightly with the fine golden-green fluorescence, particularly all around the kathode. If we had pushed the exhaustion still farther, the internal resistance would have increased so much that the spark from the induction coil would have been unable to penetrate across the space from anode to kathode.

To attain such high degrees of exhaustion as those of the latter few tubes recourse must be had to mercurial air-pumps ; no mechanical pump being adequate to produce sufficiently perfect vacua. The Sprengel pump, invented in 1865 by Dr. Hermann Sprengel, is an admirable instrument for the purpose. But it was modified and greatly improved about 1874 by Mr. Crookes, whose form of pump is shown in Fig. 132. Mercury is placed in a supplyvessel, which can be raised to drive the mercury through the pump, and lowered, when empty, to be refilled. This vessel is connected by a flexible indiarubber tube to the pump, which consists of glass-tubes fused together. From the pump-head the mercury falls in drops down a narrower tube, called the falltube, and each drop as it falls acts as a little piston to push the air in front of it, and so gradually to empty the space in the farther part of the tube. A drying-tube, filled with

Footnote: These improvements comprised the following : — A method of lowering the supply-vessel to refill it with the mercury that had run through the pump ; the use of taps made wholly of platinum to ensure tightness ; the use of a spark-gauge to test the perfection of the vacuum by observing the nature of an electric spark in it ; the use of an air-trap in the tube leading up to the pump-head; the method of connecting the pump with the object to be exhausted by a thin, flexible, spiral glass tube; and the method of cleansing the fall-tube by letting in a little strong sulphuric acid through a stoppered valve in the head of the pump. In carrying out these developments Mr. Crookes was assisted by the late Mr. C. Gimingham, whose later contributions to the subject are described in the author's monograph on the Mercurial Air-Pump.

[Figure 132]

phosphoric acid to absorb moisture, is interposed between the pump and the vacuum-tube that is to be exhausted. It is usual to add a barometric gauge to show the degree of vacuum that has been reached.

Before you, fixed against the wall, is a mercury-pump substantially like Fig. 132, but having three fall -tubes instead of one, so as to work more rapidly. Through these fall-tubes mercury is dropping freely ; the pump being at the present moment employed in the exhaustion of a Crookes's tube, which has been sealed to it by a narrow glass tube. When the exhaustion has been carried far enough, this narrow pipe will be melted with a blow-pipe, so as to seal up the tube and enable it to be removed from the pump.

It was with such a pump as this that Crookes was working from 1874 to 1875 in the memorable researches on the repulsion caused by radiation, which culminated in the invention of that exceedingly beautiful apparatus the radiometer, or light-mill, which we were using in my last lecture. From that series of researches Mr. Crookes was led on to another upon the phenomena of electric discharge in high vacua. Professor Hittorf of Miinster had already done some excellent work in this direction. He had noted the golden-green fluorescence around the kathode when the exhaustion was pushed to a high degree; and he had found that this golden glow, unlike the luminous column which at a lower exhaustion fills the vacuous tube, refuses to go round a corner. He had even found that it could cast shadows, owing to its propagation in straight lines.

Starting at this point on his famous research, Crookes

[Figure 133]

— PROFESSOR WILLIAM CROOKES, F.R.S.

investigated the properties of this kathode light, and found it to differ entirely from any known kind of radiation. It appeared to start off from the surface of the kathode and to move in straight lines, penetrating to a definite distance, the limit of which was marked by the termination of the "dark space," according to the degree of exhaustion, and causing the bright fluorescence when the exhaustion was carried so far that the dark space expanded to touch the walls. Acting on this hint he proceeded to construct tubes in which the kathode, instead of being as previously a simple wire, was FIGS. 134, 135.

shaped as a flat disk, or as a cup (Figs. 134, 135). From the flat disk the kathode rays streamed backwards in a parallel beam. Crookes regarded these kathode streams as flights of negatively-electrified molecules shot backwards from the metal surface. Doubtless such flying molecules of residual gas there are ; and they take part in the phenomenon of discharge, bombarding against the opposite wall of the tube. There are, however, strong reasons for thinking that the kathode rays are not merely flights of "radiant matter," but that the flying molecules are accompanied by ether-waves or ethermotions which cause the fluorescence on the walls of the tube. Be that as it may, Crookes found the kathode rays to be possessed of several remarkable properties. Not only could they excite fluorescence and phosphorescence to a degree previously unknown, but they exercised a mechanical force against the surfaces on which they impinged. They cast shadows of objects interposed in their path ; and were capable of being drawn aside by the influence of a magnet, just as if they were electric currents.

Here are some Crookes's tubes which display the luminescent effects. At the top of the first is a small flat disk of aluminium to serve as kathode. From it shoots downward a kathode-beam upon a few Burmese rubies fixed below. They glow with a crimson tint more intense than if they had been red-hot. In a similar tube is a beautiful phenakite, looking like a large diamond. When exposed to the kathode rays it luminesces with a lovely pale blue tint. In the third is placed a common whelk shell, which has been lightly calcined. As the kathode rays stream down upon it it lights up brilliantly. And, after the electric discharge has been switched off, the shell continues for some minutes to phosphoresce with a persistent glow.

In the next tube, which contains a sheet of mica painted with a coat of sulphate of lime so that you may better see the bright trace of its luminescence, a narrow kathode ray is admitted through a slit at the bottom, and extends in a fine bright line upwards. Holding a magnet near it, I draw the kathode ray on one side, illustrating its deflectibility.

Footnote: A species of white emerald found in the Siberian emerald mines, and often sold in Russia as a Siberian diamond. It is not so brilliant as a diamond, though much more rarely met with.

To illustrate the mechanical effect of the kathode rays I take a Crookes's tube, having at its ends flat disks of metal as electrodes. Between them is a nicelybalanced paddle-wheel, the axle of which runs upon a sort of little railway. On sending the spark from the induction-coil through the tube the little wheel is driven round and runs along the rails. Its paddles are driven as if a blast issued from the disk which serves as kathode. On reversing the current its motion is reversed.

Here (Fig. 136) is a Crookes's tube of a pear shape, having a piece of sheetmetal in the form of a Maltese cross set in the path of the kathode rays. See what a fine shadow the cross casts against the broad end of the tube ; for the whole end of the tube FIG. 136.

[Figure 136]

glows with the characteristic golden-green luminescence, except where it is shielded from the rays by the metal cross.

With this tube I am able to show you a most interesting and novel experiment discovered only a few days ago by Professor Fleming. If you surround the tube with a magnetising coil through which an electric current is passed, the magnetic field produces a remarkable effect on the shadow. Instead of pulling it on one side (as a horse-shoe magnet would do), the magnetising coil causes the cross to rotate on itself, and at the same time to grow smaller. To show the effect more conveniently I have put the magnetising coil not around the tube itself, but around an iron core beyond the end of the tube. So I am able to diminish or augment the effect by simply moving the tube away from the iron core, or by bringing it nearer. As I move it up, the shadow of the cross contracts, and grows smaller but brighter. It also twists round and turns completely over top for bottom as it vanishes into a mere point. But just as it vanishes you see its place taken by a second large shadow, which, as I push the tube still closer to the magnetised core, grows brighter and also turns round and contracts as its predecessor did. Its arms are more curved than those of the first cross. At the same moment when the second shadow-cross appears a third shadow makes its appearance as a distorted annular form against the walls of the tube between the metal cross and the kathode. Its position is such that the shadow seems to have been cast as by rays diverging from the other end of the tube. As yet we know not the explanation of these remarkable facts.
