The last tube of this set that illustrates Crookes's researches has as kathode a large hollow cup of aluminium at the bottom (Fig. 137). This concave kathode focuses the kathode rays by converging them to a point in space a little above the centre of the tube. Crookes found that if the kathode rays were in this way focused upon anything, they produced great heat. Glass was melted, diamonds charred, platinum foil heated red-hot and even fused by the impact of the concentrated kathode stream. In the focusing-tube now before you — an old one, made more than ten years ago — there is a piece of thin platinum foil hung in the tube to be heated by the rays. But it has become displaced and no longer hangs in the focus. Yet by holding a small horse-shoe magnet outside the tube to deflect the rays a little, I can displace the focus until it falls upon the surface of the platinum foil, which you now see is raised to a bright red heat.

[Figure 137]

Since the date, now nearly twenty years ago, when these most beautiful and astonishing observations were made by Crookes, there has been much speculation as to the nature of these interior kathode rays ; their properties were so extraordinarily different from anything in the nature of ordinary light that even the name " ray "

as applied to them seemed out of place. Crookes's own term, " radiant matter," was objected to as necessarily implying their material nature ; and yet no other explanation of them seemed reasonable than Crookes's own suggestion that they consisted of flights of electrified particles. It was supposed that they could only exist in a vacuum tube under an exceedingly high condition of exhaustion.

However in 1894 Dr. Philipp Lenard, acting on a hint afforded by an observation of Professor Hertz '

[Figure 138]

succeeded in bringing out the kathode rays into the air at ordinary pressure. For this purpose he fitted up a tube with a small window of thin aluminium foil opposite the kathode, as shown in Fig. 138. The general form of tube was the same as that previously used by Hertz, namely, cylindrical, with a small kathode disk on the end of a central wire, protected by an inner glass tube. The anode was a cylindrical metal tube surrounding the kathode. Upon the further end of the tube was cemented a brass cap, having at its middle a small hole covered with aluminium foil 1/10000 inch thick. Through this "window," when the tube was highly exhausted, there came out into the open air rays which, if not actual prolongations of the kathode rays, are closely identified with them. They can be deflected by a magnet — though in varying degrees depending on the internal vacuum. They can excite luminescence. Lenard explored them by using a small luminescent screen of paper covered with a chemical called pentadecylparatolylketone. He found them to be capable of affecting a photographic dry-plate ; and studied both by the luminescent screen and by the photographic plate their power of penetrating materials. He found that air at ordinary pressure was not very transparent, acting toward them as a turbid medium. He found them to pass through thin sheets of aluminium and even of copper. He also caused them to affect a photographic plate that was completely enclosed in an aluminium case, and to discharge an electroscope enclosed in a metal box. All this work was done in 1894 and 1895 and duly published. Though it excited no public notice, it was regarded by physicists as of very great importance. As you were told at the beginning in Röntgen's own account of the matter, his research began with the deliberate aim of reinvestigating the problem of the emission of kathode rays from the vacuum tube as studied by Hertz and Lenard. So as Lenard had done, he employed a luminescent screen to explore the rays, and used a Crookes tube (Fig. 139) of a form closely resembling Lenard's, and indeed identical with that previously employed by Hertz. The end opposite the kathode was simply of glass, without any brass cap or aluminium window. Thus prepared he found what I have already described, those mysterious rays which with characteristic modesty he described as "X-rays," but which will always be best known as Röntgen's rays. They are not kathode rays, though caused by them. Kathode rays will not pass through glass, and are deflected by a magnet. Röntgen rays will pass through glass and are not deflected by a magnet. They seem indeed to be formed by the destruction of the kathode rays, having for their origin the spot where the kathode rays strike against any solid object, best of all against some heavy metal such as platinum or uranium. Neither are they ordinary light of either the infra-red or of the ultra-violet kind, though they resemble the latter in their chemical activity and in so freely exciting luminescence. But ultra-violet light can, as we have seen in previous lectures, be reflected, refracted, and polarised, while Röntgen light cannot. Nor are Röntgen's rays the same thing as Lenard's rays ; for the latter are in various degrees deflectible by the magnet ; and air is toward them relatively much more opaque than it is for Röntgen's rays. Röntgen seems to have been fortunate in having the means of producing the most perfect exhaustion by his vacuum pump : for on the perfection of the vacuum more than on any other detail does the successful production of the Röntgen rays depend. The vacuum, which is abundantly good enough to evoke luminescence, or to show the shadow of the cross, or to produce the heating at the focus, or to drive the " molecule mill," does not suffice to generate the Röntgen rays. For this last purpose the exhaustion must be carried to a higher point — to a point so high indeed that the tube is on the verge of becoming non-conductive.

Footnote: Hertz noticed that when a very thin metal film was interposed inside the Crookes tube, the glass still fluoresced under the kathode discharge. He found this still to be the case when the film was replaced by a piece of thin aluminium foil which was quite opaque to light.

[Figure 139]

Footnote: Reflexion there is, but not of a regular kind ; the supposed cases of true reflexion announced by Lord Blythswood and others belong to the category of myths. There is diffuse reflexion of

Röntgen rays from polished metals, particularly from zinc, just as there is diffuse reflexion of ordinary light from white paper. As to refraction, Perrin in Paris, and Winkelmann in Jena, have independently found what they think evidence of feeble refraction through aluminium prisms. But the deviation (which is towards the refracting edge) is so excessively small as to be scarcely distinguishable from mere instrumental errors. Polarisation has been looked for by many skilled observers, using many materials including tourmalines. Only one success has been alleged, by MM. Galitzine and Karnojitzky, using tourmaline ; but their result has not been confirmed and is probably erroneous. Neither has interference of Röntgen light yet been shown to be possible. Several observers have professed that they have obtained diffraction fringes from which the wave-length of the Röntgen rays could be measured. But some of these measurements show a wave-length greater than that of red light, and others less than that of ordinary ultra-violet : they are probably all due to some unnoticed source of error. None of them can be accepted without subsequent confirmation by other experimenters, and this is not yet forthcoming.

Here let me say a word about the man himself and his material surroundings. Still in the prime of life, at the age of fifty-one, Professor Wilhelm Konrad Röntgen had already made himself a name among physicists by his work in optics and electricity before the date of the brilliant discovery that gave him wider fame. He occupies the chair of Physics in the University of Wiirzburg in Bavaria, and lives and works in the physical laboratory of the University. The little town of Wtirzburg, of 61,000 inhabitants, boasts a university frequented by 1,490 students, and supported with an income of £41,000 a year, of which more than half is contributed by the State. There are 53 professors and 40 assistants. Its buildings comprise a group of laboratories and institutes devoted to chemistry, physiology, pathology, mineralogy, and the like. Its physical laboratory, a neat detached block of buildings, wherein also the professor has his residence, is of modern design. Its equipment for the purpose of research is infinitely better than that of the University of London; and it is expected of the professor that he shall contribute to the advancement of science by original investigations.

Footnote: From a Report recently presented to the Convocation of the University of London, it appears that the physical and chemical laboratories of the University are practically non-existent. " There are three rooms at Burlington House which are occasionally used as laboratories during examinations, and for examinational purposes only. The largest of these is a large hall lit from the top. When used as a chemical laboratory, it is fitted up with working benches down the middle and along the two sides, the benches being divided into separate stalls to isolate candidates in their work. It was stated that the middle stalls and benches are taken down when the hall is used for written examinations, and are re-erected when a chemical examination is to be held. In a second hall, also lighted from above, where frequent written examinations are held, temporary arrangements are made whenever an examination in practical physics is to be held. A curtain of black cloth slung across one end of the room gave partial obscurity over the tables where photometric and spectroscopic apparatus was placed. The third room, sometimes called the galvanometer room, is a smaller room in the basement, artificially lighted, and used chiefly for printing, except at the times of examinations in practical physics." Such is the melancholy state of things in a University where everything is sacrificed on the altar of competitive examinations.

[Figure 140]

With such material and intellectual encouragements to research as surround the university professor in even the smallest of universities in Germany, what wonder that advances are made in science ? Would that a like stimulus were existent in England. The Professor of Physics in the University of London has made no discovery like that of Professor Röntgen, for the very good reason that the University of London has neither appointed any Professor of Physics, nor built any physical laboratory where he might work. Neither the State nor the municipality has provided it with the necessary funds.

Footnote: Bavaria has a population of 6,000,000. It supports the three Universities of Munich, Erlangen, and Wurzburg, with a total of over 6,000 students, at a cost of £150,000 a year, of which £93,000 is provided by the State. London, with a population of 5,000,000, has the University of London, a mere Examining Board, to which come up for intermediate and degree examinations about 2,000 students yearly, of whom a large proportion are from the provinces. It has no professors. Its laboratories are in the deplorable position above mentioned. So far from being endowed by the State, it pays in to the State about £16,500 a year, and nominally receives back about £16,280 as a parliamentary grant. It receives no subvention from the municipality. Its library is closed for a large portion of the year, the room being used for examination purposes almost every day.

Its charter precludes it from doing anything for science except hold examinations! Perhaps some day London may have a university worthy of being mentioned beside that of Wiirzburg, which is eleventh only in size amongst the universities of Germany.

Röntgen had so thoroughly explored the properties of the new rays by the time when his discovery was announced, that there remained little for others to do beyond elaborating his work. One point deserves notice ; namely, the improvement of the tubes. Röntgen held the view that his rays originated at the fluorescent spot where the kathode rays struck the glass. This led some persons to the idea that fluorescence was advantageous. Several workers, however, discovered about the same time that if the kathode rays were focused upon a piece of metal the emission of Röntgen light became more copious. When studying early last year the conditions under which the rays were produced, I found that the best radiators are substances which do not fluoresce — namely, metals. I found zinc, magnesium, aluminium, copper, and iron to answer; but platinum was better than these, and uranium best of all. Directing the kathode discharge against a target or " antikathode " of platinum fixed in the middle of the tube, I carefully watched, by aid of a luminescent screen, the emissive activity of the surface during the process of exhaustion. After the stage of exhaustion has been reached at which Crookes's shadows are produced, one must go on further exhausting before any trace of Röntgen rays appear. The first luminosity seems to come (as in Fig. 141) from both front and back of the target at once j an oblique line, corresponding to the plane of the " anti kathode" or target of metal, being seen on the screen between two partially luminescent regions. On continuing the exhaustion, the light behind dies out while that in front increases, as in Fig. 142, the rays being emitted copiously right up to the plane of the antikathode. This lateral emission is quite unlike anything in the emission or reflexion of ordinary light, and has to be accounted for in any theory of the Röntgen rays. I have myself observed l that within the tube there are some other rays given off in a similar way, along with the Röntgen rays, but which are not Röntgen rays, for they can be deflected by a magnet, and more nearly resemble the kathode rays. It is these that produce on the glass wall of the tube a well-marked fluorescence delimited (as in Fig. 142) by an oblique plane corresponding to the delimitation of Röntgen rays seen in the fluorescent screen. The tube which I used at the beginning of this lecture, and which we will use again at the close of the lecture to show you your own bones, is of the focus type (Fig. 143). It is of the pattern devised by Mr. Herbert Jackson, of King's College. The concentration of the kathode rays upon the little target of platinum (which often becomes red-hot) has the advantage not only of allowing a more copious emission of Röntgen rays than would be possible if the antikathodal surface were the glass wall, but also of causing the Röntgen rays to issue from a small and definite source so that the shadows cast by objects are more sharply defined. Here are two still more recent tubes (Figs. 144, 145) constructed for me by Mr. Bohm, in which the focus principle is preserved ; but in which there is the improvement that the antikathode T is not used also as an anode. It is an insulated target of platinum, while the anodes are aluminium rings through which the cone of kathode rays passes. These tubes are not liable to blacken, as is the case with tubes in which the antikathode is also used as anode. The tube (Fig. 145) has two concave electrodes, either or both of which may be used as kathode; it is a convenient form for those cases in which an alternating current is employed.
