[Figure 141-142]

Footnote: See Electrician.

[Figure 143]

[Figure 144]

[Figure 145]

In another direction many efforts have been made at improvement of the luminescent screen. At first good barium plati no-cyanide was not to be procured, and hydrated potassium platino-cyanide was found far superior. But the good barium salt now procurable is quite as luminescent, and is less troublesome to manage. One result of the ignorance which at first prevailed as to the real origin of Röntgen's discovery was that various experimenters up and down the world supposed themselves to have invented something when they took to using fluorescent screens. One man puts a fluorescent screen at the bottom of a pasteboard tube, with a peep-hole lens at the top, and calls it a " cryptoscope." Another, in another part of the globe, puts a fluorescent screen at the bottom of a nice cardboard box furnished with a handle and a flexible aperture to fit to the eyes, and styles it a " fluoroscope." Both are useful; but the only invention in the whole thing is Röntgen's.

Within a fe>y days of the publication of Röntgen's discovery another effect, however, which had escaped Röntgen's scrutiny, was observed by several independent observers. It had been known for several years that when ultra-violet light falls upon an electricallycharged surface it will cause a diselectrification, but only if the surface is negatively charged. Ultra-violet light will not diselectrify a positive charge. But Röntgen rays are found to produce a diselectrification of a metal surface (in air) whether the charge be positive or negative. Here is a convenient arrangement for exhibiting the experiment. An electroscope made on Exner's plan with three leaves — the central one a stiff plate of metal — is charged, and then exposed to Ront- gen light. The three leaves are made of aluminium, aluminium foil being better than leaf-gold for electroscopes. They are supported within a thin flask of Bohemian glass entirely enclosed, except at the top, in a mantle of transparent metallic gauze. After the leaves have been charged — either positively by a rod of rubbed glass, or negatively by a rod of rubbed celluloid — a metal cap is placed over the top (Fig. 146).

Footnote: Ultra-violet light will not diselectrify a metal surface in air unless that surface is negatively charged. I have observed a case, however, in which a positively-electrified body was discharged by ultra-violet light, but it was not a metal surface, nor in air.

[Figure 146]

[Figure 147]

[Figure 148]

The leaves, being thus completely surrounded by metal, are effectually screened from all external electrical influences. My electroscope is now charged. To enable you to see the effect better, a beam of light is directed upon it, throwing a magnified shadow of the leaves upon the white screen. Then, exposing the electroscope to Röntgen light from a focus tube situated some 18 inches away, you see the leaves at once closing together, proving the diselectrification. It succeeds whether the charge be positive or negative in sign.

It now only remains for me to exhibit to you the photographs which were taken at the beginning of this lecture, and a number of others prepared as lanternslides. In Figs. 147, 148 we have the hand of a poor child aged thirteen, a patient in St. Bartholomew's Hospital. She was brought to my laboratory that the deformities of her hands might be examined. The first of the two plates was insufficiently exposed, with the result that the bones scarcely show through the flesh at all. The second plate was over-exposed, and the rays have penetrated the flesh so thoroughly that only the bones appear.

[Figure 149]

Fig. 149 is the hand of a child of eleven years old. In a child's hand the bones are not yet completely ossified, their ends being still gelatinous and transparent, so that there seem to be gaps between them. Compare this with the hand of a full-grown man, and you will see how age changes the aspect of the bones.

Fig. 150 is the hand of a full-grown woman. You will observe in the case of the lady's rings that the diamonds are transparent, while the metal portion casts a shadow even through the bones. These two photographs were taken by Mr. J. W. Gifford, of Chard, an early and most successful worker with Röntgen rays.

Fig. 151 is the hand of Lord Kelvin, and shows traces of age, and of a tendency to rheumatic deposits.

Fig. 152 is the hand of Mr. Crookes, and though a knottier hand, shows some points of resemblance with that of Lord Kelvin.

Fig. 153 is the hand of Sir Richard Webster. The shadow is interesting as showing not only an athletic development, but as revealing, embedded in the flesh between the thumb and the first finger, two small shot, the result of a gunshot wound received many years previously. This photograph and the two preceding are from the series taken by Mr. Campbell-Swinton, who was first in England to put into practice this newest of the black arts.

By the courtesy of Mr. Campbell-Swinton I am also able to show you a number of other slides — the hand of Lord Rayleigh ; the hand of a lady with a needle

— Hand of Child, aged eleven years. (Photo, by Mr. J. IV. Gifford).

— Hand of full-grown Woman. (Photo, by Mr. J. IK Gifford).

— Hand of Professor Rt. Hon. Lord Kelvin.

— Hand of Professor W. Crookes, F.R.S.

— Hand of Rt. Hon. Sir Richard Webster, M.P, embedded in the palm ; a hand terribly swollen with the gout ; a foot, showing the heel-bone and the smaller bones down to the toes, as well as the bones in the ankle ; a view through the left shoulder of a young lady, showing her ribs, shoulder-blade, and collar-bone; the torso of a young man, showing his ribs, and, dimly, his heart, like a central dark shadow with a triangular apex pointing down toward the right, that is, to his left side ; lastly, the shadow of a living head, showing all the vertebrae of the neck.

[Figure 154]

Here, again, is the shadow of a newly-born child, taken by Mr. Sydney Rowland. Note the imperfect state of the bones in the hands.

Passing from human objects, we' will look at the shadows of a few animals. These are a chameleon, giving a clear view not only of its skeleton but of the internal organs; a mouse; a frog; and some fishes. The next slide was taken from an Egyptian mummy in its wrappings. Before this photograph was taken there was some dispute as to whether it was the mummy of a cat or of a girl. The photograph sets the question entirely at rest.

Earlier in my lecture I mentioned that glass is tolerably opaque to these rays. Of this you have a proof in the next photograph (Fig. 154), which represents a pair of spectacles photographed while lying in their case, the covering of which, in shagreen, shows all the markings peculiar to the shark's skin, with which the case was covered. The next photograph by Mr. Campbell- Swinton enables you to read the contents of a sealed letter which he received. His also is the next picture (Fig. 155), which is the photographed shadow of an aluminium cigar-case, containing two cigars. And lastly (Fig. 156), I exhibit to you a photograph of two ruby rings. By gaslight the gems .of one are not distinguishable from those of the other; and in broad daylight it would take an expert to pronounce between them. But when viewed or photographed by Röntgen light there remains no manner of doubt. The rubies of one ring are true Burmese rubies, and they appear transparent. The others are imitation rubies made of ruby-coloured glass, and appear quite opaque.

[Figure 155]

You will have noticed that I have spoken of these rays as " Röntgen light." But are we really justified in calling it light ? It is invisible to our eyes • but then so also is ordinary ultra-violet light, and so is infra-red light, and Hertzian light. And there are other kinds of light too, amongst them one discovered during last year by M. Becquerel ' and myself, which are invisible. But if the Röntgen light can be neither reflected nor refracted, neither diffracted nor polarised, what reason have we for calling it light at all ? In fact, direct proof that it consists of transverse waves is wanting. Many conjectures have been formed respecting its nature. Röntgen himself suggested that it might consist of longitudinal vibrations. Others have suggested ether streams, ether vortices, or even streams of minute corpuscles. At one time the notion that it might be simply an extreme kind of ultra-violet light of excessively minute wave-length was favoured by physicists, who were disposed to explain the absence of refraction, and the high penetrative power of the rays upon von Helmholtz's theory of anomalous dispersion, according to which the ultra-violet spectrum at the extreme end ought to double back on itself.

Footnote: M. Henri Becquerel (see Comptes Rendus, cxxii. pp. 559, 790, etc.) and I myself (see Philosophical Magazine, July, 1896, p. 103) quite independently discovered some invisible radiations that are emitted by uranium salts, and by the metal uranium, which can affect photographic plates, and will pass through a sheet of aluminium or of cardboard. But they are not the same as Röntgen rays, since, as M. Becquerel has shown, they can be reflected, refracted, and polarised. They also produce diselectrification.

The most probable suggestion yet made, and the only one that seems to account for the strange lateral emission of the rays right up to the plane of the antikathode (see

Fig. 142 p. 265), is that of Sir George Stokes. Stokes's view is that while all ordinary light consists of trains * of waves (Fig. 68, p. 112), in which each ripple is one of a series that gradually dies away, the Röntgen light consists of solitary ripples, each of not more than one or

Footnote: There can be no question that these rays, which are due to a sort of invisible phosphorescence, consist of transverse vibrations of a very high frequency: that is, they are ultra-violet light of a very high order.

Footnote: It has long been known from the experiments of Fizeau, that in ordinary light each train consists on the average of at least 50,000 successive vibrations ; for it is possible to produce interference of light between two parts of a beam which have traversed lengths differing by more than 50,000 wave-lengths. Michelson has gone far beyond that number. See the footnote on p. 112.

one and a half waves. According to Stokes the Röntgen light is generated at the antikathode by impact of the flying negatively-electrified molecules (or atoms) which constitute the kathode stream. At the moment when each of these flying molecules strikes against the target and rebounds, there will be a quiver of its electric charge ; in other words, the charge on the molecule will perform an oscillation. Now that electric oscillation will be executed across the molecule in a direction generally normal to the plane of the target, and will give rise to an electro-magnetic disturbance which will be propagated as a wave in all directions, except where stopped by the metal of the target. And this oscillation being of excessively short period, and dying out after about one or two (Fig. 157) complete periods, will generate a wave, which, though of a frequency as high as, or even higher than, that of ordinary ultra-violet light, and therefore capable of producing kindred effects, will not be capable of being made to interfere, nor to undergo regular refraction or reflexion, because it does not consist of a complete train of waves. Here is a model intended roughly to illustrate the theory. An iron hoop (Fig. 158) which can be thrown or swung against the wall represents the flying molecule. The electric charge which it carries is typified in the model by a lump of lead capable of sliding on a transverse wire, and held centrally by a pair of spiral springs. When this model molecule is caused to strike against the wall and rebound, the leaden mass is disturbed, and executes an oscillation to and fro along the wire. The oscillation dies out after about 1½ periods. Now, suppose this oscillation to set up a transverse wave in surrounding space. Though it consists of but 1½ ripples, they would be propagated outward just as trains of waves are. And if there were millions of such flying molecules in operation, these solitary ripples might come in millions one after the other, but not* regularly spaced out behind one another like the trains of waves constituting ordinary light This is but a gross and rough illustration of Stokes' s thesis ; but it must suffice for the present.

[Figure 158]

But I cannot close this course of lectures without one word as to the possibilities which this amazing discovery of the Röntgen light has opened out to science. It is clear that there are more things in heaven and earth than are sometimes admitted to exist. There are sounds that our ears have never heard : there is light that our eyes will never see. And yet of these inaudible, invisible things discoveries are made from time to time by the patient labours of the pioneers in science. You have seen how no scientific discovery ever stands alone : it is based on those that went before. Behind Röntgen stands Lenard; behind Lenard, Crookes ; behind Crookes the line of explorers from Boyle and Hauksbee and Otto von Guericke downwards. We have had Crookes's tubes in use since 1878, and therefore for nearly twenty years Röntgen' s rays have been in existence, though no one, until Röntgen observed them on 8th November, 1895, even suspected their presence or surmised their qualities. And just as these rays remained for twenty years undiscovered, so even now there exist, beyond doubt, in the universe, other rays, other vibrations, of which we have as yet no cognisance. Yet, as year after year rolls by, one discovery leads to another. The seemingly useless or trivial observation made by one worker leads on to a. useful observation by another \ and so science advances, "creeping on from point to point." And so steadily year by year the sum total of our knowledge increases, and our ignorance is rolled a little further and further back ; and where now there is darkness, there will be light.

Footnote: It is but fair to Professor Eilhard Wiedemann to mention that in August 1895 he described some " discharge-rays " (Entladungsstrahlen) inside a vacuum tube, which, though photographically active, refused to pass through fluor-spar, and were incapable of being deflected by a magnet. But their properties differ from Röntgen rays in some other respects.
