UPON the discovery by Röntgen of the rays that bear his name it was natural that the inquiry should be raised whether there exist any other rays having penetrative properties in any degree similar. Lenard's rays, discovered in 1894, to which some reference is made on p. 258 above, have- the power of penetrating thin sheets of metal and of producing photographic action as well as of discharging electrified bodies. But they differ from Röntgen's rays in their penetrative power, for air is relatively opaque to them. Also they are deflected in varying degrees by the magnet. Wiedemann's " discharge-rays," briefly metioned above, are further described on p. 281.

No other source than that of the highly-exhausted vacuum tube under electric stimulation has yet been discovered for Röntgen's rays. Many persons have supposed Röntgen's rays to be produced by electric sparks in the open air, simply because such sparks will fog photographic plates and cause images of coins and other metal objects in contact with the plates to impress images upon them. These images are, however, due to direct electric action. They are not produced when a sheet of aluminium is so interposed as to screen off all direct electrical action.

In sunlight there do not appear to be any Röntgen rays, nor yet in the light of the electric arc ; for neither of these sources contains any rays that will affect a photographic plate that is protected by an aluminium sheet.

There are, however, some kinds of light that, like Rb'ntgen's rays, will pass through aluminium or through black cardboard, and produce photographic effects. These are worthy of some notice.

Becquerel's Rays. — Early in 1896 M. Henri Becquerel, as mentioned on p. 272, and the author of this book independently, made the observation that some invisible radiations are emitted from some of the salts of the metal uranium, as, for example, the nitrate of uranyl and the fluoride of uranium and ammonium. These and other salts of uranium, whether in the dark or in the light, emit a sort of invisible light, which can pass through aluminium and produce on a photographic plate shadows of interposed metal objects. This effect appears to be due to an invisible phosphorescence of a persistent sort. Just as luminous paint goes on emitting visible light for many hours after it has been shone upon, so these substances go on month after month emitting an invisible light. Hence the phenomenon is known as one of hyper-phosphorescence. It is significant to note that ordinary luminous paint, which ceases after a few days to emit any light of the visible kind, will continue, even for six months, to emit in the darkness an invisible radiation of light that will fog a photographic plate.

Some time after the original discovery, Becquerel observed that metallic uranium far surpasses the salts of that metal in the power of hyper-phosphorescence.

The following is a summary 1 of Becquerel's observations : — A photographic plate was enclosed in a double layer of black paper, over which was placed a thin crust ot the transparent crystals of the double sulphate of uranyl and potassium. After several hours of exposure to the sun the plate was found to have been affected. It was also affected when a sheet of aluminium was interposed, but a coin placed between the crystals and the plate cast a photographic shadow. The experiment also succeeds if a sheet of glass is interposed. This double sulphate, when examined in the phosphorescope, is found to phosphoresce for but 1/100th sec. after exposure to light. Nevertheless it continues to emit photographically active rays for many hours without being exposed to light. The persistence of these non-luminous rays is incomparably greater than that of the visible luminescence. The invisible rays are enfeebled by passing through either thin glass or sheet aluminium.

Footnote: See paper by M. Sagnac in Journal de Physique, May, 1896, p. 193, and sundry papers by M. Becquerel in the Comptes Rendus.

Other substances were tried. M. Charles Henry had found sulphide of zinc, and M. Niewenglowski had found sulphide of calcium to emit, under stimulus of Röntgen rays, rays that traversed opaque bodies. M. Troost found hexagonal blende, previously exposed to sunlight, to photograph through cardboard. M. Becquerel found that the special kind of sulphide of calcium which luminesces blue or green gave at first a strong photographic action through aluminium 2 mm. thick. Later the same substances refused to work. Zinc sulphide (hexagonal blende) similarly failed. Becquerel was unable to revivify the sulphides of calcium, either by warming or by cooling to — 20° C. and exposing to magnesium light, or by exposing them to electric sparks. In the case of uranyl salts, neither magnesium light nor Crookes tube radiation (to which they are opaque) augment their emission of the invisible rays. Daylight quickens them a little. But the double sulphate of uranyl and potassium is quickened by exposure to the arc-light or to that of sparks from a Leyden jar. Uranous salts, which are not phosphorescent, work as strongly as uranic salts. Crystals of uranium nitrate melted and crystallised in the dark, or dissolved, and which are not fluorescent in the ordinary sense, work just as well as crystals that have been exposed to light.

Becquerel's rays possess, like ultra-violet light and like Röntgen's rays (though to a lesser degree by reason of their lesser intensity), the property of diselectrifying charged bodies. Using an electroscope designed by M. Hurmuzescu, enclosed in metal, he placed a lamina of the crystalline mass of sulphate of uranyl and potassium against an aluminium window 0.12 mm. thick. The leaves, which had an initial divergence of 18°, collapsed in 2 hours 55 minutes. They collapsed in about one-fourth the time when the lamina was placed inside under the leaves.

These rays are absorbed by air. Water is transparent to them. Metallic solutions are transparent, as also are wax and paraffin. Uranium glass and red glass (thickness 2 mm.) are fairly opaque. Native sulphur is transparent ; calc-spar not very transparent ; quartz is more opaque than calc-spar. Tin is more opaque than aluminium ; and cobalt glass more opaque than either. These rays go relatively more easily through metals than do Röntgen's rays. Copper (o-i mm. thick) is very transparent ; platinum nearly as much. Silver and zinc allow these rays to pass, but lead 0.36 mm. thick is opaque. These measurements were made electroscopically. Quartz 5 mm. thick is less absorbent for Becquerel's rays than for Röntgen's rays. Becquerel's rays will discharge an electroscope through metal screens, such as platinum or copper 1.4 mm. thick, which would arrest Röntgen's rays. Copper and aluminium screens are almost equally transparent. Platinum is a little more absorbent. The absorption of metallic screens of copper and aluminium together, or of platinum and aluminium together, is less than the sum of the absorptions by the same screens separately, thus proving that the Becquerel rays are not homogeneous.

Becquerel proved reflexion by laying on a dry-plate a lamella of uranico-potassium sulphate half-covered with a polished steel plate, face downwards. The covered part was more strongly affected after an exposure of 55 hours. He also demonstrated reflexion by using a hemispherical tin mirror. Refraction was demonstrated by using a thin prism of crown glass, near the refracting edge of which was placed a tube, i mm. in diameter, containing crystals of nitrate of uranyl. After three days' exposure he found the light refracted towards the base of the prism. He proved these rays to be capable of polarisation, since the photographic shadow through two plates of tourmaline was stronger when their axes were crossed than when they were parallel.

Metallic uranium surpasses all other materials in the freedom with which it gives off these rays. It continues to emit them for months in complete darkness ; the source whence this supply of energy is derived being at present unknown.

The author made some experiments to compare the penetrating power of uranium rays with that of Röntgen's rays. Using a layer of uranium nitrate, he found carbon and copal to be as opaque as rock salt ; whereas with Röntgen's rays those substances are much more transparent than rock salt.

There appears to be no doubt that the uranium rays are a species of extreme ultra-violet light, having a wave-length certainly less than 10 micro-centimetres, and a frequency certainly greater than 3000 billions per second.

Quite recently Dr. W. J. Russell has found a similar action to be produced by newly cleaned metallic zinc, and by some other materials, including some kinds of wood and paper.

Phosphorus Light. — The author has examined the penetrative effect of some other kinds of light. The pale light emitted by phosphorus when oxidising in moist air is accompanied by some invisible rays which will penetrate through black paper or celluloid, but will not pass through aluminium. So will some invisible rays that are emitted by the flame of bisulphide of carbon.

Light of Glow-worms and Fireflies. — Dr. Dawson Turner has found that the light emitted by glow-worms contains photographic rays which will pass through aluminium.

In Japan, Dr. Muraoka has examined the rays emitted by a firefly (" Johannis-kafer "). He found that they emitted rays which, after filtration through card or through copper plates, would act photographically. These rays can be reflected, and probably refracted and polarised. He used about 1000 fireflies shut up in a shallow box over the screened photographic plate.

Wiedemantfs Rays. — Professor E. Wiedemann in 1895 described some rays (named by him Discharge-rays, or Entladungsstrahleti] which are produced in vacuum-tubes by the influence of a rapidly-alternating electric discharge. They have the property of exciting in certain chemically prepared substances, notably in calcium sulphate containing a small percentage of manganese sulphate, the power of thermo-luminescence. In other words, the substance after exposure to these rays will emit light when subsequently warmed. They are emitted at lower degrees of rarefaction than are necessary for producing the kathode rays. They are emitted from all parts of the path of the spark-discharge, but more strongly near the kathode. They are propagated in straight lines, but no reflexion of them by solid bodies has yet been observed. They are readily absorbed by certain gases, oxygen and carbonic dioxide, but their production is promoted by hydrogen and nitrogen. Those produced in hydrogen are partially transmitted by quartz and fluor-spar. They are apparently not present in the glow discharge. In vacuo these rays are produced by all parts of the discharge. Under the influence of electric oscillations they are emitted, even in some cases at half an atmosphere of pressure, at the boundary of the rarefied gas and the glass wall, even before any visible light is seen. No deviation of them by the magnet has yet been observable. Those produced at relatively great pressures have in general the power of penetrating bodies according to the inverse ratio of their densities.

New kinds of Kathode Rays. — The author has recently found two new kinds of kathode rays. One of these, termed parakathodic rays, is produced when ordinary kathode rays strike upon an anti-kathode, as in the " focus " tubes. If the vacuum is low, there are emitted from the antikathode, in nearly equal intensity in all directions, some rays that closely resemble ordinary kathode rays. They can be deflected electrostatically and magnetically, and can cast shadows of objects on the glass walls. If the vacuum is high enough for the production of Röntgen's rays, some parakathodic rays are also produced at the same time. They cause the glass bulb to fluoresce over an obliquely limited region as in Fig. 142, p. 265.

The other kind, termed diakathodic rays, is produced by directing the ordinary kathode rays full upon a piece of wire-gauze, or upon a spiral of wire, which is itself negatively electrified. The ordinary kathode rays refuse to pass through the meshes of the gauze, but instead there passes through abeam of bluish rays, which differ from kathode rays in that they are not directly affected by a magnet. These diakathodic rays can also produce fluorescence of the glass where they meet the walls of the tube, and can cast shadows of intervening objects ; but the fluorescence is of a different kind, for ordinary soda glass gives a dark orange fluorescence instead of its usual golden green tint. This orange fluorescence when examined by the spectroscope shows the D-lines characteristic of sodium.

Goldstein's Rays. — Herr Goldstein has also described some rays apparently closely akin to those just mentioned. If a perforated disk is used as a kathode there are produced some blue rays which stream back behind the kathode opposite the apertures.
