We have all stood many times by the seashore, watching the waves, crested with white foam, roll in and break upon the rocks or beach. Every one has more than once cast a stone upon still water in a lake or pond, and noticed the expanding rings of ripples; and some have voyaged over stormy seas, whereon great ships are tossed by mighty billows with no more seeming effort than the rocking of a cradle. In all these things we have been spectators of a wave-motion, as it is called, taking place upon a water surface. Perhaps it did not occur to us at the time that the sound of the splash or thunder of these breaking waves was conveyed to our ears as a wave-motion of another sort in the air we breathe, nay, even that the light by which we see these beautiful objects is also a wave-motion of a more recondite description, produced in a medium called the æther, which fills all space.

A progressive study of Nature has shown us that we are surrounded on all sides by wave-motions of various descriptions—waves in water, waves in air, and waves in æther—and that our most precious senses, our eyes and ears, are really wave-detectors of a very special form. The examination of these waves and their properties and powers has led us to see that waves in water, air, and æther, though differing greatly in detail, have much in common; and many things about them that are difficult to understand become more intelligible when we compare these various wave-motions together. In these lectures, therefore, I shall make use of your familiar experiences concerning sea and water waves to assist you to understand some of the properties of air waves to which we owe our sensations of sound and music; and, as far as possible, attempt an explanation of the nature of æther waves, created in the all-pervading æther, to which are due not only light and sight, but also many electrical effects, including such modern wonders as wireless telegraphy. In all departments of natural science we find ourselves confronted by the phenomena of wave-motion. In the study of earthquakes and tides, telegraphs and telephones, as well as terrestrial temperature, no less than in the examination of water waves and ripples, sound, music, or light and heat, we are bound to consider waves of some particular kind.

Fastening our attention for the moment on surface water waves, the first question we shall ask ourselves is—What is a wave? If we take our station on a high cliff looking down on the sea, on some clear day, when the wind is fresh, we see the waves on its surface like green rounded ridges racing forward, and it appears at first sight as if these elevations were themselves moving masses of water. If, however, we look instead at some patch of seaweed, or floating cork, or seagull, as each wave passes over it, we shall notice that this object is merely lifted up and let down again, or, at most, has a small movement to and fro. We are led, therefore, to infer that, even when agitated by waves, each particle of water never moves far from its position when at rest, and that the real movement of the water is something very different from its apparent motion. If we place on the surface of water a number of corks or pieces of paper, and then watch them as a wave passes over them, we shall notice that the corks or bits of paper rise and fall successively, that is, one after the other, and not all together. A little more careful scrutiny will show us that, in the case of sea waves in deep water, the motion of the floating object as the wave passes over it is a circular one, that is to say, it is first lifted up, then pushed forward, next let down, and, lastly, pulled back; and so it repeats a round-and-round motion, with the plane of the circle in the direction in which the wave is progressing. This may be illustrated by the diagram in Fig. 1, where the circular dotted lines represent the paths described by corks floating on the sea-surface when waves are travelling over it.

[Figure 1]

Accordingly, we conclude that we have to distinguish clearly between the actual individual motion of each water particle and that general motion called the wave-motion. We may define the latter by saying that to produce a wave-motion, each separate particle of a medium, be it water, or air, or any other fluid, must execute a movement which is repeated again and again, and the several particles along any line must perform this same motion one after the other, that is, lagging behind each other, and not simultaneously. We might illustrate this performance by supposing a row of fifty boys to stand in a line in a play-ground, and each boy in turn to lift up his arm and let it down again, and to continue to perform this action. If all the boys lifted up their arms together, that would not produce a wave-motion; but if each boy did it one after the other in order, along the rank, it would constitute a wave-motion travelling along the line of boys. In more learned language, we may define a wave-motion by saying that a wave-motion exists in any medium when the separate portions of it along any line execute in order any kind of cyclical or repeated motion, the particles along this line performing the movement one after the other, and with a certain assigned delay between each adjacent particle as regards their stage in the movement.

It will be evident, therefore, that there can be many different kinds of waves, depending upon the sort of repeated motion the several parts perform.

Some of the numerous forms of wave-motion can be illustrated by mechanical models as follows:—

A board has fastened to it a series of wooden wheels, and on the edge of each wheel is fixed a white knob. The wheels are connected together by endless bands, so that on turning one wheel round they all revolve in the same direction. If the knobs are so arranged to begin with, that each one is a little in advance of its neighbour on the way round the wheel, then when the wheels are standing still the knobs will be arranged along a wavy line (see Fig. 2). On turning round the first wheel, each knob will move in a circle, but every knob will be lagging a little behind its neighbour on one side, and a little in advance of its neighbour on the other side. The result will be to produce a wave-motion, and, looking at the general effect of the moving knobs, we shall see that it resembles a hump moving along, just as in the case of a water wave.

[Figure 2]

[Figure 3]

The motion of the particles of the water in a deep-sea wave resembles that of the white knobs in the model described. Those who swim will recall to mind their sensations as a sea wave surges over them. The wave lifts up the swimmer, then pushes him a little forward, then lets him down, and, lastly, drags him back. It is this dragging-back action which is so dangerous to persons who cannot swim, when they are bathing on a steep coast where strong waves are rolling in towards the shore.

Two other kinds of wave-motion may be illustrated by the model shown in Fig. 3. In this appliance there are a number of eccentric wheels fixed to a shaft. Each wheel is embraced by a band carrying a long rod which ends in a white ball. The wheels are so placed on the shaft that, when at rest, the balls are arranged in a wavy line. Then, on turning round the shaft, each ball rises and falls in a vertical line, and executes a periodic motion, lagging behind that of its neighbour on one side. The result is to produce a wave-motion along the line of balls. By slightly altering the model, each ball can be made to describe a circle in a direction at right angles to the line of the balls, and then we have a sort of corkscrew wave-motion propagated along the line of balls.

[Figure 4]

Again, another form of wave-motion may be illustrated by the model shown in Fig. 4. In this case a number of golf-balls are hung up by strings, and spiral brass springs are interposed between each ball. On giving a slight tap to the end ball, we notice that its to-and-fro motion is handed on from ball to ball, and we have a wave-motion in which the individual movement of the balls is in the direction of the wave-movement, and not across it.

The kind of wave illustrated by the model in Fig. 3 is called a transverse wave, and that shown in Fig. 4 is called a longitudinal wave.

At this stage it may be well to define the meaning of some other expressions which will be much used in these lectures. We have seen that in a wave-motion each part of the medium makes some kind of movement over and over again; and of its neighbours on either side, one is a little ahead of it in its performance, and the other a little in arrear. If we look along the line, we shall see that we can select portions of it which are exactly in the same stage of movement—that is, are moving in the same way at the same time. The distance between these portions is called one wave-length. Thus, in the case of sea waves, the distance between two adjacent crests, or humps, is one wave-length.

When we use the expression, a long wave, we do not mean a wave which is of great length in the direction of the ridge, but waves in which the crests, or humps, are separated far apart, measuring from crest to crest across the ridges.

Strictly speaking, the wave-length may be defined as the shortest distance from crest to crest, or hollow to hollow, or from one particle to the next one which is in the same stage of its movement at the same time.

Another way of illustrating the same thing would be to pleat or pucker a sheet of paper into parallel ridges. If we make these pleats very narrow, they would represent what we call short waves; but if we make these pleats very far apart, they would represent long waves.

Another phrase much used is the term wave-velocity. Suppose that a seagull were to fly along over a set of sea waves so as to keep always above one particular hump, or wave-crest; the speed of the gull, reckoned in miles per hour or feet per minute, would be called the speed of the waves. This is something very different from the actual speed of each particle of water.

A third and constantly used expression is the term wave-frequency. If we watch a cork floating on a wave-tossed sea, we observe that it bobs up and down so many times in a minute. The number of times per second or per minute that each particle of the medium performs its cycle of motion is called the wave-frequency, or simply the frequency.

Again, we employ the term amplitude to denote the extreme distance that each individual particle of the medium moves from its mean position, or position of rest. In speaking of sea waves, we generally call the vertical distance between the crest and the hollow the height of the wave, and this is twice the amplitude. With regard to the height of sea waves, there is generally much exaggeration. Voyagers are in the habit of speaking of “waves running mountains high,” yet a sea wave which exceeds 40 feet in height is a rare sight. Waves have been measured on the Southern Indian Ocean, between the Cape of Good Hope and the Island of St. Paul, and of thirty waves observed the average height was found to be just under 30 feet. The highest was only 37¹⁄₂ feet in height. On the other hand, waves of 16 to 20 feet are not uncommon. Travellers who have crossed the Atlantic Ocean in stormy weather will often recount experiences of waves said to be 100 feet high; but these are exceedingly rare, if even ever met with, and unless wave-heights are obtained by some accurate method of measurement, the eye of the inexperienced voyager is apt to be deceived.

In all cases of wave-motion there is a very close connection between the wave-velocity, or speed, the wave-length, and the wave-frequency. This connection is expressed by the numerical law that the velocity is equal to the product of the length and the frequency.

Thus, supposing we consider the case of Atlantic waves 300 feet from crest to crest, which are travelling at the rate of 27 miles an hour, it is required to calculate the frequency or number of times per minute or per second that any floating object, say a boat, will be lifted up as these waves pass over it.

We must first transform a speed of 27 miles per hour into its equivalent in feet per second. Since one mile is 5280 feet, 27 miles per hour is equal to 2376 feet per minute. Accordingly, it is easy to see that the wave-frequency must be 7·92, or nearly 8, because 7·92 times 300 is 2376. The answer to the question is, then, that the floating object will rise and fall eight times a minute. This rule may be embodied in a compact form, which it is desirable to hold firmly in the memory, viz.—

      _Wave-velocity_ = _wave-length_ × _wave-frequency_.

This relation, which we shall have frequent occasion to recall, may be stated in another manner. We call the period of a wave the time taken to make one complete movement. The periodic time is therefore inversely proportional to the frequency. Hence we can say that the wave-length, divided by the periodic time, gives us the wave-velocity.

In the case of water waves and ripples, the wave-velocity is determined by the wave-length. This is not the case, as we shall see, with waves in air or waves in æther. In these latter cases, as far as we know, waves of all wave-lengths travel at the same rate. Long sea waves, however, on deep water travel faster than short ones.

A formal and exact proof of the law connecting speed and wave-length for deep-sea waves requires mathematical reasoning of an advanced character; but its results may be expressed in a very simple statement, by saying that, in the case of waves on deep water, the speed with which the waves travel, reckoned in miles per hour, is equal to the square root of 2¹⁄₄ times the wave-length measured in feet. Thus, for instance, if we notice waves on a deep sea which are 100 feet from crest to crest, then the speed with which those waves are travelling, reckoned in miles per hour, is a number obtained by taking the square root of 2¹⁄₄ times 100, viz. 225. Since 15 is the square root of 225 (because 15 times 15 is 225), the speed of these waves is therefore 15 miles an hour.
