In the same way it can be found that Atlantic waves 300 feet long would travel at the rate of 26 miles an hour, or as fast as a slow railway train, and much faster than any ordinary ship.

Note: The wave-velocity in the case of waves on deep water varies as √(gλ/2π), where λ is the wave-length. The rule in the text is deduced from this formula.

The above rule for the speed of deep-sea waves, viz. wave-velocity  square root of 2¹⁄₄ times the wave-length, combined with the general rule, wave-velocity  wave-length multiplied by frequency, provides us with a useful practical method of finding the speed of deep-sea waves which are passing any fixed point. Suppose that a good way out at sea there is a fixed buoy or rock, and we notice waves racing past it, and desire to know their speed, we may do it as follows: Count the number of waves which pass the fixed point per minute, and divide the number into 198; the quotient is the speed of the waves in miles per hour. Thus, if ten waves per minute race past a fixed buoy, their velocity is very nearly 20 miles an hour.

Note: If V is the velocity of the wave in feet per minute, and V′ is the velocity in miles per hour, then (V′ × 5280)/60  V. But V′  √(2¹⁄₄λ), and V  nλ, where λ is the wave-length in feet and n the frequency per minute; from which we have V′  198/n, or the rule given in the text.

Waves have been observed by the Challenger 420 to 480 feet long, with a period of 9 seconds. These waves were 18 to 22 feet high. Their speed was therefore 50 feet per second, or nearly 30 knots. Atlantic storm waves are very often 500 to 600 feet long, and have a period of 10 to 11 seconds. Waves have been observed by officers in the French Navy half a mile in length, and with a period of 23 seconds.

It has already been explained that in the case of deep-sea waves the individual particles of water move in circular paths. It can be shown that the diameter of these circular paths decreases very rapidly with the depth of the particle below the surface, so that at a distance below the surface equal only to one wave-length, the diameter of the circle which is described by each water-particle is only ¹⁄₅₃₅ of that at the surface. Hence storm waves on the sea are a purely surface effect. At a few hundred feet down—a distance small compared with the depth of the ocean—the water is quite still, even when the surface is tossed by fearful storms, except in so far as there may be a steady movement due to ocean currents.

Note: The amplitude of disturbance of a particle of water at a depth equal to one wave-length is equal to 1/ϵ^{2π} of its amplitude at the surface. (See Lamb’s “Hydrodynamics,” p. 189.)

By a more elaborate examination of the propagation of wave-motion on a fluid, Sir George Stokes showed, many years ago, that in addition to the circular motion of the water-particles constituting the wave, there is also a transfer of water in the direction in which the wave is moving, the speed of this transfer depending on the depth, and decreasing rapidly as the depth increases. This effect, which is known to sailors as the “heave of the sea,” can clearly be seen on watching waves on not very deep water. For the crest of the wave will be seen to advance more rapidly than the hollow until the wave falls over and breaks; and then a fresh wave is formed behind it, and the process is repeated. Hence waves break if the depth of water under them diminishes; and we know by the presence of breakers at any place that some shallow or sandbank is located there.

It is necessary, in the next place, to point out the difference between a mere wave-motion and a true wave. It has been explained that in a wave-motion each one of a series of contiguous objects executes some identical movement in turn. We have all seen the wind blowing on a breezy day across a cornfield, and producing a sort of dark shadow which sweeps along the field. This is clearly caused by the wind bending down, in turn, each row of cornstalks, and as row after row bows itself and springs up again, we are presented with the appearance of a wave-motion in the form of a rift rushing across the field.

[Figure 5]

[Figure 6]

[Figure 7]

A very similar effect can be produced, and another illustration given of a wave-motion, as follows: Coil a piece of brass wire into an open spiral like a corkscrew, and affix to it a small fragment of sealing-wax (see Fig. 5). Hold this in the sun, and let the shadow of it fall upon paper. Then turn it round like a screw. We shall see that the shadow of the spiral is a wavy line, and that, as it is turned round, the humps appear to move along just as do the crests of sea waves, but that the shadow of the little bit of sealing-wax simply moves up and down. Another wave-motion model may be made as follows: Procure a painter’s comb. This is a thin steel plate, cut into long narrow teeth. Provide also a slip of glass about 3 inches wide and 12 inches long. Paint one side of this glass with black enamel varnish, and when it is quite dry scratch a wavy line upon it (see Fig. 6). Place the glass slip close in front of the comb before the light, and, holding the comb still, move the glass slip to and fro, lengthways. The observer will see a row of dots of light lying in a wavy line, and these, as the glass moves, will rise and fall. If the movement is rapid enough, the appearance of a wave moving along will be seen. In all these exhibitions of wave-motion the movement of the particles is due to a common cause, but the moving particles do not control each other’s motion. There is no connection or tie between them. Suppose, however, that we suspend a series of heavy balls like pendulums, and interconnect them by elastic threads (see Fig. 7), then we have an arrangement along which we can propagate a true wave. Draw the end ball to one side, and notice what takes place when it is released. The first ball, being displaced, pulls the second one through a less distance, and that the third one, and the third the fourth, and so on. This happens because the balls are tied together by elastic threads, which resist stretching. When the first ball is released, it is pulled back by the tension of the thread connecting it to its neighbours, and it begins to return to its old position. The ball possesses, however, a quality called inertia, and accordingly, when once set in motion, its motion persists until an opposing force brings it to rest. Hence the returning ball overshoots the mark, and passes to the opposite side of its original position of rest. Then, again, this displacement stretches the elastic threads connecting it to its fellows, and a controlling or retarding force is thus created, which brings it to rest, and forces it again to return on its steps. We see, therefore, that each ball must oscillate, or swing to and fro, and that its movement is gradually communicated to its neighbours. A wave-motion is thus started, and a true wave is propagated along the line of balls, in consequence of the presence of elasticity and inertia. The necessary conditions for the production of a true wave in a medium of any kind are therefore: (1) that the medium must elastically resist some sort of deformation; and (2) when it is deformed at any place, and returns to its original state, it must overshoot the mark or persist in movement, in consequence of inertia, or something equivalent to it.

Note: This can easily be shown to an audience by projecting the apparatus on a screen by the aid of an optical lantern.

Briefly speaking, any material or medium in or on which a true self-propagating wave-motion can be made must resist and persist. It must have an elastic resistance to some change or deformation, and it must have an inertia which causes it to persist in movement when once set in motion. These two qualities, or others equivalent to them, must invariably be present if we are to have a true wave produced in a medium.

These things may be best understood by considering, for example, the production of surface waves on water. Let us ask ourselves, in the first place, what alteration or change it is that a water-surface resists. The answer is, that, for one thing, it resists being made unlevel. A still water surface is everywhere a level surface. If we attempt to make it unlevel by pouring water on to it at one point, or by heaping it up, the water surface would resist this process. We can dig a hole in sand, or heap up sand to form a hillock, but we know full well we cannot do the same thing with water. If, for instance, some water is placed in a glass tube shaped like the letter ⋃, then it stands at the same level in both limbs. Again, if water is set in motion, being a heavy substance, it cannot be brought to rest instantly. Like every other body, it possesses inertia. Accordingly, if we do succeed by any means in making a depression in a water-surface for an instant, the water would immediately press in to fill up the hole; but more, it would, so to speak, overshoot the mark, and, in consequence of its inertia, it would create a momentary hump, or elevation, in the place on the surface where an instant ago there was a depression.

This elevation would again subside into a hollow, and the process would be continued until the water-motion was brought to rest by friction, or by the gradual dispersion of the original energy. The process by which a wave is started on the surface of water, as a consequence of these two qualities of resistance to being made unlevel and persistence in motion, is beautifully shown by the study of waves made by throwing stones into a pond. The events which give rise to the expanding wave are, however, over so quickly that they can only be studied by the aid of instantaneous photography. The most interesting work on this subject is that of Professor A. M. Worthington, who has photographed, by the exceedingly brief light of an electric spark, the various stages of the events which happen when a drop of water or a stone falls into water. These photographs show us all that happens when the falling object touches the water, and the manner in which it gives rise to the wave or ripple which results. Some of Professor Worthington’s results for a drop of water falling into milk are reproduced in the appended diagrams. In the first place (Fig. 8) the drop is seen just entering the water. As it plunges down, it leaves behind it a cavity, or, as it may be called, a hole in the water (see Fig. 9).

Note: See “The Splash of a Drop,” by Professor A. M. Worthington, F.R.S., Romance of Science Series, published by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.

[Figure 8]

This hole, at a certain stage, begins to fill up. The water rushes in on all sides, and the impetus carries up the inrushing water so that it builds up a tall pillar of water in the place where an instant ago there was a hole (see Fig. 10). No one could anticipate such an extraordinary effect; but the instantaneous photographs, taken by the light of an electric spark, which reveal it, cannot but be truthful.

The next stage is that this pillar of water breaks up, and falls back again on the surface. Hence the water, at the place where the drop plunges into it, is subjected to two violent impulses—a downward, succeeded by an up-lifting, force. The effect of this is exactly analogous to that of giving a blow to the interconnected string of balls in the model shown in Fig. 7—it propagates a wave. In Fig. 10 is illustrated the next stage, in which this outward-moving initial wave-crest is shown.

[Figure 9]

[Figure 10]

So much for the events revealed by the flash-light of an electric spark; but succeeding these there is a long train of interesting wave-making performance which can be watched with the eye, or the stages photographed with a hand camera. This wave production is best seen when a large stone is thrown into calm water in a lake or pond.

A story is recorded of the great artist Turner, that he once spent a morning throwing stones into a pond. A friend reproved him for his idleness. “No,” said the painter, “I have not been idle; I have learnt how to paint a ripple.” If the artist’s eye has to be carefully trained to notice all that there is to see when a stone is hurled into a pond, it is not strange that a careless observer cannot grasp at once what really happens to the water in this ordinary occurrence.

[Figure 11]

The photograph in Fig. 11 will, however, show one stage in the event. As soon as the first wave-crest, the origin of which we have already explained, is formed, it begins to move outwards in a circular form, and as it moves it gives rise to a wave-train, that is, it multiplies itself into a series of concentric ripples, or waves, which move outwards, multiplying in number, but getting smaller as they move.

Thus if a large stone is thrown far out into a deep, still lake, after the first splash we shall see a circular wave spreading out from the place where the commotion was made in the water. As we look at this wave we shall see it growing in size and multiplying itself. At first there is but a single wave, then two, four, seven, ten, or more concentric ripples are seen, each circular wave expanding and getting feebler, but seeming to give birth to others as it moves. Moreover, a very careful examination will show us that the whole group of waves, or the wave-train, has an outward motion with a less speed than any individual wave. This observation will serve to initiate the conceptions of a wave-train and of a wave-group velocity. At first it is difficult to understand that a group of waves may move more slowly than the individual waves which compose it. If, however, we cast a stone into a pond, and look very carefully at what takes place, we shall see that the circular expanding band of ripples has an ill-defined but visible inner and outer edge, and that wavelets or ripples which compose it are being continually brought into existence on its inner edge, and dying away on its outer edge. Waves, so to speak, pass through the ripple band with a greater speed than that at which the whole band of waves moves forward. This rather difficult, but important, idea of the distinction between the velocity of a group of waves and that of an individual wave was first suggested by Sir George Stokes, who set a question in a Cambridge Examination on the subject in 1876, and subsequently it was elucidated by Professor Osborne Reynolds and Lord Rayleigh.
