Note: See Osborne Reynolds, Nature, vol. 16, 1877, p. 343, a paper read before the British Association at Plymouth; see also Appendix, Note A.

It can be further explained as follows: Let us consider a wave-motion model such as that represented in Fig. 7, in which a number of suspended heavy balls are connected to one another by elastic threads. Let one ball in the centre be drawn on one side and then released. It will swing to and fro, and will start a wave outwards in both directions. If the row of balls is sufficiently long, it will be seen that the ball by which the wave was started soon comes to rest, and that the wave-motion is confined to a certain group of balls on either side. As time goes on, the wave-motion in each group dies away on the side nearest the origin, and extends on the side furthest away. Hence the particular group of balls which are the seat of the visible wave-motion is continually being shifted along. The rate at which the centre of this active group of vibrating balls is displaced may be called the velocity of the wave-train. The velocity of the wave is, however, something greater, since the waves are all the time moving through the group. This wave-velocity is numerically estimated by taking the product of the wave-length and frequency of the motion.

At this stage it is necessary to explain that waves are not merely a mode of motion; they are a means of conveying energy. It is difficult to give in a compact form any simple definition of what is meant in modern scientific writings by the word Energy.

Briefly speaking, we may say that there are two fundamental agencies or things in Nature with which we are in contact, manifesting themselves in many different forms, but of which the total quantity is unchangeable by human operations. One of these is called Matter. This term is the collective name given to all the substance or stuff we can see or touch, and which can be weighed or has weight. All known solids, liquids, or gases, such things as ice, water, steam, iron, oil, or air, are called material substances, and they have in common the two qualities of occupying space or taking up room, and of having weight. Experiment has shown that there are some eighty different kinds of simple matter which cannot be transformed into each other, and these forms are called the Elements. Any other material substance is made up of mixtures or combinations of these elements. The elementary substances are therefore like the letters of the alphabet, which, taken in groups, make up words, these last corresponding to compound chemical bodies. Exact research has shown that no chemical changes taking place in a closed space can alter the total weight or amount of gravitating matter in it. If a chemist and numerous chemicals were enclosed in a great glass ball, and the ball balanced on a gigantic but very sensitive pair of scales, no operations which the chemist could conduct in the interior of his crystal laboratory would alter, by the ten-thousandth part of a grain, the total weight of it all. He might analyze or combine his chemicals, burn or mix them as he pleased, but as long as nothing entered or escaped from the ball, the total gravitating mass would remain precisely the same. This great fact is called the Law of Conservation of Matter, and it teaches us that although a scuttle of coal may seem to disappear when burnt, yet the weight of the ashes and of all the gaseous products of combustion are together equal to the weight of the original coal and the air required to burn it.

In addition to various material substances we find that we have to recognize different forms of something called Energy, associated with Matter. Thus an iron ball may be more or less hot, more or less electrified or magnetized, or moving with more or less speed. The production of these states of heat, electrification, magnetization, or movement, involves the transfer to the iron of Energy, and they are themselves forms of Energy. This Energy in all its various forms can be evaluated or measured in terms of Energy of movement. Thus the Energy required to heat a ball of iron weighing one imperial pound from a temperature of the melting point of ice to that of boiling water, is nearly equal to the Energy required to impart to it a speed of 1000 feet a second.

In the same way, every definite state of electrification or magnetization can be expressed in its mechanical equivalent, as it is called. Moreover, it is found that we can never create any amount of heat or mechanical motion or other form of energy without putting out of existence an equivalent of energy in some other form. We are therefore compelled to consider that Energy stands on the same footing as Matter in regard to our inability to create or destroy it, and its constancy in total amount, as far as we can ascertain, gives it the same character of permanence. The difference, however, is that we cannot, so to speak, ear-mark any given quantity of energy and follow it through all its transformations in the same manner in which we can mark and identify a certain portion of Matter. The moment, however, that we pass beyond these merely quantitative ideas and proceed to ask further questions about the nature of Energy and Matter, we find ourselves in the presence of inscrutable mysteries. We are not able as yet to analyze into anything simpler this “something” we call Energy which presents itself in the guise of heat or light, electricity or magnetism, movement or chemical action. It is protean in form, intangible, yet measurable in magnitude, and all its changes are by definite equivalent amount and value. There is a most rigid system of book-keeping in the transactions of the physical universe. You may have anything you like in the way of Energy served out to you, but the amount of it is debited to your account immediately, and the bill has to be discharged by paying an equivalent in some other form of Energy before you can remove the goods from the counter.

Matter in its various forms serves as the vehicle of Energy. We have no experience of Energy apart from Matter of some kind, nor of Matter altogether devoid of Energy. We do not even know whether these two things can exist separately, and we can give no definition of the one which does not in some way presuppose the existence of the other. Returning, then, to the subject of waves, we may say that a true wave can only exist when Energy is capable of being associated with a medium in two forms, and the wave is a means by which that Energy is transferred from place to place.

It has already been explained that a true wave can only be created in a medium which elastically resists some kind of deformation, and persists in motion in virtue of inertia. When any material possesses such a quality of resistance to some kind of strain or deformation of such a character that the deformation disappears when the force creating it is withdrawn, it is called an elastic material. This elasticity may arise from various causes. Thus air resists being compressed, and if the compressing force is removed the air expands again. It possesses so-called elasticity of bulk. In the case of water having a free surface there is, as we have seen, a resistance to any change of level in the surface. This may be called an elasticity of surface form. Whenever an elastic material is strained or deformed, energy has to be expended on it to create the deformation. Thus to wind up a watch-spring, stretch a piece of indiarubber, compress some air, or bend a bow, requires an energy expenditure.

As long as the material is kept strained, it is said to have potential energy associated with it. This term is not a very expressive one, and it would be better to call it Energy of strain, or deformation. If, however, we relax the bent bow or release the compressed air, the Energy of Strain disappears, and we have it replaced by Energy of Motion. The arrow which flies from a bow carries with it, as energy of motion, some part of the energy of strain associated with the bent bow.

A little examination of wave-motion shows us, therefore, that we always have at any instant associated with the material in which the wave is being propagated, both Energy of Strain and Energy of Motion. It can be shown that in a true wave of permanent type, the whole energy at any one moment is half energy of strain and half energy of motion, or, as it is called, half potential and half kinetic.

Thus if we consider a wave being propagated along a line of balls elastically connected, at any one moment some of the balls are moving with their greatest velocity, and some are at the extremity of their swing. The former have energy of motion, and the latter energy of strain.

Or, look at a train of sea waves. Some parts of the water are at any moment lifted high above the average level of the sea, or are much below it, but are otherwise nearly at rest. These portions possess what is called potential energy, or energy of position. Other parts of the water are at the average level of the sea, but are moving with considerable velocity, and these portions possess energy of motion. Every other part of the wave has in some degree both energy of motion and energy of position, and it can be shown that the energy of the whole wave is half of one kind and half of the other.

As a wave progresses over the surface, wave-energy is continually being imparted to portions of the water in front, and it is transferred away from others in the rear. In the very act of setting a fresh particle of water in oscillation, the portions already vibrating must diminish their own motion. They may hand on the whole of their energy or only a part of it to their neighbours. This distinction is a very important one, and it determines whether a single act of disturbance shall create a solitary wave or wave-train in a medium.

[Figure 12]

The difference may be illustrated as follows: Consider a row of glass or steel balls suspended by threads so hung as to be quite close to each other (see Fig. 12). Withdraw the first ball, and let it fall against the second one. The result is that the last ball of the row flies off with a jerk. In this case the whole energy imparted to the first ball is transmitted along the row of balls. The first ball, on falling against the second one, exerts on it a pressure which slightly squeezes both out of shape. This pressure is just sufficient to bring the first ball to rest. The second ball, in turn, expands after the blow and squeezes the third, and so on. Hence, in virtue of Newton’s Third Law of Motion, that “action and reaction are equal and opposite,” it follows that the pressure produced by the blow of the first ball is handed on from ball to ball, and finally causes the last ball to fly off.

In this case, owing to the rigid connection between the elastic balls, each one hands on to its neighbour the whole of the energy it receives. Supposing, however, that we separate the balls slightly, and give the first ball a transverse, or side-to-side swing. Then, owing to the fact that there is no connection between the balls, the energy imparted to the first ball would not be handed on at all, and no wave would be propagated.

Between these two extremes of the whole energy transferred and a solitary wave produced, and no energy transferred and no wave produced, we have a condition in which an initial disturbance of one ball gives rise to a wave-train and part of the energy is transferred.

For if we interconnect the balls by loose elastic threads, and then give, as before, a transverse or sideways impulse to the first ball, this will pull the second one and set it swinging, but it will be pulled back itself, and will be to some extent deprived of its motion. The same sharing or division of energy will take place between the second and third, and third and fourth balls, and so on. Hence the initial solitary vibration of the first ball draws out into a wave-train, and the originally imparted energy is spread out over a number of balls, and not concentrated in one of them. Accordingly, as time goes on, the wave-train is ever extending in length and the oscillatory motion of each ball is dying away, and the original energy gets spread over a wider and wider area or number of balls, but is propagated with less speed than the wave-velocity for that medium.

There need be no difficulty in distinguishing between the notion of a wave-velocity and a wave-train velocity, if we remember that the wave travels a distance equal to a wave-length in the time taken by one oscillation. Hence the wave-velocity is measured by taking the quotient of the wave-length by the time of one complete vibration.

If, for example, the wave-length of a water wave is 4 inches, and we observe that twelve waves pass any given point in 3 seconds, we can at once infer that the wave-velocity is 16 inches per second. The transference of energy may, however, take place so that the whole group of waves moves forward much more slowly. They move forward because the waves are dying out in the rear of the group and being created in the front, and the rate of movement of the group is, in the case of deep-water waves, equal to half that of the single-wave velocity.

A very rough illustration of this difference between a group velocity and an individual velocity may be given by supposing a barge to be slowly towed along a river. Let a group of boys run along the barge, dive over the bows, and reappear at the stern and climb in again. Then the velocity of the group of boys on the barge is the same as the speed of the barge, but the speed of each individual boy in space is equal to the speed of the barge added to the speed of each boy relatively to the barge. If the barge is being towed at 3 miles an hour, and the boys run along the boat also at 3 miles an hour, then the velocity of the group of boys is only half that of the individual boy, because the former is 3 miles an hour and the latter is 6 miles an hour.
