Before leaving the subject of sea waves there are two or three interesting matters which must be considered. In the first place, the breaking of a wave on the shore or on shallow water calls for an explanation. If we watch a sea wave rolling in towards the beach, we shall notice that, as it nears the shore, it gets steeper on the shore side, and gradually curls over until it falls and breaks into spray. The reason is because, as the wave gets into the shallow water, the top part of the wave advances more rapidly than the bottom portion. It has already been explained that the path of the water-particle is a circle, with its plane vertical and perpendicular to the wave-front or line.

Accordingly, if the wave is moving in shallow water, the friction of the water against the bottom retards the backward movement at the lowest position of the water, but no such obstacle exists to the forward movement of the water at its highest position. An additional reason for the deformation of the wave on a gently sloping shore may be found in the fact that the front part of the wave is then in shallower water, and hence moves more slowly than the rearward portion in deeper water. From both causes, however, the wave continually gets steeper and steeper on its landward side until it curls over and tumbles down like a house which leans too much on one side. The act of curling over in a breaking wave is a beautiful thing to watch, and one which attracts the eye of every artist who paints seascapes and storm waves, or of any lover of Nature who lingers by the shore.

Another matter of interest is the origin of sea waves. Undoubtedly they are due originally to the action of the wind upon the water. Whenever two layers of fluid lie in contact with each other, and one moves faster than the other, the faster-moving layer will throw the other into waves. This is seen, not only in the action of moving air or wind upon water, but even in the action of air upon air or water upon water. From the tops of high mountains we may sometimes look down upon a flat surface of cloud beneath. On one occasion the author enjoyed a curious spectacle from the summit of an Alpine peak. The climb up had been through damp and misty air, but on reaching the summit the clouds were left behind, and a canopy of blue sky and glorious sunshine were found overhead. Beneath the clouds lay closely packed like a sea of white vapour, and through this ocean of cloud the peaks of many high mountains projected and stood up like islands. The surface of this sea of white cloud, brilliantly illuminated by the sunshine, was not, however, perfectly smooth. It was tossed into cloud waves and billows by the action of currents of air blowing over its upper surface, and it had a striking resemblance to the surface of a rough sea. When such a cloud layer is not too thick, the ruffling of its upper or under surface into cloud waves may thin it away into regular cloud rolls, and these cloud rollers may then be cut up again by cross air-currents into patches, and we have the appearance known as a “mackerel sky.”

Another familiar phenomenon is that known as the “ripple-mark” on wet sand. As the tide ebbs out over a smooth bank of sea-sand, it leaves the surface ploughed into regular rounded ridges and furrows, which are stationary waves on the sand. This is called the ripple-mark. It is due to the fact that the sand, when covered by the water, forms a surface which in a certain sense is fluid, being saturated and filled with water, but the movement of this bottom sand-logged water is hindered by the sand, and hence the layer of overlying water moves over it at a different speed in ebbing out, and carves it into what are virtually sand waves.

Even a dry sand or snow surface may in this manner be moulded into a wave-form by the wind, and very curious effects of this kind have been noticed and described by Dr. Vaughan Cornish, who has made a great study of the science of waves.

Note: A very interesting article on “Kumatology, or the Science of Waves,” appeared in a number of Pearson’s Magazine for July, 1901. In this article, by Mr. Marcus Tindal, many interesting facts about, and pictures of, sea waves are given.

The production of waves on water by means of a current of air blowing over it is easily exhibited on a small scale by blowing through an indiarubber pipe, the end of which is held near the surface of the water in a tub or tank. The exact manner in which the moving air gets a grip of the water is not quite plain, but it is clear that, if once an inequality of level is set up, the moving air has then an oblique surface against which it can press, and so increase the inequality by heaping up the water in some places, and hollowing it out in others.

Hence oscillations of the water-surface are set up, which go on accumulating. These waves then travel away with a speed depending upon their wave-length, and we may have great disturbances of the sea-surface at places where there is no actual storm-wind. These “echoes of a far-off storm” are known as a “ground swell.” In some localities the inhabitants are able to apprise themselves of the coming of a storm by noticing movements of the sea which indicate the arrival of waves which have travelled more quickly than the storm-centre itself.

Every visitor to the seaside will have noticed occasions on which the sea is violently disturbed by waves, and yet the air in the locality is tolerably calm. In this case the waves have been propagated from some point of disturbance at a distance.

A study of breaking waves shows us that the cause of their great power to effect damage to coast structures, such as piers, harbour works, and shipping in harbours, is really due to the forward motion of the water as the wave is breaking. Every cubic foot of water weighs 63¹⁄₂ lbs., so that a cubic yard of water weighs about three-quarters of a ton. If this water is moving with a speed of many feet per second in a forward direction, the energy of motion stored up in it is tremendous, and fully sufficient to account for the destructive power of storm waves on a coast.

The total volume of water which is comprised in the space occupied by even one sea-storm wave of moderate dimensions may have a mass of many hundreds of tons, and its energy of motion may easily amount to that of an express train in motion. Hence when, in the last stage of its career, this mass of water is hurled forward on the shore, its destructive effects are not a matter for surprise.

We must now leave the subject of waves in the open sea on a large level surface, and consider that of waves in narrow channels, such as canals or rivers. The laws which govern water-wave production in a canal can best be studied by placing some water in a long tank with glass sides. If at one end we insert a flat piece of wood and give it a push forward, we shall start what is called a long wave in the tank. The characteristic of this kind of wave is that the oscillatory motion is chiefly to-and-fro, and not up-and-down. This may be very easily seen by placing some bran in the water, or floating in it some glass balls which have been adjusted so as to just float anywhere in the water. When this is done, and a wave started in the tank, it runs up and down, being reflected at each end (see Fig. 13).

[Figure 13]

From the motion of the bran we can see that the water swings backwards and forwards in a horizontal line with a pendulum-like motion, but its up-and-down or vertical motion is much more restricted. A wave of this kind travels along a canal with a speed which depends upon the depth of the canal. If waves of this kind are started in a very long trough, the wave-length being large compared with the depth of the trough, it can be shown that the speed of the wave is equal to the velocity which would be gained by a stone or other heavy body in falling through half the depth of the canal. Hence, the deeper the water, the quicker the wave travels. This can be shown as an experimental fact as follows: Let two galvanized iron tanks be provided, each about 6 feet long and 1 foot wide and deep.

Note: Lord Kelvin (see lecture on “Ship Waves,” Popular Lectures, vol. iii. p. 468) says the wave-length must be at least fifty times the depth of the canal.

At one end of each tank a hollow cylinder, such as a coffee-canister or ball made water-tight, is floated, and it may be prevented from moving from its place by being attached to a hinged rod like the ball-cock of a cistern. The two tanks are placed side by side, and one is filled to a depth of 6 inches, and the other to a depth of 3 inches, with water. Two pieces of wood are then provided and joined together as in Fig. 14, so as to form a double paddle. By pushing this through the water simultaneously in both tanks at the end opposite to that at which the floating cylinders are placed, it is possible to start two solitary waves, one in each tank, at the same instant. These waves rush up to the other end and cause the floats to bob up. It will easily be seen that the float on the deeper water bobs up first, thus showing that the wave on the deeper water has travelled along the tank more quickly than the wave on the shallower water.

[Figure 14]

In order to calculate the speed of the waves, we must call to mind the law governing the speed of falling bodies. If a stone falls from a height its speed increases as it falls. It can be shown that the speed in feet per second after falling from any height is obtained by multiplying together the number 8 and a number which is the square root of the height in feet.

Thus, for instance, if we desire to know the speed attained by falling from a height of 25 feet above the earth’s surface, we multiply 8 by 5, this last number being the square root of 25. Accordingly, we find the velocity to be 40 feet per second, or about 26 miles an hour.

The force of the blow which a body administers and suffers on striking the ground depends on the energy of motion it has acquired during the fall, and as this varies as the square of the speed, it varies also as the height fallen through.

Let us apply these rules to calculate the speed of a long wave in a canal having water 8 feet deep in it. The half-depth of the canal is therefore 4 feet. The square root of 4 is 2; hence the speed of the wave is that of a body which has fallen from a height of 4 feet, and is therefore 16 feet per second, or nearly 11 miles an hour. When we come to consider the question of waves made by ships, in the next chapter, a story will be related of a scientific discovery made by a horse employed in dragging canal-boats, which depended on the fact that the speed of long waves in this canal was nearly the same as the trotting speed of the horse.

[Figure 15]

It may be well, as a little digression, to point out how the law connecting height fallen through and velocity acquired by the falling body may be experimentally illustrated for teaching purposes.

The apparatus is shown in Fig. 15. It consists of a long board placed in a horizontal position and held with the face vertical. This board is about 16 feet long. Attached to this board is a grooved railway, part of which is on a slope and part is horizontal. A smooth iron ball, A, about 2 inches in diameter, can run down this railway, and is stopped by a movable buffer or bell, B, which can be clamped at various positions on the horizontal rail. At the bottom of the inclined plane is a light lever, T, which is touched by the ball on reaching the bottom of the hill. The trigger releases a pendulum, P, which is held engaged on one side, and, when released, it takes one swing and strikes a bell, G. The pendulum occupies half a second in making its swing. An experiment is then performed in the following manner: The iron ball is placed at a distance, say, of 1 foot up the hill and released. It rolls down, detaches the pendulum at the moment it arrives at the bottom of the hill, and then expends its momentum in running along the flat part of the railway. The buffer must be so placed by trial that the iron ball hits it at the instant when the pendulum strikes the bell. The distance which the buffer has to be placed from the bottom of the hill is a measure of the velocity acquired by the iron ball in falling down the set distance along the hill. The experiment is then repeated with the iron ball placed respectively four times and nine times higher up the hill, and it will be found that the distances which the ball runs along the flat part in one half-second are in the ratio of 1, 2, and 3, when the heights fallen through down the hill are in the ratio of 1, 4, and 9.

The inference we make from this experiment is that the velocity acquired by a body in falling through any distance is proportional to the square root of the height. The same law holds good, no matter how steep the hill, and therefore it holds good when the body, such as a stone or ball, falls freely through the air.

The experiment with the ball rolling down a slope is an instructive one to make, because it brings clearly before the mind what is meant by saying, in scientific language, that one thing “varies as the square root” of another. We meet with so many instances of this mode of variation in the study of physics, that the reader, especially the young reader, should not be content until the idea conveyed by these words has become quite clear to him or her.
