Thus, for instance, the time of vibration of a simple clock pendulum “varies as the square root of the length;” the velocity of a canal wave “varies as the square root of the depth of the canal;” and the velocity or speed acquired by a falling ball “varies as the square root of the distance fallen through.” These phrases mean that if we have pendulums whose lengths are in the ratio of 1 to 4 to 9, then the respective times of their vibration are in the ratio of 1 to 2 to 3. Also a similar relation connects the canal-depth and wave-velocity, or the ball-velocity and height of fall.

Returning again to canal waves, it should be pointed out that the real path of a particle of water in the canal, when long waves are passing along it, is a very flat oval curve called an ellipse. In the extreme cases, when the canal is very wide and deep, this ellipse will become nearly a circle; and, on the other hand, when narrow and shallow, it will be nearly a straight line. Hence, if long waves are created in a canal which is shallow compared with the length of the wave, the water-particles simply oscillate to and fro in a horizontal line. There is, however, one important fact connected with wave-propagation in a canal, which has a great bearing on the mode of formation of what is called a “bore.”

As a wave travels along a canal, it can be shown, both experimentally and theoretically, that the crest of the wave travels faster than the hollow, and as a consequence the wave tends to become steeper on its front side, and its shape then resembles a saw-tooth.

A very well known and striking natural phenomenon is the so-called “bore” in certain tidal rivers or estuaries. It is well seen on the Severn in certain states of the tide and wind. The tidal wave returning along the Severn channel, which narrows rapidly as it leaves the coast, becomes converted into a “canal wave,” and travels with great rapidity up the channel. The front side of this great wave takes an almost vertical position, resembling an advancing wall of water, and works great havoc with boats and shipping which have had the misfortune to be left in its path. To understand more completely how a “bore” is formed, the reader must be reminded of the cause of all tidal phenomena. Any one who lives by the sea or an estuary knows well that the sea-level rises and falls twice every 24 hours, and that the average interval of time between high water and high water is nearly 12¹⁄₂ hours. The cause of this change of level in the water-surface is the attraction exerted by the sun and moon upon the ocean. The earth is, so to speak, clothed with a flexible garment of water, and this garment is pulled out of shape by the attractive force of our luminaries; very roughly speaking, we may say that the ocean-surface is distorted into a shape called an ellipsoid, and that there are therefore two elevations of water which march across the sea-covered regions of the earth as it revolves on its axis. These elevations are called the tidal waves. The effects, however, are much complicated by the fact that the ocean does not cover all parts of the earth. There is no difficulty in showing that, as the tidal wave progresses round the earth across each great ocean, it produces an elevation of the sea-surface which is not simultaneous at all places. The time when the crest of the tidal wave reaches any place is called the “time of high tide.” Thus if we consider an estuary, such as that of the Thames, there is a marked difference between the time of high tide as we ascend the estuary.

Taking three places, Margate, Gravesend, and London Bridge, we find that if the time of high tide at Margate is at noon on any day, then it is high tide at Gravesend at 2.15 p.m., and at London Bridge a little before three o’clock. This difference is due to the time required for the tidal wave to travel up the estuary of the Thames.

When an estuary contracts considerably as it proceeds, as is the case with the Bristol Channel, then the range of the tide or the height of the tidal wave becomes greatly increased as it travels up the gradually narrowing channel, because the wave is squeezed into a smaller space. For example, the range of spring tides at the entrance of the Bristol Channel is about 18 feet, but at Chepstow it is about 50 feet. At oceanic ports in open sea the range of the tide is generally only 2 or 3 feet.

Note: See article “Tides,” by G. H. Darwin, “Encyclopædia Britannica,” 9th edit., vol. 23, p. 353.

If we look at the map of England, we shall see how rapidly the Bristol Channel contracts, and hence, as the tidal wave advances from the Atlantic Ocean, it gets jambed up in this rapidly contracting channel, and as the depth of the channel in which it moves rapidly shallows, the rear portion of this tidal wave, being in deeper water, travels faster than the front part and overtakes it, producing thus a flat or straight-fronted wave which goes forward with tremendous speed.

Note: The progress of the Severn “bore” has been photographed and reproduced by a kinematograph by Dr. Vaughan Cornish. For a series of papers bearing on this sort of wave, by Lord Kelvin, see the Philosophical Magazine for 1886 and 1887.

We must, in the next place, turn our attention to the study of water ripples. The term “ripple” is generally used to signify a very small and short wave, and in ordinary language it is not distinguished from what might be called a wavelet, or little wave. There is, however, a scientific distinction between a wave and a ripple, of a very fundamental character.

It has already been stated that a wave can only exist, or be created, in or on a medium which resists in an elastic manner some displacement. The ordinary water-surface wave is termed a gravitation wave, and it exists because the water-surface resists being made unlevel. There is, however, another thing which a water-surface resists. It offers an opposition to small stretching, in virtue of what is called its surface tension. In a popular manner the matter may thus be stated: The surface of every liquid is covered with a sort of skin which, like a sheet of indiarubber, resists stretching, and in fact contracts under existing conditions so as to become as small as possible. We can see an illustration of this in the case of a soap-bubble. If a bubble is blown on a rather wide glass tube, on removing the mouth the bubble rapidly shrinks up, and the contained air is squeezed out of the tube with sufficient force to blow out a candle held near the end of the tube.

Again, if a dry steel sewing-needle is laid gently in a horizontal position on clean water, it will float, although the metal itself is heavier than water. It floats because the weight of the needle is not sufficient to break through the surface film. It is for this reason that very small and light insects can run freely over the surface of water in a pond.

This surface tension is, however, destroyed or diminished by placing various substances on the water. Thus if a small disc of writing-paper the size of a wafer is placed on the surface of clean water in a saucer, it will rest in the middle. The surface film of the water on which it rests is, however, strained or pulled equally in different directions. If a wire is dipped in strong spirits of wine or whisky, and one side of the wafer touched with the drop of spirit, the paper shoots away with great speed in the opposite direction. The surface tension on one side has been diminished by the spirit, and the equality of tension destroyed.

These experiments and many others show us that we must regard the surface of a liquid as covered with an invisible film, which is in a state of stretch, or which resists stretching. If we imagine a jam-pot closed with a cover of thin sheet indiarubber pulled tightly over it, it is clear that any attempt to make puckers, pleats, or wrinkles in it would involve stretching the indiarubber. It is exactly the same with water. If very small wrinkles or pleats, as waves, are made on its surface, the resistance which is brought into play is that due to the surface tension, and not merely the resistance of the surface to being made unlevel. Wavelets so made, or due to the above cause, are called ripples.

It can be shown by mathematical reasoning that on the free surface of a liquid, like water, what are called capillary ripples can be made by agitations or movements of a certain kind, and the characteristic of these surface-tension waves or capillary ripples, as compared with gravitation waves, is that the velocity of propagation of the capillary ripple is less the greater the wave-length, whereas the velocity of gravitation on ordinary surface waves is greater the greater the wave-length.

Note: See Lord Kelvin, “Hydrokinetic Solutions and Observations,” Philosophical Magazine, November, 1871.

It follows from this that for any liquid, such as water, there is a certain length of wave which travels most slowly. This slowest wave is the dividing line between what are properly called ripples, and those that are properly called waves. In the case of water this slowest wave has a wave-length of about two-thirds of an inch (0·68 inch), and a speed of travel approximately of 9 inches (0·78 foot) per second.

More strictly speaking, the matter should be explained as follows: Sir George Stokes showed, as far back as 1848, that the surface tension of a liquid should be taken into account in finding the pressure at the free surface of a liquid. It was not, however, until 1871 that Lord Kelvin discussed the bearing of this fact on the formation of waves, and gave a mathematical expression for the velocity of a wave of oscillatory type on a liquid surface, in which the wave-length, surface tension, density, and the acceleration of gravity were taken into account. The result was to show that when waves are very short, viz. a small fraction of an inch, they are principally due to surface tension, and when long are entirely due to gravity.

It can easily be seen that ripples run faster the smaller their wave-length. If we take a thin wire and hold it perpendicularly in water, and then move it quickly parallel to itself, we shall see a stationary pattern of ripples round the wire which moves with it. These ripples are smaller and closer together the faster the wire is moved.

Ripples on water are formed in circular expanding rings when rain-drops fall upon the still surface of a lake or pond, or when drops of water formed in any other way fall in the same manner. On the other hand, a stone flung into quiet and deep water will, in general, create waves of wave-length greater than two-thirds of an inch, so that they are no longer within the limits entitling them to be called ripples. Hence we have a perfectly scientific distinction between a ripple and a wave, and a simple measurement of the wave-length will decide whether disturbances of oscillatory type on a liquid surface should be called ripples or waves in the proper sense of the words.

The production of water ripples and their properties, and a beautiful illustration of wave properties in general, can be made by allowing a steady stream of water from a very small jet to fall on the surface of still water in a tank. In order to see the ripples so formed, it is necessary to illuminate them in a particular manner.

The following is a description of an apparatus, designed by the author for exhibiting all these effects to a large audience:—

The instrument consists essentially of an electric lantern. A hand-regulated or self-regulating arc lamp is employed to produce a powerful beam of light. This is collected by a suitable condensing-lens, and it then falls upon a mirror placed at an angle of 45°, which throws it vertically upwards. The light is then concentrated by a plain convex lens placed horizontally, and passes through a trough of metal having a plane glass bottom. This trough is filled to a depth of half an inch with water, and it has an overflow pipe to remove waste water. Above the tank, at the proper distance, is placed a focussing-lens, and another mirror at an angle of 45° to throw an image of the water-surface upon a screen. The last lens is so arranged that ripples on the surface of the water appear like dark lines flitting across the bright disc of light which appears upon the screen. Two small brass jets are also arranged to drop water into the tank, and these jets must be supplied with water from a cistern elevated about 4 feet above the trough. The jets must be controlled by screw-taps which permit of very accurate adjustment. These jets should work on swivels, so that they may be turned about to drop the water at any point in the tank.

The capillary ripples which are produced on the water-surface by allowing water to drop on it from a jet, flit across the surface so rapidly that they cannot be followed by the eye. They may, however, be rendered visible as follows: A zinc disc, having holes in it, is arranged in front of the focussing-lens, and turned by hand or by means of a small electric motor. This disc is called a stroboscopic disc. When turned round it eclipses the light at intervals, so that the image on the screen is intermittent. If, now, one of the water-jets is adjusted so as to originate at the centre of the tank a set of diverging circular ripples, they can be projected as shadows upon the screen. These ripples move at the rate of 1 or 2 feet per second, and their shadows move so rapidly across the field of view that we cannot well observe their behaviour. If, however, the metal disc with holes in it is made to revolve and to intermittently obscure the view, it is possible to adjust its speed so that the interval of time between two eclipses is just equal to that required by the ripples to move forward through one wave-length. When this exact speed is obtained, the image of the ripples on the screen becomes stationary, and we see a series of concentric dark circles with intermediate bright spaces (see Fig. 16), which are the shadows of the ripples. In this manner we can study many of their effects. If, for instance, the jet of water is made to fall, not in the centre of the trough, but nearer one side, we shall notice that there are two sets of ripples which intersect—one of these is the direct or original set, and the other is a set produced by the reflection of the original ripples from the side of the trough. These direct and reflected ripple-shadows intersect and produce a cross-hatched pattern. If a slip of metal or glass is inserted into the trough, it is very easy to show that when a circular ripple meets a plane hard surface it is reflected, and that the reflected ripple is also a circular one which proceeds as if it came from a point, Q, on the opposite side of the boundary, just as far behind that boundary as the real centre of disturbance or origin of the ripple P is in front of it (see Fig. 17). In the diagram the dotted curves represent the reflected ripple-crests.
