[Figure 16]

If we make two sets of ripples from origins P and Q (see Fig. 18), at different distances from a flat reflecting boundary, it is not difficult to trace out that each set of ripples is reflected independently, and according to the above-mentioned rule. We here obtain a glimpse of a principle which will come before us again in speaking of æther waves, and furnishes an explanation of the familiar optical fact that when we view our own reflection in a looking-glass, the image appears to be as far behind the glass as we are in front of it.

[Figure 17]

[Figure 18]

A very pretty experiment can be shown by fitting into the trough an oval band of metal bent into the form of an ellipse. If two pins are stuck into a sheet of card, and a loop of thread fitted loosely round them, and a pencil employed to trace out a curve by using it to strain the loop of thread tight and moving it round the pin, we obtain a closed curve called an ellipse (see Fig. 19). The positions of the two pins A and B are called the foci. It is a property of the ellipse that the two lines AP and BP, called radii vectores, drawn from the foci to any point P on the curve, make equal angles with a line TT′ called a tangent, drawn to touch the selected point on the ellipse. If we draw the tangent TT′ to the ellipse at P, then it needs only a small knowledge of geometry to see that the line PB is in the same position and direction as if it were drawn through P from a false focus A′, which is as far behind the tangent TT′ as the real focus A is in front of it. Accordingly, it follows that circular ripples diverging from one focus A of an ellipse must, after reflection at the elliptical boundary, be converged to the other focus B. This can be shown by the use of the above described apparatus in a pretty manner.

[Figure 19]

A strip of thin metal is bent into an elliptical band and placed in the lantern trough. The band is so wide that the water in the trough is about halfway up it. At a point corresponding to one focus of the ellipse, drops of water are then allowed to fall on the water-surface and start a series of divergent ripples. When the stroboscopic disc is set in revolution and its speed properly adjusted, we see that the divergent ripples proceeding from one focus of the ellipse are all converged or concentrated to the other focus. In fact, the ripples seem to set out from one focus, and to be, as it were, swallowed up at the other. When, in a later chapter, we are discussing the production and reflection of sound waves in the air, you will be able to bring this statement to mind, and it will be clear to you that if, instead of dealing with waves on water, we were to create waves in air in the interior of a similar elliptically shaped room, the waves being created at one focus, they would all be collected at the other focus, and the tick of a watch or a whisper would be heard at the point corresponding to the other focus, though it might not be heard elsewhere in the room.

With the appliances here described many beautiful effects can be shown, illustrating the independence of different wave-trains and their interference. If we hurl two stones into a lake a little way apart, and thus create two sets of circular ripples (see Fig. 20), we shall notice that these two ripple-trains pass freely through each other, and each behave as if the other did not exist. A careful examination will, however, show that at some places the water-surface is not elevated or disturbed at all, and at others that the disturbance is increased.

[Figure 20]

If two sets of waves set out from different origins and arrive simultaneously at the same spot, then it is clear that if the crests or hollows of both waves reach that point at the same instant, the agitation of the water will be increased. If, however, the crest of a wave from one source reaches it at the same time as the hollow of another equal wave from the other origin, then it is not difficult to see that the two waves will obliterate each other. This mutual destruction of wave by wave is called interference, and it is a very important fact in connection with wave-motion. It is not too much to say that whenever we can prove the existence of interference, that alone is an almost crucial proof that we are dealing with wave-motion. The conditions under which interference can take place must be examined a little more closely. Let us suppose that two wave-trains, having equal velocity, equal wave-length, and equal amplitude or wave-height, are started from two points, A and B (see Fig. 21). Consider any point, P. What is the condition that the waves from the two sources shall destroy each other at that point? Obviously it is that the difference of the distances AP and BP shall be an odd number of half wave-lengths. For if in the length AP there are 100 waves, and in the distance BP there are 100¹⁄₂ waves, or 101¹⁄₂ or 103¹⁄₂, etc., waves, then the crest of a wave from A will reach P at the same time as the hollow of a wave from B, and there will be no wave at all at the point P. This is true for all such positions of P that the difference of its distances from A and B are constant.

[Figure 21]

But again, we may choose a point, Q, such that the difference of its distances from A and B is equal to an even number of half wave-lengths, so that whilst in the length AQ there are, say, 100 waves, in the distance BQ there are 101, 102, 103, etc., waves. When this is the case, the wave-effects will conspire or assist each other at Q, and the wave-height will be doubled. If, then, we have any two points, A and B, which are origins of equal waves, we can mark out curved lines such that the difference of the distances of all points on these lines from these origins is constant. These curves are called hyperbolas (see Fig. 22).

[Figure 22]

[Figure 23]

All along each hyperbola the disturbance due to the combined effect of the waves is either doubled or annulled when compared with that due to each wave-train separately. With the apparatus described, we can arrange to create and adjust two sets of similar water ripples from origins not far apart, and on looking at the complicated shadow-pattern due to the interference of the waves, we shall be able to trace out certain white lines along which the waves are annulled, these lines being hyperbolic curves (see Fig. 23). With the same appliances another characteristic of wave-motion, which is equally important, can be well shown.

[Figure 24]

We make one half of the circular tank in which the ripples are generated much more shallow than the other half, by placing in it a thick semicircular plate of glass. It has already been explained that the speed with which long waves travel in a canal increases with the depth of the water in the canal. The same is true, with certain restrictions, of ripples produced in a confined space or tank, one part of which is much shallower than the rest. If waves are made by dropping water on to the water-surface in the deeper part of the tank, they will travel more quickly in this deeper part than in the shallower portion. We can then adjust the water-dropping jet in such a position that it creates circular ripples which originate in deep water, but at certain places pass over a boundary into a region of shallower water (see Fig. 24). The left-hand side of the circular tank represented in the diagram is more shallow than the right-hand side.

When this is done, we notice two interesting facts, viz. that the wave-lines are bent, or refracted, where they pass over the boundary, and that the waves are shorter or nearer together in the shallower region. This bending, or refraction, of a wave-front in passing the boundary line between two districts in which the wave has different velocities is an exceedingly important characteristic of wave-motion, and we shall have brought before us the analogous facts in speaking of waves in air and waves in æther.

[Figure 25]

It is necessary to explain a little more in detail how it comes to pass that the wave-line is thus bent. Imagine a row of soldiers, ab, marching over smooth grass, but going towards a very rough field, the line of separation SS between the smooth and the rough field being oblique to the line of the soldiers (see Fig. 25). Furthermore, suppose the soldiers can march 4 miles an hour over the smooth grass, but only 3 miles an hour over the rough field. Then let the man on the extreme left of the line be the first to step over the boundary. Immediately he passes into a region where his speed of marching is diminished, but his comrade on the extreme right of the row is still going easily on smooth grass. It is accordingly clear that the direction of the line of soldiers will be swung round because, whilst the soldier on the extreme left marches, say, 300 feet, the one on the extreme right will have gone 400 feet forward; and hence by the time all the men have stepped over the boundary, the row of soldiers will no longer be going in the same direction as before—it will have become bent, or refracted.

This same action takes place with waves. If a wave meets obliquely a boundary separating two regions, in one of which it moves slower than in the other, then, for the same reason that the direction of the row of soldiers in the above illustration is bent by reason of the retardation of velocity experienced by each man in turn as he steps over the dividing line, so the wave-line or wave-front is bent by passing from a place where it moves quickly to a place where it moves more slowly. The ratio of the velocities or speeds of the wave in the two regions is called the index of refraction.

We can, by arranging suitably curved reflecting surfaces or properly shaped shallow places in a tank of water, illustrate all the facts connected with the change in wave-fronts produced by reflection and refraction.

We can generate circular waves or ripples diverging from a point, and convert them, by reflection from a parabolic reflector, into plane waves; and again, by means of refraction at a curved or lens-shaped shallow, converge these waves to a focus.

Interesting experiments of this kind have been made by means of capillary ripples on a mercury surface by Mr. J. H. Vincent, and he has photographed the ripples so formed, and given examples of their reflection and refraction, which are well worth study.

Note: “On the Photography of Ripples,” by J. H. Vincent, Philosophical Magazine, vol. 43, 1897, p. 411, and also vol. 48, 1899. These photographs of ripples have been reproduced as lantern slides by Messrs. Newton and Co., of Fleet Street, London.

We do not need, however, elaborate apparatus to see these effects when we know what to look for.

A stone thrown into a lake will create a ripple or wave-train, which moves outwards at the rate of a few feet a second. If it should happen that the pond or lake has an immersed wall as part of its boundary, this may form an effective reflecting surface, and as each circular wave meets the wall it will be turned back upon itself as a reflected wave. At the edge of an absolutely calm sea, at low tide, the author once observed little parallel plane waves advancing obliquely to the coast; the edge of the water was by chance just against a rather steep ledge of hard sand, and each wavelet, as it met this reflecting surface, was turned back and reflected at an angle of reflection equal to that of incidence.

It is well to notice that a plane wave, or one in which the wave front or line is a straight line, may be considered as made up out of a number of circular waves diverging from points arranged closely together along a straight line. Thus, if we suppose that a, b, c, d, etc. (see Fig. 26), are source-points, or origins, of independent sets of circular waves, represented by the firm semicircular lines, if they send out simultaneous waves equal in all directions, the effect will be nearly equivalent to a plane wave, represented by the straight thick black line, provided that the source-points are very numerous and close together.

Supposing, then, we have a boundary against which this plane wave impinges obliquely, it will be reflected and its subsequent course will be exactly as if it had proceeded from a series of closely adjacent source-points, a′, b′, c′, d′, etc., lying behind the boundary, each of which is the image of the corresponding real source-points, and lies as far behind the boundary as the real point lies in front of it.

[Figure 26]

An immediate consequence of this is that the plane reflected wave-front makes the same angle with the plane reflecting surface as does the incident or arriving wave, and we thus establish the law, so familiar in optics, that the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection when a plane wave meets a plane reflecting surface.

At the seaside, when the tide is low and the sea calm or ruffled only by wavelets due to a slight wind, one may often notice trains of small waves, which are reflected at sharp edges of sand, or refracted on passing into sudden shallows, or interfering after passing round the two sides of a rock. A careful observer can in this school of Nature instruct himself in all the laws of wave-motion, and gather a fund of knowledge on this subject during an hour’s dalliance at low tide on some sandy coast, or in the quiet study of seaside pools, the surface of which is corrugated with trains of ripples by the breeze.
