It is impossible for the most careless spectator to look at a steam-vessel making her way along a lake, a boy’s boat skimming across a pond, or even a duck paddling on a stream, without noticing that the moving body is accompanied in all cases by a trail of waves or ripples, which diverge from it and extend behind. In the case of a steamer there is an additional irregular wave-motion of the water caused by the paddle-wheels or screw, which churn it up, and leave a line of rough water in the steamer’s wake. This, however, is not included in the true ship-wave effect now to be discussed. We can best observe the proper ship-wave disturbance of the water in the case of a yacht running freely before the wind when the sea is fairly smooth. The study of these ship-waves has led to most important and practical improvements in the art of ship-designing and shipbuilding, and no treatment of the subject of waves and ripples on water would be complete in which all mention of ship-waves was omitted.

In order that we may explain the manner in which these waves are formed, and their effect upon the motion of the ship, and the power required to move it forward, we must begin by a little discussion of some fundamental facts concerning liquids in motion.

Every one is aware that certain liquids are, as we say sticky, or, to use the scientific term, viscous. A request to mention sticky liquids would call up the names of such fluids as tar, treacle, gum-water, glycerine, and honey. Very few people would think of including pure water, far less spirits of wine, in a list of sticky, or viscous liquids; and yet it is quite easy to show by experiment that even these fluids possess some degree of stickiness, or viscosity. An illustration may be afforded as follows: We provide several very large glass tubes, nearly filled respectively with quicksilver, water, alcohol, glycerine, and oil. A small space is left in each tube containing a little air, and the tubes are closed by corks. If we suddenly turn all the tubes upside down, these bubbles of air begin to climb up from the bottom of the tube to the top. We notice that in the quicksilver tube it arrives at the top in a second or two, in the water tube it takes a little longer, in the oil tube longer still, and in the tube filled with glycerine it is quite a minute or more before the bubble of air has completed its journey up the tube. This experiment, properly interpreted, shows us that water possesses in some degree the quality of viscosity. It can, however, be more forcibly proved by another experiment.

To a whirling-table is fixed a glass vessel half full of water. On this water a round disc of wood, to which is attached a long wire carrying a paper flag, is made to float. If we set the basin of water slowly in rotation, at first the paper flag does not move. The basin rotates without setting the contained water in rotation, and so to speak slips round it. Presently, however, the flag begins to turn slowly, and this shows us that the water has been gradually set in rotation. This happens because the water sticks slightly to the inner surface of the basin, and the layers of water likewise stick to one another. Hence, as the glass vessel slides round the water it gradually forces the outer layer of water to move with it, and this again the inner layers of water one by one, until at last the floating block of wood partakes of the motion, and the basin and its contents turn round as one mass. This effect could not take place unless the water possessed some degree of viscosity, and also unless so-called skin friction existed between the inside of a glass vessel and the water it contains.

We may say, however, at once that no real liquid with which we are acquainted is entirely destitute of stickiness, or viscosity. We can nevertheless imagine a liquid absolutely free from any trace of this property, and this hypothetical substance is called a perfect fluid.

It is clear that this ideal perfect liquid must necessarily differ in several important respects from any real fluid, such as water, and some of these differences we proceed to examine. We must point out that in any liquid there may be two kinds of motion, one called irrotational motion, and the other called rotational or vortex motion.

Consider any mass of water, such as a river, in motion in any way; we may in imagination fix our attention upon some small portion of it, which at any instant we will consider to be of a spherical shape. If, as this sphere of liquid moves along embedded in the rest of the liquid, it is turning round an axis in any direction as well as being distorted in shape, the motion of that part of the fluid is called rotational. If, however, our little sphere of liquid is merely being stretched or pulled into an ovoid or ellipsoidal shape without any rotation or spinning motion, then the motion of the liquid is said to be irrotational. We might compare these small portions of the liquid to a crowd of people moving along a street. If each person moves in such a way as always to keep his face in the same direction, that movement would be an irrotational movement. If, however, they were to move like couples dancing in a ball-room, not only moving along but turning round, their motion would be called rotational. Examples of rotational, or vortex motion are seen whenever we empty a wash-basin by pulling up the plug. We see the water swirl round, or rotate, forming what is called an eddy, or whirlpool. Also eddies are seen near the margin of a swiftly flowing river, since the water is set in rotation by friction against objects on the banks. Eddies are likewise created when two streams of water flow over each other with different speeds. A beautiful instance of this may be viewed at an interesting place a mile or two out of the city of Geneva. The Rhone, a rapid river, emerges as a clear blue stream from the Lake of Geneva. At a point called Junction d’eaux it meets the river Arve, a more sluggish and turbid glacier stream, and the two then run together in the same channel. The waters of the Rhone and Arve do not at once mix, but the line of separation is marked by a series of whirlpools or eddies set up by the flow of the rapid Rhone water against the slower Arve water in contact with it.

Again, it is impossible to move a solid body through a liquid without setting up eddy-motion. The movement of an oar through the water, or even of a teaspoon through tea, is seen to be accompanied by little whirls which detach themselves from the oar or spoon, and are really the ends of vortices set up in the liquid. The two facts to notice particularly are that the production of eddies in liquids always involves the expenditure of energy, or, in mechanical language, it necessitates doing work. To set in rotation a mass of any liquid requires the delivery to it of energy, just as is the case when a heavy wheel is made to rotate or a heavy train set in movement. This energy must be supplied by or absorbed from the moving solid or liquid which creates the eddies.

In the next place, we must note that eddies or vortices set up in an imperfect fluid, such as water, are ultimately destroyed by fluid friction. Their energy is frittered down into heat, and a mass of water in which eddies have been created by moving through it a paddle, is warmer after the eddies have subsided than before. It is obvious, from what has been said, that if a really perfect fluid did exist, it would be impossible by mechanical means to make eddies in it; but if they were created, they would continue for ever, and have something of the permanence of material substances.

[Figure 27]

A vortex motion in water may be either a terminated vortex, in which case its ends are on the surface, and are seen as eddies, or whirls; or it may be an endless vortex, in which case it is called a vortex ring. Such a ring is very easily made in the air as follows: A cubical wooden box about 18 inches in the side has a hole 6 inches in diameter made in the bottom (see Fig. 27). The open top of the box is covered tightly with elastic cloth. The box is then filled with the white vapour of ammonium chloride, by leading into it at the same time dry hydrochloric acid gas and dry ammonia gas. When quite full of dense white fumes, we give the cloth cover of the box a sharp blow with the fist, and from the round hole a white smoke ring leaps out and slides through the air. The experiment may be made on a smaller scale by using a cardboard box and filling it with the smoke of brown paper or tobacco. If we look closely at the smoke ring as it glides through the air, we shall see that the motion of the air or smoke particles composing the ring is like that of an indiarubber umbrella-ring fitted tightly on a round ruler and pushed along. The ring turns itself continually over and over, the rotation being round the circular ring axis line. This rotatory motion is set up by the friction of the smoky air against the edge of the hole in the box, as the puff of air emerges from it when the back of the box is thumped. A simple but striking experiment may be made without filling the box with smoke. Place a lighted candle at a few feet away from the opening of the above-described box, and strike the back. An invisible vortex ring of air is formed and blows out the candle as it passes over it. Although it is quite easy to make a rotational motion in an imperfect fluid, and in fact difficult not to do it, yet of late years a very interesting and valuable discovery has been made by Professor Hele-Shaw, of a method of creating and rendering visible a motion in an imperfect liquid like water, which is irrotational. This discovery was that, if water is made to flow in a thin sheet between two plates, say of flat glass, not more than a fiftieth of an inch or so apart, the motion of the water is exactly that of a perfect fluid, and is irrotational. No matter what objects may be placed in the path of the water, it then flows round them just as if all fluid friction or viscosity was absent.

Note: Some smokers can blow these smoke rings from their mouth, and they may sometimes be seen when a gun is fired with black old-fashioned gunpowder, or from engine-funnels.

This interesting fact can be shown by means of an apparatus designed by Professor Hele-Shaw. Two glass plates are held in a frame, and separated by a very small distance. By means of an inlet-pipe water is caused to flow between the plates. A metal block pierced with small holes is attached to the end of one plate, and this serves to introduce several small jets of coloured water into the main sheet. In constructing the apparatus great care has to be exercised to make the holes in the above-mentioned block very small (not more than ¹⁄₁₀₀ inch in diameter) and placed exactly at the right slope.

Note: For details and illustrations of these researches, the reader is referred to papers by Professor H. S. Hele-Shaw, entitled, “Investigation of the Nature of Surface-resistance of Water, and of Stream-line Motion under Experimental Conditions,” Proceedings of the Institution of Naval Architects, July, 1897, and March, 1898. A convenient apparatus for exhibiting these experiments in lectures has been designed by Professor Hele-Shaw, and is manufactured by the Imperial Engineering Company, Pembroke Place, Liverpool.

The main water inlet-pipe is connected by a rubber tube with a cistern of water placed about 4 feet above the level of the apparatus. The frame and glass plates are held vertically in the field of an optical lantern so as to project an image of the plates upon the screen. The side inlet-pipe leading to the pierced metal block is connected to another reservoir of water, coloured purple with permanganate of potash (Condy’s fluid), and the flow of both streams of water controlled by taps. The clear water is first allowed to flow down between the plates, so as to exclude all air-bubbles, and create a thin film of flowing water between two glass plates. The jets of coloured water are then introduced, and, after a little adjustment, we shall see that the coloured water flows down in narrow, parallel streams, not mixing with the clear water, and not showing any trace of eddies. The regularity of these streams of coloured water, and their sharp definition, shows that the liquid flow between the plates is altogether irrotational.

The lines marked out by the coloured water are called stream-lines, and they cut up the whole space into uniform tubes of flow. The characteristic of this flow of liquid is that the clear water in the space between two coloured streams of water never passes over into an adjacent tube. Hence we can divide up the whole sheet of liquid into tubular spaces called tubes of flow, by lines called stream-lines.

If now we dismount the apparatus and place between the glass a thin piece of indiarubber sheet—cut, say, into the shape of a ship, and of such thickness that it fills up the space between the glass plates—we shall be able to observe how the water flows round such an obstacle.

If the air is first driven out by the flow of the clear water, and then if the jets of coloured water are introduced, we see that the lines of liquid flow are delineated by coloured streams or narrow bands, and that these stream-lines bend round and enclose the obstructing object.

The space all round the ship-shaped solid body is thus cut up into tubes of flow by stream-lines, but these tubes of flow are now no longer straight, and no longer of equal width at all points.

They are narrower opposite the middle part of the obstruction than near either end.

[Figure 28]

At this point we must make a digression to explain a fundamental law concerning fluid flow in tubes. Suppose we have a uniform horizontal metal tube, through which water is flowing (see Fig. 28). At various points along the tube let vertical glass pipes be inserted to act as gauge or pressure-tubes. Then when the fluid flows along the horizontal pipe it will stand up a certain height in each pressure-tube, and this height will be a measure of the pressure in the horizontal pipe at the point where the pressure-tube is inserted. We shall notice that when the water flows in the horizontal pipe, the water in the gauge-pipes stands at different heights, indicating a fall in pressure along the horizontal pipe. We also notice that a line joining the tops of all the liquid columns in the pressure-pipes is a straight, sloping line, which is called the hydraulic gradient. This experiment proves to us that when fluid flows along a uniform-sectioned pipe there is a uniform fall or decrease in pressure along the pipe. The force which is driving the liquid along the horizontal pipe is measured by the difference between the pressures at its extreme ends, and the same is true of any selected length of the horizontal pipe.

It will also be clear that, since water is not compressible to any but the very slightest extent, the quantity of water, reckoned, say in gallons, which passes per minute across any section of the pipe must be the same.

[Figure 29]

In the next place, suppose we cause water to flow through a tube which is narrower in some places than in others (see Fig. 29). It will be readily admitted that in this tube also the same quantity of water will flow across every section, wide or narrow, of the tube. If, however, we ask—Where, in this case, will there be the greatest pressure? it is certain that most persons would reply—In the narrow portions of the tube. They would think that the water-particles passing through the tube resemble a crowd of people passing along a street which is constricted in some places like the Strand. The crowd would be most tightly squeezed together, and the pressure of people would therefore be greater, in the narrow portions of the street. In the case of the water flowing through the tube of variable section this, however, is not the case. So far from the pressure being greatest in the narrow portions of the tube, it can be shown experimentally that it is precisely at those places it is least.

This can be demonstrated by the tube shown in Fig. 29. If water is allowed to flow through a tube constricted in some places, and provided with glass gauge-pipes at various points to indicate the pressure in the pipe at those places, it is found that the pressure, as indicated by the height of the water in the gauge-glasses at the narrow parts of the tube, is less than that which it would have at those places if the tube were of uniform section and length, and passed the same quantity of water. We can formulate this fact under a general law which controls fluid motion also in other cases, viz. that where the velocity of the liquid is greatest, there the pressure is least. It is evident, since the tube is wider in some places than in others, and as a practically incompressible liquid is being passed through it, that the speed of the liquid must be greater in the narrow portions of the tube than in the wider ones. But experiment shows that after allowing for what may be called the proper hydraulic gradient of the tube, the pressure is least in those places, viz. the constricted portions, where the velocity of the liquid is greatest. This general principle is of wide application in the science of hydraulics, and it serves to enable us to interpret aright many perplexing facts met with in physics.
