We can, in the next place, gather together the various facts concerning fluid flow which have been explained above, and apply them to elucidate the problems raised by the passage through water of a ship or a fish.

Let us consider, in the first place, a body totally submerged, such as a fish, a torpedo or a submarine boat, and discuss the question why a resistance is experienced when an attempt is made to drag or push such a body through water. The old-fashioned notion was that the water has to be pushed out of the way to make room for the fish to move forward, and also has to be sucked in to fill up the cavity left behind. Most persons who have not been instructed in the subject, perhaps even now have the idea that this so-called “head resistance” is the chief cause of the resistance experienced when we make a body of any shape move through water. A common assumption is also that the object of making a ship’s bows sharp is that they may cut into the water like a wedge, and more easily push it out of the way. Scientific investigation has, however, shown that both of these notions are erroneous. The resistance felt in pulling or pushing a boat through the water is not due to resistance offered by the water in virtue of its inertia. No part of this resistance arises from the exertion required to displace the water or push it out of the way.

The Schoolmen of the Middle Ages used to discuss the question how it was that a fish could move through the water. They said the fish could not move until the water got out of the way, and the water could not get out of the way until the fish moved. This and similar perplexities were not removed until the true theory of the motion of a solid through a liquid had been developed.

Briefly it may be said that there are three causes, and only three, for the resistance which we feel and have to overcome when we attempt to drag a boat or ship through the water. These are: First, skin friction, due to the friction between the ship-surface and the water; secondly, eddy-resistance, due to the energy lost or taken up in making water eddies; and thirdly, wave-resistance, due to energy taken up in making surface-waves. The skin friction and the eddy-resistance both arise from the fact that water is not a perfect fluid. The wave-resistance arises, as we shall show, from the unavoidable formation of waves by the motion of the boat through the water.

In the case of a wholly submerged body, like a fish, the only resistance it has to overcome is due to the first two causes. The fish, progressing through the water wholly under the surface, makes no waves, but the water adheres to its skin, and there is friction between them as he moves. Also he creates eddies in the water, which require energy to produce them, and whenever mechanical work has to be done, as energy drawn off from a moving body, this implies the existence of a resistance to its motion which has to be overcome.

Accordingly Nature, economical on all occasions in energy expenditure, has fashioned the fish so as to reduce the power it has to expend in moving through water as much as possible. The fish has a smooth slippery skin. (We say “as slippery as an eel.”) It is not covered either with fur or feathers, but with shiny scales, so as to reduce to a minimum the skin friction. The fish also is regular and smooth in outline. It has no long ears, square shoulders, or projecting limbs or organs, which by giving it an irregular outline, would tend to produce eddies in the water as it moves along. Hence, when we wish to design a body to move quickly under the water, we must imitate in these respects the structure of a fish. Accordingly, a Whitehead torpedo, that deadly instrument employed in naval warfare, is made smooth and fish-shaped, and a submarine boat is made cigar-shaped and as smooth as possible, for the same reason.

If the floating object is partly above the surface, yet nevertheless, as far as concerns the portion submerged, there is skin friction, and the production of eddy-resistance. Hence, in the construction of a racing-yacht, the greatest care has to be taken to make its surface below water of polished metal or varnished wood, or other very smooth material, to diminish as far as possible the skin friction. In the case of bodies as regular in outline as a ship or fish, the proportion of the driving power taken up in making eddies in the water is not large, and we may, without sensible error, say that in their case the whole resistance to motion is comprised under the two heads of skin friction and wave-making resistance. The proportion which these two causes bear to each other will depend upon the nature of the surface of the body which moves over the water, and its shape and speed.

At this point we may pause to notice that, if we could obtain a perfect fluid in practice, it would be found that an object of any shape wholly submerged in the fluid could be moved about in any way without experiencing the least resistance. This theoretical deduction is, at first sight, so opposed to ordinary preconceived notions on the subject, that it deserves a little attention. It is difficult, as already remarked, for most people who have not carefully studied the subject, to rid their minds of the idea that there is a resistance to the motion of a solid through a liquid arising from the effort required to push the liquid out of the way. But this notion is, as already explained, entirely erroneous.

In the light of the stream-line theory of liquid motion, it is easy to prove, however, the truth of the above statement.

Let us begin by supposing that a solid body of regular and symmetrical shape, say of an oval form (see Fig. 30), is moved through a fluid destitute of all stickiness or viscosity, which therefore does not adhere to the solid. Then, if the solid is wholly submerged in this fluid, the mutual action of the liquid and the solid will be the same, whether we suppose the liquid to be at rest and the solid to move through it, or the solid body to be at rest and the liquid to flow past it.

[Figure 30]

[Figure 31]

If, then, we suppose the perfect fluid to flow round the obstacle, it will distribute itself in a certain manner, and its motion can be delineated by stream-lines. There will be no eddies or rotations, because the liquid is by assumption perfect. Consider now any two adjacent stream-lines (see Fig. 31). These define a tube of flow, represented by the shaded portion, which is narrower in the middle than at the ends. Hence the liquid, which we shall suppose also to be incompressible, must flow faster when going past the middle of the obstacle where the stream-tubes are narrow, than at the ends where the stream-tubes are wider.

By the principle already explained, it will be clear that the pressure of the fluid will therefore be less in the narrow portion of the stream-tube, and from the perfect symmetry of the stream-lines it is evident there will be greater and equal pressures at the two ends of the immersed solid. The flow of the liquid past the solid subjects it, in fact, to a number of equal and balanced pressures at the two ends which exactly equilibrate each other. It is not quite so easy to see at once that if the solid body is not symmetrical in shape the same thing is true, but it can be established by a strict line of reasoning. The result is to show that when a solid of any shape is immersed in a perfect liquid, it cannot be moved by the liquid flowing past it, and correspondingly would not require any force to move it against and through the liquid. In short, there is no resistance to the motion of a solid of any shape when pulled through a perfect or frictionless liquid. When dealing with real liquids not entirely free from viscosity, such resistance as does exist is due, as already mentioned, to skin friction and eddy formation. In the next place, leaving the consideration of the movement of wholly submerged bodies through liquids whether perfect or imperfect, we shall proceed to discuss the important question of the resistance offered by water to the motion through it of a floating object, such as a ship or swan. We have in this case to take into consideration the wave-making properties of the floating solid.

We have already pointed out that to make a wave on water requires an expenditure of energy or the performance of mechanical work. If a wave is made and travels away over water, it carries with it energy, and hence it can only be created if we have a store of energy to draw upon. If we suppose that skin friction is absent, and that the ship floats upon a perfect fluid, it would nevertheless be true that, if the moving object creates waves, it will thereby reduce its own movement and require the application of force to it to keep it going. We may say therefore that if any floating object creates waves on a liquid over which it moves, these waves rob the floating body of some of its energy of motion. The creation of the waves will bring it to rest in time, unless it is continually urged forward by some external and impressed force, and wave-generation is a reason for a part at least of the resistance we experience when we attempt to push it along.

Accordingly, one element in the problem of designing a ship is that of finding a form which will make as little wave-disturbance as possible in moving over the liquid. It is comparatively easy to find a shape for a floating solid which shall make a considerable wave-disturbance on the water when it is pulled over it, but it is not quite so easy to design a shape which will not make waves, or make but very small ones.

If we look carefully at a yacht gliding along before a fresh breeze on a sea or lake surface which is not much ruffled by other waves, it is possible to discover that a ship, when going through the water, creates four distinct systems of waves. Two of these are very easy to see, and two are more difficult to identify. These wave-systems are called respectively the oblique bow and stern waves, and the transverse and rear waves. We shall examine each system in turn.

The most important and easily observed of the four sets of waves is the oblique bow wave. It is most easily seen when a boy’s boat skims over the surface of a pond, and readily observed whenever we see a duck paddling along on the water. Let any one look, for instance, at a duck swimming on a pond. He will see two trains of little waves or ripples, which are inclined at an angle to the direction of the duck’s line of motion. Both trains are made up of a number of short waves, each of which extends beyond or overlaps its neighbour (see Fig. 32).

[Figure 32]

Hence, from a common French word, these waves have been called echelon waves, and we shall so speak of them.

Note: The French word échelon means a step-ladder-like arrangement; but it is usually applied to an arrangement of rows of objects when each row extends a little beyond its neighbour. Soldiers are said to march in echelon when the ranks of men are so ordered.

[Figure 33]

On looking at a boy’s model yacht in motion on the water, the same system of waves will be seen; and on looking at any real yacht or steamer in motion on smooth water, they are quite easily identified (see Fig. 33).

The complete explanation of the formation of these bow or echelon waves is difficult to follow, but in a general way their formation can be thus explained: Suppose we have a flat piece of wood, which is held upright in water, and to which we give a sudden push. We shall notice that, in consequence of the inertia of the liquid, it starts a wave which travels away at a certain speed over the surface of the water. The sudden movement of the wood elevates the water just in front of it, and this displacement forms the crest of a wave which is then handed on or propagated along the surrounding water-surface. If two pieces of wood are fastened together obliquely, as in Fig. 34, and held in water partly submerged, we shall find that when this wood is suddenly thrust forward like a wedge, it starts two oblique waves which move off parallel to the inclined wooden sides. The bows of a ship, roughly speaking, form such a wedge.

[Figure 34]

Hence, if we consider this wedge or the bows of a ship to be placed in still water and then pushed suddenly forward, they will start two inclined waves, which will move off parallel to themselves.

If we then consider the wedge to leap forward and repeat the process, two more inclined waves will be formed in front of the first; and again we may suppose the process repeated, and a third pair of waves formed. The different positions of the ship’s bows are shown in the diagram at 1, 2, and 3 in Fig. 35; and c, e, and f are the three corresponding sets of echeloned waves. For the sake of simplicity, the waves are shown on one side only. If, then, we imagine the ship to move uniformly forwards, its bows are always producing new inclined waves, which move with it, and it is always, so to speak, leaving the old ones behind. All these echelon waves produced by the bow of the ship are included within two sloping lines which each make with the direction of the ship’s line of movement, an angle of 19° 28´. This angle can be thus set off: Draw a circle (see Fig. 36), and produce the diameter BC of this circle for a distance, CA, equal to its own length. From the end A of the produced diameter draw a pair of lines, AD, AD′, called tangents, to touch the circle. Then each of these lines will make an angle of 19° 28´ with the diameter. If we suppose a ship-to be placed at the point marked A in the diagram (see Fig. 36), all the echelon waves it makes will be included within these lines AD, AD′.

Note: See Lord Kelvin on “Ship Waves,” Popular Lectures, vol. iii. p. 482.

[Figure 35]

Moreover, the angle of the lines will not alter, whether the ship goes fast or slow. This is easily seen in the case of a duck swimming on a lake. Throw bits of bread to a duck so as to induce it to swim faster or slower, and notice the system of inclined or echelon ripples made by the duck’s body as it swims. It will be seen that the angle at which the two lines, including both the trains of echelon ripples meet each other is not altered as the duck changes its speed.

[Figure 36]

This echelon system of inclined waves is really only a part of a system of waves which is completed by a transverse group in the rear of the vessel. A drawing has been given by Lord Kelvin, in his lecture on “Ship Waves,” of the complete system of these waves, part of which is as represented by the firm lines in Fig. 37. This complete system is difficult to see in the case of a real ship moving over the water. The inclined rear system of waves can sometimes be well seen from the deck of a lake steamer, such as those on the large Swiss or Italian lakes, and may sometimes be photographed in a snap-shot taken of a boy’s yacht skimming along on a pond.

[Figure 37]

In addition to the inclined bow waves, there is a similar system produced by the stern of a vessel, which is, however, much more difficult to detect. The other two wave-systems produced by a ship are generally called the transverse waves. There is a system of waves whose crest-lines are at right angles to the ship, and they may be seen in profile against the side of any ship or yacht as it moves along. These transverse waves are really due to the unequal pressures resulting from the distribution of the stream-lines delineating the movement of the water past the ship.
