If we return again to the consideration of the flow of a perfect fluid round an ovoid body, it will be remembered that it was shown that, in consequence of the fact that the stream-lines are wider apart near the bow and stern than they are opposite the middle part of the body, the pressure in the fluid was greater near the bow and stern than at the middle. When a body is not wholly submerged, but floats on the surface as does a ship, these excess pressures at the bow and stern reveal themselves by forcing up the water-surface opposite the ends of the vessel and lowering it opposite the middle. This may be seen on looking at any yacht in profile as it sails. The yacht appears to rest on two cross-waves, one at the bow and one at the stern, and midships the water is depressed (see Fig. 38).

[Figure 38]

These waves move with the yacht. If the ship is a long one, then each of these waves gives rise to a wave-train; and on looking at a long ship in motion, it will be seen that, in addition to the inclined bow wave-system, there is a series of waves which are seen in profile against the hull.

[Figure 39]

When a ship goes at a very high speed, as in the case of torpedo-boat destroyers, the bow of the vessel is generally forced right up on to the top of the front transverse waves, and the boat moves along with its nose entirely out of water (see Fig. 39). In fact, the boat is, so to speak, always going uphill, with its bows resting on the side of a wave which advances with it, and its stern followed by another wave, whilst behind it is left a continually lengthening trail of waves, which are produced by those which move with the boat.

The best way to see all these different groups of ship-waves is to tow a rather large model ship without masts or sails—in fact, a mere hulk—over smooth water in a canal or lake. Let one person carry a rather long pole, to the end of which a string is tied; and by means of the string let the model ship be pulled through the water. Let this person run along the banks of the canal or lake, and tow the ship steadily through the water as far as possible at a constant speed. Let another person, provided with a hand camera, be rowed in a boat after the model, and keep a few yards behind. The second observer will be able to photograph the system of ship-waves made by the model, and secure various photographs when the model ship is towed at different rates. The echelon and transverse waves should then be clearly visible, and if the water is smooth and the light good, it is not difficult to secure many useful photographs.

By throwing bits of bread to ducks and swans disporting themselves on still water, they also may be induced to take active exercise in the right direction, and expose themselves and the waves or ripples that they make to the lens of a hand camera or pocket kodak. From a collection of snap-shot photographs of these objects the young investigator will learn much about the form of the waves made by ships, and will see that they are a necessary accompaniment of the movement of every floating object on water. By conducting experiments of the above kind under such conditions as will enable the exact speed of the model to be determined, and the resistance it experiences in moving through the water, information has been accumulated of the utmost value to shipbuilders.

Our scientific knowledge of the laws of ship-resistance we owe chiefly to the labours of two great engineers, Mr. Scott Russell and Mr. William Froude. Mr. Froude’s work was begun privately at Torquay about the year 1870, and was subsequently continued by him for the British Admiralty. Mr. Froude was the first to show the value and utility of experiments made with model ships dragged through the water. He constructed at Torquay an experiment tank about 200 feet in length, which was a sort of covered swimming-bath, and he employed for his experiments model ships made of wood or paraffin wax, the latter being chosen because the model could be so easily cut to the desired shape, and all the chips and the model itself could be melted up and used over again for subsequent experiments. Without detailing in historic order his discoveries, suffice it to say that, as the outcome of his work, Mr. Froude was able to state two very important laws which relate to the relative resistance experienced when two models of different sizes are dragged through the water at different speeds.

The first of these relates to what is called the “corresponding speeds.” Suppose we have a real ship 250 feet long, and we make an exact model of this ship 10 feet long, then the ship is twenty-five times longer than the model. Mr. Froude’s law of corresponding speeds is as follows:—

If the above model and the ship are both made to move over still water, the ship going five times as fast as the model, the system of waves made by the model will exactly reproduce on a smaller scale the system of waves made by the ship. In other words, if we were to take a couple of photographs, one of the ship going at 20 miles an hour, and one of the model one twenty-fifth of its size going at 4 miles an hour, and reduce the two photographs to the same size, they would be exactly alike in every detail.

Expressed in more precise language, the first law of Froude is as follows: When a ship and a model of it move through smooth water at such speeds that the speed of the ship is to the speed of the model as the square root of the length of the ship is to the square root of the length of the model, then these speeds are called “corresponding speeds.” At corresponding speeds the wave-making power of the model resembles that of the ship on a reduced scale. If we call L and l the lengths of the ship and the model, and S and s the speeds of the ship and the model, then we have—

      _S_/_s_ = √(_L_/_l_)

where S and s are called corresponding speeds.

Mr. Froude then established a second law of equal importance, relating to that part of the whole resistance due to wave-making experienced by a ship and a model, or by two models when moving at corresponding speeds.

Mr. Froude’s second law is as follows: If a ship and a model are moving at “corresponding speeds,” then the resistances to motion due to wave-making are proportional to the cube of their lengths. To employ the example given above, let the ship be 250 feet long and the model 10 feet long, then, as we have seen, the corresponding speeds are as 5 to 1, since the lengths are as 25 to 1. If, therefore, the ship is made to move at 20 miles an hour, and the model at 4 miles an hour, the resistance experienced by the ship due to wave-making is to that experienced by the model as the cube of 25 is to the cube of 1, or in ratio of 15,625 to 1. In symbols the second law may be expressed thus: Let R be the resistance due to wave-making experienced by the ship, and r that of the model when moving at corresponding speeds, and let L and l be their lengths as before; then—

      _R_/_r_ = _L_^3/_l_^3

Before these laws could be applied in the design of real ships, it was necessary to make experiments to ascertain the skin friction of different kinds of surfaces when moving through water at various speeds.

Mr. Froude’s experiments on this point were very extensive. For example, he showed that the skin friction of a clean copper surface such as forms the sheathing of a ship may be taken to be about one quarter of a pound per square foot of wetted surface when moving at 600 feet a minute. This is equivalent to saying that a surface of 4 square feet of copper moved through water at the rate of 10 feet a second experiences a resisting force equal to the weight of 1 lb. due entirely to skin friction. Very roughly speaking, this skin resistance increases as the square of the speed. Thus at 20 feet per second the skin friction of a surface of 4 square feet of copper would be 4 lbs., and at 30 feet per second it would be 9 lbs. Any roughness of the copper surface, however, greatly increases the skin friction, and in the case of a ship the accumulation of barnacles on the copper sheathing has an immense effect in lowering the speed of the vessel by increasing the skin friction. Hence the necessity for periodically cleaning the ship’s bottom by scraping off these clinging growths of seaweed and barnacles.

Note: More accurately, as the 1·83 power of the speed.

Mr. Froude also made many experiments on surfaces of paraffin wax, because of this material his ship models were made. It may suffice to say that the skin friction in this case, in fresh water, is such that a surface of 6 square feet of paraffin wax, moving at a speed of 400 feet per minute, would experience resistance equal to the weight of 1 lb. There are, however, certain corrections which have to be applied in practice to these rules, depending upon the length of the immersed surface. The mean speed of the water past the model or ship-surface depends on the form of the stream-lines next to it, and it has already been shown that the velocity of the water next to the ship is not the same at all points of the ship-surface. It is greater near the centre than at the ends. Hence the longer the model, the less is the mean resistance per square foot of wetted surface due to skin friction when the model is moved at some constant speed through the water.

The above explanations will, however, be sufficient to enable the reader to understand in a general way the problem to be solved in designing a ship, especially one intended to be moved by steam-power.

If a shipbuilder accepts a contract to build a steamer—say a passenger-steamer for cross-Channel services—he is put under obligation to provide a ship capable of travelling at a stated speed. Thus, for instance, he may undertake to guarantee that the steamer shall be able to do 20 knots in smooth water. In order to fulfil this contract he must be able to ascertain beforehand what engine-power to provide. For, if the engine-power is insufficient, he may fail to carry out his contract, and the ship may be returned on his hands. Or if he goes to the opposite extreme and supplies too large a margin of power, he may lose money on the job, or else he may again violate his contract by providing an engine and boiler too extravagant in fuel.

It is in solving the above kind of practical problem that Mr. Froude’s methods of experimenting with models in a tank are of such immense value. The first thing that the naval architect does in designing a ship is to prepare a series of drawings, showing the form of the hull of the vessel. From these drawings a model is constructed exactly to scale. In England, following Mr. Froude’s practice, these models are usually made of paraffin wax, about 12 or 14 feet long and 1 inch in thickness. In the United States wood is used. These models are constructed with elaborate care and by the aid of special machinery, and are generally 10 or 12 feet in length, and some proper fraction of the length of the real vessel they represent. The models are then placed in a tank and experiments are made, the object of which is to ascertain the force or “pull” required to drag the model through the water at various speeds.

The tank belonging to the British Admiralty is at Haslar, Gosport, near Portsmouth, and the experiments are now conducted there by Mr. E. Edmund Froude, who continues the scientific work and investigations of his distinguished father, Mr. William Froude. This Admiralty tank at Haslar is 400 feet in length. The well-known firm of shipbuilders, Messrs. Denny Bros., of Dumbarton, Scotland, have also a private experimental tank of the same kind. The Government of the United States of America have a similar tank at Washington, the Italian Government have one at Spezzia, and the Russian Admiralty has also made one. These tanks resemble large swimming-baths, which are roofed over (see Fig. 40).

[Figure 40]

]

Over the water-surface is arranged a pair of rails, on which runs a light carriage or platform. This carriage is drawn along by a rope attached to a steam-engine, which moves at a very uniform rate, and its speed can be exactly ascertained and automatically recorded. This moving carriage has a rod or lever depending from it, to which the model ship is attached. The pull on this rod is exactly registered on a moving strip of paper by very delicate recording mechanism. The experiment is conducted by placing the model at one end of the tank, and taking a run at known and constant speed to the other end. The experimentalist is thus able to discover the total resistance which it is necessary to overcome in pushing the model ship at a certain known speed through the water. The immersed surface of the model being measured and the necessary calculations made, he can then deduct from the total resistance the resistance due to skin friction, and the residue gives the resistance due to wave-making. Suppose, then, that the experiment has been performed with a model of a ship yet to be built, the run being taken at a “corresponding speed.” The observations will give the wave-making resistance of the model, and from Mr. Froude’s second law the wave-making resistance of the real ship is predicted. Adding to this the calculated skin-friction resistance of the real ship, we have the predetermined actual total ship-resistance at the stated speed. For the sake of giving precision to these ideas, it may be well to give an outline of the calculations for a real ship, as given in a pamphlet by Mr. Archibald Denny.

Note: “Practical Applications of Model Experiments to Merchant Ship Design,” by Mr. Archibald Denny, Engineering Conference, Institution of Civil Engineers, May 25, 1897.

The tank at the Leven shipyard, constructed by Messrs. Denny Bros. for their own experiments, is 300 feet long, 22 feet wide, and 10 feet deep, and contains 1500 tons of fresh water. At each end are two shallower parts which serve as docks for ballasting and trimming models. As an example of the use of the tank in predicting the power required to drive a ship of certain design through the water, Mr. A. Denny gives the following figures: The ship to be built was 240 feet in length, and from the drawings a model was constructed 12 feet in length, or one-twentieth the size.

It was then required to predetermine the power required to drive the ship through the water at a speed of 13¹⁄₂ knots. A knot, be it remarked, is a speed or velocity of 1 nautical mile an hour, or 6080 feet per hour. It will be seen that this is not far from 100 feet per minute.

By Froude’s first law, the corresponding speed for the 12-foot model is therefore—

      13¹⁄₂ × 6080/60 × √(12/240) = 306 feet per minute

The model was accordingly dragged through the tank at a speed of nearly 5 feet per second, and, after deducting from the total observed pull the resistance due to the calculated skin friction of the model, it was found that the resistance to the motion of the model at this speed due to wave-making was 1·08 lb. Hence, by Froude’s second law, the wave-making resistance of the ship was predetermined to be—

      1·08 × (240/12)^3 × 40/39 = 8850 lbs.

The last fraction 40/39 is a correcting factor in passing from fresh water to salt water.

The surface of the proposed ship was 10,280 square feet, and the skin friction was known to be 1·01 lb. per square foot at a speed of 13·5 knots. Hence the total skin resistance of the ship would be—

      10,280 × 1·01 × 40/39 = 10,620 lbs.

Adding to this, the 8850 lbs. for wave-making resistance, we have a total resistance of 19,470 lbs. predetermined as the total pressure required to be overcome in moving the ship at a speed of 13·5 knots. Hence, since 1 horse-power is defined to be a power which overcomes a resistance of 33,000 lbs. moved 1 foot per minute, it is easy to see that 19,470 lbs. overcome at a rate of 13·5 knots represents a power of—

      (19,470 × 13·5 × 6080)/(33,000 × 60) = 810 horse-power

But now, in the case of a screw-driven steamer, a part of the power is lost in merely churning up the water, and a part in internal frictional losses in the engine and screw-shaft.

It is not far from the truth to say that 50 per cent. of the applied engine-power is lost in useless water-churning. Hence, for the above steamer, an actual power of at least 1600 H.P. would have to be applied to the screw-shaft. To allow, however, for the loss of power in friction, and to allow a margin for emergencies, it would be usual to provide for such a steamer engines of at least 3000 indicated horse-power.

Each shipbuilder has, however, at call a mass of data which enable him, from actual measured mile trials, to determine the rates between the calculated driving horse-power and the indicated horse-power of the engines, and so enable him, in the light of experience, to provide in any new ship the exact amount of steam-power necessary to produce the required speed. As an instance of how accurately this can be done by the aid of the tank experiments, Mr. A. Denny gives an example drawn from experience in building the well-known paddle-steamers Princess Josephine and Princess Henriette for the Belgian Government Dover to Ostend fast mail-steamer service.
