Let us consider next the process of production of a very simple sound, such as an explosion. Suppose a small quantity of gun-cotton to be detonated. It causes a sound, and therefore an air wave. The process by which this wave is made is as follows: The explosion of the gun-cotton suddenly creates a large quantity of gas, which administers to the air a very violent outward push or blow. In consequence of the inertia of the air, it cannot respond everywhere instantly to this force. Hence a certain spherical layer of air is compressed into a smaller volume. This layer, however, almost immediately expands again, and in so doing it compresses the next outer layer of air and rarefies itself. Then, again, the second layer in expanding compresses a third, and so on.

Accordingly, a state of compression is handed on from layer to layer, and each state of compression is followed by one of rarefaction. The individual air-particles are caused to move to and fro in the direction of the radii of the sphere of which the source of explosion is the centre. Hence we have what is called a spherical longitudinal wave produced.

Each air-particle swings backwards and forwards in the line of propagation of the wave. The actual motion of each air-particle is exceedingly small.

The speed with which this zone of compression travels outwards, is called the velocity of the sound wave, and the extent to which each air-particle moves backwards and forwards is called the amplitude of the wave.

Suppose, in the next place, that instead of a merely transitory sound like an explosion, we have a continuous musical sound, we have to inquire what then will be the description of air-movement executed. The experiments shown already will have convinced you that, in the case of a musical sound, each air-particle must repeat the same kind of motion again and again.

The precise nature of the displacement can be best illustrated by the use of two models. Before you is placed a frame to which are slung a series of golf-balls suspended by threads (see Fig. 4, Chapter I.). Between each pair of balls there is a spiral brass spring, which elastically resists both compression and extension. You will see that the row of balls and springs, therefore, has similar properties to the air. In virtue of the springs it resists compression and expansion, and in virtue of the mass or inertia of the balls any ball, if displaced and allowed to move back, overshoots its position of equilibrium because it persists in motion. The row of balls, therefore, resists extension and compression in consequence of the elasticity of the springs, and each ball persists in movement in consequence of the inertia of the ball.

If we then administer a little pat to the first ball, you will see a wave-motion run along the line of balls. Each ball in turn moves to and fro a little way, and its movement is handed on to its neighbours. We have here an example of a longitudinal wave-motion which resembles that of the air when it is traversed by a sound wave.

Another model which is of a more elaborate character shows us the sort of motion made in a tube when a sound wave due to a continuous musical sound is passing along it. It consists of a glass disc which is blackened, and has the paint removed along certain excentric circular lines. This disc is made to revolve in front of a wide slit in a piece of metal. By means of an optical lantern we project on to the screen an image of the slit, which you see is crossed by certain bright bars of light, crowded together at some places and more spaced apart at others. When the disc revolves, these bars of light each move to and fro successively, and the result is that the crowded place moves along, or is displaced.

A wave of compression is propagated along the slit, and the localities where the bars of light are compressed or expanded continually change their place. If we imagine the air in a tube to be divided into slices, represented by these bars of light, the motion of the model exactly represents the motion of the air in the tube when it is traversed by a series of sound waves.

The distance from one place of greatest compression to the next is called the wave-length of the sound wave. Hence, although a sound such as that of an explosion may consist in the propagation of a single layer of compression, the production of a continuous musical note involves the transference of a series of equidistant compressional zones, or waves.

These models will have assisted you, I trust, to form a clear idea of the nature of a sound wave in air. It is something very different, in fact, from a wave on the surface of water, but it is characterized by the same general qualities of wave-motion. It is a state of longitudinal periodic motion in a row of particles, which is handed on from one to another. Each particle of air oscillates in the line of propagation of the wave, and moves a little way backwards and forwards on either side of its undisturbed position.

It will be seen, therefore, that a solitary sound wave is a state of air-compression which travels along in the otherwise stationary air. The air is squeezed more tightly together in a certain region, and successive layers of air take up this condition. In the case of water-surface waves the wave is a region of elevation at which the water is raised above the general or average level, and this elevated region is transferred from place to place on otherwise stationary water. In the case of an air-wave train we have similar regions of compression following each other at distances, it may be, of a fraction of an inch or of several feet.

Thus in the case of ordinary speech or song, the waves are from 2 to 8 feet in length, that is, from one compressed region to the next. In the case of a whistle, the wave-length may be 1 or 2 inches, whilst the deepest note of an organ produces a sound of which the wave-length is about 32 feet.

As in every other instance of wave-motion, air waves may differ from each other in three respects. First, in wave-length; secondly, in amplitude; and thirdly, in wave-form. The first determines what we call the tone, i.e. whether the sound is high or low, treble or bass; the second determines the intensity of the sound, whether faint or loud; and the third determines its quality, or, as the Germans expressively call it, the sound-colour (Klangfarbe).

We recognize at once a difference between the sound of a vowel, say ah, sung by different persons to the same note of the piano and with the same loudness. There is a personal element, an individuality, about voices which at once arrests our attention, apart altogether from the tone or loudness. This sound-quality is determined by the form of the wave-motion, that is, by the nature of the movement of the air-particle during its little excursion to and fro in which it takes part in producing a zone of compression or rarefaction in the air and so forms a sound wave.

We have next to discuss the speed with which this air-compression is propagated through the air. Every one knows that it is not instantaneous. We see the flash of a gun at a distance, and a second or so afterwards we hear the bang. We notice that the thunder is heard often long after the lightning flash is seen. It would take too long to describe the experiments which have been made to determine precisely the speed of sound waves. Suffice it to say that all the best experiments show that the velocity of a sound wave in air, at the temperature of melting ice, or at 0° C.  32° Fahr., is very nearly 1087 feet per second, or 33,136 centimetres per second. This is equivalent to 741 miles per hour, or more than ten times the speed of an express train. At this rate a sound wave would take 4 hours to cross the Atlantic Ocean, 16 hours to go half round the world or to the antipodes, and some 2 minutes to cross from Dover to Calais.

An opportunity of observing this speed of sound waves on a gigantic scale occurred about 20 years ago on the occasion of a great volcanic eruption near Java. If you open the map of Asia and look for Java and Sumatra in the Asiatic Archipelago, you will easily find the Sunda Strait, and on a good map you will see a small island marked called Krakatoa. This island possesses, or rather did possess, a volcano which, until the year 1883, had not been known to be in eruption. In that year, however, it again burst into activity, and after preliminary warnings a final stupendous outburst occurred on August 27, 1883. The roar of this volcanic explosion was probably the loudest noise ever heard upon this earth. The pent-up volcanic gases and vapours burst forth from some subterranean prison with such appalling power that they created an air wave which not only encircled the earth, but reverberated to and fro seven times before it finally faded away. The zone of compressed air forming the mighty air wave as it passed from point to point on the earth’s surface, caused an increase of atmospheric pressure which left its record on all the self-registering barometers, and thus enabled its steps to be traced. A diligent examination of these records, as collected in a celebrated Report of the Royal Society upon the Eruption of Krakatoa, showed exactly the manner in which this great air wave expanded. Starting from Krakatoa at 10 a.m. on the 27th of August, 1883, the air wave sped outwards in a circle of ever-increasing diameter until, by 7 p.m. on the same day, or 9 hours later, it formed a girdle embracing the whole world. This stupendous circular air wave, 24,000 miles in circumference, then contracted again, and in 9 hours more had condensed itself at a point in the northern region of South America, which is the antipodes of Krakatoa. It then rebounded, and, expanding once more, just like a water wave reflected from the side of a circular trough, returned on its own steps, so that 36 hours afterwards it had again reached the point from whence it set out. Again and again it performed the same double journey, but each time weaker than before, until, after seven times, the echoes of this mighty air wave had completely died away. This is no fancy picture, but a sober record of fact obtained from the infallible records of self-registering air-pressure-measuring instruments. But we have evidence that the actual sound of the explosion was heard, 4 hours after it happened, on the other side of the Indian Ocean, by human ears, and we have in this an instance of the measurement of the velocity of sound on the largest scale on which it was ever made.

There are many curious and interesting facts connected with the transmission of a sound wave through air, affecting the distance at which sounds can be heard. The speed of sound in air is much influenced by the temperature of the air and by wind.

The speed of sound increases with the temperature. For every degree Fahrenheit above the melting-point of ice (32° Fahr.) the speed is increased by one foot per second. A more accurate rule is as follows: Take the temperature of the air in degrees Centigrade, and add to this number 273. In other words, obtain the value of 273 + t° where t° is the temperature of the air. Then the velocity of sound in feet per second at this temperature is equal to the value of the expression—

      1090√((273 + _t°_)/273)

There is one point in connection with the velocity of propagation of a sound wave which should not be left without elucidation. It has been explained that the velocity of a wave in any medium is numerically given by the number obtained by dividing the square root of the elasticity of the medium by the square root of its density. The number representing the elasticity of a gas is numerically the same as that representing its absolute pressure per square unit of surface. The volume elasticity of the air may therefore be measured by the absolute pressure it exerts on a unit of area such as 1 square foot. At the earth’s surface the pressure of the air at 0° C. is equal to about 2116·4 lbs. per square foot. The absolute unit of force in mechanics is that force which communicates a velocity of 1 foot per second to a mass of 1 lb. after acting upon it for 1 second. If we allow a mass of 1 lb. to fall from rest under the action of gravity at the earth’s surface, it acquires after 1 second a velocity of 32·2 feet per second. Hence the force usually called “a pressure of 1 lb.” is equal to 32·2 absolute units of force. Accordingly, the atmospheric pressure at the earth’s surface is 2116·4 × 32·2  68,148 absolute units of force in that system of measurement in which the foot, pound, and second are the fundamental units.

The absolute density of the air is the mass of 1 cubic foot: 13 cubic feet of air at the freezing-point, and when the barometer stands at 30 inches, weigh nearly 1 lb. More exactly, 1 cubic foot of air under these conditions weighs 0·080728 lb. avoirdupois. If, then, we divide the number representing the absolute pressure of the air by the number representing the absolute density of air, we obtain the quotient 844,168; and if we take the square root of this, we obtain the number 912·6.

The above calculation was made first by Newton; and he was unable to explain how it was that the velocity of the air wave, calculated in the above manner from the general formula for wave-speed, gave a value for the velocity, viz. 912·6, which was so much less than the observed velocity of sound, viz. 1090 feet per second at 0° C. The true explanation of this difference was first given by the celebrated French mathematician Laplace. He pointed out that in air, as in all other gases, the elasticity, when it is compressed slowly, is less than that when it is compressed quickly. A gas, when compressed, is heated, and if we give this heat time to escape, the gas resists the compression less than if the heat stays in it. Hence air is a little more resilient to a very sudden compression than to a slow one. Laplace showed that the ratio of the elasticity under sudden compression was to that under slow compression in the same ratio as the quantities of heat required to raise a unit mass of air 1° C. under constant pressure and under constant volume. This ratio is called “the ratio of the two specific heats,” and is a number close to 1·41. Hence the velocity, as calculated above, must be corrected by multiplying the number 844,168 by the number 1·41, and then taking the square root of the product. When this calculation is made, we obtain, as a result, the number 1091, which is exactly the observed value of the velocity of sound in feet per second at 0° C. and under atmospheric pressure. The velocity of sound is much affected by wind or movement of the air. Sound travels faster with the wind than against it. Hence the presence of wind distorts the shape of the sound wave by making portions of it travel faster or slower than the rest.

These two facts explain how it happens that loud sounds are sometimes heard at great distances from the source, but not heard at places close by.
