[Figure 47]

Consider the case of a loud sound made near the surface of the earth. If the air were all at rest, and everywhere at the same temperature, the sound waves should spread out in hemispherical form. But if, as is generally the case, the temperature near the ground is higher than it is up above, then the part of the wave near the earth travels more quickly than that in the higher regions of the air. It follows that the sound wave will have its direction altered, and instead of proceeding near the earth in a direction parallel to the ground, it will be elevated, so as to strike in an upward direction. Again, it may be brought down by meeting with a current of air which blows against the lower portion and so retards that to a greater extent than it does the upper part. So it comes to pass that a sound wave may, as it were, “play leap-frog” over a certain district, being lifted up and then let down again; and persons in that region will not hear the sound, although others further off will do so. A very striking instance of this occurred on the occasion of the funeral procession of our late beloved Queen Victoria of blessed memory. The body was conveyed across the Solent on February 1, 1901, between lines of battleships which fired salutes with big guns. Arrangements were made to determine the greatest distance the sound of these guns was heard. In a very interesting article in Knowledge for June, 1901, Dr. C. Davison has collected the results of observation from eighty-four places, some of which are indicated in the map (see Fig. 47), taken, by kind permission of the editor of Knowledge, from that journal. Observations were received from places as far distant as Alderton (Suffolk), 139 miles from the Solent. At several places the sound of the guns was loud enough to make windows shake. This occurred at Longfield (56 miles), Sutton (58 miles), and Richmond Hill (61 miles). But whilst there is clear evidence that the sound of the guns was heard even at Peterborough (125 miles), most curious to say, the sound was hardly heard at all in the neighbourhood of the Solent. The nearest place from which any record was received was Horley, in Surrey (50 miles). Hence it appears evident that the sound was lifted up soon after leaving the Solent, and passed right over the heads of observers near, travelling in the higher air for a considerable distance, probably 40 or 50 miles, and was then deflected down again, and reached observers on the earth’s surface at much greater distances. An examination of the wind-charts for that day makes it tolerably clear that this was due to the manner in which the wind was blowing at the time. Dr. Davison, loc. cit., says—

“Now, on February 1, the wind at places to the west of Spithead was generally light, and from the west or nearly so, though near Lyndhurst there was a fresh breeze from about W.N.W. or N.W. At Portsmouth, again, the wind is described as from the shore. On the other hand, many of my correspondents at great distances from Spithead state that the wind, when sensible, was southerly in direction. Thus the sound-rays were first of all refracted by contrary winds over the heads of observers between 10 and 45 miles, and were afterwards brought down again by favourable upper currents, so that the reports were clearly audible beyond 50 miles and up to 140 miles from Spithead, and were so loud at a distance of 84 miles that labourers in the fields put down their spades and listened.”

The same explanation has been given of the extraordinary differences that are found at various times in the distance at which lighthouse fog-horns are heard by ships at sea. There is in this case, however, another possible explanation, due to what is called interference of sound waves, the explanation of which will be given presently. The late Professor Tyndall, who was an authority on this subject, was of opinion that in some states of the atmosphere there existed what he called “acoustic opacity,” the air being non-uniform in temperature and moisture; and through this very irregular medium, sound waves, when passing, lost a great deal of their intensity by internal reflection, or eclipses, just as light is stopped when passing through a non-homogeneous medium like crushed ice or glass. At each surface a little of the light is wasted by irregular reflection, and so the medium, though composed of fragments of a transparent substance, is more or less opaque in the mass.

On the subject of sound-signals as coast-warnings, some exceedingly interesting information has recently been supplied by Mr. E. Price-Edwards (see Journal of the Society of Arts, vol. 50, p. 315, 1902). The Lighthouse Boards of different countries provide the means for making loud warning sounds at various lighthouses, as a substitute for the light when fog comes on. The distance at which these sounds can be heard, and the distance-traversing power of various kinds of sounds, have been the subject of elaborate investigations.

The instrument which has been found to be the most effective in producing very powerful sound waves is called a siren. It consists of a tube or horn, having at the bottom a fixed disc with slits in it. Outside this disc is another movable one which revolves against the first, and which also has slits in it. When the second disc revolves, the passage way into the horn is opened and closed intermittently and suddenly, as the slits in the discs coincide or not. Air or steam under a pressure of 10 to 40 lbs. on the square inch is blown into the horn, and the rapid interruption of this blast by the revolving slits causes it to be cut up into puffs which, when sufficiently frequent, give rise to a very loud sound. The air under pressure is admitted to a back chamber and awaits an opportunity to escape, and this is given to it when the revolving disc moves into such a position that the slits in the fixed and moving disc come opposite each other. In comparative trials of different sound-producing instruments, nothing has yet been found to surpass this siren as a producer of penetrating sounds.

It has been found very important that the frequency of the note given by the siren should coincide with the fundamental tone of the trumpet or horn. As will be explained in the next lecture, every column of air in a tube has a particular natural time-period of oscillation. Suppose, for instance, that for a certain length of trumpet-tube this is ¹⁄₁₀₀ second. Then the siren with that trumpet will be most effective if the interruptions of the air-blast are 100 per second.

Lord Rayleigh has also shown that the shape of the mouth of the trumpet is important, and that this should not be circular as usual, but elliptical or oval, the shortest diameter of the ellipse being one quarter of the longest one. Also that the mouth should occupy such a position that the longer axis is vertical. Moreover, he considers that the short axis of the oval should not exceed half the wave-length of the sound being emitted. With a trumpet-mouth of such a shape, the sound is prevented to some extent from being projected up and down, but diffused better laterally—a result which is desired in coast sound-signals.

The information accumulated as regards the distances at which sounds can be heard is very briefly as follows:—

First as regards wind. The direction of the wind has a most remarkable influence on the distance at which a given loud sound can be heard. In one instance, the noise of a siren was heard 20 miles in calm weather; whereas, with an opposing wind, it was not heard more than 1¹⁄₄ mile away.

It has been found that for calm weather a low-pitched note is better in carrying power than a high note, but in rough weather the opposite is the case.

One thing that has been noticed by all who have experimented with this subject is the curious occurrence of “areas of silence.” That is to say, a certain siren will be well heard close to its position. Then a little farther off the sound will be lost, but on going farther away still it is heard again.

Many theories have been advanced to account for this, but none are completely satisfactory. It is, however, a well-established effect, and one with which it behoves all mariners to be acquainted.

One curious fact is the very great power that can be absorbed in creating a loud siren note. Thus in one case, a siren giving a high note was found to absorb as much as 600 horse-power when the note was sounded continuously. The most striking and in one sense the most disappointing thing about these loud sounds is the small distance which they travel in certain states of the wind. As a general result, it has been found that the most effective sound for coast-warnings is one having a frequency of 100, or a wave-length of about 10 feet. When dealing with the subject of waves in general, it was pointed out that the velocity of a wave depended upon the elasticity and the density of the medium in which it was being propagated. In the case of a sound wave in air or any other gas, the speed of wave-transmission is proportional to the square root of the elasticity of the gas, and inversely proportional to the square root of the density.

At the same temperature the elasticity of a gas may be taken to be the same as its pressure. Hence, at the same pressure, the speed of sound-wave transmission through different gases varies inversely as the square root of their densities. An example will make this clear. If we take the density of hydrogen gas to be unity ( 1), then the density of oxygen is 16. The ratio of the densities is therefore 1 to 16, and the square roots of the densities are as √(1) to √(16), or as 1 to 4. Accordingly, the velocity of sound waves in hydrogen gas is to that in oxygen gas as 1 is to ¹⁄₄. In other words, sound travels four times faster in hydrogen than it does in oxygen at the same temperature and pressure. The following table shows the velocity of sound in different gases at the melting-point of ice ( 0° C.) and atmospheric pressure ( 760 mm. barometer).

                Gas.                     Velocity.
           Hydrogen                4163 feet per second
           Carbonic oxide          1106     ”      ”
           Air                     1090     ”      ”
           Oxygen                  1041     ”      ”
           Carbonic acid            856     ”      ”

Accordingly, we see that the lighter the gas the faster sound travels in it, pressure and temperature being the same. If the atmosphere we breathe consisted of hydrogen instead of a mixture of oxygen, nitrogen, and many other gases, a clap of thunder would follow a flash of lightning much more quickly than it does in our present air, supposing the storms to be at the same distance. Under present circumstances, if 20 seconds elapse between the flash and the peal, it indicates that the storm is about 4 miles away, but if the atmosphere were of hydrogen, for a storm at the same distance the thunder would follow the lightning in about 5 seconds.

Furnished with these facts about the propagation of air waves, it is now possible to point out some interesting consequences. It will be in your recollection that in the first chapter it was pointed out that a wave on water could be reflected by a hard surface, and that it could be refracted, or bent, when it passed from a region where it was moving quickly to one where it was moving more slowly. It will be necessary now to prove experimentally that the same things can be done with sound, in order that a body of proof may be built up in your minds convincing you that the external cause of sound-sensation must be a wave-motion in the air.

In the first place, I must describe to you, somewhat in detail, the nature of the arrangements we shall employ for producing and detecting the sound waves which will be used in these experiments.

It would not do to rely upon the ear as a detector because you cannot all be so placed as to hear the sounds which will be produced, and we shall, therefore, employ a peculiar kind of flame, called a sensitive flame, to act as a detector.

If ordinary coal-gas stored in a gasometer is burnt at a small jet under considerable pressure, we are able to produce a tall flame about 18 to 24 inches in height. The jet used is one with a steatite top and small pin-hole gas exit about ¹⁄₂₅ inch in diameter. The pressure of gas must be equal to about 10 inches of water, and it cannot be drawn straight off the house gas-pipes, but must be supplied from a special gasometer or gasbag under a pressure sufficient to make a flame 18 inches or so in height. If the pressure is too great, the flame roars; if the pressure is slightly reduced, the flame can be made to burn quietly and form a tall reed-like flame (A, Fig. 48). This flame, when properly adjusted, is curiously sensitive to shrill, chirping sounds. You may shout or talk loudly near it, and it takes no notice of your voice, but if you chirrup or whistle in a shrill tone, or clink your keys or a few coins in your hand, the flame at once shortens itself to about 6 or 7 inches in height, and becomes possessed of a peculiarly ragged edge, whilst at the same time it roars (B, Fig. 48). When in adjustment, the clink of a couple of coins in the hand will affect this sensitive flame on the other side of the room. The flame is also very sensitive to a shrill whistle or bird-call. It will be clear to you, from previous explanations, that the flame responds, therefore, to very short air waves forming high notes. The particular flame I shall now use responds with great readiness to air waves of 1 inch to ¹⁄₂ inch in length.

Note: See Professor W. F. Barrett, Nature, 1877, vol. 16, p. 12.

[Figure 48]

It may be well to explain that the sensitive portion of the flame is the root, just where it emerges from the burner, and it is the action of the sound wave in throwing this portion of the flame into vibration which is the cause of its curious behaviour.

If you think what the action must be, you will easily see that the operation of the sound wave is to throw the particles of the gas, just as they escape from the hole in the jet, into vibration in a direction transverse or at right angles to the direction of their movement in the flame. The gas molecules are, when unacted upon by the sound wave, rushing out of the jet, in an upward direction. When the sound wave impinges on them they are, so to speak, caught, and caused to rock to and fro in a direction across the flame. The combination of these two motions results in a spreading action on the flame, so that instead of being a thin lance-like shape, it becomes more blunt, stumpy, and ragged at the sides. The flame acts, therefore, as a detector of certain sounds. It is a very sensitive kind of ear which listens and responds to the slightest whisper if only uttered in certain tones, but is deaf to all other sounds. Its great use to us is that it acknowledges the presence of air waves of short wave-length, and shows at once when it is immersed in a stream of air waves or ripples of very short wave-length.
