In addition to this, I am provided with a whistle giving a very shrill or high note, which is blown steadily by a current of air supplied under constant pressure from a reservoir. If the whistle is set in action, you will at once see the sensitive flame dip down and acknowledge the presence of the air-waves sent out by the whistle.

The air waves sent out by this whistle proceed, of course, in all directions, but for our present purpose we require to create what I may call a beam of sound. You all know the action of a magnifying-glass, or lens, upon a ray of light. What boy is there who has not, at some time or other, amused himself by concentrating the rays of the sun by a burning-glass, and by bringing them to a focus set light to a piece of paper, or burnt his own or companion’s hand? In this case we use a piece of glass called a lens, which is thicker in the middle than at the edges, to converge parallel rays of light to a point or focus. We also use such a lens in our optical lantern to render the diverging rays from an electric lamp parallel, and so make a parallel beam of light. I shall defer for a moment an explanation of this action, and simply say here that it is possible to construct a sound-lens, which operates in the same manner on rays of sound. I have had such a sound-lens constructed for our present experiments, and it is made as follows:—

It is possible to buy small balloons made of very thin material called collodion, this latter consisting of gun-cotton dissolved in ether and alcohol, and then poured out on a glass plate and allowed to dry. If one of these balloons is purchased, it is possible with great dexterity to cut from it two spherical segments or saucer-shaped pieces. These have then to be cemented with siccotine to a wooden ring having two small pipes opening into it (see Fig. 49). By means of these pipes we can inflate the lens-shaped bag so formed with a heavy gas called carbonic acid gas, made by pouring strong acid upon marble or chalk. The result of these operations, all of which require considerable skill of hand, is to furnish us with a sound-lens consisting of a collodion film in the shape of a magnifying-glass, or double convex lens, filled with carbonic acid gas heavier than the air.

The sound-lens so made is fixed up against a hole in a glass screen of the same size as the lens, and on one side of the lens is placed the whistle, and on the other side the sensitive flame. These have to be adjusted so that the whistle W, the centre of the lens L, and the jet of the flame F are in one straight horizontal line perpendicular to the glass plate.

[Figure 49]

The distance of the whistle from the lens has then to be adjusted so as to produce on the other side a nearly parallel beam of sound. In other words, the whistle must be placed in the focus of the lens. A rule for doing this is as follows: If the balloon from which the segments of collodion were cut was nearly spherical, and had a diameter of 8 inches, then the whistle must be placed at slightly less than 8 inches from the side of the lens next to it. The exact distance, however, will have to be found by trial, but it is somewhere near the point so determined. The sensitive flame should be about 4 or 5 feet away from the lens on the other side of the screen.

Note: This follows from the ordinary formula for the focal length f of a biconvex lens, each surface having a radius of curvature equal to r. For then it can be shown that f  (r/2) · (1/(μ - 1)) where μ is the index of refracture of the lens material. As shown later on, the acoustic index of refraction of carbonic acid, when that of air is taken as unity, is 1·273. Hence, μ - 1  0·273, and 1/(μ - 1)  3²⁄₃. Hence, f  2r(¹¹⁄₁₂), or f is slightly less than twice the radius of curvature of the spherical segment forming the sound-lens.

These arrangements having been made and the whistle set in action, it will be found that the flame responds vigorously when it is placed on the axis-line of the lens, but if moved a few inches to right or left of this line, it will cease to flare. This shows us that we have formed a beam of sound, and with some little care it is possible to make this a nearly parallel beam, so that when plunged in this stream of air waves the flame dips, but by removing it just outside the stream of sound it no longer flares. I have found it not difficult, when using a sound-lens 6 or 7 inches in diameter, to make a beam of sound from a whistle some 10 inches wide at about 4 feet from the lens.

Supposing the sound-lens and sensitive flame so adjusted, it is then necessary for our purpose to provide a sound-prism, made in the following manner: A zinc box is made in wedge form, and the two inclined sides are cut out, and these windows are covered with thin collodion film. The box has two pipes connected with it, by means of which it can be filled with carbonic acid gas.

Provided with this apparatus, it is now possible to show you a series of experiments which will leave no doubt in your minds that the external agency which creates in us the sensation of sound is a wave-motion in the air we breathe. Let me, in the first place, show you that a sound-beam can be reflected. We adjust our sensitive flame and set the whistle in action, and create, as described, by the lens, a beam of sound. At a little distance, say a couple of feet, outside the parallel beam we place the sensitive flame, and, being sheltered from the direct action of the whistle, it remains perfectly quiescent. Taking a sheet of glass in my hand, I hold it at an angle of 45° in the sound-beam, and you see the flame at once roars. The beam has been reflected on to the flame, but a very small angular movement of the glass is sufficient to reflect the sound-ray past the flame without touching it, and the flame then exhibits no agitation.

A few experiments of this kind with the flame in various positions are sufficient to show that the sound-beam is reflected by the glass in accordance with the law of reflection of wave-motion, viz. that the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. We can in the same way reflect the sound-beam by a wooden board, a piece of cardboard, a looking-glass, or a sheet of metal. We can reflect it from a wet duster, but not very well from a dry handkerchief. If we place the flame in the direct beam, it is easy to show that all the above good reflectors of sound are opaque to a sound-ray, and cast an acoustic shadow. In fact, I can prevent the flame from roaring by merely interposing my hand in front of it. A wet duster is found to be opaque to these sound waves, but a dry linen handkerchief is fairly transparent.

The collodion film used in making the lens and prism is also exceedingly transparent to these short air waves. We may then go one step further, and show that these air waves are capable of refraction. It will be in your remembrance that, in speaking of water ripples, it was shown by experiment that, when water ripples passed over a boundary between two regions, in one of which they travelled more quickly than in the other, a bending of the direction of ripple-motion took place. We can show precisely the same thing with these air waves.

The collodion prism has been filled with a heavy gas called carbonic acid. This gas is about half as heavy again as air, and it is this heavy and poisonous gas which, by accumulating in old wells or brewers’ vats or in coal-mines after an explosion, causes the death of any man or living animal immersed in it.

It has already been explained that the velocity of sound waves in different gases varies inversely as the square root of their density. Hence the speed of a sound wave in carbonic acid gas will be less than that in air in the ratio of the square roots of the densities of these gases. The density of carbonic acid gas is to that of air as 1·552 is to 1. The square root of 1·552 is 1·246, or nearly 1¹⁄₄. Accordingly, the speed of a sound wave in carbonic acid gas is to the speed in air as 4 is to 5. A sound wave in air will therefore travel 5 feet or 5 inches in the same time that it travels 4 feet or 4 inches in carbonic acid gas.

Let us now consider what must happen if a sound wave falls obliquely upon the face of our carbonic acid prism.

[Figure 50]

Let ABC be the prism (see Fig. 50) represented in plan, and let ab, ab, ab, be a train of sound waves advancing against the face AC. As soon as the left end b of the wave ab touches the face AC, and enters the carbonic acid gas, its speed will begin to be retarded, and in the time taken by the right end a to move in air from a to c, the left end will have moved in carbonic acid gas, by a less distance, bd, the distances ca and db, being in the ratio of 5 to 4. Hence it is clear that the wave-front ab will be swung round, and when the wave has wholly entered the prism, its direction of motion will have been bent round to the left.

The same thing will happen at emergence. The right end, e, of the wave ef gets out into the air whilst the left end, f, is still in carbonic acid. Accordingly, in the time taken for the end f to move to h, the end e will have moved a greater distance, in the ratio of 5 to 4, to g, and therefore we have again a bending round of the wave-direction. It is evident, therefore, that this unequal retarding of the two sides of the wave will result in a refraction, or bending, of the wave-direction, and that whereas the sound-ray was proceeding, before entering the prism, in the direction of the arrow on the right hand, it is altered, after passing through the prism, so as to be travelling in the direction of the arrow on the left-hand side. The double bending of the sound-ray is therefore caused by, and is evidence of the fact that, the sound wave travels more slowly in carbonic acid gas than it does in air.

Note: We can, in fact, discover the ratio of the velocities from the amount of bending the ray experiences and the angle BAC of the prism, called its refracting angle. It can be shown that if we denote this refracting angle by the letter A, and the deflection or total bending of the ray by the letter D, then the ratio of the velocity of the wave in air to its velocity in carbonic acid gas (called the acoustic refractive index), being denoted by the Greek letter μ; we have— μ  sin((A + D)/2)/sin(A/2)

Let us, then, bring these statements to the test of experiment. We again start in action the whistle W, and place the sensitive flame in the line of the lens-axis, and notice how violently the flame flares (see Fig. 51). The flame is now at a distance of 4 feet from the lens. I move the flame 1 foot to the left hand, and it is now outside the beam of sound, and remains quiescent. The prism P, previously filled with carbonic acid gas, is then inserted between the sound-lens and the flame, and close to the former. When properly placed, the sensitive flame F immediately dips and roars. It will be abundantly evident to you that this can only arise because the prism has bent round the sound-beam, and deflected it on to the flame. But if the beam is bent round, then it follows that if the flame is now moved back to the central position F′, the prism remaining in front of the lens, that the flame will not now roar, and this we find to be the case. If, however, the prism is then removed, the flame at once bursts into a roar.

[Figure 51]

This experiment proves to demonstration that we can refract waves of sound just as we can refract ripples on water.

Having regard to what we have now seen, I do not think you will have any difficulty in seeing how it is that the biconvex sound-lens, filled with carbonic acid gas, is able to render divergent sound-rays parallel; in other words, can convert a spherical sound wave into a plane sound wave.

Consider what the effect really must be. Let the sound-lens be represented in section by AB (see Fig. 49), and let W be the whistle sending out spherical sound waves, represented by the dotted lines.

When the spherical wave meets the lens, the central portion of the wave passes into a retarding medium, whilst the right and left wings of the wave are still in air. Hence, as before, the wings gain on the centre. Again, at emergence the wings emerge before the centre of the wave, and hence again the wings gain on the centre. After complete emergence the spherical wave-surface has been flattened out and made into a plane wave. Hence the sound-rays diverging from the whistle are rendered parallel or even convergent, provided that the whistle is properly placed with regard to the lens.

You will see, therefore, that we can use a gas denser than the air, contained in a transparent bag or vessel of collodion, as the means of changing the form and direction of sound waves. We can make lenses and prisms of carbonic acid gas which act on rays of sound just as do lenses and prisms of glass on rays of light. There is, however, one great difference between the operation of a carbonic acid prism on rays of sound, and that of a glass or other prism on rays of light. In the lectures on æther waves it will be made clear to you that what we call light really consists in waves in a medium known as the æther. But when such light waves are propagated through a transparent material like glass, the speed of transmission depends on the wave-length, just as in the case of water waves. But as regards sound waves there is no difference between the velocity of propagation or speed with which waves of different wave-lengths move. Hence a bass note travels just as fast as a treble note, and the sound waves from a flute have a speed of the same value as that from a trumpet or bassoon. If it were not so, it would be impossible for us to hear music or song at a distance, because the notes would arrive all in the wrong order, and the most familiar melody would be unrecognizable. It follows from this that air waves, no matter what their wave-length, are equally refracted on passing from one medium to another of different density. We shall see later on that this is not the case with waves of light and æther waves generally.
