Our discussion of waves and ripples in the air would be very incomplete if we left it without any further reference to the difference between those motions in the air which constitute noise or sound, and those to which we owe the pleasure-producing effects of musical tones. I propose, therefore, to devote our time to-day to a brief exposition of the properties and modes of production of those air-vibrations which give rise to the class of sensations we call music. Sufficient has already been said to make it clear to you that one essential difference between sound or noise and music, as far as regards the events taking place outside of our own organism, is that, in the first case, we have a more or less irregular motion in the air, and, in the second, a rhythmical movement, constituting a train of air waves. The greater pleasure we experience from the latter is, no doubt, partly due to their rhythmic character. We derive satisfaction from all regularly repeated muscular movements, such as those involved in dancing, skating, and rowing, and the agreeable sensation we enjoy in their performance is partly due to their periodic or cyclical character.

In the same way, our ears are satisfied by the uniformly repeated and sustained vibrations proceeding from an organ-pipe or tuning-fork in action, but we are irritated and annoyed by the sensations set up when irregular vibrations of the air due to the bray of a donkey or the screech of a parrot fall upon them. Before, however, we can advance further in an analysis of the nature of musical sounds, two things must be clearly explained. The first of these is the meaning of the term natural period of vibration, and the second is the nature of the effect called resonance. You see before you three small brass balls suspended by strings. One string is 1 foot long, the second 4 feet, and the third 9 feet. These suspended balls are called simple pendulums. Taking in my hands the balls attached to the 1-foot and the 4-foot strings, I withdraw them a little way from their positions of rest and let them go. They vibrate like pendulums, but, as you see, the 1-foot pendulum makes two swings in the time that the 4-foot makes one swing. Repeating the experiment with the 1-foot and the 9-foot pendulum, we find that the short one now makes three swings in the time the long one makes one swing. The inference immediately follows that these pendulums, whose respective lengths are 1, 4, and 9 feet, make their swings from side to side in times which are respectively in the ratio of 1, 2, and 3.

Again, if we withdraw any of the pendulums from its position of rest and let it swing, we shall find that in any stated period of time, say 1 minute, it executes a certain definite number of oscillations which is peculiar to itself. You might imagine that, by withdrawing it more or less from its position of rest, and making it swing over a larger or smaller distance, you could make these swings per minute more or less as you please. But you would find, on trying the experiment, that this is not the case, and that, provided the arc of vibration is not too great, the time of one complete swing to and fro is the same whether the swing be large or small.

In scientific language this is called the isochronism of the pendulum, and is said to have been discovered by Galileo in the Cathedral at Pisa, when watching the swings of a chandelier die away, whilst counting their number by the beats of his pulse. This periodic time of vibration, which is independent of the amplitude of vibration, provided the latter is small, is called the natural time of vibration of the pendulum, or its free periodic time.

In the case of the simple pendulum the free periodic time is proportional to the square root of the length of the pendulum. Accordingly, a short pendulum makes more swings per minute than a long one, and this rate of swinging is quite independent of the weight of the bob. We can, of course, take hold of the bob with our hand and force it to vibrate in any period we please, and thus produce a forced vibration; but a free vibration, or one which is unforced, has a natural time-period of its own.

In order that any body may vibrate when displaced and then set free, two conditions must exist. In the first place, there must be a controlling force tending to make the substance return to its original position when displaced. In the second place, the thing moved must have mass or inertia, and when displaced and allowed to return it must in consequence overshoot the mark, and acquire a displacement in an opposite direction. In the case of the pendulum the elastic control or restoring force is the weight of the bob, which makes it always try to occupy the lowest position. We can, however, make a pendulum of another kind. Here, for instance, is a heavy ball suspended by a spiral spring (see Fig. 53). If I pull the ball down a little, and then let it go, it jumps up and down, and executes vertical vibrations. The elastic control here is the spring which resists extension. In this instance, also, there is a natural free time of vibration, independent of the extent of the motion, but dependent upon the weight of the ball and the stiffness of the spring.

[Figure 53]

A good illustration of the above principles may be found in the construction of a clock or a watch. A clock contains a pendulum which vibrates in a certain fixed time. The arrangements we call the “works” of a clock are only a contrivance for counting the swings, and recording them by the “hands” of the clock. Owing, however, to the friction of the “works,” the pendulum would soon come to rest, and hence we have a mainspring or “weights” which apply a little push to the pendulum at each swing, and keep it going. In a watch there is no pendulum, but there is a “balance-wheel and hair-spring,” or a wheel which has a spiral spring attached to it, so that it can swing backwards and forwards through a small angle. The so-called “escapement” is a means by which the swings are counted, and a little impulse given to the wheel to keep it swinging. The watch “keeps time” if this hair-spring is of the right degree of stiffness, and the balance-wheel of the right weight and size. Thus a clock can be made to go faster or slower by slightly altering the length of its pendulum, and the watch by slightly changing the stiffness of its hair-spring.

It may be noted in passing that our legs, in walking, swing like pendulums, and every particular length of leg has its own natural time of vibration, so that there is a certain speed at which each person can walk which causes him or her the least amount of fatigue, because it corresponds with the natural free or unforced period of vibration of the leg considered as a pendulum.

We now pass on to notice another very important matter. If we have any pendulum, or mass suspended by a spring, having therefore a certain natural period of vibration, we can set it in motion by administering to it small repeated blows or pushes. If the interval between these impulses corresponds with the natural time-period of oscillation, it will be found that quickly a very large swing is accumulated or produced. If, on the other hand, the interval between the blows does not correspond with the natural time of vibration, then their effect in producing vibration is comparatively small. This may be illustrated with great ease by means of the ball suspended by a spring. Suppose that by means of an indiarubber puff-ball I make a little puff of air against the suspended ball. The small impulse produces hardly any visible effect. Let this puff be repeated at intervals of time equal to that of the natural free period of vibration of the suspended ball. Then we find that, in the course of a very few puffs, we have caused a very considerable vibration or swing to take place in the heavy ball. If, however, the puffs of air come irregularly, they produce very little effect in setting the ball in motion. In the same manner a pendulum, consisting of a heavy block of wood, may be set swinging over a considerable range by a very few properly timed taps of the finger. We may notice another instance of the effect of accumulated impulses when walking over a plank laid across a ditch. If we tread in time with the natural vibration-period of the flexible plank, we shall find that very soon we produce oscillations of a dangerously large extent. Whereas, if we are careful to make the time of our steps or movement disagree with that of the plank, this will not be the case.

It is for this reason that soldiers crossing a suspension bridge are often made to break step, lest the steady tramp of armed men should happen to set up a perilous state of vibration in the bridge. It is not untruthful to say that a boy with a pea-shooter could in time break down Charing Cross Railway Bridge over the Thames. If we suppose a pea shot against one of the sections of this iron bridge, there is no doubt that it would produce an infinitesimal displacement of the bridge. Also there is no question that the bridge, being an elastic and heavy structure, has a natural free time of vibration. Hence, if pea after pea were shot at the same place at intervals of time exactly agreeing with the free time-period of vibration of the bridge, the effects would be cumulative, and would in time increase to an amount which would endanger the structure. Impracticable and undesirable as it might be to carry out the experiment, it is nevertheless certainly true, that a boy with a pea-shooter, given sufficient patience and sufficient peas, could in time break down an iron girder bridge by the accumulation of properly timed but infinitely small blows.

The author had an instance of this before him not long ago. He was at a place where very large masts were being erected. One of these masts, about 50 feet long, was resting on two great blocks of wood placed under each end. This mast was a fine beam of timber, square in section, and each side about 2 feet wide. The mast, therefore, lay like a bridge on its terminal supports. Standing or jumping on the middle of this great beam produced hardly any visible deflection. The writer, however, placed his hand on the centre of the log and pressed it gently. Repeating this pressure at intervals, discovery was soon made of the natural time-period of vibration, and by repeating the pressures at the right moment it was found that large oscillations could be accumulated. If he had ventured to proceed far with this operation, it is certain that, with properly timed impulses, it would have been possible, by merely applying the pressure of one hand, to break in half this great wooden mast.

We have constant occasion in mechanical work to notice that whereas one pull or push of great vigour will not create some desired displacement of an object, a number of very small hits, or properly timed pushes or pulls, will achieve the requisite result. We might summarize the foregoing facts by saying that it is a maxim in dealing with bodies capable of any kind of free vibration that impulses, however small, will create oscillations of any required magnitude, if only applied at intervals equal to the natural free period of vibration of the body in question.

We can illustrate these principles by a few experiments which have special reference to musical instruments. If we fasten one end of a rope to a fixed support, we find we can produce a wave or pulse in the rope by jerking the free end up and down with the hand. The speed with which a pulse or wave travels along a rope depends upon its weight per unit of length, or, say, on the number of pounds it weighs per yard, and on the tension or pull on the rope. The tighter the rope, the quicker it travels; and for the same tension the heavier the rope, the slower it travels.

It is not difficult to show that the speed with which the pulse travels is measured by the square root of the quotient of the tension of the rope by its weight per unit of length, or, as it may be called, the density of the rope.

We have already explained that, in a medium such as air, a wave of compression is propagated at a speed which is measured by the square root of the quotient of the air-pressure, or elasticity, by its density. In exactly the same way the hump that is formed on a rope by giving one end of it a jerk, runs along at a speed which is measured by the square root of the quotient of the stretching force, or tension, by the density. The propagation of a pulse or wave along a string is most easily shown for lecture purposes by filling a long indiarubber tube with sand, and then hanging it up by one end. The tube so loaded has a large weight per unit of length, and accordingly, if we give one end a jerk a hump is created which travels along rather slowly, and of which the movement can easily be watched. We may sometimes see a canal-boat driver give a jerk of this kind to the end of his horse-rope, to make it clear some obstacle such as a post or bush.

If we do this with a rope fixed at one end, we shall notice that when the hump reaches the end it is reflected and returns upon itself. If we represent by the letter l the length of the rope, and by t the time required to travel the double distance there and back from the free end, then the quotient of 2l by t is obviously the velocity of the wave. But we have stated that this velocity is equal to the square root of the tension of the rope (call it e) by the weight per unit of length, say m. Hence clearly—

      2_l_/_t_ = √(_e_/_m_); or _t_ = 2_l_ · √(_m_/_e_)

Supposing, then, that the jerks of the free end are given at intervals of time equal to t, or to the time required for the pulse to run along and back again, we shall find the rope thrown into so-called stationary waves. If, however, the jerks come twice as quickly, then the rope can accommodate itself to them by dividing itself into two sections, each of which is in separate vibration; and similarly it can divide itself into three, four, five, or six, or more sections in stationary vibration. The rope, therefore, has not only one, but many natural free periods of vibration, and it can adapt itself to many different frequencies of jerking, provided these are integer multiples of its fundamental frequency.

The above statements may be very easily verified by the use of a large tuning-fork and a string. Let a light cord or silk string be attached to one prong of a large tuning-fork which is maintained in motion electrically as presently to be explained. The other end of the cord passes over a pulley, and has a little weight attached to it. Let the tuning-fork be set in vibration, and various weights attached to the opposite end of the cord.

It is possible to find a weight which applies such a tension to the cord that its time of free vibration, as a whole, agrees with that of the fork. The cord is then thrown into stationary vibration. This is best seen by throwing the shadow of the cord upon a white screen, when it will appear as a grey spindle-shaped shadow. The central point A of the spindle is called a ventral point, or anti-node, and the stationary points N are called the nodes (see Fig. 54). Next let the tension of the string be reduced by removing some of the weight attached to the end. When the proper adjustment is made, the cord will vibrate in two segments, and have a node at the centre. Each segment vibrates in time with the tuning-fork, but the time of vibration of the whole cord is double that of the fork. Similarly, by adjusting the tension, we may make the cord vibrate in three, four, or more sections, constituting what are called the harmonics of the string.
