The string, therefore, in any particular state as regards tension and length, has a fundamental period in which it vibrates as a whole, but it can also divide itself into sections, each of which makes two, three, four, or more times as many vibrations per second.

[Figure 54]

In the case of a violin or piano string, we have an example of the same action. In playing the violin, the effective length of the string is altered by placing the finger upon it at a certain point, and then setting the string in vibration by passing along it a bow of horsehair covered with rosin. The string is set in vibration as a whole, and also in sections, and it therefore yields the so-called fundamental tone, accompanied by the harmonics or overtones. Every violinist knows how much the tone is affected by the point at which the bow is placed across the string, and the reason is that the point where the bow touches the string must always be a ventral point, or anti-node, and it therefore determines the harmonics which shall occur.

Another good illustration of the action of properly intermittent small impulses in creating vibrations may be found in the following experiment with two electrically controlled tuning-forks: A large tuning-fork, F (see Fig. 54), has fixed between its prongs an electro-magnet, E, or piece of iron surrounded with silk-covered wire. When an electric current from a battery, B, traverses the wire it causes the iron to be magnetized, and it then attracts the prongs and pulls them together. The circuit of the battery is completed through a little springy piece of metal attached to one of the prongs which makes contact with a fixed screw. The arrangement is such that when the prongs fly apart the circuit is completed and the current flows, and then the current magnetizes the iron, and this in turn pulls the prongs together, and breaks the circuit. The fork, therefore, maintains itself in vibration when once it has been started. It is called an electrically driven tuning-fork. Here are two such forks, in every way identical. One of the forks is self-driven, but the current through its own electro-magnet is made to pass also through the electro-magnet of the other fork, which is, therefore, not self-driven, but controlled by the first. If, then, the first fork is started, the electro-magnet of the second fork is traversed by intermittent electric currents having the same frequency as the first fork, and the electro-magnet of the second fork administers, therefore, small pulls to the prongs of the second fork, these pulls corresponding to the periodic time of the first fork. If, as at present, the forks are identical, and I start the first one, or the driving fork, in action it will, in a few seconds, cause the second fork to begin to sound. Let me, however, affix a small piece of wax to the second fork. I have now altered its proper period of vibration by slightly weighting the prongs. You now see that the first fork is unable to set the second fork in action. The electro-magnet is operating as before, but its impulses do not come at the right time, and hence the second fork does not begin to move.

If we weight the two forks equally with wax, we can again tune them in sympathy, and then once again they will control each other.

[Figure 55]

All these cases, in which one set of small impulses at proper intervals of time create a large vibration in the body on which they act, are said to be instances of resonance. A more perfect illustration of acoustic resonance may be brought before you now. Before me, on the table, is a tall glass cylindrical jar, and I have in my hand a tuning-fork, the prongs of which make 256 vibrations per second when struck (see Fig. 55). If the fork is started in action, you at a distance will hear but little sound. The prongs of the fork move through the air, but they do not set it in very great oscillatory movement. Let us calculate, however, the wave-length of the waves given out by the fork. From the fundamental formula, wave-velocity  wave-length × frequency; and knowing that the velocity of sound at the present temperature of the air is about 1126 feet per second, we see at once that the length of the air wave produced by this fork must be nearly 4·4 feet, because 4·4 × 256  1126·4. Hence the quarter wave-length is nearly 1·1 foot, or, say, 1 foot 1 inch.

I hold the fork over this tall jar, and pour water into the jar until the space between the water-surface and the top of the jar is a little over 1 foot, and at that moment the sound of the fork becomes much louder. The column of air in the jar is 1·1 foot in length and this resounds to the fork. You will have no difficulty in seeing the reason for this in the light of previous explanations. The air column has a certain natural rate of vibration, which is such that its fundamental note has a wave-length four times the length of the column of air. In the case of the rope fixed at one end and jerked up and down at the other so as to make stationary vibrations, the length of the rope is one quarter of the wave-length of its stationary wave. This is easily seen if we remember that the fixed end must be a node, and the end moved up and down must be an anti-node, or ventral segment, and the distance between a node and an anti-node is one quarter of a wave-length. Accordingly the vibrating column of air in the jar also has a fundamental mode of vibration, such that the length of the column is one quarter of a wave-length. Hence the vibrating prongs of the 256-period tuning-fork, when held over the 1·1 foot long column of air, are able to set the air in great vibratory movement, for the impulses from the prongs come at exactly the right time. Accordingly, the loud sound you hear when the fork is held over the jar proceeds, not so much from the fork as from the column of air in the jar. The prongs of the fork give little blows to the column of air, and these being at intervals equal to the natural time-period of vibration of the air in the jar, the latter is soon set in violent vibration.

We can, in the next place, pass on now to discuss some matters connected with the theory of music. When regular air-vibrations or wave-trains fall upon the ear they produce the sensation of a musical tone, provided that their frequency lies between about 40 per second and about 4000. The lowest note in an organ usually is one having 32 vibrations per second, and the highest note in the orchestra is that of a piccolo flute, giving 4752 vibrations per second. We can appreciate as sound vibrations lying between 16 and 32,000, but the greater portion of these high frequencies have no musical character, and would be described as whistles or squeaks.

When one note has twice the frequency of another it is called the octave of the first. Thus our range of musical tones is comprised within about seven octaves, or within the limits of the notes whose frequencies are 40, 80, 160, 320, 640, 1280, 2560, and 5120.

These musical notes are distinguished, as every one knows, by certain letters or signs on a clef. Thus the note called the middle C of a piano has a frequency of 248, and is denoted by the sign

[Figure music]

The octave is divided into certain musical intervals by notes, the frequencies of which have a certain ratio to that of the fundamental note. This ratio is determined by what is called the scale, or gamut. Thus, in the major diatonic natural scale, if we denote the fundamental note by C, called do or ut in singing, and its frequency by n, then the other notes in the natural scale are denoted by the letters, and have frequencies as below.

     _do_   _re_   _mi_   _fa_   _sol_   _la_   _si_   _do′_
      C      D      E      F       G      A      B      C^1
      n     ⁹⁄₈n    ⁵⁄₄n   ⁴⁄₃n     ³⁄₂n    ⁵⁄₃n   ¹⁵⁄₈n    2n

Hence if the note C has 248 vibrations per second, then the note D will have 9 × 248 ÷ 8  279 vibrations per second. On looking at the above scale of the eight notes forming an octave, it will be seen that there are three kinds of ratios of frequencies of the various notes.

(1) The ratio of C to D, or F to G, or A to B, which is

      that of 8 to 9.

(2) The ratio of D to E, and G to A, which is that of

      9 to 10.

(3) The ratio of E to F, or B to C^1, which is that of

      15 to 16.

The first two of these intervals or ratios are both called a tone, and the third is called a semitone. The two tones, however, are not exactly the same, but their ratio to one another is that of ⁸⁄₉ to ⁹⁄₁₀ or of 80 to 81. This interval is called a comma, and can be distinguished by a good musical ear.

Several of these intervals or ratios of frequencies have received names. Thus the interval C to E,  4:5, is called a major third, and the interval E to G,  5:6, is called a minor third; the interval C to G,  2:3, is called a fifth, and that of C to C^1,  1:2, is called an octave. For the purposes of music it has been found necessary to introduce other notes between the seven notes of the octave. If a note is introduced which has a frequency greater than any one of the seven in the ratio of 25 to 24, that is called a sharpened note; thus the note of which the frequency is ³⁄₂n × ²⁵⁄₂₄ would be called G sharp, and written G♯. In the same way, if the frequency of any note is lowered in the ratio of 24 to 25, it is said to be flattened. Then the note whose frequency is ³⁄₂n × ²⁴⁄₂₅ would be called G flat, and written G♭.

It is obvious that if we were to introduce flats and sharps to all the eight notes we should have twenty-four notes in the octave, and the various intervals would become too numerous and confusing for memory or performance. Hence in keyed instruments the difficulty has been overcome by employing a scale of equal temperament, made as follows: The interval of an octave is divided into twelve parts by introducing eleven notes, the ratio of the frequency of each note to its neighbours on either side being the same, and equal to the ratio 1 to 1·05946.

The scale thus formed is called the chromatic scale, and by this means a number of the flats and sharps become identical; thus, for instance, C♯ and D♭ become the same note. The octave has therefore twelve notes, which are the seven white keys, and the five black ones of the octave of the keyboard of a piano or organ.

Every one not entirely destitute of a musical ear is aware that certain of these musical intervals, such as the fifth, the octave, or the major third, produce an agreeable impression on the ear when the notes forming them are sounded together. On the other hand, some intervals, such as the seventh, are not pleasant. The former we call concords, and the latter discords. The question then arises—What is the reason for this difference in the effect of the air-vibrations on the ear? This leads us to consider the nature of simple and complex air vibrations or waves.

Let us consider, in the first place, the effect of sending out into the air two sets of air waves of slightly different wave lengths. These waves both travel at the same rate, hence we shall not affect the combined effects of the waves upon the air if we consider both sets of waves to stand still. For the sake of simplicity, we will consider that the wave-length of one train is 20 inches, and that of the other is 21. Moreover, let the two wave-trains be so placed relatively to one another that they both start from one point in the same phase of movement; that is, let their zero points, or their humps or hollows, coincide. Then if we draw two wavy lines (see Fig. 56) to represent these two trains, it will be evident that, since the wave-length of one is 1 inch longer than that of the other—that is, a distance equal to twenty wave-lengths—one wave-train will have gained a whole wave-length upon the other, and in a distance equal to ten wave-lengths, one wave train will have gained half a wave-length upon the other. If we therefore imagine the two wave-trains superimposed, we shall find, on looking along the line of propagation, an alternate doubling or destruction of wave-effect at regular intervals. In other words, the effect of superimposing two trains of waves of slightly different wave-lengths is to produce a resultant wave-train in which the wave-amplitude increases up to a certain point, and then dies away again nearly to nothing, as shown in the lowest of the three wave-lines in Fig. 56.

[Figure 56]

We must, then, determine how far apart these points of maximum wave-amplitude or points of no wave effect lie. If the wave-length of one train is, as stated, 20 inches, then a length of ten wave-lengths is 200 inches, and this must be, therefore, the distance from a place of maximum combined wave-effect to a place of zero wave-effect. Accordingly, the distance between two places where the two wave trains help one another must be 400 inches, and this must also be the distance between two adjacent places of wave-destruction. If, therefore, we look along the wavy line representing the resultant wave, every 400 inches we shall find a maximum wave-amplitude, and every 400 inches a place where the waves have destroyed each other. We may call this distance a wave-train length, and it is obviously equal to the product of the constituent wave-lengths divided by the difference of the two constituent wave-lengths.

It follows from this that if we suppose the two wave-trains to move forward with equal speed, the number of maximum points or zero points which will pass any place in the unit of time will be equal to the difference between the frequencies of the constituents. Let us now reduce this to an experiment. Here are two organ-pipes exactly tuned to unison, and when both are sounded together we have two identical wave-trains sent out into the air. We can, however, slightly lengthen one of the pipes, and so put them out of tune. When this is done you can no longer hear the smooth sound, but a sort of waxing and waning in the sound, and this alternate increase and diminution in loudness is called a beat. We can easily take count of the number of beats per second, and by the reasoning given above we see that the number of beats per second must be equal to the difference between the frequencies of the two sets of waves. Thus if one organ-pipe is giving 100 vibrations per second to the air, and the other 102, we hear two beats per second.

Now, up to a certain point we can count these beats, but when they come quicker than about 10 per second, we cease to be able to hear them separately. When they come at the rate of about 30 per second they communicate to the combined sound a peculiar rasping and unpleasant effect which we call a discord. If they come much more quickly than 70 per second we cease to be conscious of their presence by any discordant effect in the sound.
