The theory was first put forward by the famous physicist, Von Helmholtz, that the reason certain musical intervals are not agreeable to the trained ear is because the difference between the frequencies of the constituent fundamental tones or the harmonics present in them give rise to beats, approximately of 30 to 40 per second.

In order to simplify our explanations we will deal with two cases only, viz. that of the octave interval and that of the seventh. The first is a perfect concord, and the second, at least on stringed instruments, is a discord. It has already been explained that when a string vibrates it does so not only as a whole, but also in sections, giving out a fundamental note with superposed harmonics. Suppose we consider the octave of notes lying between the frequencies 264 and 528, which correspond to the notes C and C^1 forming the middle octave on a piano. The frequencies and differences of the eight tones in this octave are as follows:—

FREQUENCIES OF THE NOTES OF THE MIDDLE OCTAVE OF A PIANO.

              Notes.   Frequency.   Difference.
                C        264
                                        33
                D        297
                                        33
                E        330
                                        22
                F        352
                                        44
                G        396
                                        44
                A        440
                                        55
                B        495
                                        33
                C^1      528

It will thus be seen that the differences between the frequencies of adjacent notes are such as to make beats between them which have a number per second so near to the limits of 30 to 40 that adjacent notes sounded together are discords.

Suppose, however, we sound the seventh, viz. C and B, together. The frequencies are 264 and 495, and the difference is 231. Since, then, the difference between the frequencies lies far beyond the limit of 30 to 40 per second, how comes it that in this case we have a discord? To answer this question we must consider the harmonics present with the fundamentals. Write down each frequency multiplied respectively by the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.—

                                C.       B.
            Fundamental        264      495
            First harmonic     528      990
            Second   ”         792     1475
            Third    ”        1056     1980
            Fourth   ”        1320     2475
            Fifth    ”        1584     2970

On looking at these numbers we see that although the difference between the frequencies of the two fundamentals is too great to produce the disagreeable number of beats, yet the difference between the frequencies of the fundamental of note B (495) and the first harmonic of note C (528) is exactly 33, which is, therefore, the required number. Accordingly, the discordant character of the seventh interval played on a piano is not due to the beats between the primary tones, but to beats arising between the first harmonic of one and the fundamental of the other. It will be a useful exercise to the reader to select any other interval, and write down the primary frequencies and the overtone frequencies, or harmonics, and then determine whether between any pairs disagreeable beats can occur.

The presence of harmonics or overtones is, therefore, a source of discord in some cases, but nevertheless these overtones communicate a certain character to the sound.

Helmholtz’s chief conclusions as regards the cause of concord and discord in musical tones were as follows:—

(1) Musical sounds which are pure, that is, have no harmonics mixed up with them, are soft and agreeable, but without brilliancy. Of this kind are the tones emitted by tuning-forks gently struck or open organ-pipes not blown violently.

(2) The presence of harmonics up to the sixth communicates force and brilliancy and character to the tone. Of this kind are the notes of the piano and organ-pipes more strongly blown.

(3) If only the uneven harmonics, viz. the first, third, fifth, etc., are present, the sound acquires a certain nasal character.

(4) If the higher harmonics are strong, then the sound acquires great penetrating force, as in the case of brass instruments, trumpet, trombone, clarionet, etc.

(5) The causes of discord are beats having a frequency of 30 to 40 or so, taking place between the two primary tones or the harmonics of either note.

The pleasure derived from the sound of a musical instrument is dependent, to a large extent, on the existence of the desirable harmonics in each tone, or on the exclusion of undesirable ones.

In the next place, let us consider a little the means at our disposal for creating and enforcing the class of air-waves which give rise to the sensations of musical tones. Broadly speaking, there are three chief forms of musical air-wave-making appliance, viz. those which depend on the vibrations of columns of air, on strings, and on plates respectively.

One of the oldest and simplest forms of musical instrument is that represented by the pan-pipes, still used as an orchestral accompaniment in the case of the ever-popular peripatetic theatrical display called Punch and Judy.

If we take a metal or wooden pipe closed at the bottom, and blow gently across the open end, we obtain a musical note. The air in the pipe is set in vibration, and the tone we obtain depends on the length of the column of air, which is the same as the length of the pipe. The manner in which this air-vibration is started is as follows: On blowing across the open end of the pipe closed at the bottom a partial vacuum is made in it. That this is so, can be seen in any scent spray-producer, in which two glass tubes are fixed at right angles to each other. One tube dips into the scent, and through the other a puff of air is sent across the open mouth of the first. The liquid is sucked up the vertical tube by reason of the partial vacuum made above it. If we employ a pipe closed at the bottom and blow across the open end, the first effect of the exhaustion is that the jet of air is partly sucked down into the closed tube, and thus compresses the air in it. This air then rebounds, and again a partial vacuum is made in the tube. So the result is an alternate compression and expansion of the air in the closed tube. The column of air is alternately stretched and squeezed, and a state of stationary vibration is set up in the air in the tube; just as in the case of a rope fixed at one end and jerked up and down at the other end. The natural time-period of vibration of the column of air in the tube controls the behaviour of the jet of air blown across its mouth, the energy of the jet of air being drawn upon to keep the column of air in the tube in a state of oscillation. Thus a flutter is excited in the air in the tube, which is maintained as long as there is a blast of air across its mouth, and this communicates to the air outside a wave-motion. We have, therefore, a musical note produced, the wave-length of which is four times the length of the closed tube across the mouth of which we are blowing. Accordingly, a very simple musical instrument such as the pan-pipes consists of a row of tubes closed at the bottom, the tubes being of different lengths. A current of air from the mouth is blown across the tubes taken in a certain order, and we can obtain a simple melody by that process of selection.

[Figure 57]

An organ-pipe is only a more perfect means for doing the same thing. Organ-pipes may be either open or closed pipes. Also they have either a reed or a flute at one end for the purpose of establishing air-vibrations when a current of air is blown into the pipe. The form of organ-pipe most easy to understand is the closed flute pipe. This consists of a wooden tube closed at the upper end, and at the lower end having a foot-tube and mouthpiece as shown in section in Fig. 57. When a gentle current of air is blown in at the foot-tube, it impinges on the sharp edge or chamfer of the mouthpiece, and it acts just as when blown across the open end of a simple closed pipe. That is to say, it sets up a state of alternate compression and expansion of the air in the pipe. At the closed end, period-changes in density in the air are established, but no great movement takes place. At the open end or mouth there are no great changes of density, but the air is alternately moving in and out at the mouthpiece. The steady blast of air against the chamfer, therefore, sets up a state of steady oscillation of the air in the pipe, the air being squeezed up and extended alternately so that there is first a state of compression, and then a state of partial rarefaction in the air at the closed end of the pipe. In this case, also, the wave-motion communicated to the surrounding air has a wave-length equal to four times the length of the pipe.

If we open the upper end of the pipe, it at once emits a note which has a wave-length equal to double the length of the pipe. Hence the note emitted by an open-ended organ-pipe is an octave higher than that given out by a closed organ-pipe of the same length.

The action of an open organ-pipe is not quite so easy to comprehend as that of a closed pipe. The difficulty is to see how stationary air waves can be set up in a pipe which is open at both ends. The easiest way to comprehend the matter is as follows: When the blast of air against the lip of the pipe begins to partially exhaust the air in it, the rarefaction so begun does not commence everywhere in the pipe at once. It starts from the mouthpiece end, and is propagated along the pipe at a rate equal to the velocity of sound. The air at the open ends of the pipe moves in to supply this reduced pressure, and, in so doing, overshoots the mark, and the result is a region of compression is formed in the central portions of the pipe (see Fig. 58). The next instant this compressed air expands again, and moves out at the two open ends of the pipe. We have thus established in the pipe an oscillatory state which, at the central region of the pipe, consists in an alternate compression and expansion or rarefaction of the air, whilst at the open end and mouthpiece end there is an alternate rushing in and rushing out of the air. Hence in the centre of the pipe we have little or no movement of the air, but rapid alternations of pressure, or, which is the same thing, density; and at the two ends little or no change in density, but rapid movement of the air in and out of the pipe.

[Figure 58]

An analogy between the vibration of the air in a closed and open organ-pipe might be found in considering the vibration of an elastic rod—first, when clamped at one end, and secondly, when clamped at the two ends. The deflection of the rod at any point may be considered to represent change of air-pressure, and the fixed point or points the open end of the pipe at which there can be no change of density, because there it is in close communication with the open air outside the pipe. It is at once evident that the length of the open organ-pipe, when sounding its fundamental tone, is one-half of the length of the air wave it produces. Accordingly, from the formula, wave-velocity  frequency × wave-length, we see that, since the velocity of sound at ordinary temperature is about 1120 feet per second, an approximate rule for obtaining the frequency of the vibrations given out by an open organ-pipe is as follows:—

      _Frequency_ = 1120 _divided by twice the length of pipe_.

We say approximate, because, as a matter of fact, for a reason rather too complicated to explain here, the wave-length of the air-vibrations is equal to rather more than double the length of the pipe. In fact, what we may call the effective length of the pipe is equal to its real end-to-end length increased by a fraction of its diameter, which is very nearly four-fifths.

[Figure 59]

We can confirm by experiments the statements made as to the condition of the air in a sounding organ-pipe. Here is a pipe with three little holes bored in it at the top, middle, and bottom (see Fig. 59). Each of these is covered with a thin indiarubber membrane, and this, again, by a little box which has a gas-pipe leading to it and a gas-jet connected with it. If we lead gas into the box and light the jet, we have a little flame, as you see. If, then, the indiarubber membrane is pressed in and out, it will cause the gas-flame to flicker. Such an arrangement is called a manometric flame, because it serves to detect or measure changes of pressure in the pipe. The flicker of the flame when the organ-pipe is sounded is, however, so rapid that we cannot follow it unless we look at the image in a cubical revolving mirror of the kind already used. When so regarded, if the flame is steady, we see a broad band of light.

If we sound the organ-pipe gently and look at the bands of light corresponding to the three flames, we see that the flames at the top and bottom of the pipe are nearly steady, but that the one at the middle of the pipe is flickering rapidly, the band of light being changed to a saw-tooth-like form (see Fig. 60).

This shows us that rapid changes of pressure are taking place at the centre of the pipe.

Again, if we prepare a little tambourine (by stretching parchment-paper over a wooden ring), and lower it by a string into the sounding organ-pipe, we shall find that grains of sand scattered over this tambourine jump about rapidly when the membrane is held near the top or the bottom of the pipe, but are quiescent when it is at the middle.

[Figure 60]

This shows us that there is violent movement of the air at the ends, but not in the centre, thus confirming the deductions of theory.

It should be noted that if the pipe is over-blown or sounded too strongly, harmonics will make their appearance, and the simple state of affairs will no longer exist.

The celebrated mathematician, Daniel Bernoulli, discovered that an organ-pipe can be made to yield a succession of musical notes by properly varying the pressure of the current of air blown into it. If the pipe is an open one, then, if we call the frequency of the primary note 1, obtained when the pipe is gently blown, if we blow more strongly, the pipe yields notes which are the harmonics of the fundamental one, that is to say, have frequencies represented by 2, 3, 4, 5, etc., as the blast of air increases in force.

Thus, if the pipe is one about 2 feet in length, it will yield a note near to the middle C on a piano. If more strongly blown, it gives a note, C^1, an octave higher, having double the frequency. If more strongly blown still, it yields a note which is the fifth, G^1, above the last, and has three times the frequency of the primary tone; and so on.

If the pipe is closed at the top, then over-blowing the pipe makes it yield the odd harmonics, or the tones which are related in frequency to the primary tone in the ratio of 1, 3, 5, etc. Hence, if a stopped pipe gives a note, C, its first overtone is the fifth above the octave, or G^1.

It is usual, in adjusting the air-pressure of an organ-bellows, to allow such a pressure as that some of the overtones, or harmonics, shall exist. The presence of these harmonics in a note gives brilliancy to it, whereas an absolutely pure or simple musical tone, though not disagreeable to the ear, is not fully satisfying. Any one with a good ear can detect these harmonics or overtones in a single note sounded on a piano or organ due to the subdivision of the vibrating string or air-column into sections separated by nodes.

It will be seen that the acoustic action of the organ-pipe depends essentially upon some operation tending at the commencement to make an expansion of the air in the pipe at one end, and subsequently to cause an increase of air-pressure in it.
