This can be effected not only by blowing into the pipe, but in another way, by introducing a hot body into a pipe open at both ends. We can show here as an illustration of this an interesting experiment due to Lord Rayleigh. A long cast-iron water-pipe about 4 inches in diameter and 8 feet long is suspended from the ceiling. About 1 foot up the tube from the lower end a piece of iron-wire gauze is fixed (see Fig. 61). By means of a gas-burner introduced into the tube, we heat the gauze red hot, and on withdrawing the lamp the tube suddenly emits a deep organ-like note for a few moments. The heated metal creates an up-draught in the tube at the lower end, and, as in the case of the open organ-pipe, causes also an in-suction of air at the upper end. The column of air is thus set vibrating with a point of alternate condensation and rarefaction in the centre, and in-draughts and out-rushes of air at the ends. Indeed, this rush of air into and out of the pipe at the lower end during the time it is sounding its note is so violent that if the hands are placed just below the bottom end of the tube they will feel chilled, as if placed near an electric fan, by the blast of air. Closing the bottom end of the pipe with a sheet of metal at once stops the air-movement, and with it the musical note.

[Figure 61]

[Figure 62]

In another form the experiment has long been known under the name of a singing flame. A small jet of burning hydrogen gas is introduced into a glass tube about 3 feet in length. The jet must consist of a long narrow brass tube, and the proper position for the jet must be found by trial (see Fig. 62). When this is done, however, the tube emits a clear musical note, due to the tube acting as an open organ-pipe. If the flame is examined in a revolving mirror when the tube is singing, it will be found to be in vibration in sympathy with the movement of air in the tube. The tube often refuses to start singing, but may be made to do it by giving it a little tap. The actions taking place in the tube are something as follows: When the flame is introduced, it heats and rarefies the air around it. This causes an in-rush of air both at the top and bottom of the tube. A state of steady oscillation is then established, in which the air at the centre undergoes periodical expansions and compressions, and the pressure of the air round the flame changes in the same manner. The flame is therefore alternately expanded and contracted. When it expands, it heats the air more. When it is compressed, it heats it less. This variation of the flame causes air to be sucked in or expelled from both open ends of the tube, and establishes the state of steady vibration in accordance with the length of the tube. The flame and the air-column act and react on each other, and establish a state of stationary aerial oscillation in accordance with the natural time-period of the column of air. The tube can be made to give out not only its fundamental note, but a series of harmonics, or overtones, with frequencies 2, 3, 4, 5, etc., times the fundamental note, by varying the position of the flame, which must always be just under the place where a node, or place of alternate condensation and rarefaction, occurs.

We may, in the next place, with advantage briefly examine the principles of construction of one musical instrument, and allude to some recent improvements. One of the most interesting of all the musical appliances devised by human ingenuity is the violin, comprising as it does in its construction an art, a science, and a tradition. In principle the violin is nothing but a wooden box, along the top of which are stretched four strings, which are strained over a piece of wood called a bridge. These strings have their effective length altered in playing by placing the finger of the performer at some place on them, and they are set in vibration by drawing over them a well-rosined bow made of horsehair. The vibrating string communicates its vibrations to the surface of the box or body by means of the bridge, and this again to the air in the interior. The body thus serves two purposes. It acts as a resonating-chamber, and also it affords a large surface of contact with the surrounding air, whereby a greater mass of air is set simultaneously in wave-motion. The four strings are normally tuned in fifths, so that the fundamental note of each is an interval of a fifth above the next.

The performer varies the note given by each string by shortening its vibrating length by pressing the finger upon it. The skilled violinist has also great control over the tone, and can determine the harmonics, or overtones, which shall accompany the fundamental by altering the point on the string at which the bow is applied, and lightly touching it at some other point.

The great art in the construction of the violin rests in the manufacture of the wooden body. Its form, materials, and minute details of construction have been the subject of countless experiments in past ages, and until quite recently no essential improvement was made in the instrument as completed by the masters of violin construction three centuries ago. In classical form the violin consists of a wooden box of characteristic shape, composed of a back, belly, and six ribs. These are shaped out of thin wood, the belly being made of pine, and maple used for the rest. A neck or handle is affixed to one end, and a tail-piece, to which the gut-strings are fastened, to the other.

The strings are strained over a thin piece of wood which rests on two feet on the belly. One of these feet rests over a block of wood in the interior of the box called the sound-post, and this forms a rigid centre; the other foot stands on the resonant part of the belly. The belly is strengthened in addition by a bar of wood, which is glued to it just under the place where the active foot of the bridge rests. The ribs or sides of the box are bent inwards at the centre to enable the playing-bow to get at the strings more easily. The selection of the wood and its varnishing is the most important part of the construction. The wood must be elastic, and its elasticity has to be preserved by the use of an appropriate hard varnish, or else it will not take up the vibrations imparted by the strings. The old makers used wood which was only just sufficiently seasoned, and applied their varnish at once.

An essential adjunct is a good bow, which is of more importance than generally supposed. Something may be got out of a poor violin by a good player, but no one can play with a bad bow.

The process of eliciting a musical tone from the violin is as follows: The player, holding the instrument in the left hand, and with its tail end pressed against the left shoulder, places a finger of the left hand lightly on some point on a string, and sweeps the bow gently across the string so as to set it in vibration, yielding its fundamental note, accompanied by the lower harmonics. The purity and strength of the note depend essentially upon the skill with which this touch of the bow is made, creating and sustaining the same kind of vibration on the string throughout its sweep. The string then presses intermittently on the bridge, and this again turns, so to speak, round one foot as round a pivot, and presses intermittently on the elastic wooden belly. The belly takes up these vibrations, and the air in the interior is thrown into sympathetic vibration by resonance. The sound escapes by the ƒ-holes in the belly. The extraordinary thing about the violin is that the shape of the box permits it to take up vibrations lying between all the range of musical tones. The air-cavity does not merely resonate to one note, but to hundreds of different rates of vibration.

The peculiar charm of the violin is the quality of the sound which a skilled player can elicit from it. That wonderful pleading, sympathetic, voice-like tone, which conveys so much emotional meaning to the trained musical ear, is due to the proper admixture of the harmonics, or overtones, with the fundamental notes. The string vibrates not merely as a whole, but in sections. Hence the place at which the bow touches must always be an anti-node, or ventral point, and the smallest change in this position greatly affects the quality of the tone.

Quite recently an entirely new departure has been made in violin construction by Mr. Augustus Stroh, a well-known inventor. He has abolished the wooden body and bridge, and substituted for them an aluminium trumpet-shaped tube as the resonant chamber, ending in a circular corrugated aluminium disc, on the centre of which rests an aluminium lever pivoted at one point. The strings are strained over this lever, and held on a light tube, which does duty as a point of attachment of all parts of the instrument. The strings are the same, and the manipulation of the instrument identical with that of the ordinary violin. The vibrations of the strings are communicated by the pivoted lever over which they pass to the corrugated aluminium disc, and by this to the air lying in the trumpet-tube. This tube points straight away from the player, and directs the air waves to the audience in front. The tone of the new violin is declared by connoisseurs to be remarkably full, mellow, and resonant. The notes have a richness and power which satisfies the ear, and is generally only to be found in the handiwork of the classical constructors of the ordinary form of violin. One great advantage in the Stroh violin is that every one can be made perfectly of the same excellence. The aluminium discs are stamped out by a steel die, and are therefore all identical. The element of chance or personal skill in making has been eliminated by a scientific and mechanical construction. Thus the musician becomes possessed of an instrument in which scientific construction predominates over individual art or tradition in manufacture, yet at the same time the musical effects which skill in playing can produce are not at all diminished.

Whilst our attention has so far been fixed on the external operations in the air which constitute a train of music-making waves, it seems only appropriate to make, in conclusion, a brief reference to the apparatus which we possess in our ears for appreciating these subtle changes in air-pressure with certainty and pleasure. The ear itself is a marvellous appliance for detecting the existence of waves and ripples in the air, and it embodies in itself many of the principles which have been explained to-day.

[Figure 63]

The organ of hearing is a sort of house with three chambers in it, or, rather, two rooms and an entrance hall, with the front door always open. This entrance passage of the ear is a short tube which communicates at one end with the open air, being there provided with a sound-deflecting screen in the shape of an external ornamental shell, commonly called the ear. In many animals this external appendage is capable of being turned into different positions, to assist in determining the direction in which the sound wave is coming. The entrance tube of the ear is closed at the bottom by a delicate membrane called the tympanum, or drum. Against this drum-head the air waves impinge, and it is pressed in and out by the changes of air-pressure. This drum separates the outer end from a chamber called the middle ear, and the middle ear communicates, by a sort of back staircase, or tube called the Eustachian tube, with the cavity at the back of the mouth (see Fig. 63).

Behind the middle ear, and buried in the bony structure of the skull, is a third, more secret chamber, called the inner ear. This is separated from the middle ear by two little windows, which are also covered with delicate membranes. In the middle ear there is a chain of three small bones linked with one another, which are connected at one end with the tympanum, or drum, and at the other end with the so-called oval window of the inner ear. Helmholtz has shown that this little chain of bones forms a system of levers, by means of which the movements of the tympanum are diminished in extent, but increased in force in the ratio of 2 to 3.

The internal ear is the real seat of audition, and it comprises the parts called the labyrinth, the semicircular canals, and the cochlea. These are cavities lined with delicate membranes and filled with fluid. In the cochlea there is an organ called Corti’s organ, which is a veritable harp of ten thousand strings. This consists of innumerable nerve-fibres, which are an extension of the auditory nerve. The details of the organic structure are far too complicated for description here. Suffice it to say that air waves, beating against the tympanum, propagate vibrations along the chain of bones into the fluids in the inner ear, and finally expend themselves on these nerve-fibres, which are the real organs of sound-sensation.

Helmholtz put forward the ingenious hypothesis that each fibre in the organ of Corti was tuned, so to speak, to a different note, and that a composite sound falling upon the ear was analyzed or disentangled by this organ into its constituents. Although this theory, as Helmholtz originally stated it, has not altogether been upheld by subsequent observation, it is certain that the ear possesses this wonderful power of analysis. It can be shown by mathematical reasoning of an advanced kind that any musical sound, no matter what its quality, can be resolved into the sum of a number of selected pure sounds such as those given by a tuning-fork.

Consider now for one moment the physical state of the air in a concert-room in which a large orchestra is performing. The air is traversed by a chaos of waves of various wave-lengths. The deep notes of the violincello, organ, and trumpets are producing waves 10 to 20 feet in wave-length, which may be best described as billows in the air. The violin-strings and middle notes of the piano, harp, or flute are yielding air waves from 6 or 8 feet to a few inches long, whilst the higher notes of violins and flutes are air ripples some 3 or 4 inches in length.

If we could see the particles of the air in the concert-room, and fasten our attention upon any one of them, we should see it executing a most complicated motion under the combined action of these air-wave-producing instruments. We should be fascinated by the amazing dance of molecules to and fro and from side to side, as the medley of waves of compression or rarefaction embraced them and drove them hither and thither in their resistless grasp.

The tympana of our ears are therefore undergoing motions of a like complicated kind, and this complex movement is transmitted through the chain of bones in the middle ear to the inner ear, or true organ of sensation. But there, by some wondrous mechanism not at all yet fully understood, an analysis takes place of these entangled motions.

The well-trained ear separates between the effect due to each kind of musical instrument, and even detects a want of tuning in any one of them. It resolves each sound into its harmonics, appreciates their relative intensity, is satisfied or dissatisfied with the admixture. In the inner chamber of the ear physical movements are in some wholly inscrutable manner translated into sensations of sound, and the confused aggregation of waves and ripples in the air, beating against the tympanic membrane there, takes effect in producing impulses which travel up the auditory nerve and expend their energy finally in the creation of sensations of melody and tune, which arouse emotions, revive memories, and stir sometimes the deepest feelings of our minds.
