It is necessary, in the next place, to point out that an electric current has a directive quality. It belongs to that category of things like forces and movements, which have direction as well as magnitude. It is not completely defined by the answer to the question—How much? We must also ask—In what direction? The direction of an electric current is settled by holding a small compass needle near to the conductor or wire in which the current exists. The little magnet will set itself with its north pole in one direction or in the opposite, across the wire. That is to say, the axis of the compass needle places itself at right angles to that of the wire. The direction of the electric current is decided in accordance with the following conventional rule: Imagine yourself placed with your arms extended straight out like a cross, and that the wire conveying the current is placed before your face in a vertical position. Imagine, also, that the position in which the compass needle naturally sets when held between you and the wire is such that its North pole is on your right-hand side. Then the current would be said to move upwards in the wire. A current which is always in one and the same direction in a wire is called a continuous, direct, or one-way current.

A current which periodically changes its direction so that it is first in one direction and then in the other is called an alternating or two-way current.

I can now show you two experiments, the employment of which will enable us always to decide whether a current in a wire is a one-way or a two-way current. In the first experiment you see a copper wire stretched between the poles of a powerful horseshoe magnet. When a one-way current is sent through the wire, it is pulled either up or down, like a fiddle or harp string being plucked by the finger. If, however, we send a two-way current through the wire, it moves alternately up and down, and vibrates just like a harp-string when plucked and left to itself.

The next experiment gives us, however, a more convenient method of ascertaining the presence in a wire of an alternating or two-way electric current. If two wire circuits are laid parallel to each other, and we send through one of these an electric current, then, in accordance with Faraday’s most notable discovery, we find that the beginning or the ending of the one-way current in the first wire gives rise at the moment to a transitory current in the second wire. If, however, we pass through the first wire, which we call the primary circuit, a two-way current, then, since this is, so to speak, continually beginning and ending, we have a similar alternating or two-way electric current produced in the secondary circuit.

This fact may be most neatly and forcibly illustrated by the employment of the following pieces of apparatus: An insulated wire is wound many times round a great bundle of iron wire, thus forming what is called an electro-magnet. Through this wire is passed a strong alternating electric current which reverses its direction 160 times a second.

Over the top of the electro-magnet we hold another coil of insulated wire, the ends of which are connected to a small electric glow lamp (see Fig. 64). When held near to the pole of the electro-magnet, we find the little lamp in the secondary coil lights up brilliantly, because there is created in that circuit a secondary or induced alternating electric current by the action of the other current in the primary or electro-magnet circuit. Thus we see that one alternating electric current can, so to speak, give birth to another in a second circuit held parallel to the first. In like manner this secondary current can give rise to a third or tertiary current, and the third to a fourth, and so on indefinitely.

[Figure 64]

We can always make use of this test to ascertain and prove the existence of an alternating current in any electric circuit. If we provide a coil of insulated wire, having its ends connected to a small incandescent lamp, and hold this lamp coil or secondary circuit near to and parallel with any other circuit in which we suspect the existence of an alternating electric current, and if the lamp in the secondary circuit lights up, then we can say with certainty that there is an alternating or two-way electric current in the first circuit.

Having, then, indicated briefly the effects which are produced by an electric current when it exists in a conducting circuit, and the way in which we can determine its presence and direction, we must pass on to discuss some other facts connected with its production.

It is a maxim in philosophy that every effect must have a cause; hence we must assign a name to the cause of the effect we call electric current. This cause we call electromotive force.

Electromotive force may be created in many ways, and time will not permit us to refer to these in detail, but it must be taken that electrical machines, batteries, and dynamos are all of them appliances for creating electromotive force, or, as it is sometimes called, electric pressure, just as various kinds of force-pumps are contrivances for creating pressure in fluids. We find that electromotive force acts differently on various substances when they are subjected to its operation. In some substances electromotive force produces a continuous electric current, and in these cases the material is called a conductor. In other cases electromotive force creates what is called electric strain, or electric displacement, and these substances are generally called non-conductors. The difference between conductors and non-conductors can be illustrated by a mechanical analogy. Consider, for instance, a force-pump consisting of a cylinder with a tightly fitted piston; suppose the bottom of the pump-tube to be closed by a pipe having in it a tap. If we open the tap and apply pressure to the piston, we can force out of the pipe a current of air which continues to flow as long as the piston is being pressed down. In this case the pressure on the piston corresponds to an electromotive force, and the current of air flowing out corresponds with the electric current in the electrical circuit.

Supposing, however, that we shut the tap and then attempt to force down the piston, we find at once an elastic resistance to motion. The piston can be pressed down a little way, compressing the air and thus creating a strain; but if the pressure is removed the piston flies up again, on account of the compressional elasticity of the air. In this operation we have a mechanical illustration of the action of electromotive force on a material such as glass or air, which is called a non-conductor, or sometimes a dielectric. In these bodies electromotive force produces an electric strain, just as the mechanical force produces in the air enclosed in the cylinder a mechanical strain. When the tap at the bottom of the cylinder is closed, we can, by applying pressure, force down the piston a little way, but that movement cannot be continued, because we are building up an opposing pressure due to the elasticity of the air.

It is possible to show you an electrical experiment which has a close analogy with the above simple mechanical experiment. Here is a glass tube which has platinum wires sealed into the two ends, and the tube is partly exhausted of its air. Such a tube is called a vacuum tube, and when an electrical current is passed through this rarefied air, it causes it to become luminous, and, as you see when the room is darkened, the tube is filled with a reddish light. A tube, therefore, of this kind is very convenient in some experiments, because we can, in effect, see the electric current passing through it. If I connect one end of this tube with the earth, and the other with the terminal of an electrical machine, and if then the handle of the electrical machine is turned, the tube will continue to glow as long as the electrical machine is rotated. The electrical machine must be regarded as a pump which is forcing something called electricity through the vacuum tube, and as long as the pressure is continued the current flows.

This corresponds with the case in which the tap at the bottom of the force pump was open and a continuous current of air could be forced out of it by pressing down the piston. Supposing, however, that I insert between the vacuum tube and the electrical machine a plate of glass, which is covered over with tinfoil on the two sides such an arrangement constitutes what is called a condenser, or Leyden pane. We now repeat the experiment, and begin to turn the handle of the electrical machine. You will notice that the vacuum tube glows as before, and is filled with a reddish light for a short time, but as we continue to turn the handle this dies away, and after a few moments there is no further evidence of an electric current passing through the vacuum tube.

You will understand, therefore, that an electric current cannot be caused to flow for an indefinite time in one direction through a glass plate, although, by the application of electromotive force, it does evidently, as you see, pass through it for a short time. This is analogous to the operation of the force-pump when the tap at the bottom is closed. We then find that we can move the piston down a little way, compressing or straining the enclosed air, but that its motion is soon stopped by an opposing resistance. We therefore say that in the glass plate we have created an electric strain by the action of the electromotive force, just as we describe the effect of the mechanical pressure on the air by saying that we have created a compression in it.

But there is an additional resemblance between the electrically strained glass and the mechanically compressed air. When any elastic object has been strained, and is suddenly released, it regains its position of equilibrium by a series of oscillations or vibrations. Thus, for instance, if we take a strip of steel and fix one end of it in a vice, and pull the other end on one side and then release it, the steel regains its position of equilibrium only after having executed a series of diminishing swings to and fro.

In the same way, if we place some mercury or water in a glass tube bent in the shape of the letter ⋃, and displace the liquid by blowing into the tube, then, on releasing the pressure suddenly, the liquid will regain its position of equilibrium by a series of oscillations which die gradually away. You will not have any difficulty in seeing that this is really due to the inertia of the material, whether it be steel or mercury or water which is displaced. In an exactly similar manner, we find that when we have produced an electric strain in a sheet of glass by the application of electromotive force, and if we then remove the electromotive force and connect the two tinfoil or metal surfaces by means of a piece of wire, the electric strain in the glass disappears with a series of electric oscillations; that is to say, the electric strain in the glass does not disappear or die away gradually, but it is alternately reversed, at each reversal the strain becoming less and less in magnitude. The result of this oscillatory strain in the glass is to produce in the connecting wire an alternating electric current.

[Figure 65]

A very familiar and simple piece of electric apparatus is that known as a Leyden jar (see Fig. 65). A Leyden jar consists of a glass vessel, the outside and inside surfaces of which are respectively covered with tinfoil. If we apply to these two surfaces an electromotive force, we produce what is called an electric charge in the jar, which in reality consists in a state of electric strain in the walls of the vessel. When the jar is charged, if we connect together, by means of a thick wire, the outside and the inside tinfoil surfaces, we have a bright spark produced at the moment of making contact, and we have a rapidly alternating electric current produced in the connecting wire. If this connecting wire has a low resistance—in other words, is a very good conductor—then this electric spark consists, not in a discharge of electricity uniformly in one direction, but of a series of rapidly succeeding sparks which are really discharges of electricity or electric currents passing through the air alternately in opposite directions. This can be demonstrated by taking a photograph of the electric spark on a rapidly revolving photographic plate or strip. You are probably all familiar with the sensitive photographic film which is employed in hand cameras, such as the kodak. If a strip of this sensitive film is bound round the edge of a wheel, and if the wheel is set in very rapid rotation, and if we throw on the film, by means of a lens, an image of an oscillatory electric spark, it will be clear to you that, if the spark is continuous, it will produce upon the moving photographic film an image which will be of the nature of a broad band. If, however, the electric spark is intermittent, then this photographic image will be cut up into a series of bars or patches, each one of which will correspond to a separate image of one constituent of the oscillatory spark.

Photographs of oscillatory electric sparks have in this way been taken by many observers, and have afforded a demonstration that the electric discharge of a Leyden jar, when taken through a wire of low resistance, is not a continuous movement of electricity in one direction, but a rapidly alternating electric current through the wire, forming the oscillatory spark, and corresponding with an equally rapid alternating electric strain in the glass, both strain and current dying gradually away.

Although this operation takes a long time to describe, yet, nevertheless, an oscillatory spark consisting of 20 or 30 electric oscillations may all be over in the ¹⁄₁₀₀₀₀ or even ¹⁄₁₀₀₀₀₀ second. In the photograph now thrown upon the screen (see Fig. 66) you see the image of an oscillatory electric spark, each oscillation of which lasted ¹⁄₇₀₀₀ second. We can, however, give a still further proof that the discharge of a Leyden jar or electric condenser is, under some circumstances, oscillatory, in the following manner:—

[Figure 66]

You have already seen that an alternating or two-way electric current existing in one circuit can produce another alternating or two-way electric current in a neighbouring circuit. Before me, on the table, is an arrangement by which a battery of six Leyden jars, L, is continually being charged and discharged through a thick wire which is wound a dozen times round a square wooden frame, P (see Fig. 67). In proximity to this wooden frame there is another wooden frame, S, also having on it a dozen or two turns of insulated wire; the circuit of this last conductor is completed by a small incandescent lamp, G. You will notice that when the Leyden jars are charged and discharged rapidly through the primary conductor, the little glow-lamp of the secondary circuit lights up brilliantly, and, in virtue of what has already been explained, you will see that this experiment is a proof that the discharge of the Leyden jars through the primary circuit must consist in an alternating or two-way current; in other words, it must be oscillatory.
