[Figure 67]

A still further proof may be given that the discharge of a Leyden jar or condenser, when taking place through a low-resistance circuit, is oscillatory in the following manner:—

We employ the vacuum tube that we brought to your notice a few moments ago. When an electric current is sent always in the same direction through such a tube, it is well known that the two ends of the tube are not alike in appearance. The tube, as you have seen, is filled with a luminous glow; but this glow is interrupted, forming what is called a dark space near one terminal of the tube, this terminal being that which is termed the negative pole. Accordingly, this unsymmetrical appearance in the light in the tube is a proof that the electric current is passing through it always in one direction. We can, however, vary the experiment, and instead of illuminating the tube by means of a direct-discharge or induction coil, which is always in one direction, we are able to illuminate it by means of a rapid series of discharges from a Leyden jar. You will then see that the glow-light in the tube is symmetrical—the tube, in other words, is alike at both ends; and this shows us that the discharge from the tube under these circumstances must be alternating—that is, first in one direction and then in the other.

Whilst this apparatus is in use, we can show you with it two other very pretty experiments dependent upon the fact that the discharge of a Leyden jar through a low-resistance circuit is alternating or oscillatory. A moment ago we employed this oscillatory discharge in one circuit to induce a secondary oscillatory discharge in another metallic circuit, and this secondary oscillatory or alternating current was made manifest by its power to illuminate a little incandescent lamp. If, however, we place a large glass bulb, P, which has been partly exhausted of its air, in the interior of the primary discharge coil, you will see that this primary oscillatory discharge of the Leyden jar is able to create in the glass bulb a brilliant luminous ring of light (see Fig. 68). This is called an electrodeless discharge, and it is due to the fact that the rapidly oscillatory current existing in the wire wrapped round the bulb creates a similar oscillatory discharge in the rarefied air in the interior of the bulb, this being a conductor, and thus renders it luminous along a certain line.

The production of these electrodeless discharges in rarefied gases has been particularly studied by Professor J. J. Thomson.

Another experiment illustrating what is called the inductive transformation of electrical oscillations is in the arrangement commonly called a Tesla coil. Such a coil is now before you. It consists of a long coil of insulated wire which is placed in the interior of a tall glass vessel, and on the outside of this glass vessel is wound another insulated and much longer wire. If the alternating or oscillatory discharge of a Leyden jar is allowed to take place through the thicker wire in the interior of the glass cylinder, it generates in the outer or secondary wire a very powerful alternating or oscillatory electromotive force, and we see that this is the case by connecting the ends of this secondary circuit to two insulated brass balls, between which a torrent of sparks now passes. We may vary the experiment by connecting the ends of the secondary circuit of the Tesla coil to two insulated concentric rings of thin, bare, brass wire, and then, when the room is darkened, we see the space between these rings filled with a brilliant purple light, which is due to the discharge taking place through the air under the action of the rapidly oscillatory electromotive force generated in the secondary circuit.

[Figure 68]

I trust that these experiments will have produced a conviction in your minds that the release of the electric strain in the glass dielectric of a Leyden jar results in the production of electric oscillations or rapidly alternating electric currents in the metallic circuit connecting the two surfaces, just as the sudden release of a compressed spring results in a series of mechanical oscillations.

We may here remark that any arrangement of two metallic plates with a sheet of insulator or non-conductor between them is called a condenser. Thus, a condenser can be built up by coating a sheeting of glass on its two sides with tinfoil, or in place of glass we may use mica, paraffin paper, or any other good non-conductor. We may even use air at ordinary pressures; and thus, if two metal plates are placed near to one another in air, the plates being both insulated—that is, supported on non-conductors,—this arrangement constitutes what is called an air condenser. An air condenser, therefore, is virtually only a kind of Leyden jar in which the glass is replaced by air, and the tinfoil by two stout metal plates.

[Figure 69]

I must now proceed to describe and show you a particular kind of air condenser which was invented by the late Professor Hertz, and, in consequence, is called a Hertz oscillator (see Fig. 69). It consists of two square or round metal plates which are carried on glass or ebonite legs, and these plates have short, stout wires attached to them, ending in brass knobs. If these plates are placed in line with one another, they constitute an air condenser of a very peculiar kind, the two brass plates correspond with the tinfoil surfaces of a Leyden jar, and the air all round them corresponds with the glass of the jar. Supposing the plates are so arranged that the brass knobs are about ¹⁄₄ inch apart, or rather less, if then we connect these two brass plates to the secondary terminals of an induction coil or electrical machine capable of giving long sparks in air, we shall find, when the electrical machine or induction coil is set in action, that a very bright crackling spark passes between these little knobs, and with proper experience it is easy to adjust the distance from the knobs so that this spark is an oscillatory spark. Under these circumstances, what is taking place is as follows: In the first place, an electromotive force is acting between the two plates, and creating an electric strain in the air all round them along certain lines, and also between the two knobs. The air, and all other gases like it, possess this peculiar property, that whilst at ordinary pressures they are nearly perfect non-conductors, yet, nevertheless, if they are subjected to more than a certain electric pressure, they pass instantly into a condition in which they become very good conductors. Accordingly, if we progressively increase the electromotive force acting between the plates, up to a certain point the whole arrangement acts like a Leyden jar; but there comes a moment when the air between the knobs breaks down and passes from a non-conductive to a conductive condition. The two plates then resemble at that moment the surfaces of a charged Leyden jar which are connected together by a good conductor, and, as we have already seen, under those circumstances the discharge is oscillatory, and the electric strain in the non-conductor, or dielectric, viz. the air around the plates, dies away by a series of rapidly alternating electric strains in opposite directions.

Now, at this point I must recall to your recollection that, in speaking about the production of air waves, I pointed out that one condition essential to the production of an air wave was that there must be a very sudden application or release of the air-pressure, such as is caused by an explosion or escape of compressed air. We cannot produce an air wave by moving any object such as a fan slowly to and fro through the air. In order to produce an air wave we must strike the air a very sudden blow, or, which comes to the same thing, we must apply and remove a very sudden pressure to the air; and under these circumstances we start into existence an air wave, which travels away from the vibrating or rapidly moving body, and continues its journey out into surrounding space.

I want to show you that, in the case of the Hertz oscillator, these very sudden reversals of electric strain in the air or space round about it, which take place at the moment when the oscillatory spark passes between the knobs, creates in a similar manner what is called an electric wave, which travels out into the space around. The point you must appreciate is, that just as an air wave conveys away to distant places a rapidly alternating compression made in the air by a vibrating body at a particular place, so an electric wave conveys away to distant places an alternating electric strain, which is originated at some point in the medium by the oscillatory discharge of some form of condenser. Before, however, we can demonstrate this fact, we must have some means for detecting the influence of what we call an electric wave. You will remember that, in the case of experiments with air waves, I used a sensitive flame in order to make evident to you the presence of waves in the air which you could not see, so here I must use an appropriate detector for electric waves, the operation of which will render evident to us the existence in the space round our electric oscillator of the electric waves we cannot see.

Time will not permit me to discuss all the different forms of electric-wave detector which have been invented. For our present purposes we must limit ourselves to the description of one plan, which depends on the remarkable fact that finely powdered dry metal or metallic filings are non-conductors of the electric current until they are subjected to an electromotive force exceeding a certain value, when the metallic filings at once pass into a conductive condition.

If you recall the remarks made just now in connection with the special electrical properties of air and other gases, you will notice that there is a remarkable similarity between the electrical behaviour of air at ordinary pressures to electromotive force, and that of a loose mass of metallic filings. Both the air and the metallic filings are non-conductors as long as the electromotive force acting on them does not exceed a certain value, but if it exceeds this critical value, they pass at once into a conductive condition. The fact that pieces of metal in loose contact with one another behave in a similar manner was discovered more than twenty years ago by the late Professor D. E. Hughes, who, as you may perhaps know, was the inventor of a printing telegraph, the microphone, and many other most important electrical instruments. Professor Hughes was a great genius, and in many respects in advance of his age. He it was who undoubtedly discovered that an electric spark has the power of affecting at a distance the electric conductivity of a metallic junction consisting of two metals in loose contact.

The peculiar behaviour of metallic filings under electromotive force, and under the influence of electric sparks at a distance, was subsequently rediscovered by Professor Branly; and the effect of an electric oscillatory spark in changing the conductivity of a light metal contact was also rediscovered by Sir Oliver Lodge, and the phenomena investigated by many other observers. I can show you the experiment on a large scale in the following manner:—

[Figure 70]

I have here a number of aluminium discs, the size of sixpences, stamped out of thin metal, and these are arranged in a sort of semi-cylindrical trough between two terminal screws, so that the discs are very lightly pressed together. Under these circumstances the pile of metal discs is not a conductor, and it will not pass the electric current from a battery which is joined up in series with an electric bell and the pile of discs (see Fig. 70). Supposing, however, that I make an oscillatory spark in proximity to this pile of metal discs, as I can do by taking the discharge from a large Leyden jar near it; the pile of discs at once becomes a conductor; the electric current from the battery can then pass through it, and the bell rings. Such an arrangement has been named by Sir Oliver Lodge a coherer, because, under the action of the oscillatory spark, the discs cohere or stick together. We can separate the discs by giving them a sharp rap, and then the operation can be again repeated.

A much more sensitive arrangement can be made by taking a small box of wood through the bottom of which pass two nickel wires which are parallel to one another, but not in contact. In this box is placed a small quantity of very finely powdered metallic nickel or nickel filings, and if the quantity of these filings is properly adjusted, it is possible to make an arrangement which possesses the property that there is no conductivity between the two nickel wires under ordinary circumstances, but that they become conductively connected to one another the moment an oscillatory electric spark is made in the neighbourhood. We shall speak of this contrivance as an electric wave indicator, and we shall employ it in subsequent experiments to enable us to detect the presence of an electric wave.

We must then return for a moment to the consideration of the production of electrical oscillations in circuits of various kinds. I trust it has been made plain to you that if two metallic surfaces, separated by a non-conductor such as air or glass, are acted upon by an electromotive force, the non-conductor becomes electrically strained. Another way of stating this is to say that a positive charge of electricity exists on one metal surface, and a negative charge on the other. The only objection which can be raised to expressing the facts in this manner is that it fastens attention rather upon the conductors than upon the insulator, which is the real storehouse of the energy. If these two metal surfaces are then connected together by a conductor of low resistance, the charges disappear by a series of oscillations, and the result is an electric current in the conducting circuit connecting the plates, which rushes backwards and forwards in the circuit, but gradually diminishes in strength until it completely dies away. You may picture to yourselves the electrical effect as analogous to the following experiment with two air-vessels: Supposing we have two strong steel bottles, into one of which we compress a quantity of air, and in the other we make a vacuum by pumping out nearly all the air. These vessels would correspond with two conductors, one charged with positive electricity and the other with negative. Imagine these vessels connected by a wide pipe in which is placed a tap or valve, which can be opened suddenly so as to permit the air to rush over from the full vessel to the empty one. If this is done, it is a matter of experience that the equality of pressure between the two vessels is not at once established, but in virtue of the inertia quality of the air, it only takes place after a series of oscillations of air in the pipe. In rushing over from the full vessel to the empty one the air, so to speak, overshoots the mark, and the state of the vessels as regards air-pressure is exactly interchanged. The air then rushes back again, and it is only after a series of to-and-fro movements of the air in the pipe that an exact equality of pressure in the two vessels is attained.
