The electrical actions which take place in connection with an electric discharge between two conductors, one of which is charged positively and the other negatively, are exactly analogous to the above-described experiment with two air-vessels, one of which has air in it under compression, and the other has had the air removed from it. You will notice, however, that the oscillations of the air in the pipe in the air-vessel experiment depend essentially upon the fact that air is a substance which has inertia, or mass, and you will naturally ask what is it which has inertia, or its equivalent, in the electrical experiment? The answer to this question is as follows: Every electric circuit has a quality which is called inductance, in virtue of which an electric current cannot be started in it instantly, even under any electromotive force, and conversely when the current is started it cannot be immediately brought to rest. From the similarity of this quality of the circuit to the inertia of ordinary material substances, it has been sometimes called the electric inertia of the circuit. The word “inertia” really means inactivity, or laziness, but the term as used in mechanics implies something more than mere inactivity. It involves the notion of a persistence in motion when once the body is set moving.

When a material substance is in motion it possesses energy, and has the power of overcoming up to a certain point resistance to its motion. This energy-holding power, or capacity for storing up energy of motion, which is characteristic of all material substances, is a consequence of their inertia. The fact is otherwise expressed by stating that the mass of a material substance is one element in the production of energy of motion.

An electric current in one sense resembles a moving substance, for it is an exhibition of energy in association with matter. The current-energy is measured by the product of two factors: one is half the square of the current-strength, and the other is the inductance of the circuit. The analogy between the two cases may be more exactly brought out by pointing out that the energy of motion of a moving body is measured by the product of its mass and half the square of its velocity. Hence it follows that the power of overcoming resistance, or, in other words, of doing useful work or mischief, which is possessed by a heavy body in motion is proportional, not simply to its speed, but to the square of its speed. If a bullet, moving with a certain speed, can just pass through one plank 1 inch thick, then, when moving with twice the speed, it will pass through four such planks, and if moving with three times the speed, through nine planks of equal thickness. The energy of an electric current is similarly measured by the product of the inductance of the circuit and half the square of the current-strength. In the same or equal circuits two currents, the strengths of which are in the ratio of 1 to 2, have energies in the ratio of 1 to 4. The greater, therefore, the inductance of an electric circuit, the greater is the tendency of an electric current set flowing in it to run on after the electromotive force is withdrawn. The inductance of a circuit is increased by coiling it into a coil of many turns, and decreased by stretching it out in a straight line.

The important idea to grasp in connection with this part of the subject is that, just as there are two forms of mechanical energy, viz. energy of mechanical strain and energy of motion, so also there are two forms of electrical energy, viz. energy of electro-static strain and electric-current energy.

If, for instance, we bend a bow or extend a spring, this action involves the expenditure of mechanical energy, or work, and the energy so spent is stored up as energy of strain, or, as it is called, distorsional energy in the distorted bow or spring. When, however, the bow communicates its energy to the arrow or the spring to a ball, and so sets these in motion, we have in the flying arrow or ball a store of energy of motion. If a slip of steel spring is fixed at one end, and then set in vibration, we have a continual transformation of energy from the motional to the distorsional form. At one moment the spring is moving violently, and at the next it is bent to its utmost extent; and these states succeed each other. The store of energy in the vibrating spring is, however, gradually frittered away, partly because the continual bending of the steel heats it, and this heat dissipates some of the energy; but also because the spring, if vibrating quickly enough, imparts its energy to the surrounding air, and creates air waves, which travel away, and rapidly rob the vibrating spring of its stock of energy.

In a precisely similar manner all electrical oscillation effects depend upon the fact that electric energy can exhibit itself in two forms. In one form it is electro-static energy, or energy of electric strain. In this form we have it when we charge a Leyden jar. The glass is then, as explained, in a state of electrical strain, and its condition is analogous to that of a stretched spring. The same holds good when we have two conductors insulated from each other in air. We have then an electrical strain in the air. It is important, however, to notice that, since a perfect vacuum can support electric strain, it follows that, in the cases where air or glass constitute this non-conductor, or dielectric, of a condenser, the whole of the energy cannot be stored in the material substance, the glass or the air. The real storehouse of the energy is the æther, as modified by the presence of the ordinary matter in the same place.

When we discharge the Leyden jar or condenser, the electro-static energy in the dielectric disappears, and we obtain in its place an electric current in the connecting conductor; and this, as described, is an exhibition of energy in another form. If the resistance of the connecting conductor is small, then we have electrical oscillations established which consist in an alternate transformation of the energy from an electro-static form to the electric-current form.

At each oscillation some energy is frittered away into heat in the conductor, and if the conductor and condenser have a special form, energy may be rapidly removed from the system by the electric waves which are formed in the surrounding æther or dielectric. These waves consist in the propagation through the medium of lines of electric strain, just as an air wave consists in the propagation through the air of regions of air-compression, or a water wave consists in the propagation of an elevation on the surface.

Returning again to the discussion of the production of electrical oscillations, it is necessary to consider a little more in detail the manner in which we can create an electrical oscillation in what we have called an open electric circuit. Let me begin with an experiment, and it will then be easier for you to understand the particular points to be explained.

[Figure 71]

Before me are two long brass rods, each of them about 5 feet in length, and the ends of these rods are provided with polished brass balls (see Fig. 71). The rods are placed in one line and supported on pieces of ebonite, and are so fixed that the two balls are separated from one another by a space of about ¹⁄₄ inch. The two rods constitute, therefore, two insulated conductors. These rods are connected by coils of wire with the terminals of an instrument called an induction coil, which I shall not stop to describe, but which you may regard as a kind of electrical machine for producing electromotive force. If we set the induction coil in action, it creates between its terminals an intermittent but very powerful electromotive force, which gradually increases up to a certain value, at which it breaks down the conductivity of the air-gap between the two balls. Let us think carefully what happens as the electromotive force of the induction coil is increasing. One of the rods is in effect being electrified with positive, and the other with negative, electricity, and these charges are increasing in magnitude. The two rods constitute, as it were, the two coated surfaces of a kind of Leyden jar, or condenser, of which the surrounding air is the non-conductor. Accordingly, by all that has been previously explained, you will easily understand that there is an electric strain in the air which exists along certain lines, called lines of electro-static strain, and this state in the air is exactly similar to the condition in which the glass of a Leyden jar finds itself when the jar is charged. If we were to delineate the direction of this electric strain by lines drawn through the space around the rods, we should have to draw them somewhat in the fashion represented by the dotted lines in Fig. 71. As the electrical state of the rods gradually increases in intensity, a point is reached at which the air between the balls can no longer maintain this strain, and it breaks down and passes into a conductive condition. The state of affairs round the rods is then similar to that of a Leyden jar being discharged. An electric current is produced across the air-gap, moving from one rod to the other, and the intensely heated air in between the balls is visible to us as an electric spark. This spark, if photographed, would be found to be an oscillatory spark. The electric current in the rods cannot continue indefinitely: it gradually falls off in strength, but as it flows it creates in the space around the rods an electric strain which is in the opposite direction to that which produced it, although taking place along the same lines.

After a very short time, therefore, the electrical conditions which existed at the moment before the air broke down are exactly reproduced, only the direction of the strain is reversed. In other words, the rod which was positively electrified is now negatively, and vice versâ. Then this state of strain again begins to disappear, producing in the rod an electric current, again in the reverse direction; and so the energy, which was originally communicated to the space round the rods in the form of an electric strain, continually changes its form, existing at one moment as energy of the electric current passing across the spark gap, and the next moment as energy of electric strain. We may ask why this state of things does not continue indefinitely, and the answer to that question is twofold. First because the rods possess a property called electrical resistance, and this acts towards the electric current just as friction acts towards the motion of material substances; in other words, it fritters away the energy into heat. So at each reversal of the electric current in the rod a certain quantity of the original store of energy has disappeared, due to the resistance.

There is, however, a further and more important source of dissipation of energy, and this is due to the fact that an electrical oscillation of this kind taking place in a finite straight circuit, or, as it is called, an open electric circuit, creates in the space around an electric wave. The rapid reversal of the electric strain in the air results in the production of an electric wave, just as in the case of an explosion made in air, the rapid compression of the air results in the production of an air wave. It is not easy for those who come to the subject for the first time to fully grasp the notion of what is implied by the term “an electric wave.”

In the first lecture, you will perhaps remember, I pointed out that the production of a wave in a medium of any kind can take place if the medium possesses two properties. In the first place, it must elastically resist some change or distortion, and, in the second place, when that distortion is made it must tend to disappear if the medium is left to itself, and in so doing the displacement of the medium must overshoot the mark and be reproduced in the opposite direction, owing to some inertia-like quality or power of persistence in the medium.

It would lead us into matters beyond the scope of elementary lectures if we were to attempt to summarize all the evidence which exists tending to show that the phenomena of electricity and magnetism must depend upon actions taking place in some medium called the electro-magnetic medium. All the great investigators at the beginning of the last century, when electrical and magnetic phenomena were beginning to be explored, came to this conclusion, and in the writings of Joseph Henry, of Ampère, and of Faraday we find references again and again to their conviction that the phenomena of electricity imply the existence of a medium exactly in the same way as do the phenomena of optics. It is only, however, in recent years that we have had evidence before us, some of which will be reviewed in the next lecture, which affords convincing proof that the luminiferous æther and the electro-magnetic medium must be the same. The consideration of the simplest electrical effects is sufficient to show that, if this medium exists, it possesses at least two properties, one of which is that it offers an elastic resistance to the production of electric strain in it by means of electromotive force. A question which is sure to arise in the minds of those who consider this subject carefully is, What is the nature of an electric strain? And the only answer which we can give at the present moment is that we must be content to leave the question unanswered. We do not know enough yet about the mechanical structure of the electro-magnetic medium, or æther, to be able to pronounce in detail on the nature of the change we call an electric strain. It may be a motion of some kind, it may be a compression or a twist, or it may be something totally different and at present unthinkable by us, but, whatever it is, it is some kind of change which is produced under the action of electromotive force, and which disappears when the electromotive force is removed.

Clerk-Maxwell, to whom we owe some of our most suggestive conceptions of modern electricity, coined the phrase electric displacement to describe the change which we are here calling an electric strain. One essential element in Maxwell’s theory of electricity is that an electric strain or displacement, whilst it is being made or whilst it is disappearing, is in effect an electric current, and it is for that reason sometimes spoken of as a displacement current. We have seen that every electric circuit possesses a quality analogous to inertia, that is to say, when a current is produced in it it tends to persist, and it cannot be created at its full value instantly by any electromotive force.

Just as we cannot, at the present moment, pronounce in detail on the real nature of electric strain, so we cannot say whether that quality which we call inductance of a circuit is dependent upon a true inertia of the electro-magnetic medium or on some entirely different quality more fundamental.
