Having in the last chapter explained the nature and mode of production of electric oscillations, and shown that when these take place in an open electric circuit or long straight rod they give rise to certain actions at a distance, rendered evident by the changes taking place in the conductivity of metallic powders, we have now to present the outlines of a proof that these actions are really due to a wave-motion of some description set up in the æther, which in nature is essentially the same as that which constitutes the agency we call light.

We shall begin by studying a few of the epoch-making discoveries we owe to the celebrated Heinrich Hertz, announced in a series of famous researches with which he surprised and delighted the scientific world in the years 1887 and 1888. These investigations opened a new and remarkable field of experimental work.

The precise form of apparatus used by Hertz in these researches is, however, unsuited for lecture demonstration, and I shall use on this occasion some arrangements of my own, which are only convenient modifications of appliances previously employed by other experimentalists. The devices here shown are, however, very convenient for public demonstrations.

This apparatus consists of two parts, a part for generating electric waves, which we shall call the radiator, and a part for detecting them, which is called the receiver.

The radiator consists of a zinc box, A (see Fig. 73), which is provided with hollow trunnions, and can be fixed to a suitable stand and turned in any direction. The box has an open end to it, and in its interior there are two brass rods about 4 inches long, each terminating in brass balls, S, 1 inch in diameter. These rods are thrust through corks fixed in the end of two ebonite tubes, which pass through the hollow trunnions of the box. The rods have their ends attached to very closely wound spirals of gutta-percha-covered wire contained in the ebonite tubes. These spirals are called choking coils. When the balls are arranged in the interior of the box in their proper position, they are about ¹⁄₁₆ inch apart, and the rods to which they are attached are in line with each other.

[Figure 73]

The outer ends of the choking coils are connected to an induction coil or electrical machine, say a small Wimshurst machine, suitable for producing electric sparks about 2 or 3 inches in length. If then sparks are taken between the balls, we have an arrangement which is, in fact, a small Hertz oscillator or radiator. It has been fully explained in the last chapter that the action of the induction coil or electrical machine is first to create a difference in the electric condition of the balls, such that one is positively electrified and the other negatively. The balls and rods and the surrounding air, as already explained, then form a sort of Leyden jar or condenser, and in virtue of the electromotive force the air is electrically strained around the balls. When this strain reaches a particular value, the air between the balls passes at once into a conductive condition, and we have a discharge which is oscillatory in nature produced between the conductors. We may consider that the electrical charges on the two rods rush backwards and forwards, setting up on the rods an oscillatory surface electric current, and that this is accompanied by a very rapid reversal of the strain in the surrounding non-conductor or dielectric. This state of affairs results in sending out into space an effect called an electric wave.

[Figure 74]

Turning, then, to the receiver B (Fig. 73), we notice that this consists of a similarly shaped metal box, having in it a board to which are fixed two short nickel wires. These are crossed without touching in the interior of a small ebonite box (see Fig. 74). The wires are just covered inside the box with a very small quantity of fine nickel filings. To the end of the zinc receiver-box is fixed a long lead pipe, in the interior of which are two insulated wires, c, d.

These wires are joined to the extremities of the nickel wires in the receiver-box and then, passing through the lead pipe, they enter another metal box which contains a battery and electric bell. The pinch of nickel filings in the small ebonite box is not an electric conductor in its ordinary condition, and hence the electric circuit, including the battery and bell, is not complete. If, however, an electric oscillation is set up in the nickel receiver-wires, the mass of metal particles connecting them at once becomes a conductor, because little metallic granules stick or cohere together. The battery is thus able to send an electric current through the circuit, which includes the coherer, and the electric bell is caused to ring. It may be mentioned that in the actual apparatus employed the arrangement is not quite so simple. The coherer would be permanently injured if we were to attempt to send through it an electric current strong enough to ring an electric bell. Hence we associate with the coherer a contrivance called a relay. A single voltaic cell, E (a dry cell) (see Fig. 75), is joined up in series with the coherer C and this relay R. The latter is a sort of switch or circuit-closer of such kind that when a very feeble current passes through it it closes a second circuit through which a much stronger current can pass. The transition of the nickel filings from a non-conductive to a conductive condition is, therefore, only the means by which a very small current of electricity is allowed to pass through the circuit of an electro-magnet which forms the circuit of the relay. This action causes a piece of iron to be attracted, and this again in turn closes another circuit, and so enables the current from a second battery, F, of five or six cells to actuate the electric bell G. The arrangement of the two batteries, the relay coherer, and bell will be understood by studying the diagram of connections in Fig. 75.

The really important condition in securing success in the performance of the experiments made with this apparatus is that the long wires which connect the receiver-box with the metal box containing the bell, battery, and relay shall be entirely enclosed in a lead pipe without joint, which is soldered at one end into the receiver-box and at the other into the battery-box. Another practical point is that these wires, where they enter the battery-box, must have included in their circuit two little coils of insulated wire of a good many turns, which are called “choking coils.” A third element of success is that the coherer or sensitive conductor shall be sensitive enough, but not too sensitive. This condition can only be obtained by a process of trial and failure. Being provided with these two pieces of apparatus, we can now proceed to exhibit a series of experiments of great interest.

[Figure 75]

In the first place, let the radiator-box and receiver-box be placed a few feet apart with their open mouths facing each other, like two guns arranged to fire down each other’s throats. Then, if all is in order when we make an electric spark between the two balls of the radiator, the electric bell in connection with the receiver will begin to ring, showing that the coherer in the receiver-box has been affected and made conductive by the electric wave sent out from the radiator-box. If a smart rap is then given to the receiver-box the clinging metallic filings in the ebonite box will be separated again and, the circuit being interrupted, the bell will stop ringing.

This being done, the radiator-box is then turned a little on one side by rotating it round its hollow trunnions like a gun until the open mouths of the two boxes no longer face each other. It will then be found, on repeating the former experiment, that the bell will not ring when a spark is made between the balls. A little experimenting will show that the action which affects the coherer is propagated out from the radiator-box in straight lines like the light from a lamp, and that we are here dealing with something which has all the character of radiation. In the next place, let the receiver- and radiator-boxes be again arranged with their open mouths facing each other. We make a spark and again secure the responsive action of the bell. We shall now proceed to prove that this effect, which is called electric radiation, passes quite freely through certain substances, but is more or less completely stopped by others. For instance, if we hold a sheet of iron, tinfoil, or even paper covered with silver leaf between the open mouths of the radiator and receiver, we find that the bell of the receiver will not ring even when a rapid series of oscillatory sparks are made in the radiator. These sheets of metal, thick or thin, are quite opaque to the electric radiation proceeding from the spark-balls. On the other hand, we find a sheet of paper or card, a wooden board, a sheet of glass, a slab of wax or bitumen, sulphur, marble, or slate, are all quite pervious or transparent, and when held between the radiator and receiver do not hinder at all perceptibly the action of the former on the latter. We conclude, therefore, that some bodies are opaque and some transparent to the electric radiation. But the classification does not agree with the classification as regards opacity or transparency for light. Wood, marble, and pitch are optically opaque, but electrically transparent. The general law, however, which decides the question of opacity or transparency for electric radiation, is as follows: All good electrical conductors are opaque to electric radiation, and all good insulators or non-conductors are transparent.

Hence we see at once why metal sheets are opaque, and wood, wax, or glass transparent, to the electric radiation from the spark-balls.

We may go one step further. If we take some sheets of perforated zinc or wire gauze, or even a large packet of pins, or paper bag full of iron filings, we shall find that all these bodies are practically opaque to the electric rays. Moreover, we can show that not only is the above law true for solids, but it holds good for liquids as well. I have provided here a number of flat glass bottles which are filled with various liquids, salt water, fresh water, solution of soda, paraffin oil, olive oil, turpentine and methylated spirits.

If we test an empty glass bottle between the radiator and receiver, we can assure ourselves that the bottle itself is transparent to the electric radiation.

If, then, we take the bottles containing the various liquids and test them one by one between the radiator and the receiver, we find that the bottles containing the paraffin oil, the olive oil, and the turpentine are transparent to the electric radiation, but that the bottles containing the salt water, the fresh water, the solution of soda, and the methylated spirits are all opaque. The oils and liquids similar to them are all good non-conductors, whereas water and various aqueous solutions are fairly good conductors of electricity, and hence these liquids, although they are all about equally transparent to light, behave very differently to electric radiation. As regards the electric ray, a bottle full of pure water is as opaque to the electric radiation we are here using as it would be to light if it were filled with black ink.

Experiment shows that every object containing water, or which is wet, is exceedingly opaque to the electric radiation we are employing. Thus, for instance, if I take a dry duster folded in four, and hold it in the path of the electric ray, you see that it is quite transparent, and that the bell attached to the receiver rings as easily as if there were no duster there at all. If, however, we dip the duster in water, and then hold it between the radiator and receiver, we find that the wet duster is perfectly opaque.

The human body consists largely of water which exists in the tissues, and hence it is not surprising to find that the hand or any part of the body placed between the radiator and receiver intercepts the electric ray. You see, if I hold my hand in front of the radiator, that nothing is able to escape from it, when sparks are made between the balls, which can affect the receiver. In the same way it can be shown by experiment that the human head is perfectly opaque—in fact, much more opaque than an equally thick block of wood; and this opacity to the electric ray is due in a veritable sense to the water in the brain. All dry animal tissues, such as leather, bone, gelatine, and flesh, if dry, are very transparent to electric radiation of the kind we are now using, but if these objects are made thoroughly wet, then they become intensely opaque.

[Figure 76]

We can, then, proceed to show that this electric radiation can be reflected, just like light or sound, by metal or other conducting surfaces, and that the law of reflection of the electric ray is the same as the law of reflection for rays of light or sound. If we place the radiator A with its mouth upwards, still preserving the receiver B in a horizontal position, it is possible to adjust the two very near to one another, but yet so that the radiation from the radiator does not affect the receiver. If I now hold a metal plate, P, at an angle of 45° above the mouth of the radiator, you will notice that the bell at once rings, thus showing that the electric radiation has been reflected into the receiver-box (see Fig. 76). Also we find that a very small deviation from the angle of 45° is sufficient to prevent the effect. Careful experiments in the laboratory show that the electric ray is reflected according to the optical law, viz. that the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence. We find that any good conducting surface will, in this manner, affect the electric radiation. Thus I can reflect it from a sheet of tinfoil or even from my hand, and the fact that I can, so to speak, take hold of this electric radiation, and deflect it in different directions by the palm of my hand, produces in the mind a very strong conviction that we are dealing with something of a very real nature in experimenting with this electric radiation.

It will be in your remembrance that, in the chapter in which we were dealing with waves in the air, I showed you a very interesting experiment illustrating the refraction of rays of sound by means of a carbonic acid prism, and I have now to bring before you an exactly analogous experiment performed with electric radiation. Here, for instance, is a prism made of paraffin wax, a substance which you have already seen is transparent to the electric ray. If we arrange the radiator- and receiver-boxes at an angle to one another, it is possible so to adjust them that the electric radiation projected from the radiator-box A just escapes the receiver-box B, and does not therefore cause the bell to ring (see Fig. 77). When this adjustment has been made we introduce the paraffin prism P into the path of the electric ray, and if the adjustments are properly made, we find that the electric ray is bent round or refracted, and that it then enters the receiver-box and causes the bell to ring. This experiment was first performed by Hertz with a very large pitch prism, but his apparatus was too cumbersome for lecture purposes, and the smaller and more compact arrangement you see before you is therefore preferable for present purposes.
