You will notice, on referring to the above table of frequencies, that the range of sensibility of the human eye is very much smaller than that of the ear. Our eyes are wonderful instruments for detecting wave-motion in the æther, and our ears are appliances for detecting wave-motion in the air. The ear, however, is, as explained in a previous chapter, sensitive to air-vibration forming musical tones which lie between 30 and 30,000 per second, and these numbers are in the ratio of 1000 to 1, and cover a range of about ten octaves. The eye, however, is only sensitive to æther-vibrations which lie in frequency between 400 and 700 billions per second, and these numbers are in the ratio of nearly 2 to 1, or comprise only one octave.

The question, of course, immediately arises—What are the properties of æther waves the frequency of which lies outside the above limits?

Scientific investigation has made us acquainted with a vast range or gamut of æther-vibrations, and we are able to summarize our present knowledge as follows:—

The physical effect we call light, and that which we have up to the present moment merely called electric radiation, are really identical in nature, and both consist in waves propagated through the space-filling æther, the only difference between them is in wave-length and wave-amplitude. In between these two classes of radiation comes a third, which is called the dark-heat radiation, and beyond the limits of visible radiation we are acquainted with another group of æther waves which cannot affect the eye as light, but which from their power to affect a photographic plate, is called actinic radiation. Hence, briefly speaking, four great groups of æther waves are known to us, called respectively—

1. Actinic, or photographic rays.

2. Luminous, or light rays.

3. Ultra-red, or dark-heat rays.

4. Electric, or Hertz rays.

Convincing proof has been afforded that these various rays are essentially the same in nature, and that they consist in periodic disturbances or waves propagated through the æther in every case with the velocity of 186,500 miles, or 1000 million feet, or 30,000 million centimetres per second.

We may, therefore, say that these classes of æther waves differ from each other only in the same sense in which a bass note in music differs from a treble one; that is, the difference is a difference in frequency.

Just, therefore, as we have a gamut, or scale of musical tones, or air-vibrations of increasing frequency, so we may arrange a gamut or scale of æther waves progressively placed according to their vibration-rates. Our present knowledge concerning æther waves can best be exhibited by arranging in a chart a series of numbers showing the wave-lengths of the waves with which we are so far acquainted. As a limit of length we shall take the one-thousandth part of a millimetre. Most persons know that a millimetre is a thousandth part of a metre, and is a short length nearly equal to one twenty-fifth of an inch. The thousandth part of a millimetre is called a micron, and is denoted by the symbol 1μ. This last is therefore an exceedingly short length, nearly equal to one twenty-five thousandth part of an inch.

Following, also, the musical nomenclature, we shall speak of all those waves included between two wave-lengths, one of which is double or half the other, as an octave. Thus all the various waves whose wave-lengths lie between 1μ and 2μ in length are said to be an octave of radiation. As a preliminary to further discussion let us consider, in the first place, the simple facts about the radiation which affects our eyes as light.

The light which comes to us from the sun is not a simple thing. It consists of æther waves of many different wave-lengths mingled together. Sir Isaac Newton first revealed to us the compound nature of white light by his celebrated experiment with a glass prism, and his optical discoveries were the starting-point for our information on this subject. If a beam of sunlight is allowed to fall on a glass prism, the rays of light of different wave-lengths which compose it are each bent or refracted to a different degree. In free space æther waves of various wave-lengths all travel, as far as we know, at the same rate. This equality in speed is, however, disturbed the moment the waves enter a transparent material substance such as glass. The velocity of propagation is then reduced in all cases, but it is generally more reduced for the shorter waves than for the longer ones; and as a consequence the rays of shorter-wave lengths are more bent or refracted than the rays of longer wave-length. We have, therefore, a dispersion of the component rays, or a sorting out or analysis of the mixture of rays of various wave-lengths, and if we receive the light on a screen after passing through the prism we have a band of coloured light called a spectrum, which consists of a series of patches of light each of a different wave-length. The component rays of the original beam of light are spread out fan-fashion by the prism. We may note, in passing, that it is not every transparent body when fashioned into a prism which thus analyzes the light into a fan-shaped beam with rays of various wave-lengths arranged in the order of their wave-lengths. The substances which behave as does glass or water when made into prisms are said to exhibit normal dispersive power. There are, however, some bodies, such as iodine or an alcoholic solution of fuschine, which exhibit anomalous dispersion and refract some longer waves of light more than some shorter ones. The arrangements for forming a normal spectrum are as follows: We pass a beam of light from the electric lamp through a lens, and place in front of this lens a metal plate with a narrow vertical slit-shaped opening in it. At a proper distance in front of the slit we place another lens, and project upon the screen a sharp image of the slit in the shape of a bar of white light. Placing a hollow glass prism filled with bisulphide of carbon in front of the last lens, we find that the various rays in the white light are dispersed, and we produce on the screen a band of rainbow-coloured light, called the spectrum. This spectrum is in reality a series of differently coloured images of the slit placed side by side. By making use of the principle of interference as disclosed by Young, it is possible to make a measurement of the wave-length of the rays of light which produce the sensation of various colours when they fall upon the eye. Thus the wave-length of those æther waves which produce the sensation of deep red is 0·75μ, and that of the waves producing the sensation of violet when they fall upon the retina of the eye is 0·43μ. The whole of the visible spectrum is therefore included within a single octave of æther radiation. Within these limits any change in the wave-lengths makes itself felt in our eyes as a change of colour. It is commonly said that there are seven colours in the spectrum—red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet. As a matter of fact, a highly trained eye can discover about a thousand different tints in the spectrum of white light. Time will not allow us to enter into any discussion of what is called colour-vision and the theory of sensations of colour. The fact I wish to impress upon you here is that, outside of ourselves, there is no such thing as colour. The rays of light which produce these sensations of colour when they enter the eye differ from one another only in wave-length and wave-amplitude. Hence there is a complete analogy between light of different colours and sounds of different pitches or tone. Red light differs from blue light only as a bass note in music differs from a treble note. Hence you must distinguish very carefully between a ray of light in itself, and the sensation it produces when it falls upon the retina of the eye. Our eyes are gifted with a marvellous power of detecting slight differences between the wave-length and the amplitude of the rays which may stimulate two adjacent portions of the retina of our eyes.

That range of sensibility is, however, very limited. Supposing we allow a ray having a wave-length greater than 0·75 or less than 0·43 to enter the human eye. It produces no sensation of light at all. Accordingly, if we form a spectrum with sunlight, we find a tolerably sharp limit to the visible spectrum. Supposing, however, we allow the spectrum to fall upon a sensitive photographic plate, we find that the plate will be chemically acted upon far beyond the limits of the visible violet end of the spectrum. Hence we learn that beyond the violet there is radiation of a kind which is invisible to the eye, yet can affect a photographic plate. This is called the ultra-violet, or actinic radiation.

Schumann, in 1893, measured waves in actinic radiation of a wave-length as short as 0·1μ, or one two hundred and fifty thousandth part of an inch, and hence we may say that we are acquainted with at least two octaves of invisible ultra-violet or actinic radiation, or æther waves have wave-lengths lying between the limits 0·1μ and 0·4μ.

In a similar manner very delicate heat-detecting instruments or thermometers called bolometers, or thermopiles, show us that beyond the visible-red end of the normal spectrum there is radiation called the ultra-red radiation, or dark-heat, which cannot affect the eye.

The wave-length of dark-heat radiation has been measured up to a limit of 67μ by Professor Rubens and Professor Nichols in 1897 and 1898. Accordingly, we can assert that beyond the red end of the spectrum we are acquainted with six octaves or more of ultra-red radiation, viz. that lying in wave-length between 0·75μ and 67μ.

We may represent the above facts in another way as follows: In most pianos the keyboard extends over a range of seven or eight octaves. Imagine a piano having a keyboard with nine octaves, and that each key was labelled to correspond with a light wave of a particular length. At the extreme treble end let the first key be labelled 0·1, and at the extreme base end let the last key be labelled 51·2. Then the various octaves will be comprised between the keys marked 0·1, 0·2, 0·4, 0·8, 1·6, 3·2, 6·4, 12·8, 25·6, and 51·2 (see Fig. 77).

Suppose that each key when struck caused some kind of electric radiator to emit an æther wave whose wave-length reckoned in microns or thousandths of a millimetre, is indicated by the number on the key. Of all this great gamut of æther waves only the notes of one octave, viz. the third from the treble end, the wave-lengths of which lie between 0·4μ and 0·8μ, affect the retina of the human eye as light.

Those waves in the two octaves higher up, that is, of wave-length less than 0·4μ, are able powerfully to affect a photographic plate, and so, indeed, do some of the waves in the visible octave. We may, in fact, say that all the æther waves with which we are acquainted, the wave-length of which is less than about 0·5μ, are able to make an impression upon a photographic plate. These rays, whatever their wave-lengths, are called the actinic rays.

On the other hand, all the æther waves with wave-length greater than about 0·8μ, and for six octaves further down, can only be recognized by their ability to heat a delicate thermopile or other heat-measuring instrument. They cannot affect the eye, and they have little or no effect in decomposing silver salts and impressing a sensitive photographic surface.

[Figure 80]

It should be noted, however, that whilst there are more or less definite limits to the wave-lengths of the eye-affecting radiation, and probably also to the actinic, or photographic radiation (radiation of some wave-lengths being both visible and actinic), rays of every wave-length are in some degree thermal, or heat-producing. The term dark-heat radiation is, however, generally restricted to radiation of that wave-length which is non-visible and non-actinic. This mode of presenting the facts will call your attention again to the narrow limits of sensibility of the human eye as compared with those of the ear.

The above-mentioned range of wave-lengths does not, however, exhaust our powers of æther-wave production. If we skip over six octaves lying below the limits of the longest dark-heat wave with which we are acquainted, we should arrive at a wave whose wave-length is about 4000μ, or 4 millimetres. At this point we encounter the shortest æther waves which have yet been made by means of electrical oscillations in the fashion first discovered by Hertz.

It is not possible to define exactly the wave-length limits of radiation as yet made by means of electrical oscillations. Lampa has experimented with æther waves made by the Hertz method, the wave-length of which was not more than 4 millimetres. Professors Lodge, Rhigi, Bose, Trouton, the author, and many others, have carried out quasi-optical experiments with electrically made æther waves, the wave-length of which ranged from a few millimetres to several inches. Hertz’s own work was chiefly done with æther waves from 1 or 2 feet to 30 or 40 feet in wave-length. More recently, æther waves of 800 to 1000 feet in wave-length have been employed in wireless telegraphy. Perhaps we shall not be wrong in saying that we are acquainted with sixteen or seventeen octaves of æther-wave radiation which is made electrically, and is usually called the Hertz radiation.

Between the radiation of greatest wave-length which proceeds from hot or incandescent bodies such as the sun, the electric arc, or a hot ball, and that of the shortest wave-length which has been created by means of electrical oscillations set up in some form of Hertz oscillator, there is a range of six octaves of æther waves which, so far as we know, have not yet been manufactured or detected. Herein lies an opportunity for much future scientific work. We have to discover how to create and recognize these interconnecting wave-lengths. From the fact that all Hertz waves travel with the same speed as light, and from our ability to imitate, as you have seen, the well-known optical phenomena with Hertz radiation of short wave-length, the great induction has been made that all æther waves have the same essential nature, and that invisible actinic rays, light rays, dark-heat rays, and Hertz rays are all of them æther waves of various wave-lengths and amplitudes. Thus we see, as Maxwell long ago predicted, that light in all probability is an electro-magnetic phenomenon, and therefore all optical effects must be capable of receiving an electro-magnetic explanation. The inclusion thus made of the whole science of Optics within the domain of Electricity and Magnetism is one of the grandest achievements of Physical Science. It stands second only to Newton’s great discovery of universal gravitation, which reduced all Physical Astronomy to pure Dynamics, and showed that the force concerned in the falling of a stone is identical with that which holds the planets in their orbits, and controls the motions of galaxies of suns.
