At the end of the last chapter it was explained that these Hertz radiations are created in the æther by the suddenly starting, stopping, or reversing the motion of crowds of electrons, which are, as it were, instantly released from a state of pressure or tension, and set moving inside a straight insulated conductor, which forms an open electric circuit. The radiations we call light and dark heat are probably, therefore, started in a similar manner by vibrations of the electrons which form parts of, or which build up, atoms. There are many physical phenomena which seem to show that the electrons which we can detach from atoms in a high vacuum tube are capable of vibrating freely in definite periods when in connection with their atom. If the atoms are able to move freely, and if each is practically independent, as is the case in a gas, and if they are then caused to radiate by any means, the radiation emitted by the vibration of these electrons consists of certain definite wave-lengths. Hence, when we form the spectrum of an incandescent gas, we find it to consist of several detached bright lines, each corresponding to one particular wave-length, and we do not obtain a uniformly graduated band of coloured light. If an atom is struck by colliding with another, and then left to itself, it appears as if the electrons which compose it and form part of it are set in vibration, and each executes its oscillation in some definite period of time. An atom has, therefore, been compared to a “collection of small tuning-forks,” which, if rudely struck, would result in the emission of a set of air-wave trains, each one corresponding in wave-length to one particular tuning-fork which emitted it. Hence, if we could administer a blow to such a congeries of tuning-forks, and then analyze the compound sound, we should obtain a sound spectrum consisting of separated tones—in other words, a bright line spectrum of the complex sound. Supposing, however, that we have a mass of atoms much more closely in contact, as in the case of a solid body, the continual collisions between the atoms and the closer contact between them cause the vibrations of the electrons to be “forced,” and not “free.” Hence the electrons are compelled to execute all varieties of irregular motion, and these predominate over their regular free natural vibrations. Accordingly, the waves emitted are of a large variety of wave-length, and when the radiation is analyzed by a prism, we obtain a continuous spectrum, or band of many-coloured light, as the result of the separation of the rays of different wave-lengths present in it.

It is this fact which renders our present method of creating artificial light so excessively uneconomical.

All our practical methods for making light consist in heating a solid body in one way or another. In the case of the electric light we heat electrically a carbon rod or filament, or else, as in the Nernst lamp, a rod composed of magnesia and the rare earths. In the case of the lime-light we heat a cylinder of lime. In an ordinary gas or candle flame we heat small particles of carbon, and the same is the case even in the sun itself.

But this process manufactures not only the single octave of radiation which can affect our eyes as light, but a dozen other octaves of radiation to which they are insensible. Hence it follows that of the whole radiation from a gas flame, only about 3 per cent. is eye-affecting light, the remainder is dark heat. In the case of an incandescent electric lamp, this luminous efficiency may amount to 5 per cent., and in the electric arc to 10 or 15 per cent. There is, however, always a great dilution of the useful light by useless dark heat.

The proportion of the light or eye-affecting radiation to the dark heat in the total radiation from any source of light increases with the temperature, but it is not always merely a question of temperature. Thus the electric arc is hotter than a candle flame, and the sun is hotter than the electric arc. Hence, whilst the luminous rays only form 3 parts out of 100, or 3 per cent. of the radiation of a candle, they constitute 10 to 15 per cent. of those of the electric arc, and more than 30 per cent. of those of the sun. On the other hand, the glow-worm and the fire-fly seem to have possession of a knowledge and an art which is as yet denied to man. It has been shown by Professor Langley and Mr. Very that nearly the whole of the radiation from the natural torch of the fire-fly is useful light, and none of it is useless dark heat. Hence these photogenic (light-producing) insects have the art, which we have not, of creating cold light, or unadulterated luminous radiation.

At the present moment in ordinary incandescent or glow-lamp electric lighting we require to expend an amount of power, called one horse-power, to produce illumination equal to that of 600 candles. Supposing, however, that all our power could be utilized in generating merely the rays useful for vision, or which can impress our eyes, we might be able to create by the expenditure of one horse-power more than twenty times as much illumination, that is, a light equal to 12,000 candles.

These figures show us what rewards await the inventor who can discover a means of generating æther waves having wave-lengths strictly limited to the range lying between the limits 0·4μ and 0·7μ without, at the same time, being obliged to create radiation comprising longer waves which are not useful for the purpose of rendering objects visible to us. For the purposes of artificial illumination we require only the æther waves in this one particular octave, and nothing else.

This increase in the efficiency of our sources of artificial illumination is only likely to be brought about when we abandon the process of heating a solid substance to make it give out light, and adopt some other means of setting the electrons in vibration.

It is almost impossible to discuss the subject of æther waves without some reference to the most modern utilization of them in the so-called wireless telegraphy. Without entering upon the vexed questions of priority, or on the historical development of the art, we shall simply confine our attention here to a consideration of the methods employed by Mr. Marconi, who has accomplished such wonderful feats in this department of invention.

We have already seen that when two insulated conductors are placed with their ends very near together, and are then electrified, one positively and the other negatively, and then allowed to be suddenly connected by an electric spark, they constitute an arrangement called an electrical oscillator. If the conductors take the form of two long rods placed in one line, and if their contiguous ends are provided with spark-balls separated by a small gap, we have seen that we have shown that, under the above-mentioned conditions, electric currents of very high frequency are set up in these rods. For creating these oscillations, an instrument called an induction coil or spark-coil is generally employed. You will understand the arrangements better if a brief description is given first of the spark-coil itself as used in wireless telegraphy.

[Figure 81]

The appliance consists of a large bundle of fine iron wires, which are wound over with a long coil of insulated wire. This forms the primary coil. It is enclosed entirely in a tube of ebonite. One end of this coil is a contact-breaker, which automatically interrupts an electric current flowing from a battery through the primary coil (see Fig. 81). A hand-key is also placed in the circuit to stop and start the primary current as desired. Over the primary coil is a very long coil of much finer silk-covered copper wire, called the secondary coil. The length of this coil is very considerable, and may amount to many miles. The secondary coil is divided into sections all carefully insulated from each other. Another important part is the condenser. This consists of sheets of tinfoil laid between sheets of waxed paper, alternate tinfoil sheets being connected. The arrangement forms virtually a Leyden jar, and one set of tinfoils is connected to one side of the automatic break, and the other to the adjacent side. When, therefore, the primary circuit is interrupted by the break, the condenser is at that moment thrown into series with the primary coil. The rapid interruption of the primary current causes a secondary current in the fine-wire coil. The automatic contact-breaker makes from ten to fifty such interruptions per second. At every “break” of the primary a very high electromotive force is generated in the secondary circuit, which may amount to many hundreds of thousands of volts. This very high secondary electromotive force is able to cause an electric discharge in the form of a spark between brass balls connected to the secondary circuit terminals. Coils are generally rated by the length (in inches) of the spark they can produce between brass balls about ¹⁄₂ inch in diameter. The coil most commonly used in wireless telegraphy is thus technically termed a “10-inch induction coil,” from the length of the spark this particular type of coil can produce.

If the insulated brass balls, called the spark-balls, connected to the secondary terminals, are placed an inch or so apart, and the hand-key in the primary circuit is closed, a battery connected to the primary circuit will send a rapidly interrupted current through the primary coil, and a torrent of sparks will pass between the spark-balls. The primary current of the 10-inch coil is usually a current of 10 ampères, supplied at a pressure of 10 volts.

If the hand-key is raised or pressed, it is possible to make long or short torrents of secondary sparks.

Suppose, then, that we connect to the secondary spark-balls two long insulated rods, and place the spark-balls about ¹⁄₄ inch apart. On pressing the hand-key, we obtain a peculiarly bright crackling spark between the balls, which is an oscillatory spark, and at the same time, as already described, electrical oscillations are set up in the rods and electric waves given off. We may represent to ourselves these electrical oscillations in the rods as similar to the mechanical vibrations which would be set up in a long elastic wooden rod, clamped at the middle and set in vibration at the ends. Or we may consider them similar to the fundamental vibrations of an open organ-pipe, the middle of the pipe corresponding with the middle of the rod. In comparing the mechanical vibrations of the rod or the acoustic vibration of the air in the organ-pipe with the electrical oscillations in the long rods, we must bear in mind that the displacement of the rod or the air in the organ-pipe at any point corresponds with electrical pressure, or potential, as it is called, at any point in the long oscillator. Hence, bearing in mind the remarks in the fourth lecture, it will be evident to you that just as the length of the air wave emitted by the open organ-pipe is double the length of the pipe, so the length of the electric wave thrown off from the pair of long rods is double their total length.

Instead of using a pair of rods for the electrical oscillator, it was found by Mr. Marconi to be an improvement to employ only one insulated rod, held vertically, and to connect it to one spark-ball of the coil, and to connect the opposite spark-ball to a metal plate buried in the earth. Then, when the spark-balls are placed a little apart and the hand-key pressed, we have a torrent of oscillatory sparks between the “earthed ball” and the insulated rod ball. This sets up in the rod electrical oscillations, which run up and down the rod. It is easy to show that there is a strong electric current passing into and out of the rod by connecting it to the spark-ball by means of a piece of fine wire. When the sparks are taken, we find this wire will become hot, it may be red hot, or sometimes it may be melted.

By applying the principles already explained, it is not difficult to demonstrate that in the case of an oscillator consisting of a single rod connected to one spark-ball the electric waves thrown off are in wave-length four times the length of the rod.

The electrical actions taking place, therefore, are as follows: At each interruption of the primary current of the spark-coil there is an electromotive force created in the secondary circuit, which gradually charges up the insulated rod until it attains a state in which it is said to be at a potential or electrical pressure of several thousand volts. The spark then happens between the balls, and the rod begins to discharge.

This process consists, so to speak, in draining the electric charge out of the rod, and it takes the form of an electric current in the rod, which has a zero value at the top insulated end, and has its maximum value at the spark-ball end.

Also, when the oscillations take place, we have variations of electric pressure, or potential, which are at a maximum at the upper or insulated end, and have a zero value at the spark-ball end. From the rod we have a hemispherical electric wave radiated. In the language of wireless telegraphists, such a simple insulated rod is called an insulated aerial, or an insulated antenna.

A simple insulated aerial has, however, a very small electrical capacity, and it can store up so little electric energy that the whole of it is radiated in the first oscillation. Hence, strictly speaking, we have no train of electric waves radiated, but merely a solitary wave or electric impulse. The effect on the æther thus produced corresponds to the effect on the air caused by the crack of a whip or an explosion, and not to a musical note or tone as produced by an organ-pipe.

We can, however, make an arrangement which is superior in electric wave-making power, as follows:—

[Figure 82]

The vertical rod, or antenna, A, is not insulated, but is connected by its lower end with one end of a coil of insulated wire, S, wound on a wooden frame (see Fig. 82). The other end of this last coil is connected to a metal plate, e, buried in the earth. Around the wooden frame is wound a second insulated wire, P, one end of which is connected to one spark-ball of the induction coil, and the other end to the outside of a Leyden jar, L, or collection of jars. This double coil on a frame is called an oscillation transformer. The inside of this condenser is connected to the second spark-ball of the induction coil I. When these spark-balls S are placed a short distance apart, and the coil set in action, we have a torrent of oscillatory electric sparks between these balls, and powerful oscillations set up in one circuit of the oscillation-transformer. These oscillations induce other oscillations in the second circuit of the oscillation-transformer, viz. in the one connected to the aerial. The oscillations produced in the air-wire, or aerial, are therefore induced, or secondary oscillations. The aerial wire, or antenna, has therefore a much larger store of electric energy to draw upon, viz. that stored up in the Leyden jars, than if it was itself directly charged by the coil.

In order, however, to obtain the best results certain adjustments have to be made. It has already been explained that every open electrical circuit has a certain natural time-period for the electrical oscillations which can be set up in it. This is technically called its tune.

If we administer a blow to a suspended pendulum we have seen that, if left to itself, it vibrates in a definite period of time, called its natural period. In the same manner, if we have a condenser or Leyden jar having electrical capacity which is joined in series with a coil of wire having electrical inertia or inductance, and apply to the circuit so formed a sudden electromotive force or impulse, and then leave the circuit to itself, the electric charge in it vibrates in a certain definite period, called its natural electrical periodic time.
