The aerial, or antenna, is simply a rod connected to the earth, but it has a certain inductance, and also a certain electrical capacity, and hence any metal rod merely stuck at one end in the earth has a perfectly definite periodic time for the electrical oscillations which can be produced in it. We may compare the rod in this respect with a piece of steel spring held at one end in a vice. If we pull the spring on one side, and let it vibrate, it does so in accordance with its natural time-period for mechanical vibrations. The sound waves given out by it have a wave-length equal to four times the length of the spring. In the same manner the fundamental wave-length of the electric waves emitted by an “earthed aerial,” or rod stuck in the earth, when an electric impulse is applied to its lower end, and electrical oscillations are set up in it, have a wave-length equal to four times that of the rod. Hence to obtain the best result the circuit, including the aerial A, must be “tuned” electrically to the circuit including the Leyden jar L.

Note: See Appendix, Note B.

A consideration of these arrangements will show you that if the hand-key in the primary circuit of the induction coil is pressed for a long or short time, we have long or short torrents of sparks produced between the secondary balls, and long or short trains of electric waves emitted from the aerial, or earthed vertical wire.

Whenever we have any two different signals, we can always make an alphabet with them by suitable combinations of the two. In the well-known Morse alphabet, with which every telegraphist is as familiar as we all are with the printed alphabet, the sign for each of the letters of the alphabet is composed of groups of long and short symbols, called dots and dashes, as follows: Each letter is made by selecting some arrangements of dots or dashes, these being the technical names for the two signs. The Morse code, as used all over the world, is given in the table below—

    THE MORSE ALPHABET.
      A  — ———
      B  ——— — — —
      C  ——— — ——— —
      D  ——— — —
      E  —
      F  — — ——— —
      G  ——— ——— —
      H  — — — —
      I  — —
      J  — ——— ——— ———
      K  ——— — ———
      L  — ——— — —
      M  ——— ———
      N  ——— —
      O  ——— ——— ———
      P  — ——— ——— —
      Q  ——— ——— — ———
      R  — ——— —
      S  — — —
      T  ———
      U  — — ———
      V  — — — ———
      W  — ——— ———
      X  ——— — — ———
      Y  ——— — ——— ———
      Z  ——— ——— — —
    THE MORSE NUMERALS.
      1  — ——— ——— ——— ———
      2  — — ——— ——— ———
      3  — — — ——— ———
      4  — — — — ———
      5  — — — — —
      6  ——— — — — —
      7  ——— ——— — — —
      8  ——— ——— ——— — —
      9  ——— ——— ——— ——— —
      0  ——— ——— ——— ——— ———
      Full Stop  — ——— — ——— — ———
      Signal for calling up — — — ———  — — — ———

The process of sending a wireless message consists in so manipulating the key in the primary circuit of the induction coils that a rapid stream of sparks passes between the secondary balls for a shorter or for a longer time. This gives rise to a corresponding series of electric waves, radiated from the aerial. The dash is equal in duration to about three dots, and a space equal to three dots is left between each letter, and one equal to five dots between each word. Thus, in Morse alphabet the sentence “How are you?” is written—

    — — — —   ——— ——— ———   — ——— ———     — ———   — ——— —   —
         H           O            W           A        R      E
              ——— — ——— ———   ——— ——— ———   — — ———
                    Y              O           U

We have, in the next place, to explain how the signals sent out are recorded.

[Figure 83]

At the receiving station is erected a second insulated aerial, antenna, or long vertical rod, A (see Fig. 83), and the lower end is connected to the earth through a coil of fine insulated wire, P, which forms one circuit of an oscillation-transformer. The secondary circuit, S, of this oscillation-transformer, which is called a jigger, is cut in the middle and has a small condenser, C{1}, inserted, consisting of two sheets of tinfoil separated by waxed paper (see Fig. 83), and to the ends of this circuit is connected the coherer, or metallic filings tube, T, which acts as a sensitive receiver. The Marconi sensitive tube (see Fig. 84) is made as follows. A glass tube about ¹⁄₄ inch in diameter and 2 inches long has two silver plugs put in it, and these are soldered to two platinum wires which are sealed into the closed ends of the tube. The ends of the plugs are cut in a slanting fashion and made very smooth. These ends very nearly touch each other. A very small quantity of very fine metallic powder consisting of nineteen parts nickel and one part silver is then placed between the plugs. The quantity of this powder is scarcely more than could be taken up on the head of a large pin. The glass tube is then exhausted of its air and sealed. The tube is attached to a bone rod by means of which it is held in a clip.

[Figure 84]

To the two sides of the above-mentioned condenser are connected two wires which lead to a circuit including a single voltaic cell, V, and a relay, E. The relay is connected to another circuit which includes a battery, B, and a piece of apparatus called a Morse printer, M, for marking dots and dashes on a strip of paper.

The working details of the above rather complicated system of apparatus devised by Mr. Marconi would require for its full elucidation a large amount of explanation of a technical character. The general reader may, however, form a sufficiently clear idea of its performance as follows:—

When the electrical waves from the distant transmitting station reach the aerial at the receiving station, they set up in it sympathetic electrical oscillations. The most favourable conditions are when the two aerials at the distant stations are exactly similar. These electrical oscillations, or rapid electric currents, set up an electromotive force in the secondary circuit of the oscillation-transformer, and this acts, as already explained, upon the metallic filings in the coherer-tube and causes it to become an electrical conductor. The cell attached to the relay then sends a current through the conductive circuit so formed and operates the relay. This last contrivance is merely a very delicate switch or circuit-closer which is set in action by a small current sent through one of its circuits, and it then closes a second circuit and so enables another much larger battery to send a current through the Morse printer. The printer then prints a dot upon a moving strip of paper and records a signal. One other element in this rather complicated arrangement remains to be noticed, and that is the tapper. Underneath the coherer-tube is a little hammer worked by an electro-magnet like an electric bell. This tapper is set vibrating by the same current which passes through the Morse printer, and hence almost as soon as the latter has begun to print, the sensitive tube receives a little tap which causes the metallic filings to become again a non-conductor, and so arrests the whole of the electric currency. If it were not for this tapper, the arrival of the electric wave would cause the printer to begin printing a line which would continue. The dot is, so to speak, an arrested line. If, however, trains of electric waves continue to arrive, then dots continue to be printed in close order, and form a dash on the paper strip. It will thus be seen that the whole arrangements constitute an exceedingly ingenious device of such a nature that a single touch on the hand-key at one station causing a spark or two to take place between the spark-balls makes a dot appear upon a band of paper at the distant station; whilst, if the hand-key is held down so that a stream of sparks takes place at the transmitting station, a dash is recorded at the receiving station. The means by which this distant effect is produced is the train of electric waves moving over the earth’s surface setting out from one aerial and arriving at the other.

[Figure 85]

The reader who has difficulty in following the above explanations may perhaps gather a sufficiently clear notion of the processes at work by considering a reduced, or simplified, arrangement. Imagine two long insulated rods, A, A′ (see Fig. 85), like lightning-conductors set up at distant places. Suppose each rod cut near the bottom, and let a pair of spark-balls, S, be inserted in one gap and a coherer or sensitive tube, C, in the other. At one station let an electrical machine have its positive and negative terminals connected to the two spark-balls, and at the other let a battery and electric bell be connected to the ends of the coherer. Then, as long as the coherer remains in a non-conductive condition, the electric bell does not ring. If, however, a spark is made between the balls, in virtue of all that has been explained, the reader will understand that the coherer-tube becomes at once conductive by the action of the electric wave sent out from the transmitter-rod. The battery at the receiver-rod then sends a current through the coherer, and rings the bell.

All the other complicated details of the receiver are for making the process of stopping the bell and beginning over again self-acting, and also for the production of two kinds of signals, a long and a short, by means of which an alphabet is made. In order that we may have telegraphy in any proper sense of the word, we must be able to transmit any intelligence at pleasure, and not merely one single arbitrary signal. This transmission of intelligence involves the command of an alphabet, and that in turn requires the power of production of two kinds of signals.

It remains to notice a few of the special details which characterize Mr. Marconi’s system of wireless telegraphy. In establishing wireless communication between two places, the first thing to be done is to equip them both with aerials. If one station is on land, it is usual to erect a strong mast about 150 feet high, and to the top of this is attached a sprit. From this sprit a stranded copper wire is suspended by means of an insulator of ebonite, so that the upper end of the wire is insulated. The lower end of the wire is led into a little hut or into some room near the foot of the mast in which is the receiving and transmitting apparatus.

If the apparatus is to be installed on board ship, then a similar insulated wire is suspended from a yardarm or from a sprit attached to a mast. Each station is provided with the transmitting apparatus and the receiving apparatus, and the attendant changes over the aerial from one connection to the other so as to receive or send at pleasure.

In the case of long-distance wireless telegraphy, the aerial is not a single wire, but a collection of wires, suspended so as to space them a little from each other. Thus in the case of the first experiments made by M. Marconi across the Atlantic, the aerial erected on the coast of Cornwall consisted of fifty stranded copper wires each 150 feet in length suspended in a fan-shaped fashion from a long transverse stay upheld between two masts. The wires were spaced out at the top and gathered in together at the bottom.

The question which almost immediately occurs to most people to ask is how far it is possible to prevent the electric waves emanating from one station affecting all receiving instruments alike within a certain radius. The answer to this is that considerable progress has been made in effecting what is called “tuning” the various stations. In speaking of acoustic resonance it has been pointed out that a train of air waves can set up vibration in other bodies which have the same natural period of vibration. Thus, if we open a piano so as to expose the strings, and if a singer with a strong voice sings a loud true note and then stops suddenly, it will be found that one particular string of the piano is vibrating, viz. that which would give out if struck the note which was sung, but all the rest of the strings are silent. It has been pointed out that every open electric circuit has a natural electrical time-period of vibration in which its electric charge oscillates if it is disturbed by a sudden electromotive force and then left to itself. If the two aerials at two stations are exactly alike, and if the various circuits constituting the oscillation-transformers in the transmitting and receiving appliances are all adjusted to have the same electrical period, then it is found that the stations so tuned are sympathetic at distances vastly greater than they would be if not so tuned. Hence it is possible to arrange wireless telegraph apparatus so that it is not affected by any electric waves arriving from a distance which have not a particular time-period.

Mr. Marconi has also proved that it is possible to receive on the same aerial, at the same time, two different messages on separate receiving instruments from two distant but properly tuned transmitting stations.

Since the date of these pioneer inventions many different forms of wave detector have been discovered, and wireless telegraphy has shown itself to be of the greatest utility in effecting communication between ship and ship, and ship and shore. Its value in enabling intelligence to be transmitted from lightships or lighthouses to coast stations cannot be over estimated. One very remarkable feature of the apparatus as arranged by Mr. Marconi is the small space it occupies. It is in this respect most admirably adapted for use on board ship. It only requires a long, insulated, vertical wire which can easily be suspended from a mast, and the whole receiving and transmitting apparatus can be placed on board ship in a small cabin. Employing the sensitive tube and Marconi receiving arrangements, messages can easily be sent 150 miles over the sea-surface by means of an aerial 150 feet high and a 10-inch induction coil.

It is a curious fact that better results are obtained over a water-surface than over land. Two similar stations with the same appliances can communicate at two or three times greater distance if they are separated by sea than if they are on land and have no water between. This is connected with the fact that electric waves are not able to pass through sea-water, but can diffuse through dry earth. The sea-surface acts somewhat like an optical reflector or mirror, and the electric waves glide along its surface. The rotundity of the earth within certain limits hardly makes any perceptible effect upon the ease of communication. The waves sent out by the transmitter of a long-distance wireless station are from 3000 to 20,000 feet in length, and there is, therefore, a considerable amount of bending or diffraction. It is a familiar fact, as already explained, that a wave-motion, whether on water or in air, spreads round an obstacle to a certain extent. Thus an interposing rock or wall does not form a sharply marked sound-shadow, but there is some deflection of the air waves by the edge of the obstacle. The amount of bending which takes place depends on the length of the wave.
