The Good Bargain

There was once a peasant who had driven his cow to the fair and sold her for seven thalers. On the way home he had to pass a pond, and from a long way off he could hear the frogs crying, "Aik, aik, aik, aik."

"Well," he said to himself, "they are talking without rhyme or reason. It's seven I got, not eight."

When he came to the water he called out to them, "Stupid creatures that you are! Don't you know any better? It's seven thalers, not eight."

But the frogs stuck to their "Aik, aik, aik, aik."

"Come on then, if you won't believe it, I can count it out for you." And he took his money out of his pocket and counted out the seven thalers, reckoning twenty-four groschen to the thaler.

But the frogs paid no attention to his reckoning and went on crying, "Aik, aik, aik, aik."

"What!" cried the peasant, thoroughly angry. "Since you're so determined to know better than I do, count it yourselves" — and he threw all the money into the water to them.

He stood still and waited for them to finish and give him his own back again; but the frogs held to their opinion and went on crying "Aik, aik, aik, aik," and what is more, they did not throw the money out again. He waited a long while, until evening came on and he had to go home. Then he swore at the frogs and called out, "You water-splashers, you thick-heads, you goggle-eyes! You have great mouths on you and can screech till a man's ears hurt, but you can't count seven thalers. Do you think I'm going to stand here till you've finished?"

And with that he went off; but the frogs went on crying "Aik, aik, aik, aik" after him, and he got home thoroughly angry.

After a while he bought another cow and killed it, and worked out that if he sold the meat well he might make as much as the two cows were worth, and have the hide into the bargain.

So when he got to the town with the meat, there was a great pack of dogs gathered in front of the gate, with a big greyhound at the head of them, which jumped at the meat, sniffed at it and barked, "Wow, wow, wow."

As there was no stopping him, the peasant said, "Yes, yes, I know perfectly well you're saying wow, wow, wow because you want some of the meat. But I'd come off badly if I gave it to you."

The dog answered nothing but "Wow, wow."

"Will you promise not to eat the lot, then? And will you stand surety for your companions?"

"Wow, wow, wow," said the dog.

"Well, if you insist on it, I'll leave it with you. I know you well enough, and I know who your master is. But I tell you this: I must have my money in three days, or it will go badly for you. You'll have to bring it out to me."

With that he unloaded the meat and turned back, and the dogs fell on it, barking loudly, "Wow, wow."

The countryman heard them from a distance and said to himself, "Listen to that — now they all want a share, but the big one is answerable to me for it."

When three days had gone by, the countryman thought, "Tonight my money will be in my pocket," and he was quite delighted. But nobody came to pay it.

"There's no trusting anybody nowadays," he said. And at last he lost patience and went into the town to the butcher and demanded his money.

The butcher thought it was a joke, but the peasant said, "Joking aside, I'll have my money. Didn't the big dog bring you a whole slaughtered cow three days ago?"

At that the butcher lost his temper, snatched up a broom handle and drove him out.

"Just wait," said the peasant. "There's still some justice in the world" — and he went to the royal palace and asked for an audience.

He was brought before the King, who was sitting there with his daughter, and was asked what wrong he had suffered.

"Alas," he said, "the frogs and the dogs have taken what was mine, and the butcher paid me for it with a stick" — and he told the whole story from beginning to end.

At that the King's daughter began to laugh out loud, and the King said, "I cannot give you justice in this, but you shall have my daughter for a wife instead. In her whole life she has never laughed as she has just laughed at you, and I promised her to the man who could make her laugh. You may thank God for your good fortune."

"Oh," said the peasant, "I don't want her. I have a wife already, and she is one too many for me. When I go home it is as bad as if there were a wife standing in every corner."

Then the King grew angry and said, "You are a boor."

"Ah, my lord King," said the peasant, "what can you expect from an ox but beef?"

"Wait," said the King. "You shall have another reward. Be off now, and come back in three days, and you shall have five hundred counted out in full."

As the peasant went out through the gate, the sentry said, "You made the King's daughter laugh, so you're bound to have got something good."

"Yes, that's what I think," said the peasant. "Five hundred are to be counted out to me."

"Listen," said the soldier, "give me some of it. What can you do with all that money?"

"Since it's you," said the peasant, "you shall have two hundred. Present yourself before the King in three days and have it paid to you."

A Jew who was standing by and had heard the conversation ran after the peasant, caught him by the coat and said, "Well, what a wonder! What a child of luck you are! I'll change it for you, I'll change it into small coin for you — what do you want with the big thalers?"

"Jew," said the countryman, "you can have three hundred more. Give it to me now in coin, and in three days from now the King will pay you for it."

The Jew was delighted with his profit and brought the sum in bad groschen, three of which were worth two good ones.

When the three days were up, the peasant went before the King as he had been told.

"Pull off his coat," said the King, "and he shall have his five hundred."

"Ah," said the peasant, "they don't belong to me any more. I made a present of two hundred of them to the sentry, and three hundred the Jew has changed for me, so by rights nothing at all belongs to me."

Meanwhile the soldier and the Jew came in and claimed what they had got from the peasant — and they received the blows, strictly counted out. The soldier bore it patiently and knew already how it tasted; but the Jew said sorrowfully, "Oh dear, oh dear, are these the heavy thalers?"

The King could not help laughing at the peasant, and as all his anger was gone he said, "Since you have already lost your reward before it came to you, I'll give you something in its place. Go into my treasure chamber and help yourself to as much money as you like."

The peasant did not need telling twice, and stuffed his big pockets with whatever would go in. Afterwards he went to an inn and counted out his money. The Jew had crept after him and heard him muttering to himself, "That rogue of a King has cheated me after all. Why couldn't he have given me the money himself, and then I'd have known what I had? How am I supposed to tell now whether what I happened to put in my pockets is right or not?"

"Good heavens," said the Jew to himself, "that man is speaking disrespectfully of our lord the King. I'll run and inform on him, and then I shall get a reward and he will be punished as well."

When the King heard what the peasant had said he flew into a rage and ordered the Jew to go and bring the offender to him.

The Jew ran to the peasant. "You're to go to my lord the King at once, in the very clothes you have on."

"I know better than that," said the peasant. "I shall have a new coat made first. Do you suppose a man with so much money in his pocket is going to turn up there in his ragged old coat?"

The Jew, seeing that the peasant would not stir without another coat, and afraid that if the King's anger cooled he would lose his own reward and the peasant his punishment, said, "Out of pure friendship, I'll lend you a coat for the short time. What won't a man do for love!"

The peasant was satisfied with that, put on the Jew's coat and went off with him.

The King reproached the countryman for the disrespectful words the Jew had informed him of.

"Ah," said the peasant, "what a Jew says is always false — no true word ever comes out of his mouth. That rascal there is capable of claiming that I have his coat on."

"What's this?" shrieked the Jew. "Is the coat not mine? Didn't I lend it to you out of pure friendship, so that you could appear before my lord the King?"

When the King heard that, he said, "The Jew has certainly deceived one or other of us — either me or the peasant" — and he ordered another sum to be counted out to him in hard thalers.

But the peasant went home in the good coat with the good money in his pocket, and said to himself, "This time I've hit it."


The Wonderful Musician

There was once a wonderful musician who was walking all alone through a forest, thinking of all kinds of things; and when he had nothing left to think about he said to himself, "Time is beginning to hang heavy here in the forest. I'll fetch myself a good companion."

So he took his fiddle off his back and played, and the sound rang through the trees. It was not long before a wolf came trotting through the thicket towards him.

"Ah, here's a wolf coming. I've no wish for him," said the musician.

But the wolf came nearer and said, "Ah, dear musician, how beautifully you play. I should like to learn that too."

"It's soon learnt," said the musician. "You have only to do everything I tell you."

"Oh, musician," said the wolf, "I'll obey you as a pupil obeys his master."

The musician told him to follow; and when they had gone part of the way together they came to an old oak tree that was hollow inside and split down the middle.

"Look," said the musician, "if you want to learn to fiddle, put your forepaws into this crack."

The wolf did as he was told; but the musician quickly picked up a stone and with one blow wedged his two paws in so fast that he had to stay there like a prisoner.

"Wait there till I come back," said the musician, and went on his way.

After a while he said to himself again, "Time is beginning to hang heavy here in the forest. I'll fetch myself another companion" — and he took his fiddle and played again. It was not long before a fox came creeping through the trees towards him.

"Ah, there's a fox coming," said the musician. "I've no wish for him."

The fox came up and said, "Oh, dear musician, how beautifully you play. I should like to learn that too."

"That's soon learnt," said the musician. "You have only to do everything I tell you."

"Oh, musician," said the fox, "I'll obey you as a pupil obeys his master."

"Follow me," said the musician. And when they had walked part of the way they came to a footpath with high bushes on both sides of it. There the musician stopped, bent a young hazel bush down to the ground from one side and put his foot on the top of it, and bent a young tree down from the other side as well.

"Now, little fox, if you want to learn something, give me your left front paw."

The fox obeyed, and the musician tied his paw to the left bough. "Little fox," he said, "now give me your right paw" — and he tied it to the right bough. And when he had made sure they were firm enough, he let go, and the bushes sprang up again and jerked the little fox up, so that he hung there struggling in the air.

"Wait there till I come back," said the musician, and went on his way.

Again he said to himself, "Time is beginning to hang heavy here in the forest. I'll fetch myself another companion" — so he took his fiddle, and the sound rang through the forest. And a little hare came springing towards him.

"Why, here's a hare coming," said the musician. "I don't want him."

"Ah, dear musician," said the hare, "how beautifully you fiddle. I should like to learn that too."

"That's soon learnt," said the musician. "You have only to do everything I tell you."

"Oh, musician," said the little hare, "I'll obey you as a pupil obeys his master."

They went part of the way together until they came to an open place in the forest where an aspen tree stood. The musician tied a long string round the little hare's neck and fastened the other end to the tree.

"Now look sharp, little hare — run twenty times round the tree," cried the musician; and the little hare obeyed. And when it had run round twenty times it had twisted the string twenty times round the trunk, and the little hare was caught; and it could pull and tug as much as it liked, it only cut the string into its tender neck.

"Wait there till I come back," said the musician, and went on.

Meanwhile the wolf had been pushing and pulling and biting at the stone, and had worked at it so long that he got his feet free and pulled them out of the crack again. Full of anger and rage he hurried after the musician, meaning to tear him to pieces.

When the fox saw him running, he began to wail and cried with all his might, "Brother wolf, come and help me — the musician has tricked me!"

The wolf pulled the little tree down, bit the cord in two and set the fox free, and the fox went along with him to take revenge on the musician. They found the tied-up hare and freed him as well, and then all three of them went looking for their enemy together.

The musician had been playing his fiddle again as he went on his way, and this time he had had better luck. The sound reached the ears of a poor woodcutter, who instantly, whether he wanted to or not, dropped his work and came with his hatchet under his arm to listen to the music.

"At last the right companion," said the musician, "for it was a human being I was looking for, and not wild beasts."

And he began to play, so beautifully and so delightfully that the poor man stood there as if he were bewitched, and his heart leapt for gladness. And as he stood there, up came the wolf, the fox and the hare; and he could see well enough that they meant harm. So he raised his glittering axe and put himself in front of the musician, as much as to say, "Whoever wants to touch him had better beware — he'll have me to deal with."

Then the beasts were frightened and ran back into the forest; and the musician played once more for the man, out of gratitude, and then went on his way.
