The Twelve Brothers

Once upon a time there were a king and a queen who lived happily together and had twelve children — but they were all boys.

Then the King said to his wife, "If the thirteenth child you are about to bring into the world is a girl, the twelve boys must die, so that her fortune may be great and the kingdom fall to her alone."

He had twelve coffins made as well, already filled with wood shavings, and in each of them lay the little pillow for the dead; and he had them carried into a locked room, and gave the Queen the key of it and told her to speak of it to nobody.

But now the mother sat and grieved all day long, until the youngest son, who was always with her and whom she had named Benjamin, out of the Bible, said to her, "Dear mother, why are you so sad?"

"Dearest child," she answered, "I am not allowed to tell you."

But he gave her no peace until she went and unlocked the room and showed him the twelve coffins, ready and filled with shavings. Then she said, "My dearest Benjamin, your father had these coffins made for you and your eleven brothers; for if I bring a little girl into the world, you are all to be killed and buried in them."

And as she wept while she was saying it, her son comforted her and said, "Don't cry, dear mother. We will save ourselves and go away."

But she said, "Go out into the forest with your eleven brothers, and let one of you always sit in the highest tree that can be found and keep watch, looking towards the tower here at the castle. If I give birth to a little son, I will put up a white flag, and then you may risk coming home. But if I bear a daughter, I will hoist a red flag, and then fly away as fast as you can, and may the good God protect you. And every night I will get up and pray for you — in winter that you may have a fire to warm yourselves at, and in summer that you may not faint in the heat."

So when she had blessed her sons, they went out into the forest. They kept watch by turns, sitting in the highest oak and looking towards the tower. And when eleven days had gone by and it came to Benjamin's turn, he saw a flag being raised. But it was not the white one. It was the blood-red flag, which meant that they were all to die.

When the brothers heard it they were furious, and said, "Are we all to suffer death for the sake of a girl? We swear we will be revenged: wherever we find a girl, her red blood shall flow."

Then they went deeper into the forest; and in the middle of it, where it was darkest, they found a little enchanted hut standing empty.

"Here we will live," they said. "And you, Benjamin, who are the youngest and weakest, shall stay at home and keep house, and the rest of us will go out and get food."

So they went out into the forest and shot hares and wild deer, birds and pigeons, and whatever there was to eat, and brought it to Benjamin, who had to prepare it so that they could satisfy their hunger. They lived together in the little hut for ten years, and the time did not seem long to them.

The little daughter that their mother the Queen had borne was grown up by now. She was good-hearted and lovely to look at, and she had a golden star on her forehead.

Once, when it was the great washing day, she saw twelve men's shirts among the things, and asked her mother, "Whose are these twelve shirts? They are far too small for father."

Then the Queen answered with a heavy heart, "Dear child, they belong to your twelve brothers."

Said the girl, "Where are my twelve brothers? I have never even heard of them."

"God knows where they are," she said. "They are wandering about the world somewhere."

Then she took the girl and opened the room for her and showed her the twelve coffins with the shavings and the pillows for the head. "These coffins," she said, "were meant for your brothers; but they went away in secret before you were born" — and she told her how it had all happened.

Then the girl said, "Dear mother, don't cry. I will go and find my brothers."

So she took the twelve shirts and set off, straight into the great forest. She walked all day, and in the evening she came to the enchanted hut. She went in and found a young boy there, who asked, "Where have you come from, and where are you going?" — and he was astonished that she was so beautiful, and wore royal clothes, and had a star on her forehead.

She answered, "I am a king's daughter, and I am looking for my twelve brothers, and I mean to walk as far as the sky is blue until I find them." And she showed him the twelve shirts that belonged to them.

Then Benjamin saw that she was his sister, and said, "I am Benjamin, your youngest brother."

She began to cry for joy, and Benjamin cried too, and they kissed and hugged each other with the greatest love. But afterwards he said, "Dear sister, there is still one difficulty. We agreed that every girl we met should die, because it was on account of a girl that we had to leave our kingdom."

Then she said, "I will die willingly, if by doing it I can set my twelve brothers free."

"No," he answered, "you shall not die. Sit down under this tub until our eleven brothers come, and I will soon come to terms with them."

She did so; and when night came the others got back from hunting and their dinner was ready. And as they sat at the table eating, they asked, "What's the news?"

Said Benjamin, "Don't you know anything?"

"No," they said.

He went on, "You have been in the forest and I have stayed at home, and yet I know more than you do."

"Tell us, then," they cried.

He answered, "But promise me that the first girl we meet shall not be killed."

"Yes," they all cried, "she shall be spared — only tell us."

Then he said, "Our sister is here" — and he lifted up the tub, and the King's daughter came out in her royal clothes with the golden star on her forehead, and she was beautiful and delicate and fair. Then they were all overjoyed, and fell on her neck and kissed her and loved her with all their hearts.

Now she stayed at home with Benjamin and helped him with the work. The eleven went out into the forest and caught game — deer and birds and wood pigeons — for food, and the little sister and Benjamin saw to getting it ready. She fetched the wood for the cooking and the herbs for the vegetables, and put the pans on the fire, so that dinner was always ready when the eleven came home. She kept the little house in order too, and put beautiful clean white covers on the little beds; and the brothers were always content and lived in great harmony with her.

One day the two at home had prepared a splendid meal; and when they were all together they sat down and ate and drank and were full of gladness.

Now there was a little garden belonging to the enchanted house, and in it stood twelve lily flowers. The sister wanted to give her brothers pleasure, so she picked the twelve flowers, meaning to give one to each of them at dinner. But at the very moment she picked the flowers, the twelve brothers were turned into twelve ravens and flew away over the forest, and the house and the garden vanished too.

And now the poor girl was alone in the wild forest; and when she looked round, there stood an old woman beside her, who said, "My child, what have you done? Why didn't you leave the twelve white flowers growing? Those were your brothers, and now they are turned into ravens for ever."

The girl said, weeping, "Is there no way of setting them free?"

"No," said the woman, "there is only one in the whole world, and it is so hard that you will not free them by it: you must be dumb for seven years, and must not speak or laugh; and if you speak a single word, even with only an hour of the seven years still to run, it is all in vain and your brothers will be killed by that one word."

Then the girl said in her heart, "I know for certain that I shall set my brothers free"; and she went and found a tall tree and settled herself in it and span, and neither spoke nor laughed.

Now it happened that a king was hunting in the forest, and he had a great greyhound which ran to the tree the girl was sitting in and sprang about it, whining and barking up at her. Then the King came by and saw the beautiful King's daughter with the golden star on her forehead, and he was so taken with her beauty that he called up to ask whether she would be his wife. She gave no answer, but nodded her head a little. So he climbed the tree himself, carried her down, set her on his horse and took her home.

The wedding was celebrated with great magnificence and rejoicing, but the bride neither spoke nor smiled.

When they had lived happily together for a few years, the King's mother, who was a wicked woman, began to speak against the young Queen, and said to the King, "This is some common beggar girl you have brought home with you. Who knows what ungodly tricks she gets up to in secret! Even if she is dumb and cannot speak, she might laugh once in a while; and people who never laugh have bad consciences."

At first the King would not believe it; but the old woman pressed it so long, and accused her of so many evil things, that at last the King let himself be persuaded, and sentenced her to death.

And now a great fire was lit in the courtyard where she was to be burned; and the King stood up at the window and watched with tears in his eyes, because he still loved her so much. And when she was tied fast to the stake, and the fire was licking at her clothes with its red tongue, the last instant of the seven years ran out.

Then a whirring was heard in the air, and twelve ravens came flying to the place and sank down; and when they touched the earth they were her twelve brothers, whom she had set free. They tore the fire apart, put out the flames, untied their dear sister and kissed and hugged her.

And now that she could open her mouth and speak, she told the King why she had been dumb and had never laughed. The King rejoiced when he heard that she was innocent, and they all lived together in great harmony until they died. The wicked stepmother was brought before the judge and put into a barrel filled with boiling oil and poisonous snakes, and died an evil death.


The Pack of Ragamuffins

The cock said one day to the hen, "It's the time of year when our nuts are ripe. Let's go up the hill together and eat our fill for once, before the squirrel carries them all off."

"Yes," said the hen, "come along, we'll have a good time together."

So off they went up the hill, and as it was a fine day they stayed there till evening. Now I do not know whether it was that they had eaten themselves too fat, or whether they had grown proud, but they would not go home on foot, and the cock had to build a little carriage out of nutshells.

When it was ready the little hen seated herself in it and said to the cock, "You can just harness yourself to it."

"I like that!" said the cock. "I'd sooner walk home than be harnessed to it. No, that wasn't the bargain. I don't mind being coachman and sitting on the box, but pull it myself I will not."

While they were arguing about it, a duck came quacking at them. "You thieving creatures, who told you to go to my nut hill? You'll suffer for it!" — and she ran at the cock with her beak open. But the cock was not idle either; he set on the duck boldly and in the end wounded her so with his spurs that she begged for mercy and let herself be harnessed to the carriage as a punishment, willingly enough.

So the little cock sat up on the box as coachman, and off they went at a gallop, with "Duck, go as fast as you can."

When they had driven part of the way they met two travellers on foot, a pin and a needle. "Stop, stop!" they cried; and they said it would soon be as dark as pitch and then they would not be able to go a step further, and the road was so dirty — couldn't they get into the carriage for a while? They had been at the tailor's alehouse by the gate and had sat too long over the beer. As they were thin people who did not take up much room, the cock let them both get in, but they had to promise not to tread on his feet or the hen's.

Late in the evening they came to an inn; and as they did not care to go on by night, and the duck was not steady on her feet either but kept lurching from side to side, they went in. The landlord at first made a great many objections — his house was full already, and besides, he did not think they could be very distinguished persons. But at last, as they made pleasant speeches and told him he could have the egg the little hen had laid on the way, and could keep the duck, which laid one every day, he said they might stay the night. And so they had themselves well waited on, and feasted and made a great noise.

Early in the morning, at daybreak, when everybody was asleep, the cock woke the hen, fetched the egg, pecked it open, and they ate it between them and threw the shell on the hearth. Then they went to the needle, which was still asleep, took it by the head and stuck it into the cushion of the landlord's chair, and put the pin in his towel; and then, without more ado, they flew away over the heath.

The duck, who liked sleeping in the open air and had stayed in the yard, heard them going, cheered up, found a stream and swam off down it, which was a much quicker way of travelling than being harnessed to a carriage.

The landlord did not get out of bed for another two hours. He washed himself and went to dry his face, and the pin went across it and drew a red streak from one ear to the other. Then he went into the kitchen to light a pipe; and when he came to the hearth the eggshell flew up into his eyes.

"Everything is going for my head this morning," he said, and sat down crossly in his grandfather's chair — and jumped straight up again crying, "Oh, misery!" — for the needle had pricked him worse than the pin had, and not in the head.

Now he was thoroughly angry, and suspected the guests who had come so late the night before; and when he went to look for them, they were gone. So he made a vow to take no more ragamuffins into his house: they eat a great deal, pay for nothing, and play spiteful tricks on you into the bargain, by way of thanks.
