The Three Little Men in the Wood

There was once a man whose wife had died, and a woman whose husband had died; and the man had a daughter, and the woman had a daughter too. The girls knew each other and went out walking together, and afterwards came back to the woman's house.

Then she said to the man's daughter, "Listen: tell your father I should like to marry him, and then you shall wash in milk every morning and drink wine, while my own daughter washes in water and drinks water."

The girl went home and told her father what the woman had said. The man said, "What shall I do? Marriage is a joy, and it is also a torment."

At last, as he could not make up his mind, he pulled off his boot and said, "Take this boot — it has a hole in the sole. Go up to the loft with it, hang it on the big nail and pour water into it. If it holds the water, then I will take a wife again; and if it runs through, I won't."

The girl did as she was told; but the water drew the hole together and the boot filled up to the top. She told her father how it had turned out. Then he went up himself; and when he saw that she was right, he went to the widow and courted her, and the wedding was celebrated.

The next morning, when the two girls got up, there stood milk for the man's daughter to wash in and wine for her to drink; but for the woman's daughter there stood water to wash in and water to drink.

On the second morning there stood water for washing and water for drinking in front of the man's daughter just as in front of the woman's daughter.

And on the third morning there stood water for washing and water for drinking in front of the man's daughter, and milk for washing and wine for drinking in front of the woman's daughter; and so it went on.

The woman turned bitterly unkind to her stepdaughter, and did her best to treat her worse every day. She was envious as well, because her stepdaughter was beautiful and lovable and her own daughter ugly and disagreeable.

Once, in winter, when everything was frozen as hard as stone and hill and valley lay under snow, the woman made a frock out of paper, called her stepdaughter and said, "Here, put this dress on and go out into the wood and fetch me a little basketful of strawberries. I have a fancy for some."

"Good heavens," said the girl, "strawberries don't grow in winter. The ground is frozen, and the snow has covered everything besides. And why must I go in this paper frock? It's so cold outside that your very breath freezes. The wind will blow straight through it and the thorns will tear it off my body."

"Are you contradicting me again?" said the stepmother. "See that you go, and don't show your face here until you have the basketful of strawberries." Then she gave her a little piece of hard bread and said, "That will do you for the day" — and thought to herself, "You will die of cold and hunger out there and I shall never set eyes on you again."

So the girl did as she was told, put on the paper frock and went out with the basket. Far and wide there was nothing but snow, and not a green blade to be seen.

When she came into the wood she saw a little house with three dwarfs peeping out of it. She wished them good day and knocked modestly at the door. They called, "Come in" — and she went into the room and sat down on the bench by the stove and began to warm herself and eat her breakfast.

The little men said, "Give us some of it too."

"Gladly," she said, and broke her bit of bread in two and gave them half.

They asked, "What are you doing here in the forest in winter, in that thin dress?"

"Ah," she answered, "I have to find a basketful of strawberries, and I'm not to go home until I can take them with me."

When she had eaten her bread they gave her a broom and said, "Sweep the snow away at the back door with this."

But when she was outside, the three little men said to one another, "What shall we give her, since she is so good and has shared her bread with us?"

The first said, "My gift is that she shall grow more beautiful every day."

The second said, "My gift is that gold pieces shall fall out of her mouth every time she speaks."

The third said, "My gift is that a king shall come and take her for his wife."

Meanwhile the girl did as the little men had told her, swept the snow away behind the little house with the broom — and what should she find but real ripe strawberries, coming up dark red out of the snow! In her delight she quickly gathered her basket full, thanked the little men, shook hands with each of them, and ran home to bring her stepmother what she had wanted so badly.

When she went in and said good evening, a piece of gold fell out of her mouth at once. Then she told what had happened to her in the wood; but with every word she spoke gold pieces fell out of her mouth, until before long the whole room was covered with them.

"Just look at her showing off," cried the stepsister, "throwing gold about like that!" — but secretly she was envious, and wanted to go into the forest to look for strawberries too.

Her mother said, "No, my dear little daughter, it is too cold, you might freeze to death." But her daughter gave her no peace, so at last she gave in, made her a magnificent fur dress, which she had to put on, and gave her bread and butter and cake to take with her.

The girl went into the forest and straight up to the little house. The three little men peeped out again, but she did not greet them, and without so much as looking at them or speaking to them she blundered into the room, sat down by the stove and began to eat her bread and butter and cake.

"Give us some of it," cried the little men.

But she answered, "There isn't enough for me, so how am I supposed to give it away to other people?"

When she had finished eating they said, "There's a broom for you — sweep it all clean for us outside by the back door."

"Pooh, sweep for yourselves," she answered. "I'm not your servant."

And when she saw that they were not going to give her anything, she went out of the door.

Then the little men said to one another, "What shall we give her, since she is so ill-natured and has a wicked envious heart that will never let her do anybody a good turn?"

The first said, "I grant that she shall grow uglier every day."

The second said, "I grant that at every word she says a toad shall jump out of her mouth."

The third said, "I grant that she shall die a miserable death."

The girl looked for strawberries outside; but as she found none, she went home in a temper. And when she opened her mouth to tell her mother what had happened to her in the wood, at every word a toad jumped out of it, so that everybody was seized with disgust at her.

Then the stepmother was angrier than ever, and thought of nothing but how to do the man's daughter every possible injury — while the girl's beauty grew greater by the day.

At last she took a cauldron, set it on the fire and boiled yarn in it. When it was boiled she flung it over the poor girl's shoulder and gave her an axe, so that she could go out on the frozen river, cut a hole in the ice and rinse the yarn.

She did as she was told, went out and cut a hole in the ice; and while she was in the middle of her cutting, a splendid carriage came driving up with the King in it. The carriage stopped, and the King asked, "My child, who are you, and what are you doing here?"

"I am a poor girl, and I am rinsing yarn."

Then the King felt pity for her; and when he saw how very beautiful she was, he said, "Will you come away with me?"

"Ah yes, with all my heart," she answered — for she was glad to get away from her stepmother and stepsister.

So she got into the carriage and drove away with the King; and when they came to his palace the wedding was celebrated with great splendour, exactly as the little men had granted.

When a year had gone by, the young Queen bore a son; and as the stepmother had heard of her great good fortune, she came to the palace with her daughter and pretended she wanted to pay a visit. But once, when the King had gone out and there was nobody else there, the wicked woman seized the Queen by the head and her daughter seized her by the feet, and they lifted her out of bed and threw her out of the window into the stream that flowed past. Then the ugly daughter lay down in the bed, and the old woman covered her up over her head.

When the King came home and wanted to speak to his wife, the old woman cried, "Hush, hush, not now — she is in a heavy sweat, you must let her rest today."

The King suspected nothing, and did not come back until the next morning; and as he talked with his wife and she answered him, at every word a toad leapt out, where before a piece of gold had always fallen. So he asked what that could be; but the old woman said it came of the heavy sweating and would soon pass off.

But in the night the kitchen boy saw a duck come swimming up the gutter, and it said:

	"King, what are you doing now?
	Are you sleeping, or awake?"

And when he gave no answer, it said:

	"And my guests — what do they do?"

The kitchen boy said:

	"They are sleeping soundly too."

Then it asked again:

	"And my baby — what does she?"

He answered:

	"Sleeping in her cradle, she."

Then she went upstairs in the Queen's own shape, fed the baby, shook up its little bed, covered it over, and then swam away down the gutter again as a duck.

She came like that for two nights; and on the third she said to the kitchen boy, "Go and tell the King to take his sword and swing it three times over me on the threshold."

So the kitchen boy ran and told the King, who came with his sword and swung it three times over the spirit; and at the third time his wife stood before him, strong and living and healthy, just as she had been before.

At that the King was full of joy; but he kept the Queen hidden in a room until the Sunday, when the baby was to be christened. And when it had been christened, he said, "What does a person deserve who drags somebody out of bed and throws them in the water?"

"The wretch deserves nothing better," said the old woman, "than to be put in a barrel stuck full of nails and rolled downhill into the water."

"Then," said the King, "you have passed sentence on yourself."

And he ordered such a barrel to be brought, and the old woman put into it with her daughter; and then the lid was hammered on and the barrel was rolled downhill until it went into the river.


The Three Spinners

There was once a girl who was idle and would not spin; and whatever her mother said to her, she could not bring her to it. At last the mother was so overcome with anger and impatience one day that she beat her, and the girl began to cry loudly.

Now at that very moment the Queen drove past; and when she heard the crying she stopped her carriage, went into the house and asked the mother why she was beating her daughter so that the cries could be heard out on the road.

The woman was ashamed to tell anybody how lazy her daughter was, and said, "I can't get her to stop spinning. She insists on spinning for ever and ever, and I am poor and can't get hold of the flax."

Then the Queen answered, "There is nothing I like better to hear than spinning, and I am never happier than when the wheels are humming. Let me take your daughter with me to the palace. I have flax enough, and she shall spin there as much as she likes."

The mother was heartily glad of it, and the Queen took the girl away with her.

When they came to the palace she led her up to three rooms which were filled from floor to ceiling with the finest flax. "Now spin me this flax," she said, "and when you have done it you shall have my eldest son for a husband. I don't mind that you are poor — your tireless industry is dowry enough."

The girl was secretly terrified, because she could not have spun that flax — no, not if she had lived to be three hundred years old and sat at it every day from morning till night. So when she was alone she began to cry, and sat like that for three days without moving a finger.

On the third day the Queen came; and when she saw that nothing had been spun yet, she was surprised. But the girl excused herself by saying that she had not been able to start because she was so upset at leaving her mother's house. The Queen was satisfied with that, but said as she was going, "Tomorrow you must begin work."

When the girl was alone again she did not know what to do, and in her distress she went to the window. And there she saw three women coming towards her: the first had a broad flat foot; the second had such a great underlip that it hung down over her chin; and the third had a broad thumb.

They stopped in front of the window, looked up and asked the girl what was the matter with her. She told them her trouble, and then they offered her their help and said, "If you will invite us to the wedding, and not be ashamed of us, and call us your aunts, and seat us at your table, we will spin the flax up for you, and in a very short time too."

"With all my heart," she said. "Only come in and start the work at once."

So she let the three strange women in and cleared a space in the first room, where they sat down and began their spinning. One drew out the thread and trod the wheel, the second wetted the thread, the third twisted it and struck the table with her finger; and every time she struck it, a skein of thread fell to the floor, spun in the finest way possible.

The girl kept the three spinners hidden from the Queen, and every time she came showed her the great quantity of spun thread, until the Queen could not praise her enough. When the first room was empty they went to the second, and at last to the third, and that was soon cleared as well.

Then the three women took their leave and said to the girl, "Don't forget what you promised us. It will make your fortune."

When the girl showed the Queen the empty rooms and the great heap of yarn, she gave orders for the wedding; and the bridegroom was delighted that he was to have such a clever, hard-working wife, and praised her mightily.

"I have three aunts," said the girl, "and as they have been very good to me, I shouldn't like to forget them now that I have such good fortune. Let me invite them to the wedding, and let them sit with us at table."

The Queen and the bridegroom said, "Why should we not allow that?"

So when the feast began, the three women came in, dressed very strangely, and the bride said, "Welcome, dear aunts."

"Ah," said the bridegroom, "how do you come to have such hideous friends?"

And he went over to the one with the broad flat foot and said, "How did you come by such a broad foot?"

"By treading," she answered, "by treading."

Then the bridegroom went to the second and said, "How did you come by that hanging lip?"

"By licking," she answered, "by licking."

Then he asked the third, "How did you come by that broad thumb?"

"By twisting thread," she answered, "by twisting thread."

At that the King's son was alarmed, and said, "Neither now nor ever shall my beautiful bride touch a spinning wheel."

And so she was rid of the hateful flax-spinning.
