Hansel and Gretel

At the edge of a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter with his wife and his two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. He had little enough to eat at the best of times; and once, when a great famine came over the land, he could no longer even get their daily bread.

Lying in bed at night thinking about it, tossing and turning with worry, he groaned and said to his wife, "What is to become of us? How are we to feed our poor children when we have nothing even for ourselves?"

"I'll tell you what, husband," said the woman. "Early tomorrow morning we'll take the children out into the forest, to the thickest part of it. We'll light them a fire and give them each one more piece of bread, and then we'll go off to our work and leave them there. They won't find the way home again, and we shall be rid of them."

"No, wife," said the man, "I won't do it. How could I bear to leave my children alone in the forest? The wild animals would soon come and tear them to pieces."

"You fool," she said. "Then all four of us will starve, and you may as well start planing the boards for our coffins." And she gave him no peace until he agreed.

"But I do feel very sorry for the poor children, all the same," said the man.

The two children had not been able to sleep for hunger either, and had heard what their stepmother said to their father. Gretel wept bitter tears and said to Hansel, "Now it's all over with us."

"Be quiet, Gretel," said Hansel. "Don't upset yourself. I'll soon find a way to help us."

And when the old people had fallen asleep he got up, put on his little coat, opened the door downstairs and crept outside. The moon was shining brightly, and the white pebbles lying in front of the house glittered like real silver coins. Hansel bent down and put as many of them into his coat pocket as would go in.

Then he went back and said to Gretel, "Don't worry, dear little sister, and sleep in peace. God won't forsake us" — and he lay down in his bed again.

When day broke, before the sun had risen, the woman came and woke the two children. "Get up, you lazybones. We're going into the forest to fetch wood." She gave each of them a little piece of bread and said, "There's something for your dinner, but don't eat it before then, because you'll get nothing else."

Gretel put the bread under her apron, because Hansel had the stones in his pocket. Then they all set out together on the way to the forest.

When they had walked a little way, Hansel stopped and looked back at the house, and did it again and again.

His father said, "Hansel, what are you looking at back there, and why are you falling behind? Pay attention and don't forget how to use your legs."

"Ah, father," said Hansel, "I'm looking at my little white cat, sitting up on the roof and wanting to say goodbye to me."

The wife said, "Fool, that isn't your cat, that's the morning sun shining on the chimney."

But Hansel had not been looking at the cat at all. He had been dropping one of the white pebbles out of his pocket onto the road, over and over.

When they had come to the middle of the forest, the father said, "Now, children, gather some wood, and I'll light a fire so that you don't get cold."

Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood into a pile as high as a little hill. The brushwood was lit; and when the flames were burning high, the woman said, "Now, children, lie down by the fire and rest. We're going into the forest to cut wood. When we've finished, we'll come back and fetch you."

Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire; and when noon came they each ate their little piece of bread. And as they could hear the strokes of an axe, they thought their father was nearby. But it was not an axe: it was a branch he had tied to a dead tree, which the wind was knocking backwards and forwards.

And as they had been sitting so long, their eyes closed with tiredness and they fell fast asleep. When at last they woke, it was already black night. Gretel began to cry and said, "How are we ever to get out of the forest now?"

But Hansel comforted her: "Just wait a little, until the moon has risen, and then we'll soon find the way."

And when the full moon had risen, Hansel took his little sister by the hand and followed the pebbles, which shone like newly minted silver and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and at daybreak came back to their father's house. They knocked at the door; and when the woman opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said, "You wicked children, why did you sleep so long in the forest? We thought you were never coming back at all."

But their father was overjoyed, because it had cut him to the heart to leave them behind on their own.

Not long afterwards there was famine everywhere again, and the children heard their mother saying to their father in the night, "Everything is eaten up again. We have half a loaf left, and after that it's the end. The children must go. We'll take them further into the wood, so that they can't find their way out again. There's no other way of saving ourselves."

The man's heart was heavy, and he thought, "It would be better to share the last mouthful with your children." But the woman would not listen to anything he said; she scolded him and reproached him. Whoever says A must say B as well; and as he had given in the first time, he had to give in the second time too.

But the children were still awake and had heard the conversation. When the old people were asleep, Hansel got up again and wanted to go out and pick up pebbles as he had done before; but the woman had locked the door and he could not get out. All the same, he comforted his little sister and said, "Don't cry, Gretel. Go to sleep quietly. The good God will help us."

Early in the morning the woman came and got the children out of their beds. They were given their bit of bread, but it was even smaller than last time. On the way into the forest Hansel crumbled his in his pocket, and kept stopping to throw a crumb on the ground.

"Hansel, why do you keep stopping and looking round?" said his father. "Get along."

"I'm looking back at my little pigeon, sitting on the roof and wanting to say goodbye to me," answered Hansel.

"Simpleton," said the woman, "that isn't your pigeon, that's the morning sun shining on the chimney."

But little by little, Hansel dropped all his crumbs on the path.

The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had never been in their lives before. Again a great fire was made, and the mother said, "Just sit there, children, and if you're tired you can sleep a little. We're going into the forest to cut wood, and this evening when we've finished we'll come and fetch you."

When it was noon Gretel shared her piece of bread with Hansel, who had scattered his along the way. Then they fell asleep; and the evening came and went, and nobody came for the poor children.

They did not wake until it was black night; and Hansel comforted his little sister and said, "Just wait, Gretel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the breadcrumbs I scattered. They'll show us the way home."

When the moon came up they set off; but they found no crumbs, because the many thousands of birds that fly about the woods and the fields had picked them all up.

Hansel said to Gretel, "We'll soon find the way" — but they did not find it. They walked the whole night and the next day too, from morning till evening, and still they did not get out of the forest; and they were terribly hungry, because they had nothing to eat but a few berries growing on the ground. And when they were so tired that their legs would not carry them any further, they lay down under a tree and fell asleep.

It was now the third morning since they had left their father's house. They began walking again, but they only went deeper into the forest; and if help did not come soon they must die of hunger and exhaustion.

At midday they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a branch, singing so sweetly that they stood still and listened. And when it had finished its song it spread its wings and flew on ahead of them, and they followed it until they came to a little house, and it settled on the roof. And when they came right up to the little house, they saw that it was built of bread and roofed with cake, and the windows were of clear sugar.

"We'll set to work on that," said Hansel, "and have a proper meal. I'll eat a bit of the roof, and you can eat some of the window, Gretel — that will taste sweet."

Hansel reached up and broke off a bit of the roof to try how it tasted, and Gretel leaned against the window and nibbled at the panes. Then a soft voice called from inside:

	"Nibble, nibble, little mouse,
	who is nibbling at my house?"

The children answered:

	"The wind, the wind,
	the heavenly child" —

and went on eating without troubling themselves. Hansel, who found the roof very good indeed, tore down a great piece of it; and Gretel pushed a whole round pane out of the window, sat down and enjoyed herself with it.

Then suddenly the door opened, and a very, very old woman came creeping out, leaning on a crutch. Hansel and Gretel were so terrified that they dropped what they were holding.

But the old woman nodded her head and said, "Oh, you dear children, who brought you here? Do come in and stay with me. No harm shall come to you."

She took them both by the hand and led them into her little house. Then good food was set in front of them — milk and pancakes with sugar, apples and nuts. Afterwards two pretty little beds were made up with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay down in them and thought they were in heaven.

But the old woman had only pretended to be kind. In truth she was a wicked witch who lay in wait for children, and had built the little house of bread on purpose to lure them there. When a child came into her power she killed it, cooked it and ate it, and that was a feast day for her.

Witches have red eyes and cannot see far, but they have a keen sense of smell like animals, and know when a human being is coming near. When Hansel and Gretel came into her neighbourhood she laughed spitefully and said with a sneer, "I have them. They shan't escape me again."

Early in the morning, before the children were awake, she was up already; and when she saw the two of them sleeping and looking so pretty, with their plump red cheeks, she muttered to herself, "That will be a dainty mouthful."

Then she seized Hansel with her withered hand, carried him out to a little stable and shut him in behind a barred door. He could scream as much as he liked; it was no use.

Then she went to Gretel, shook her till she woke, and cried, "Get up, lazy thing, fetch water and cook something good for your brother. He's out in the stable, and he's to be fattened. When he's fat, I shall eat him."

Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all in vain; she had to do what the wicked witch told her.

And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, and Gretel got nothing but crab shells. Every morning the old woman crept out to the little stable and cried, "Hansel, stick out your finger, so that I can feel whether you'll soon be fat."

But Hansel used to stick out a little bone; and the old woman, whose eyes were dim, could not see it and thought it was Hansel's finger, and was astonished that he would not fatten.

When four weeks had gone by and Hansel was still thin, impatience got the better of her and she would not wait any longer. "Hey, Gretel," she called to the girl, "look sharp and fetch water. Fat or thin, tomorrow I'm going to kill Hansel and cook him."

Oh, how the poor little sister grieved as she carried the water, and how the tears ran down her cheeks! "Dear God, help us," she cried. "If only the wild beasts in the forest had eaten us, at least we should have died together."

"Just keep your noise to yourself," said the old woman. "None of it will help you."

Early in the morning Gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron of water and light the fire. "We'll bake first," said the old woman. "I've heated the oven already and kneaded the dough." And she pushed poor Gretel out to the oven, with the flames already darting out of it.

"Creep in," said the witch, "and see whether it's properly heated, so that we can put the bread in."

And once Gretel was inside, she meant to shut the oven and let her bake in it, and then eat her too. But Gretel saw what she had in mind, and said, "I don't know how to do it. How do you get in?"

"Silly goose," said the old woman, "the opening is big enough — look, I could get in myself." And she hobbled up and stuck her head into the oven.

Then Gretel gave her a shove that drove her right inside, and slammed the iron door and shot the bolt. Oh, how horribly she began to howl! But Gretel ran away, and the godless witch was miserably burnt to death.

Gretel ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his little stable and cried, "Hansel, we're saved! The old witch is dead."

Then Hansel sprang out like a bird from a cage when the door is opened for it. How they rejoiced, and hugged each other, and danced about and kissed each other! And as they had nothing to fear from her any more, they went into the witch's house; and in every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels.

"These are much better than pebbles," said Hansel, and stuffed his pockets with as much as would go in; and Gretel said, "I'll take something home too," and filled her pinafore full.

"But now we'll go," said Hansel, "so that we get out of this witch's forest."

When they had walked for two hours they came to a great stretch of water. "We can't get across," said Hansel. "I can't see any stepping-plank or any bridge."

"And there's no boat either," answered Gretel. "But there's a white duck swimming there. If I ask her, she'll help us over." And she called:

	"Little duck, little duck, do you see
	Hansel and Gretel, waiting here?
	There's never a plank or a bridge in sight —
	carry us over on your back so white."

The duck came to them, and Hansel sat down on her back and told his sister to sit beside him.

"No," said Gretel, "that will be too heavy for the little duck. She shall take us across one after the other."

The good little duck did so; and when they were safely across and had walked a short way, the forest began to seem more and more familiar to them, and at last they saw their father's house in the distance. Then they began to run, and rushed into the parlour and threw themselves into their father's arms.

The man had not known one happy hour since he left the children in the forest; and the woman was dead.

Gretel shook out her pinafore until the pearls and precious stones went bouncing about the room, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to join them. And so all their troubles were over, and they lived together in perfect happiness.

My tale is done; there runs a mouse; whoever catches it may make himself a great big fur cap out of it.
