The Three Snake-Leaves

Once upon a time there was a poor man who could no longer support his only son.

So the son said, "Dear father, things are going so badly with us that I am a burden to you. I would rather go away and see how I can earn my own bread."

His father gave him his blessing and took leave of him with great sorrow.

At that time the King of a mighty empire was at war, and the young man took service with him and went out to fight. And when he came in front of the enemy there was a battle and great danger, and it rained shot until his comrades fell on every side; and when their commander was killed as well, the rest were about to run — but the young man stepped forward, spoke boldly to them, and cried, "We will not let our country be ruined!"

Then the others followed him, and he pressed on and defeated the enemy. And when the King heard that he owed the victory to him alone, he raised him above all the rest, gave him great treasures, and made him the first man in the kingdom.

The King had a daughter who was very beautiful, but very strange as well. She had made a vow to take no man for her lord and husband unless he promised to let himself be buried alive with her if she died first. "If he loves me with his whole heart," she said, "what use will life be to him afterwards?" And she would do the same on her side: if he died first, she would go down into the grave with him.

This strange oath had frightened off every suitor so far; but the young man became so enchanted by her beauty that he cared for nothing, and asked her father for her.

"But do you know what you must promise?" said the King.

"I must be buried with her," he answered, "if I outlive her. But my love is so great that I don't mind the danger."

So the King consented, and the wedding was celebrated with great splendour.

They lived happily and contentedly together for a while; and then it happened that the young Queen fell gravely ill, and no doctor could save her. And as she lay there dead, the young King remembered what he had been obliged to promise, and was horrified at having to lie down alive in the grave; but there was no escape. The King had set sentries at all the gates, and there was no avoiding his fate.

When the day came for the body to be buried, he was taken down into the royal vault with it, and then the door was shut and bolted.

Near the coffin stood a table with four candles on it, four loaves of bread and four bottles of wine; and when these ran out he would have to die of hunger. So he sat there full of pain and grief, ate only a little piece of bread each day and drank only a mouthful of wine, and all the same saw death coming nearer every day.

And while he sat staring in front of him, he saw a snake creep out of a corner of the vault and go towards the dead body. Thinking it had come to gnaw at her, he drew his sword and said, "As long as I am alive you shall not touch her," and cut the snake into three pieces.

After a while a second snake crept out of the hole; but when it saw the other lying dead and cut in pieces, it went back, and soon came again with three green leaves in its mouth. Then it took the three pieces of the snake, laid them together as they ought to go, and put one of the leaves on each wound. Immediately the severed parts joined together, the snake stirred and came alive again, and the two of them hurried away together, leaving the leaves lying on the ground.

Then it came into the mind of the unhappy man, who had been watching all this, to wonder whether the wonderful power of the leaves, which had brought the snake back to life, might not do the same for a human being. So he picked up the leaves and laid one of them on his dead wife's mouth and the other two on her eyes.

And hardly had he done it before the blood stirred in her veins, rose into her pale face and gave it colour again. Then she drew breath, opened her eyes and said, "Ah, God, where am I?"

"You are with me, dear wife," he answered; and he told her how it had all happened and how he had brought her back to life. Then he gave her some wine and bread; and when she had got her strength back he helped her up, and they went to the door and knocked and called so loudly that the sentries heard them and told the King.

The King came down himself and opened the door, and there he found them both strong and well, and rejoiced with them that all the sorrow was over.

But the young King took the three snake-leaves with him and gave them to a servant, saying, "Keep them for me carefully and carry them about with you always. Who knows what trouble they may yet get us out of?"

A change had come over his wife, though. After she had been brought back to life, it was as if all love for her husband had gone out of her heart. Some time later, when he wanted to make a voyage across the sea to visit his old father, and they had gone aboard a ship, she forgot the great love and faithfulness he had shown her, and which had rescued her from death, and took a wicked fancy to the captain.

And once, when the young King lay asleep, she called the captain in and took the sleeping man by the head, and the captain took him by the feet, and so they threw him down into the sea.

When the shameful thing was done, she said, "Now let us go home and say that he died on the way. I will praise you so highly to my father that he will marry me to you and make you heir to his crown."

But the faithful servant, who had seen everything they did without being seen himself, unfastened a little boat from the ship, got into it and rowed after his master, and let the traitors go on their way. He fished up the dead body, and with the help of the three snake-leaves he carried about with him, laid on the eyes and the mouth, he happily brought the young King back to life.

Then the two of them rowed with all their strength, day and night, and their little boat flew so fast that they reached the old King before the others did. He was astonished to see them come alone, and asked what had happened.

When he learned how wicked his daughter had been, he said, "I cannot believe she has behaved so badly; but the truth will soon come out" — and he told them both to go into a hidden room and keep out of everybody's sight.

Soon afterwards the great ship came sailing in, and the godless woman appeared before her father with a troubled face.

He said, "Why do you come back alone? Where is your husband?"

"Ah, dear father," she said, "I come home in great grief. On the voyage my husband suddenly fell ill and died, and if the good captain had not helped me it would have gone badly with me. He was there when he died and can tell you everything."

The King said, "I will bring the dead man back to life" — and he opened the room and told the two of them to come out.

When the woman saw her husband she was thunderstruck, and fell on her knees and begged for mercy.

The King said, "There is no mercy. He was ready to die with you and brought you back to life; and you murdered him in his sleep, and shall have the reward you deserve."

Then she was put with her accomplice into a ship that had been bored full of holes and sent out to sea, where they soon went down among the waves.


The White Snake

A long time ago there lived a king who was famous throughout the land for his wisdom. Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemed as though news of the most secret things was carried to him through the air.

But he had a strange custom. Every day after dinner, when the table had been cleared and nobody else was there, a trusted servant had to bring him one more dish. It was covered, though, and even the servant did not know what was in it; nor did anybody else, because the King never took the cover off to eat from it until he was quite alone.

This went on for a long time; and then one day the servant who took the dish away was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help carrying it into his own room. When he had carefully locked the door he lifted the cover, and saw a white snake lying on the dish. And at the sight of it he could not deny himself a taste, so he cut off a little piece and put it in his mouth.

No sooner had it touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering of little voices outside his window. He went and listened, and found it was the sparrows chattering together, telling one another all sorts of things they had seen in the fields and woods. Eating the snake had given him the power of understanding the language of animals.

Now it happened that on that very day the Queen lost her most beautiful ring, and the suspicion of having stolen it fell on this trusted servant, who was allowed to go everywhere. The King had the man brought before him and threatened him angrily that unless he could name the thief by the next day, he would be counted guilty himself and executed. He declared his innocence in vain; he was sent away with no better answer.

In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and tried to think how to help himself out of it. Now some ducks were sitting quietly together by a brook, resting; and while they smoothed their feathers with their bills they were having a confidential conversation. The servant stood by and listened.

They were telling one another about all the places they had waddled about in that morning and what good food they had found; and one said in a pitiful voice, "Something lies heavy on my stomach. I was eating in such a hurry that I swallowed a ring that was lying under the Queen's window."

The servant seized her by the neck at once, carried her into the kitchen and said to the cook, "Here's a fine duck — kill her, will you?"

"Yes," said the cook, weighing her in his hand. "She has spared no trouble fattening herself, and has been waiting to be roasted long enough."

So he cut off her head; and as she was being made ready for the spit, the Queen's ring was found inside her.

Now the servant could easily prove his innocence; and the King, to make up for the wrong, told him to ask a favour, and promised him the best position at court that he could wish for. The servant refused everything, and only asked for a horse and some money for travelling, as he had a mind to see the world and go about a little.

When his request had been granted he set out; and one day he came to a pond, where he saw three fish caught in the reeds and gasping for water. Now, although fish are said to be dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must die so miserably; and as he had a kind heart he got off his horse and put the three prisoners back into the water. They wriggled with delight, put out their heads and called to him, "We will remember you and repay you for saving us."

He rode on; and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in the sand at his feet. He listened, and heard an ant-king complaining, "Why can't people keep their clumsy beasts off us? That stupid horse is treading my people down without mercy with his heavy hooves."

So he turned aside onto a side path, and the ant-king called after him, "We will remember you — one good turn deserves another."

The path led him into a wood, and there he saw two old ravens standing by their nest, throwing their young ones out. "Out with you, you idle good-for-nothings," they were crying. "We can't find food for you any longer. You're big enough to provide for yourselves."

But the poor young ravens lay on the ground flapping their wings and crying, "Oh, what helpless creatures we are! We're to shift for ourselves, and we can't even fly. What can we do but lie here and starve?"

So the good young man got down, killed his horse with his sword and gave it to them for food. Then they came hopping up, satisfied their hunger, and cried, "We will remember you — one good turn deserves another."

And now he had to use his own legs; and when he had walked a long way he came to a great city. There was a crowd and a great noise in the streets, and a man came riding up crying aloud, "The King's daughter wants a husband. But whoever asks for her hand must perform a hard task, and if he fails he forfeits his life."

Many had tried already, and all in vain; but when the young man saw the King's daughter he was so overcome by her great beauty that he forgot all the danger, went before the King and declared himself a suitor.

So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into it before his eyes; and the King ordered him to fetch this ring up from the bottom of the sea, and added, "If you come up again without it, you will be thrown back in, again and again, until you die among the waves."

All the people were sorry for the handsome young man; and then they went away and left him alone by the sea.

He stood on the shore wondering what to do, when suddenly he saw three fish come swimming towards him — and they were the very fish whose lives he had saved. The one in the middle held a mussel in its mouth, and laid it on the shore at his feet; and when he had picked it up and opened it, there lay the gold ring in the shell.

Full of joy he took it to the King, expecting him to grant the promised reward. But when the proud princess saw that he was not her equal in birth, she looked down on him and demanded that he perform another task first. She went down into the garden and scattered ten sackfuls of millet seed on the grass with her own hands, and then said, "Tomorrow morning before sunrise these must be picked up again, and not a single grain missing."

The young man sat down in the garden and tried to think how the task might be done; but he could think of nothing, and there he sat, sorrowfully waiting for daybreak, when he would be led out to die.

But as soon as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden, he saw all ten sacks standing side by side, quite full, and not a single grain missing. The ant-king had come in the night with many thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had industriously picked up every grain of millet and gathered it into the sacks.

Presently the King's daughter came down into the garden herself, and was amazed to see that the young man had done what she set him. But she still could not conquer her proud heart, and said, "Although he has performed both tasks, he shall not be my husband until he brings me an apple from the Tree of Life."

The young man did not know where the Tree of Life stood, but he set out, and would have gone on for ever as long as his legs would carry him, though he had no hope of finding it. After he had wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to a wood and lay down under a tree to sleep.

But he heard a rustling in the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand. At the same moment three ravens flew down to him, perched on his knee and said, "We are the three young ravens you saved from starving. When we had grown big and heard that you were looking for the Golden Apple, we flew over the sea to the end of the world, where the Tree of Life stands, and have brought you the apple."

Full of joy the young man set out for home, and took the Golden Apple to the King's beautiful daughter, who now had no excuses left. They cut the Apple of Life in two and ate it together; and then her heart filled with love for him, and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.


The Straw, the Coal, and the Bean

In a village there lived a poor old woman who had collected a dish of beans and wanted to cook them. So she made a fire on her hearth, and to make it burn up quicker she lit it with a handful of straw.

When she was tipping the beans into the pan, one dropped without her noticing and lay on the floor beside a straw; and soon afterwards a burning coal jumped down out of the fire to join them.

Then the straw began, and said, "Dear friends, where have you come from?"

The coal answered, "I was lucky enough to leap out of the fire; and if I hadn't got out by main force I should certainly have died — I'd have been burnt to ashes."

The bean said, "I got away with a whole skin too. But if the old woman had got me into the pan, I'd have been made into broth without any mercy, like my companions."

"And would a better fate have come to me?" said the straw. "The old woman has destroyed all my brothers in fire and smoke. She grabbed sixty of them at once and took their lives. I slipped through her fingers by good luck."

"But what shall we do now?" said the coal.

"I think," said the bean, "that as we have all so luckily escaped death, we should stick together like good companions; and in case some fresh misfortune comes on us here, we should go away together and travel to a foreign country."

The other two liked the idea, and they set off together. Soon, though, they came to a little brook; and as there was no bridge and no plank across it, they did not know how they were to get over.

The straw hit on a good idea and said, "I'll lay myself straight across, and then you can walk over me as if I were a bridge."

So the straw stretched itself from one bank to the other; and the coal, who was of a hasty disposition, tripped quite boldly onto the newly built bridge. But when she got to the middle and heard the water rushing underneath, she took fright after all and stood still and dared not go any further. And the straw began to burn, broke in two and fell into the stream. The coal slipped after her, hissed as she hit the water, and breathed her last.

The bean, who had prudently stayed behind on the bank, could not help laughing at all this; and she could not stop, and laughed so heartily that she burst.

And that would have been the end of her too, if by good luck a tailor had not been travelling in search of work and sat down to rest by the brook. As he had a kind heart he took out his needle and thread and sewed her together again. The bean thanked him very prettily; but as the tailor had used black thread, all beans have had a black seam ever since.
