The Fisherman and His Wife

Once upon a time there was a fisherman who lived with his wife in a miserable hovel close by the sea, and every day he went out fishing.

And once, as he sat with his rod looking into the clear water, his line went down, far down below; and when he pulled it up again he brought out a great flounder. And the flounder said to him, "Listen, fisherman, I beg you, let me live. I am no flounder really, but an enchanted prince. What good will it do you to kill me? I shouldn't be good to eat. Put me back in the water and let me go."

"Come," said the fisherman, "there's no need for so many words about it. A fish that can talk I would certainly let go anyway." And with that he put him back into the clear water, and the flounder went down to the bottom, leaving a long streak of blood behind him.

Then the fisherman got up and went home to his wife in the hovel.

"Husband," said the woman, "haven't you caught anything today?"

"No," said the man. "I did catch a flounder, who said he was an enchanted prince, so I let him go again."

"Didn't you wish for anything first?" said the woman.

"No," said the man. "What should I wish for?"

"Ah," said the woman, "it's hard having to live always in this dirty hovel. You might have wished for a little cottage for us. Go back and call him. Tell him we want a little cottage. He's sure to give us that."

"Ah," said the man, "why should I go there again?"

"Why," said the woman, "you caught him and you let him go again — he's sure to do it. Go at once."

The man still did not much want to go, but he did not want to cross his wife either, and he went to the sea.

When he got there the sea was all green and yellow and no longer smooth. So he stood still and said:

	"Flounder, flounder in the sea,
	come, I beg you, here to me;
	for my wife, good Ilsabil,
	wills not as I'd have her will."

Then the flounder came swimming up and said, "Well, what does she want, then?"

"Ah," said the man, "I did catch you, and my wife says I really ought to have wished for something. She doesn't want to live in a wretched hovel any longer. She would like a cottage."

"Go home, then," said the flounder. "She has it already."

When the man got home his wife was not in the hovel any more; in its place there stood a little cottage, and she was sitting on a bench in front of the door. She took him by the hand and said, "Just come inside. Look — now isn't this a great deal better?"

So they went in; and there was a little porch and a pretty little parlour and bedroom, a kitchen and a pantry, with the best of furniture and fitted out with beautiful things of tin and brass, everything anybody could want. And behind the cottage there was a little yard with hens and ducks, and a little garden with flowers and fruit.

"Look," said the wife, "isn't that nice?"

"Yes," said the husband, "and so we must always think it. Now we shall live quite contented."

"We'll think about that," said the wife.

With that they had something to eat and went to bed.

Everything went well for a week or a fortnight, and then the woman said, "Listen, husband, this cottage is much too small for us, and the garden and the yard are little. The flounder might just as well have given us a bigger house. I should like to live in a great stone castle. Go to the flounder and tell him to give us a castle."

"Ah, wife," said the man, "the cottage is quite good enough. Why should we live in a castle?"

"What!" said the woman. "Just go there — the flounder can always do it."

"No, wife," said the man, "the flounder has only just given us the cottage. I don't like to go back so soon; it might make him angry."

"Go," said the woman. "He can do it easily enough and will be glad to. Just you go to him."

The man's heart grew heavy and he did not want to go. He said to himself, "It isn't right" — and yet he went.

And when he came to the sea, the water was quite purple and dark blue and grey and thick, and no longer green and yellow; but it was still calm. And he stood there and said:

	"Flounder, flounder in the sea,
	come, I beg you, here to me;
	for my wife, good Ilsabil,
	wills not as I'd have her will."

"Well, what does she want, then?" said the flounder.

"Alas," said the man, half frightened, "she wants to live in a great stone castle."

"Go to her, then. She is standing in front of the door," said the flounder.

So the man went off, meaning to go home; but when he got there he found a great stone palace, and his wife was standing at the top of the steps just going in. She took him by the hand and said, "Come inside."

So he went in with her; and in the castle there was a great hall paved with marble, and a crowd of servants who flung the doors wide open. The walls were all bright with beautiful hangings, and in the rooms were chairs and tables of pure gold, and crystal chandeliers hung from the ceilings; and all the rooms and bedrooms had carpets, and food and wine of the very best stood on all the tables, so that they nearly broke under it. Behind the house there was a great courtyard too, with stables for horses and cows and the very best of carriages; and there was a magnificent great garden with the most beautiful flowers and fruit trees, and a park a good half mile long with stags and deer and hares in it, and everything anybody could wish for.

"Come," said the woman, "isn't that beautiful?"

"Yes indeed," said the man. "Now let it be at that. We'll live in this beautiful castle and be content."

"We'll consider it," said the woman, "and sleep on it." And with that they went to bed.

Next morning the wife woke first. It was just daybreak, and from her bed she could see the beautiful country lying in front of her. Her husband was still stretching himself, so she poked him in the side with her elbow and said, "Get up, husband, and look out of the window. Couldn't we be King over all that land? Go to the flounder. We will be King."

"Ah, wife," said the man, "why should we be King? I don't want to be King."

"Well," said the wife, "if you won't be King, I will. Go to the flounder, because I mean to be King."

"Ah, wife," said the man, "why do you want to be King? I don't like to say that to him."

"Why not?" said the woman. "Go to him this instant. I must be King."

So the man went, and was thoroughly unhappy that his wife wanted to be King. "It isn't right, it isn't right," he thought. He did not want to go; but he went.

And when he came to the sea, it was quite dark grey, and the water heaved up from below and smelt foul. So he stood by it and said:

	"Flounder, flounder in the sea,
	come, I beg you, here to me;
	for my wife, good Ilsabil,
	wills not as I'd have her will."

"Well, what does she want, then?" said the flounder.

"Alas," said the man, "she wants to be King."

"Go to her. She is King already."

So the man went; and when he came to the palace, the castle had grown much bigger, with a great tower and magnificent ornaments; and a sentry was standing in front of the door, and there were crowds of soldiers with kettledrums and trumpets. And when he went inside, everything was of real marble and gold, with velvet covers and great golden tassels. Then the doors of the hall were opened, and there was the whole court in its splendour; and his wife was sitting on a high throne of gold and diamonds with a great gold crown on her head and a sceptre of pure gold and jewels in her hand, and on either side of her stood her maids of honour in a row, each one a head shorter than the last.

Then he went and stood in front of her and said, "Ah, wife, so now you are King."

"Yes," said the woman, "now I am King."

So he stood and looked at her; and when he had looked at her a while he said, "And now that you are King, let everything else be. Now we shall wish for nothing more."

"No, husband," said the woman, quite restlessly, "the time hangs very heavy on me. I can't bear it any longer. Go to the flounder. I am King, but I must be Emperor too."

"Alas, wife, why do you want to be Emperor?"

"Husband," she said, "go to the flounder. I will be Emperor."

"Alas, wife," said the man, "he can't make you Emperor. I can't say such a thing to the fish. There is only one Emperor in the land. The flounder can't make you an Emperor — I promise you he can't."

"What!" said the woman. "I am King, and you are nothing but my husband. Will you go this minute? Go at once! If he can make a King he can make an Emperor. I will be Emperor. Go this instant."

So he had to go. But as he went he was troubled in his mind, and thought to himself, "This will not end well. It will not end well. Emperor is too shameless. The flounder will get tired of it in the end."

With that he came to the sea; and the sea was quite black and thick and began to boil up from below, so that it threw up bubbles, and such a sharp wind blew over it that it curdled; and the man was afraid. So he stood by it and said:

	"Flounder, flounder in the sea,
	come, I beg you, here to me;
	for my wife, good Ilsabil,
	wills not as I'd have her will."

"Well, what does she want, then?" said the flounder.

"Alas, flounder," he said, "my wife wants to be Emperor."

"Go to her," said the flounder. "She is Emperor already."

So the man went; and when he got there the whole palace was of polished marble with alabaster figures and golden ornaments, and soldiers were marching up and down in front of the door blowing trumpets and beating cymbals and drums; and inside the house barons and counts and dukes were going about as servants. Then they opened the doors to him, and they were of pure gold.

And when he came in, there sat his wife on a throne made out of one solid piece of gold, and it was fully two miles high; and she wore a great golden crown three yards high, set with diamonds and rubies, and in one hand she held the sceptre and in the other the imperial orb. And on both sides of her stood the yeomen of the guard in two rows, each one smaller than the man before him, from the biggest giant, who was two miles high, down to the very smallest dwarf, no bigger than my little finger. And in front of them stood a great many princes and dukes.

Then the man went and stood among them and said, "Wife, are you Emperor now?"

"Yes," she said, "now I am Emperor."

So he stood and looked at her properly; and when he had looked at her a while he said, "Ah, wife, be content now that you are Emperor."

"Husband," she said, "why are you standing there? Now I am Emperor, but I will be Pope too. Go to the flounder."

"Alas, wife," said the man, "what will you not wish for next? You can't be Pope. There is only one in all Christendom. He can't make you Pope."

"Husband," she said, "I will be Pope. Go this moment. I must be Pope this very day."

"No, wife," said the man, "I don't like to say that to him. It won't do. It is too much. The flounder can't make you Pope."

"Husband," she said, "what nonsense! If he can make an Emperor he can make a Pope. Go to him directly. I am Emperor and you are nothing but my husband. Will you go at once?"

Then he was frightened, and went; but he felt quite faint, and shivered and shook, and his knees and his legs trembled under him. And a high wind was blowing over the land, and the clouds raced, and towards evening everything grew dark, and the leaves fell from the trees, and the water rose and roared as if it were boiling and beat upon the shore. And far off he saw ships firing their guns in their distress, pitching and tossing on the waves. And still there was a small patch of blue in the middle of the sky, though all round it was as red as a heavy storm.

So, full of despair, he went and stood there in great fear and said:

	"Flounder, flounder in the sea,
	come, I beg you, here to me;
	for my wife, good Ilsabil,
	wills not as I'd have her will."

"Well, what does she want, then?" said the flounder.

"Alas," said the man, "she wants to be Pope."

"Go to her, then," said the flounder. "She is Pope already."

So he went; and when he got there he saw what seemed to be a great church surrounded by palaces. He pushed his way through the crowd. Inside, everything was lit up with thousands and thousands of candles, and his wife was dressed in gold and sitting on a far higher throne, with three great golden crowns on her head; and round about her was all the splendour of the Church, and on both sides of her stood a row of candles, the biggest as tall as the very tallest tower and the smallest no bigger than a kitchen candle; and all the emperors and kings were on their knees before her, kissing her shoe.

"Wife," said the man, looking at her carefully, "are you Pope now?"

"Yes," she said, "I am Pope."

So he stood and looked at her, and it was just as if he were looking into the bright sun. And when he had stood looking at her a little while, he said, "Ah, wife, if you are Pope, do let well alone."

But she sat as stiff as a post and did not move or give any sign of life.

Then he said, "Wife, now that you are Pope, be satisfied. There is nothing greater you can become now."

"I'll consider that," said the woman.

And with that they both went to bed; but she was not satisfied, and her greed would not let her sleep, because she was thinking all the time what there was left for her to be.

The man slept well and soundly, for he had run about a great deal that day; but the woman could not get to sleep at all, and flung herself from one side to the other the whole night through, thinking always what more there was left for her to be, and unable to think of anything.

At last the sun began to rise; and when the woman saw the red of the dawn she sat up in bed and looked at it. And when she saw the sun rising through the window she said, "Can't I make the sun and the moon rise too?"

"Husband," she said, poking him in the ribs with her elbows, "wake up. Go to the flounder. I want to be like God."

The man was still half asleep, but he was so horrified that he fell out of bed. He thought he must have misheard, and rubbed his eyes and said, "Alas, wife, what are you saying?"

"Husband," she said, "if I can't make the sun and the moon rise, and have to sit and watch the sun and the moon rising, I can't bear it. I shall never know another happy hour unless I can make them rise myself."

And she looked at him so terribly that a shudder ran through him, and said, "Go at once. I want to be like God."

"Alas, wife," said the man, falling on his knees in front of her, "the flounder can't do that. He can make an emperor and a pope. I beg you, stay as you are and be Pope."

Then she flew into a rage, and her hair went flying wildly about her head, and she cried, "I won't put up with it, I won't stand it any longer. Will you go?"

Then he pulled on his trousers and ran off like a madman. But outside a great storm was raging and blowing so hard that he could scarcely keep his feet. Houses and trees were toppling over, the mountains shook, rocks rolled into the sea, the sky was pitch black, and it thundered and lightened, and the sea came in with black waves as high as church towers and mountains, every one of them crested with white foam.

Then he cried out, and could not hear his own words:

	"Flounder, flounder in the sea,
	come, I beg you, here to me;
	for my wife, good Ilsabil,
	wills not as I'd have her will."

"Well, what does she want, then?" said the flounder.

"Alas," he said, "she wants to be like God."

"Go to her. You will find her back in the dirty hovel."

And there they are living to this very day.
