The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage

Once upon a time a mouse, a bird and a sausage went into partnership, kept house together, lived well and happily with one another, and increased their property wonderfully. The bird's work was to fly into the forest every day and bring back wood. The mouse had to carry water, light the fire and lay the table; but the sausage had to do the cooking.

Whoever is too well off is always longing for something new. So one day the bird met another bird on the way, and told it what excellent circumstances it was in, and boasted about them. But the other bird called it a poor simpleton for doing all the hard work, and said the two at home had an easy time of it. For when the mouse had made her fire and carried her water, she went into her little room to rest until they called her to lay the table; and the sausage stayed by the pot, saw that the food was cooking nicely, and when it was nearly dinner time rolled itself once or twice through the broth or the vegetables, and then they were buttered and salted and ready. And when the bird came home and put down his load, they sat down to dinner; and after they had eaten, they slept their fill till next morning. It was a splendid life.

Next day the bird, put up to it by the other one, would go into the wood no more. He said he had been their servant long enough and had been made a fool of by them, and that they must change round for once and try arranging it some other way. And although the mouse and the sausage begged him most earnestly, the bird would have his way and said it must be tried. They drew lots about it; and the lot fell so that the sausage was to carry wood, the mouse became cook, and the bird was to fetch water.

And what happened? The little sausage set off towards the wood; the little bird lit the fire; and the mouse stayed by the pot and waited alone for the little sausage to come home and bring wood for the next day.

But the little sausage stayed away so long on the road that the two of them were afraid something was wrong, and the bird flew out a little way into the air to meet it. Not far off, though, he met a dog on the road who had fallen on the poor sausage as fair game, seized it and swallowed it down. The bird accused the dog of barefaced robbery, but it was no use talking, because the dog said he had found forged papers on the sausage, and its life was forfeit to him on that account.

The bird sadly took up the wood, flew home and told what he had seen and heard. They were very much upset, but agreed to do their best and stay together. So the bird laid the cloth, and the mouse got the food ready and meant to dress it; and she wanted to get into the pot the way the sausage used to, and roll and creep about among the vegetables to mix them. But before she was well into the middle of them she was stopped, and lost her skin and her hair and her life in the attempt.

When the bird came to carry the dinner up, there was no cook there. In his distress the bird threw the wood about here and there, called and searched, but no cook was to be found. And through his carelessness the wood caught fire and the place burst into flames; and the bird hurried off to fetch water, and then the bucket slipped out of his claws into the well, and he fell in after it and could not get out again, but had to drown there.


Mother Holle

There was once a widow who had two daughters, one of them pretty and hard-working, the other ugly and idle. But she was much fonder of the ugly, idle one, because she was her own daughter; and the other, who was a stepdaughter, had to do all the work and be the household drudge.

Every day the poor girl had to sit by a well beside the road and spin, and spin until her fingers bled.

Now one day it happened that the shuttle was marked with her blood, so she dipped it into the well to wash the mark off; but it slipped out of her hand and fell to the bottom. She began to cry, and ran to her stepmother and told her what had happened. But the stepmother scolded her sharply, and was so merciless as to say, "Since you let the shuttle fall in, you can fetch it out again."

So the girl went back to the well and did not know what to do; and in the misery of her heart she jumped into the well to get the shuttle. She lost her senses; and when she came round again she was in a lovely meadow, with the sun shining and many thousands of flowers growing.

She walked on across this meadow and at last came to a baker's oven full of bread; and the bread cried out, "Oh, take me out, take me out, or I shall burn! I've been baking a long time." So she went up to it and took all the loaves out, one after another, with the bread shovel.

After that she went on, and came to a tree covered with apples, which called out to her, "Oh, shake me, shake me! We apples are all ripe." So she shook the tree until the apples fell like rain, and went on shaking until they were all down; and when she had gathered them into a heap, she went on her way.

At last she came to a little house, out of which an old woman was peeping. But she had such big teeth that the girl was frightened and was about to run away.

The old woman called out to her, though: "What are you afraid of, dear child? Stay with me. If you do all the housework properly, you shall be the better for it. Only you must take care to make my bed well and shake it thoroughly, until the feathers fly — because then it snows on the earth. I am Mother Holle."

As the old woman spoke to her so kindly, the girl took heart and agreed to enter her service. She saw to everything to her mistress's satisfaction, and always shook the bed so hard that the feathers flew about like snowflakes. And so she had a pleasant life with her: never an angry word, and boiled or roast meat every day.

She stayed some time with Mother Holle, and then she grew sad. At first she did not know what was the matter with her, but at last she found that it was homesickness. Although she was many thousand times better off here than at home, still she longed to be there.

At last she said to the old woman, "I am homesick; and however well off I am down here, I can't stay any longer. I must go up again to my own people."

Mother Holle said, "I am pleased that you long for home again; and as you have served me so faithfully, I will take you up myself."

With that she took her by the hand and led her to a great door. The door was opened; and just as the girl was standing under the doorway, a heavy shower of golden rain fell, and all the gold stuck to her, so that she was covered with it from head to foot.

"That is for you, because you have been so hard-working," said Mother Holle; and at the same time she gave her back the shuttle she had let fall into the well.

Then the door closed, and the girl found herself up above on the earth, not far from her mother's house. And as she came into the yard, the cock was standing by the well and crowed:

	"Cock-a-doodle-doo!
	Your golden girl's come back to you!"

So she went in to her mother; and as she arrived covered with gold like that, she was made welcome by both her mother and her sister.

The girl told everything that had happened to her; and as soon as the mother heard how she had come by so much wealth, she was very eager to get the same good luck for her ugly, lazy daughter. She had to sit by the well and spin; and so that her shuttle should be stained with blood, she stuck her hand into a thorn bush and pricked her finger. Then she threw the shuttle into the well and jumped in after it.

Like her sister, she came to the beautiful meadow and walked along the very same path. When she got to the oven, the bread cried out again, "Oh, take me out, take me out, or I shall burn! I've been baking a long time."

But the lazy thing answered, "As if I wanted to get myself dirty!" — and on she went.

Soon she came to the apple tree, which cried, "Oh, shake me, shake me! We apples are all ripe."

But she answered, "I like that! One of you might fall on my head" — and went on.

When she came to Mother Holle's house she was not afraid, because she had already heard about the big teeth, and she hired herself out to her at once.

The first day she made herself work hard and did what Mother Holle told her, because she was thinking about all the gold she would give her. But on the second day she began to be lazy, and on the third day lazier still, and then she would not get up in the morning at all. She did not make Mother Holle's bed properly either, and did not shake it so as to make the feathers fly.

Mother Holle was soon tired of this and gave her notice to leave. The lazy girl was quite willing to go, and thought that now the golden rain would come. Mother Holle led her to the great door too; but as she was standing under it, instead of the gold a great kettleful of pitch was emptied over her.

"That is the reward for your service," said Mother Holle, and shut the door.

So the lazy girl went home, but she was covered all over with pitch; and the cock by the well, as soon as he saw her, crowed:

	"Cock-a-doodle-doo!
	Your pitchy girl's come back to you!"

And the pitch stuck fast to her and could not be got off as long as she lived.


The Seven Ravens

There was once a man who had seven sons, and still no daughter, however much he wished for one. At last his wife gave him hope of another child; and when it came into the world it was a girl. There was great joy; but the child was sickly and small and had to be baptized privately because it was so weak.

The father sent one of the boys in a hurry to the spring to fetch water for the baptism. The other six went with him; and as each of them wanted to be the first to fill it, the jug fell into the well. There they stood and did not know what to do, and not one of them dared go home.

As they still did not come back, the father grew impatient and said, "They have certainly forgotten about it for some game, the wicked boys." He grew afraid that the girl would have to die unbaptized, and in his anger he cried, "I wish the boys were all turned into ravens."

Hardly was the word spoken before he heard a whirring of wings over his head in the air, looked up, and saw seven coal-black ravens flying away.

The parents could not take the curse back; and however sad they were at the loss of their seven sons, they comforted themselves to some extent with their dear little daughter, who soon grew strong and became more beautiful every day.

For a long time she did not know that she had had brothers, because her parents were careful not to mention them in front of her. But one day she happened to overhear some people saying about her that the girl was certainly beautiful, but that in truth she was to blame for the misfortune that had come on her seven brothers.

Then she was very much troubled, and went to her father and mother and asked whether it was true that she had had brothers, and what had become of them. Her parents did not dare keep the secret any longer, but said that what had happened to her brothers was the will of Heaven, and that her birth had only been the innocent cause of it.

But the girl took it to heart, day after day, and thought she must set her brothers free. She had no rest and no peace until she set out in secret and went off into the wide world to find her brothers and free them, whatever it cost. She took nothing with her but a little ring belonging to her parents, as a keepsake; a loaf of bread against hunger; a little jug of water against thirst; and a little stool in case she grew tired.

And now she went on and on, far, far away to the very end of the world. Then she came to the sun; but it was too hot and terrible, and it devoured little children. She ran away in a hurry and ran to the moon; but the moon was far too cold, and dreadful and spiteful as well, and when it saw the child it said, "I smell, I smell the flesh of a human being."

So she ran quickly away and came to the stars, who were kind and good to her, and each of them was sitting on its own little stool. And the morning star got up and gave her a chicken's leg bone and said, "Without this bone you cannot open the glass mountain, and it is in the glass mountain that your brothers are."

The girl took the bone, wrapped it up carefully in a cloth, and went on until she came to the glass mountain. The door was shut, and she meant to take out the bone; but when she undid the cloth it was empty, and she had lost the good star's present.

What was she to do now? She wanted to rescue her brothers, and had no key to the glass mountain. So the good sister took a knife, cut off one of her little fingers, put it in the door and managed to open it.

When she had gone inside, a little dwarf came to meet her and said, "My child, what are you looking for?"

"I am looking for my brothers, the seven ravens," she answered.

The dwarf said, "The lord ravens are not at home; but if you will wait here until they come, step inside."

Then the little dwarf carried in the ravens' dinner on seven little plates and in seven little glasses; and the little sister ate a morsel from each plate and took a sip from each glass; and into the last glass she dropped the ring she had brought with her.

Suddenly she heard a whirring of wings and a rushing through the air, and the little dwarf said, "Now the lord ravens are flying home."

Then they came, and wanted to eat and drink, and looked for their little plates and glasses. And one after another they said, "Who has been eating off my plate? Who has been drinking out of my glass? It was a human mouth."

And when the seventh came to the bottom of his glass, the ring rolled against his mouth. He looked at it and saw that it was a ring belonging to his father and mother, and said, "God grant that our sister may be here, and then we shall be free."

When the girl, who was standing behind the door and listening, heard that wish, she came out; and at once all the ravens got their human shape back again. And they hugged and kissed one another, and went joyfully home.


Little Red-Cap

Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everybody who set eyes on her, but most of all by her grandmother, who would have given her anything in the world. Once she gave her a little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well that she would never wear anything else; and so she was always called Little Red-Cap.

One day her mother said to her, "Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine. Take them to your grandmother — she is ill and weak and they will do her good. Set off before it gets hot; and when you're on your way, walk nicely and quietly and don't run off the path, or you may fall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother will get nothing. And when you go into her room, don't forget to say good morning, and don't go peeping into every corner first."

"I'll take great care," said Little Red-Cap to her mother, and shook hands on it.

The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from the village; and just as Little Red-Cap came into the wood, a wolf met her. Red-Cap did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all afraid of him.

"Good day, Little Red-Cap," he said.

"Thank you kindly, wolf."

"Where are you off to so early, Little Red-Cap?"

"To my grandmother's."

"What have you got there under your apron?"

"Cake and wine. Yesterday was baking day, so my poor sick grandmother is to have something good to make her stronger."

"Where does your grandmother live, Little Red-Cap?"

"A good quarter of a league further on in the wood. Her house stands under the three big oak trees, with the nut trees just below. You must know it," said Little Red-Cap.

The wolf thought to himself, "What a tender young creature — what a nice plump mouthful. She'll be better eating than the old woman. I must go about it craftily, so as to catch them both."

So he walked along beside Little Red-Cap for a while, and then said, "Look, Little Red-Cap, at the pretty flowers all about here. Why don't you look round you? And I don't believe you hear how sweetly the little birds are singing. You walk along as solemnly as if you were going to school, and out here in the wood everything else is merry."

Little Red-Cap looked up; and when she saw the sunbeams dancing here and there among the trees, and pretty flowers growing everywhere, she thought, "Suppose I take grandmother a fresh bunch of flowers — that would please her too. It's so early in the day that I shall still get there in good time." And so she ran off the path into the wood to look for flowers. And whenever she had picked one, she thought she saw a prettier one further off and ran after it, and so got deeper and deeper into the wood.

Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother's house and knocked at the door.

"Who's there?"

"Little Red-Cap," answered the wolf. "I've brought cake and wine. Open the door."

"Lift the latch," called the grandmother. "I'm too weak to get up."

The wolf lifted the latch, the door flew open, and without a word he went straight to the grandmother's bed and ate her up. Then he put on her clothes and her cap, lay down in the bed and drew the curtains.

Little Red-Cap, meanwhile, had been running about picking flowers; and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she remembered her grandmother and set off on the way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage door standing open; and when she came into the room she had such a strange feeling that she said to herself, "Oh dear, how uneasy I feel today — and other times I like being at grandmother's so much."

She called out, "Good morning," but got no answer. So she went to the bed and drew back the curtains. There lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far down over her face, and looking very strange.

"Oh, grandmother, what big ears you have!"

"The better to hear you with, my child."

"But, grandmother, what big eyes you have!"

"The better to see you with, my dear."

"But, grandmother, what big hands you have!"

"The better to hug you with."

"Oh, but grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!"

"The better to eat you with!"

And hardly had the wolf said it before he was out of bed at one bound and had swallowed up Red-Cap.

When the wolf had satisfied his appetite he lay down in the bed again, fell asleep and began to snore very loudly. The huntsman was just passing the house and thought, "How the old woman is snoring! I'd better see whether she wants anything."

So he went into the room; and when he came to the bed he saw the wolf lying in it. "Do I find you here, you old sinner?" he said. "I've been looking for you a long time."

Then, just as he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might have eaten the grandmother and that she might still be saved. So he did not fire, but took a pair of scissors and began to cut open the sleeping wolf's stomach. When he had made two snips he saw the little red cap shining; and when he had made two more, the little girl sprang out, crying, "Oh, how frightened I was! How dark it was inside the wolf!" And after that the old grandmother came out alive too, though she could scarcely breathe.

Then Red-Cap quickly fetched some great stones, and they filled the wolf's body with them; and when he woke up he tried to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at once and fell down dead.

Then all three of them were delighted. The huntsman skinned the wolf and went home with the skin; the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine Red-Cap had brought, and revived; but Red-Cap thought to herself, "As long as I live I will never leave the path and run off into the wood by myself again, when my mother has told me not to."

* * *

It is also told that once, when Red-Cap was taking cakes to the old grandmother again, another wolf spoke to her and tried to tempt her off the path. But Red-Cap was on her guard and went straight on her way, and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf, and that he had said good morning to her, but with such a wicked look in his eyes that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would have eaten her up.

"Well," said the grandmother, "we'll shut the door, so that he can't get in."

Soon afterwards the wolf knocked and called, "Open the door, grandmother, I'm Little Red-Cap and I've brought you some cakes."

But they said nothing and did not open the door. So the grey-beard prowled round the house two or three times and at last jumped up onto the roof, meaning to wait until Red-Cap went home in the evening and then creep after her and eat her in the dark.

But the grandmother saw what he had in mind. In front of the house there was a great stone trough, so she said to the child, "Take the pail, Red-Cap. I boiled some sausages yesterday — carry the water I boiled them in out to the trough."

Red-Cap carried it until the great trough was quite full. Then the smell of the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peered down, and at last stretched his neck so far out that he could not keep his footing and began to slide, and slid off the roof straight into the great trough and was drowned.

And Red-Cap went home in high spirits, and nobody ever did her any harm.
