The Devil With the Three Golden Hairs

There was once a poor woman who gave birth to a little son; and as he came into the world with a caul on his head, it was foretold that in his fourteenth year he would have the King's daughter for his wife.

It happened that soon afterwards the King came into the village, and nobody knew that he was the King; and when he asked the people what news there was, they answered, "A child has just been born with a caul on. Whatever anybody born like that undertakes turns out well. And it is prophesied too that in his fourteenth year he will have the King's daughter for his wife."

The King, who had a bad heart and was angry about the prophecy, went to the parents and, seeming perfectly friendly, said, "You poor people, let me have your child and I will take care of it."

At first they refused; but when the stranger offered them a great deal of gold for it, and they thought, "It's a luck-child, and everything is bound to turn out well for it," they agreed at last and gave him the child.

The King put it in a box and rode away with it until he came to a deep stretch of water; and then he threw the box in and thought, "I have rid my daughter of a suitor she never asked for."

But the box did not sink. It floated like a boat, and not a drop of water got into it. And it floated to within two miles of the King's capital city, where there was a mill, and came to a stop at the mill dam.

A miller's boy who happened by good luck to be standing there noticed it and pulled it out with a hook, thinking he had found a great treasure. But when he opened it, there lay a pretty boy inside, quite fresh and lively. He took him to the miller and his wife; and as they had no children they were glad, and said, "God has given him to us." They took great care of the foundling, and he grew up good in every way.

It happened once, in a storm, that the King went into the mill, and asked the mill folk whether the tall lad was their son.

"No," they said, "he's a foundling. Fourteen years ago he came floating down to the mill dam in a box, and the mill boy pulled him out of the water."

Then the King knew that it was none other than the luck-child he had thrown into the water, and he said, "My good people, could the lad not take a letter to the Queen for me? I'll give him two gold pieces as a reward."

"Just as the King commands," they answered, and told the boy to make himself ready.

Then the King wrote a letter to the Queen, in which he said, "As soon as the boy arrives with this letter, let him be killed and buried; and let it all be done before I come home."

The boy set out with this letter; but he lost his way, and in the evening came to a great forest. In the darkness he saw a small light, and went towards it and came to a cottage. When he went in, an old woman was sitting by the fire all alone. She started when she saw the boy, and said, "Where do you come from, and where are you going?"

"I come from the mill," he answered, "and I want to go to the Queen, to take her a letter. But I've lost my way in the forest, and I should like to stay here overnight."

"You poor boy," said the woman, "you have come into a den of thieves, and when they get home they will kill you."

"Let them come," said the boy. "I'm not afraid. But I'm so tired that I can't go any further." And he stretched himself out on a bench and fell asleep.

Soon afterwards the robbers came, and asked angrily what strange boy that was lying there.

"Ah," said the old woman, "it's an innocent child who has lost himself in the forest, and I let him in out of pity. He has a letter to take to the Queen."

The robbers opened the letter and read it, and in it was written that the boy was to be put to death as soon as he arrived. Then the hard-hearted robbers felt pity, and their leader tore the letter up and wrote another, saying that as soon as the boy came he was to be married at once to the King's daughter. Then they let him lie quietly on the bench until the next morning; and when he woke they gave him the letter and showed him the right road.

And the Queen, when she had received the letter and read it, did as it said. She had a splendid wedding feast prepared, and the King's daughter was married to the luck-child; and as the young man was handsome and pleasant, she lived with him in joy and contentment.

After some time the King came back to his palace and saw that the prophecy had been fulfilled and the luck-child married to his daughter.

"How has this come about?" he said. "I gave quite different orders in my letter."

So the Queen gave him the letter and said he could see for himself what was written in it. The King read the letter and saw perfectly well that it had been changed for another. He asked the young man what had become of the letter entrusted to him, and why he had brought a different one instead.

"I know nothing about it," he answered. "It must have been changed in the night, when I was asleep in the forest."

The King said in a rage, "You shan't have things quite so much your own way. Whoever marries my daughter must fetch me three golden hairs from the Devil's head, out of hell. Bring me what I want, and you shall keep my daughter." In this way the King hoped to be rid of him for good.

But the luck-child answered, "I'll fetch the golden hairs. I'm not afraid of the Devil." And with that he took his leave of them and began his journey.

The road led him to a large town, where the watchman at the gate asked him what his trade was and what he knew.

"I know everything," answered the luck-child.

"Then you can do us a favour," said the watchman, "if you'll tell us why our market fountain, which once ran with wine, has gone dry and doesn't even give water any more."

"You shall know that," he answered. "Only wait till I come back."

Then he went further and came to another town, and there too the gatekeeper asked him what his trade was and what he knew.

"I know everything," he answered.

"Then you can do us a favour and tell us why a tree in our town that once bore golden apples doesn't so much as put out leaves now."

"You shall know that," he answered. "Only wait till I come back."

Then he went on and came to a wide river which he had to cross. The ferryman asked him what his trade was and what he knew.

"I know everything," he answered.

"Then you can do me a favour," said the ferryman, "and tell me why I have to row backwards and forwards for ever and am never set free."

"You shall know that," he answered. "Only wait till I come back."

When he had crossed the water he found the entrance to hell. Inside it was black and sooty, and the Devil was not at home, but his grandmother was sitting in a great armchair.

"What do you want?" she said to him — but she did not look so very wicked.

"I should like three golden hairs from the Devil's head," he answered, "or I can't keep my wife."

"That's a great deal to ask," she said. "If the Devil comes home and finds you here, it will cost you your life. But as I'm sorry for you, I'll see whether I can't help you."

She turned him into an ant and said, "Creep into the folds of my dress; you'll be safe there."

"Yes," he answered, "so far so good. But there are three other things I want to know: why a fountain that once ran with wine has gone dry and doesn't even give water; why a tree that once bore golden apples doesn't so much as put out leaves; and why a ferryman must go backwards and forwards for ever and is never set free."

"Those are difficult questions," she answered. "But just keep quiet and still, and pay attention to what the Devil says when I pull the three golden hairs out."

As the evening came on, the Devil came home. He had hardly got in before he noticed that the air was not pure. "I smell human flesh," he said. "Something's not right here." And he pried into every corner and searched, but could find nothing.

His grandmother scolded him. "It's just been swept," she said, "and everything put in order, and now you're turning it all upside down again. You've always got human flesh in your nose. Sit down and eat your supper."

When he had eaten and drunk he was tired, and laid his head in his grandmother's lap, and before long he was fast asleep, snoring and breathing heavily. Then the old woman took hold of a golden hair, pulled it out and laid it down beside her.

"Ow!" cried the Devil. "What are you doing?"

"I had a bad dream," said the grandmother, "so I caught hold of your hair."

"What did you dream, then?" said the Devil.

"I dreamed that a fountain in a market place, which once ran with wine, had dried up, and not even water would come out of it. What's the cause of that?"

"Oho, if they only knew," answered the Devil. "There's a toad sitting under a stone in the well. If they killed it, the wine would flow again."

He went to sleep again and snored until the windows shook. Then she pulled the second hair out.

"Hey! What are you doing?" cried the Devil angrily.

"Don't take it badly," she said. "I did it in my sleep."

"What have you dreamed this time?"

"I dreamed that in a certain kingdom there stood an apple tree which had once borne golden apples, and now wouldn't even bear leaves. What do you suppose was the reason?"

"Oh, if they only knew," answered the Devil. "There's a mouse gnawing at the root. If they killed it they'd have golden apples again; but if it gnaws much longer the tree will wither away altogether. Now leave me alone with your dreams. If you disturb me in my sleep again you'll get a box on the ear."

The grandmother spoke gently to him until he fell asleep again and snored. Then she took hold of the third golden hair and pulled it out. The Devil jumped up, roared out and would have handled her roughly if she had not quieted him once more and said, "Who can help bad dreams?"

"What was the dream, then?" he asked, and was quite curious.

"I dreamed about a ferryman who complained that he has to ferry from one bank to the other for ever and is never released. What's the cause of that?"

"Ah, the fool," answered the Devil. "When somebody comes along and wants to cross, he must put the oar in his hand, and then the other man will have to do the ferrying and he'll be free."

As the grandmother had now pulled out the three golden hairs and had her three questions answered, she left the old serpent alone, and he slept until daybreak.

When the Devil had gone out again, the old woman took the ant out of the folds of her dress and gave the luck-child his human shape back. "There are the three golden hairs for you," she said. "And I suppose you heard what the Devil said to your three questions?"

"Yes," he answered, "I heard, and I'll take care to remember."

"Then you have what you wanted," she said, "and you can go your way."

He thanked the old woman for helping him in his need, and left hell well pleased that everything had turned out so happily.

When he came to the ferryman, he was expected to give the promised answer. "Ferry me across first," said the luck-child, "and then I'll tell you how you can be set free." And when he reached the other bank he gave him the Devil's advice: "Next time somebody comes who wants to be ferried over, just put the oar in his hand."

He went on and came to the town where the barren tree stood, and there too the watchman wanted his answer. So he told him what he had heard from the Devil: "Kill the mouse that is gnawing at its root, and it will bear golden apples again." The watchman thanked him, and gave him two donkeys loaded with gold as a reward, which followed him.

At last he came to the town whose well was dry. He told the watchman what the Devil had said: "There is a toad in the well under a stone. You must find it and kill it, and the well will give wine in plenty again." The watchman thanked him, and gave him two donkeys loaded with gold as well.

And at last the luck-child got home to his wife, who was heartily glad to see him again and to hear how well everything had gone with him. He took the King what he had asked for, the Devil's three golden hairs; and when the King saw the four donkeys loaded with gold he was quite content, and said, "Now all the conditions are met and you can keep my daughter. But tell me, dear son-in-law, where did all that gold come from? This is tremendous wealth."

"I was rowed across a river," he answered, "and got it there. It lies on the shore there instead of sand."

"Can I fetch some of it too?" said the King, and was quite eager about it.

"As much as you like," he answered. "There's a ferryman on the river. Let him ferry you over, and you can fill your sacks on the other side."

The greedy King set out in all haste; and when he came to the river he beckoned to the ferryman to put him across. The ferryman came and told him to get in; and when they reached the other bank he put the oar in his hand and sprang out.

And from that time on the King had to do the ferrying, as a punishment for his sins.

Is he ferrying still? If he is, it is because nobody has taken the oar from him.


The Louse and the Flea

A louse and a flea kept house together and were brewing beer in an eggshell. Then the little louse fell in and scalded herself. At that the little flea began to scream loudly.

Then the little room door said, "Little flea, why are you screaming?"

"Because the louse has scalded herself."

Then the little door began to creak. At that a little broom in the corner said, "Why are you creaking, little door?"

"Haven't I reason to creak?

	The little louse has scalded herself,
	the little flea is weeping."

So the little broom began to sweep furiously. Then a little cart came past and said, "Why are you sweeping, little broom?"

"Haven't I reason to sweep?

	The little louse has scalded herself,
	the little flea is weeping,
	the little door is creaking."

So the little cart said, "Then I will run" — and began to run wildly. Then the ash heap it ran past said, "Why are you running like that, little cart?"

"Haven't I reason to run?

	The little louse has scalded herself,
	the little flea is weeping,
	the little door is creaking,
	the little broom is sweeping."

The ash heap said, "Then I will burn furiously" — and began to burn with clear flames. A little tree stood near the ash heap and said, "Ash heap, why are you burning?"

"Haven't I reason to burn?

	The little louse has scalded herself,
	the little flea is weeping,
	the little door is creaking,
	the little broom is sweeping,
	the little cart is running."

The little tree said, "Then I will shake myself" — and began to shake herself so hard that all her leaves fell off. A girl who came up with her water pitcher saw it and said, "Little tree, why are you shaking yourself?"

"Haven't I reason to shake myself?

	The little louse has scalded herself,
	the little flea is weeping,
	the little door is creaking,
	the little broom is sweeping,
	the little cart is running,
	the little ash heap is burning."

At that the girl said, "Then I will break my little water pitcher" — and she broke her little water pitcher. Then the little spring the water ran from said, "Girl, why are you breaking your water jug?"

"Haven't I reason to break my water jug?

	The little louse has scalded herself,
	the little flea is weeping,
	the little door is creaking,
	the little broom is sweeping,
	the little cart is running,
	the little ash heap is burning,
	the little tree is shaking itself."

"Oho," said the spring, "then I will begin to flow" — and it began to flow violently. And everything was drowned in the water: the girl, the little tree, the little ash heap, the little cart, the broom, the little door, the little flea and the little louse, all together.
