Thumbling

There was once a poor peasant who sat by the hearth in the evening poking the fire, while his wife sat and span. And he said, "How sad it is that we have no children. It's so quiet here with us, and in other houses it's noisy and lively."

"Yes," said his wife, and sighed. "Even if we had only one, and it were quite small — no bigger than a thumb — I should be quite satisfied, and we would still love it with all our hearts."

Now it happened that the woman fell ill; and after seven months she gave birth to a child that was perfect in every limb, but no longer than a thumb.

Then they said, "It is just as we wished, and it shall be our dear child" — and because of its size they called it Thumbling. They did not let it go short of food; but the child did not grow any taller, and stayed just as it had been at first. All the same, it looked out of its eyes with good sense, and soon showed itself to be a clever and nimble creature, for everything it did turned out well.

One day the peasant was getting ready to go into the forest to cut wood, and said, as if to himself, "How I wish there were somebody to bring the cart out to me."

"Oh, father," cried Thumbling, "I'll bring the cart, you can rely on that. It shall be in the forest at the proper time."

The man laughed and said, "How can that be done? You're far too small to lead the horse by the reins."

"That doesn't matter, father. If mother will only harness it, I'll sit in the horse's ear and call out to him which way to go."

"Well," said the man, "we'll try it for once."

When the time came, the mother harnessed the horse and set Thumbling in its ear; and then the little creature called out, "Gee up! Gee up!"

And the horse went along quite properly, as if his master were driving him, and the cart went the right way into the forest.

It so happened that just as he was turning a corner, and the little one was crying "Gee up!", two strangers came towards him.

"Upon my word," said one of them, "what's this? There's a cart coming, and a driver calling to the horse, and no driver to be seen!"

"That can't be right," said the other. "We'll follow the cart and see where it stops."

But the cart went right on into the forest, exactly to the place where the wood had been cut. When Thumbling saw his father he called to him, "You see, father, here I am with the cart. Now take me down."

The father got hold of the horse with his left hand and with his right took his little son out of its ear. Thumbling sat down quite happily on a straw; but when the two strangers saw him they did not know what to say for astonishment.

Then one of them took the other aside and said, "Listen, that little fellow would make our fortune if we showed him for money in a big town. Let's buy him."

They went to the peasant and said, "Sell us the little man. He'll be well treated with us."

"No," said the father, "he's the apple of my eye, and all the money in the world can't buy him from me."

But Thumbling, hearing the bargaining, had climbed up the folds of his father's coat, settled on his shoulder and whispered in his ear, "Father, do let me go. I'll soon be back again."

So his father parted with him to the two men for a handsome sum of money.

"Where will you sit?" they asked him.

"Oh, just set me on the brim of your hat, and then I can walk up and down and look at the country, and still not fall off."

They did as he wanted; and when Thumbling had said goodbye to his father, they went off with him. They walked until it was dusk, and then the little fellow said, "Do put me down, I want to get down."

The man took off his hat and put the little fellow on the ground at the side of the road; and he leapt and crept about a little among the clods, and then suddenly slipped into a mouse hole that he had been looking out for.

"Good evening, gentlemen — go home without me," he called to them, and laughed at them. They ran up and poked their sticks into the mouse hole, but it was all wasted labour. Thumbling crept still further in; and as it soon grew quite dark, they had to go home with their annoyance and their empty purses.

When Thumbling saw that they had gone, he crept back out of the underground passage. "It's so dangerous walking on the ground in the dark," he said. "How easily a man breaks his neck or his leg!"

Luckily he knocked against an empty snail shell. "Thank God," he said, "I can spend the night safely in there" — and got inside.

Not long afterwards, when he was just going to sleep, he heard two men walk past, and one of them was saying, "How can we manage to get hold of the rich parson's silver and gold?"

"I could tell you that," cried Thumbling, interrupting them.

"What was that?" said one of the thieves in fright. "I heard somebody speaking."

They stood still and listened, and Thumbling spoke again and said, "Take me with you and I'll help you."

"But where are you?"

"Just look on the ground and see where my voice is coming from," he answered.

At last the thieves found him and picked him up. "You little imp, how are you going to help us?" they said.

"A great deal," he said. "I'll creep into the parson's room between the iron bars and hand out to you whatever you want."

"Come along, then," they said, "and we'll see what you can do."

When they came to the parson's house, Thumbling crept into the room — and immediately shouted at the top of his voice, "Do you want everything that's in here?"

The thieves were alarmed and said, "Do speak softly, so as not to wake anybody."

But Thumbling behaved as if he had not understood, and shouted again, "What do you want? Do you want everything that's in here?"

The cook, who slept in the next room, heard it, sat up in bed and listened. The thieves, though, had run some distance away in their fright; but at last they took courage and thought, "The little rascal is making fun of us." They came back and whispered to him, "Come now, be serious, and hand something out to us."

Then Thumbling shouted again as loudly as he could, "I really will give you everything — just put your hands in."

The maid, who was listening, heard that quite distinctly, jumped out of bed and rushed to the door. The thieves took flight and ran as if the Wild Huntsman were behind them; but as the maid could not see anything, she went to fetch a light. And when she came back with it, Thumbling slipped off unnoticed to the granary; and the maid, after searching every corner and finding nothing, went back to bed and thought that after all she must have been dreaming with her eyes and ears open.

Thumbling had climbed up among the hay and found a beautiful place to sleep in. There he meant to rest until daylight and then go home to his parents. But he had other things to go through first. Truly, there is a great deal of trouble and misery in this world.

When day broke, the maid got up to feed the cows. Her first errand was to the barn, where she took up an armful of hay — and precisely the armful that poor Thumbling was lying asleep in. He was sleeping so soundly, though, that he knew nothing about it, and did not wake until he was in the mouth of the cow, who had picked him up with the hay.

"Good heavens," he cried, "how have I got into the fulling mill?" — but he soon found out where he was. Then he had to be careful not to get between the teeth and be crushed; but all the same he had to slide down into the stomach with the hay.

"They've forgotten the windows in this little room," he said, "and no sun shines in, and nobody brings a candle either."

He thought very poorly of his quarters; and the worst of it was that more and more hay kept coming in at the door and the space got smaller and smaller. At last, in his distress, he cried as loudly as he could, "Bring me no more fodder! Bring me no more fodder!"

The maid was just milking the cow; and when she heard somebody speaking and could see nobody, and recognised the same voice she had heard in the night, she was so terrified that she slipped off her stool and spilt the milk. She ran in a great hurry to her master and said, "Oh heavens, parson, the cow has been talking!"

"You're out of your mind," said the parson; but he went to the cowshed himself to see what was there. And hardly had he set foot inside before Thumbling cried again, "Bring me no more fodder! Bring me no more fodder!"

Then the parson himself was alarmed, and thought an evil spirit had got into the cow, and ordered her to be killed. She was killed; but the stomach, with Thumbling inside it, was thrown on the dunghill.

Thumbling had great difficulty working his way through it; but he got far enough to make himself a little room — and then, just as he was about to put his head out, a new misfortune happened. A hungry wolf came running up and swallowed the whole stomach at a gulp.

Thumbling did not lose heart. "Perhaps," he thought, "the wolf will listen to what I have to say" — and he called out to him from inside, "Dear wolf, I know where there's a magnificent feast for you."

"Where's it to be had?" said the wolf.

"In such and such a house. You must creep in through the kitchen drain, and you'll find cakes and bacon and sausages, as much as you can eat" — and he described his father's house exactly.

The wolf did not need telling twice. He squeezed in at night through the drain and ate his fill in the larder. When he had eaten enough he wanted to get out again; but he had grown so fat that he could not get out the same way.

Thumbling had counted on that, and now began to make a violent noise in the wolf's body, and raged and screamed as loudly as he could.

"Will you be quiet?" said the wolf. "You'll wake the people up."

"What of it?" said the little fellow. "You've eaten your fill, and now I'll enjoy myself too" — and began to scream again with all his strength.

At last his father and mother were woken by it, and ran to the room and looked in through the crack of the door. When they saw that there was a wolf inside, they ran off, and the husband fetched his axe and the wife her scythe.

"Stay behind me," said the man as they came into the room. "When I've given him a blow, if he isn't killed by it, you must cut at him and hack his body open."

Then Thumbling heard his parents' voices and cried, "Dear father, I'm here — I'm inside the wolf!"

His father said, full of joy, "Thank God, we've found our dear child again!" — and told his wife to put down her scythe, in case Thumbling should be hurt with it. Then he raised his arm and struck the wolf such a blow on the head that he fell down dead; and then they got knives and scissors and cut his body open and drew the little fellow out.

"Ah," said his father, "what sorrow we've been through for your sake."

"Yes, father, I've been about the world a good deal. Thank heaven I'm breathing fresh air again."

"And where have you been?"

"Ah, father, I've been in a mouse hole, in a cow's stomach and in a wolf's. Now I'll stay with you."

"And we won't sell you again, not for all the riches in the world," said his parents, and hugged and kissed their dear Thumbling. They gave him food and drink and had new clothes made for him, because his own had been spoiled on his travels.


The Wedding of Mrs. Fox

First Story

There was once an old fox with nine tails, who believed his wife was not faithful to him and wanted to test her. He stretched himself out under the bench, did not move a limb, and behaved as if he were stone dead.

Mrs. Fox went up to her room and shut herself in; and her maid, Miss Cat, sat by the fire and did the cooking. When it became known that the old fox was dead, suitors began to present themselves.

The maid heard somebody standing at the house door, knocking. She went and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said:

	"What may you be about, Miss Cat?
	Are you asleep, or wide awake?"

She answered:

	"I'm not asleep, I'm wide awake.
	Would you like to know what I make?
	I'm boiling warm beer with butter so nice —
	will the gentleman come in and drink some likewise?"

"No, thank you, miss," said the fox. "What is Mrs. Fox doing?"

The maid answered:

	"She sits all alone
	and makes her moan,
	and weeps her little eyes quite red,
	because old Mr. Fox is dead."

"Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here who would like to court her."

"Certainly, young sir."

	The cat goes up the stairs, trip, trap;
	she knocks upon the door, tap, tap.
	"Mistress Fox, are you inside?"
	"Oh yes, my little cat," she cried.
	"A suitor's standing at the door."
	"Tell me what he's like, my dear."

"But has he nine beautiful tails, like the late Mr. Fox?"

"Oh no," said the cat, "he has only one."

"Then I won't have him."

Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the suitor away. Soon afterwards there was another knock, and there was another fox at the door who wanted to court Mrs. Fox. He had two tails, but he fared no better than the first. After that still more came, each with one tail more than the last; but they were all turned away, until at last one came who had nine tails, like old Mr. Fox.

When the widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat:

	"Now open the gates and the doors all wide,
	and carry old Mr. Fox outside."

But just as the wedding was about to be celebrated, old Mr. Fox stirred under the bench and cudgelled the whole rabble, and drove them and Mrs. Fox out of the house.

Second Story

When old Mr. Fox was dead, the wolf came courting and knocked at the door; and the cat, who was Mrs. Fox's servant, opened it for him. The wolf greeted her and said:

	"Good day to you, Mrs. Cat of Kehrewit.
	How is it that all alone you sit?
	And what good thing are you making?"

The cat answered:

	"In milk I'm breaking bread so sweet —
	will the gentleman come in and eat?"

"No, thank you, Mrs. Cat," said the wolf. "Is Mrs. Fox not at home?"

The cat said:

	"She sits upstairs in her room,
	bewailing her sorrowful doom,
	bewailing her trouble so sore,
	for old Mr. Fox is no more."

The wolf answered:

	"If she's in want of a husband now,
	then will it please her to step below?"

	The cat runs quickly up the stair
	and lets her tail fly here and there,
	until she comes to the parlour door
	and with her five gold rings she knocks:
	"Are you within, good Mistress Fox?
	If you're in want of a husband now,
	then will it please you to step below?"

Mrs. Fox asked, "Has the gentleman got red stockings on, and has he a pointed muzzle?"

"No," said the cat.

"Then he won't do for me."

When the wolf had gone, there came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion, and all the beasts of the forest, one after another. But every one of them lacked one of the good points that old Mr. Fox had had, and the cat had to keep sending the suitors away.

At length a young fox came. Then Mrs. Fox said, "Has the gentleman got red stockings on, and has he a little pointed muzzle?"

"Yes," said the cat, "he has."

"Then let him come upstairs," said Mrs. Fox — and ordered the servant to get the wedding feast ready.

	"Sweep me the room as clean as you can,
	up with the window, fling out my old man!
	For many a fine fat mouse he brought,
	yet of his wife he never thought,
	but ate up every one he caught."

Then the wedding was celebrated with young Mr. Fox, and there was a great deal of rejoicing and dancing; and if they haven't left off, they are dancing still.


The Elves

First Story

A shoemaker, through no fault of his own, had grown so poor that at last he had nothing left but the leather for one pair of shoes. So in the evening he cut out the shoes that he meant to start on next morning; and as he had a good conscience, he lay down quietly in his bed, commended himself to God, and fell asleep.

In the morning, after he had said his prayers and was just going to sit down to work, the two shoes stood on his table, quite finished. He was astounded and did not know what to say about it. He took the shoes in his hands to look at them more closely, and they were so neatly made that there was not one bad stitch in them, as if they had been meant for a masterpiece.

Soon afterwards a buyer came in; and as the shoes pleased him so well, he paid more for them than was usual, and with the money the shoemaker could buy leather for two pairs of shoes. He cut them out in the evening and next morning was about to set to work with fresh heart; but there was no need, because when he got up they were made already. And there were buyers for those too, who gave him money enough to buy leather for four pairs.

The next morning he found the four pairs made as well; and so it went on continually. Whatever he cut out in the evening was finished by morning, so that he soon had a decent living again, and at last became a wealthy man.

Now it happened one evening not long before Christmas, when the man had been cutting out, that he said to his wife before going to bed, "What would you say to sitting up tonight to see who it is that gives us this helping hand?"

His wife liked the idea, and lit a candle; and then they hid in a corner of the room behind some clothes that were hanging there, and watched.

At midnight two pretty little naked men came in, sat down at the shoemaker's table, took all the work that had been cut out and began to stitch and sew and hammer so skilfully and so quickly with their little fingers that the shoemaker could not take his eyes off them for astonishment. They did not stop until everything was done and standing finished on the table; and then they ran quickly away.

Next morning the wife said, "The little men have made us rich, and we really must show that we're grateful. They run about like that with nothing on, and they must be cold. I'll tell you what I'll do: I'll make them little shirts and coats and waistcoats and trousers, and knit them both a pair of stockings; and you make them two little pairs of shoes."

The man said, "I'll be very glad to." And one night, when everything was ready, they laid their presents out together on the table instead of the cut-out work, and then hid themselves to see how the little men would behave.

At midnight they came bounding in and were going to set to work at once; but when they found no leather cut out, but only the pretty little clothes, they were astonished at first and then showed the greatest delight. They dressed themselves with enormous speed, putting the pretty clothes on and singing:

	"Now we're boys so fine to see,
	why should we longer cobblers be?"

Then they danced and skipped and leapt over the chairs and benches. At last they danced out of the door. From that time on they never came again; but as long as the shoemaker lived all went well with him, and everything he undertook prospered.

Second Story

There was once a poor servant girl who was hard-working and clean, and swept the house every day and emptied her sweepings on the great heap in front of the door.

One morning, when she was just going back to her work, she found a letter on the heap; and as she could not read, she put her broom in the corner and took the letter to her master and mistress. And it was an invitation from the elves, who asked the girl to hold a child for them at its christening.

The girl did not know what to do; but at last, after a good deal of persuading, and as they told her it was not right to refuse an invitation of that kind, she agreed.

Then three elves came and led her to a hollow mountain where the little folk lived. Everything there was small, but more elegant and beautiful than can be described. The baby's mother lay in a bed of black ebony decorated with pearls, the covers were embroidered with gold, the cradle was of ivory and the bath of gold.

The girl stood godmother, and then wanted to go home again; but the little elves urgently begged her to stay three days with them. So she stayed, and passed the time in pleasure and gaiety, and the little folk did everything they could to make her happy.

At last she set out for home. First they filled her pockets quite full of money, and after that they led her out of the mountain again.

When she got home she wanted to get on with her work, and took the broom, which was still standing in the corner, and began to sweep. Then some strangers came out of the house and asked her who she was and what business she had there. And she had not, as she thought, been three days with the little men in the mountain, but seven years — and in the meantime her old master and mistress had died.

Third Story

A certain mother's child had been carried off out of its cradle by the elves, and a changeling with a huge head and staring eyes, which would do nothing but eat and drink, had been laid in its place.

In her trouble she went to her neighbour and asked her advice. The neighbour said she should carry the changeling into the kitchen, set it down on the hearth, light a fire and boil some water in two eggshells; that would make the changeling laugh, and if he laughed it would be all over with him.

The woman did everything her neighbour told her. And when she put the eggshells of water on the fire, the imp said, "I am as old now as the Wester forest, and I've never yet seen anybody boil anything in an eggshell" — and began to laugh about it.

And while he was laughing, a host of little elves suddenly came in, who brought the right child, set it down on the hearth and took the changeling away with them.
