The Robber Bridegroom

There was once a miller who had a beautiful daughter; and when she was grown up he wanted to see her provided for and well married. He thought, "If a decent suitor comes and asks for her, I'll give her to him."

Not long afterwards a suitor came who seemed to be very rich; and as the miller could find no fault with him, he promised him his daughter.

The girl, though, did not like him as much as a girl ought to like the man she is engaged to, and had no confidence in him. Whenever she saw him, or thought about him, she felt a secret horror.

Once he said to her, "You're my betrothed, and yet you've never once come to visit me."

The girl answered, "I don't know where your house is."

Then the bridegroom said, "My house is out there in the dark forest."

She tried to excuse herself and said she would not be able to find the way there.

The bridegroom said, "Next Sunday you must come out to me. I've invited the guests already, and I'll scatter ashes so that you can find your way through the forest."

When Sunday came and the girl had to set out, she grew very uneasy, though she did not herself know exactly why; and to mark her way she filled both her pockets with peas and lentils.

Ashes had been scattered at the entrance to the forest, and she followed them; but at every step she threw a couple of peas on the ground. She walked almost the whole day, until she reached the middle of the forest, where it was darkest; and there stood a house standing all by itself, which she did not like, because it looked so dark and dismal. She went inside, but there was nobody there, and the most complete stillness reigned.

Suddenly a voice cried:

	"Turn back, turn back, young maiden dear —
	it's a murderer's house you enter here."

The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a cage on the wall. And again it cried:

	"Turn back, turn back, young maiden dear —
	it's a murderer's house you enter here."

The girl went on further, from one room to another, and walked through the whole house; but it was completely empty and not a living soul was to be found. At last she came to the cellar, and there sat an extremely old woman whose head shook all the time.

"Can you tell me," said the girl, "whether my betrothed lives here?"

"Alas, poor child," said the old woman, "where have you come to? You're in a murderers' den. You think you're a bride soon to be married, but the wedding you'll keep is with death. Look — they've made me put that great kettle of water on, and when they have you in their power they'll cut you to pieces without mercy, and cook you and eat you, because they are eaters of human flesh. Unless I take pity on you and save you, you are lost."

With that the old woman led her behind a great barrel where she could not be seen. "Be as still as a mouse," she said. "Don't make a sound or move, or it will be all over with you. Tonight, when the robbers are asleep, we'll escape. I've been waiting a long time for a chance."

Hardly was it done before the godless crew came home. They dragged another young girl in with them. They were drunk, and paid no attention to her screams and her weeping. They gave her wine to drink, three glasses full, one glass of white wine, one of red and one of yellow — and with that her heart burst in two.

Then they tore off her fine clothes, laid her on a table, cut her beautiful body in pieces and scattered salt over them. The poor bride behind the barrel trembled and shook, because she saw perfectly well what fate the robbers had in mind for her.

One of them noticed a gold ring on the murdered girl's little finger; and as it would not come off at once, he took an axe and chopped the finger off. But it sprang up into the air, over the barrel, and fell straight into the bride's bosom. The robber took a candle and went to look for it, but could not find it.

Then another of them said, "Have you looked behind the big barrel?"

But the old woman called out, "Come and get something to eat, and leave off looking till morning — the finger won't run away from you."

Then the robbers said, "The old woman is right," and gave up their search and sat down to eat; and the old woman poured a sleeping draught into their wine, so that before long they lay down in the cellar and slept and snored.

When the bride heard that, she came out from behind the barrel; and she had to step over the sleepers, because they were lying in rows on the floor, and she was in terror of waking one of them. But God helped her, and she got safely over. The old woman went up with her, opened the doors, and they hurried out of the murderers' den as fast as they could go.

The wind had blown the scattered ashes away, but the peas and lentils had sprouted and come up, and showed them the way in the moonlight. They walked the whole night, until in the morning they reached the mill; and then the girl told her father everything, exactly as it had happened.

When the day came for the wedding to be celebrated, the bridegroom appeared, and the miller had invited all his relations and friends. As they sat at table, each of them was asked to tell something. The bride sat still and said nothing.

Then the bridegroom said to her, "Come, my darling, do you know nothing? Tell us something, like the rest."

She answered, "Then I'll tell you a dream. I was walking alone through a wood, and at last I came to a house where there wasn't a living soul; but there was a bird in a cage on the wall, which cried:

	'Turn back, turn back, young maiden dear —
	it's a murderer's house you enter here.'

And it cried it once more. My darling, I only dreamed this.

"Then I went through all the rooms, and they were all empty, and there was something so horrible about them. At last I went down into the cellar, and there sat a very, very old woman whose head shook. I asked her, 'Does my bridegroom live in this house?' She answered, 'Alas, poor child, you've come into a murderers' den. Your bridegroom does live here, but he'll hack you to pieces and kill you, and then he'll cook you and eat you.' My darling, I only dreamed this.

"But the old woman hid me behind a great barrel; and hardly was I hidden before the robbers came home, dragging a girl with them, and gave her three kinds of wine to drink, white, red and yellow, and her heart broke in two with it. My darling, I only dreamed this.

"Then they pulled off her pretty clothes and hacked her lovely body to pieces on a table and sprinkled salt on them. My darling, I only dreamed this.

"And one of the robbers saw that there was still a ring on her little finger; and as it was hard to pull off, he took an axe and chopped it off — but the finger sprang up into the air and over the great barrel and fell into my bosom. And here is the finger, with the ring!"

And with these words she drew it out and showed it to the company.

The robber, who had turned as pale as ashes during the story, jumped up and tried to escape; but the guests held him fast and handed him over to justice. And he and his whole gang were executed for their infamous deeds.


Herr Korbes

There were once a cock and a hen who wanted to go on a journey together. So the cock built a beautiful carriage with four red wheels, and harnessed four mice to it. The hen got in with the cock, and away they drove.

Not long afterwards they met a cat, who said, "Where are you going?"

The cock answered, "We're going to Herr Korbes's house."

"Take me with you," said the cat.

The cock answered, "Very gladly. Get up behind, or you'll fall off in front. And take great care not to dirty my little red wheels.

	And you, little wheels, roll on,
	and you, little mice, pipe out,
	as we go on our way
	to the house of Herr Korbes."

After that came a millstone, then an egg, then a duck, then a pin, and last of all a needle, and they all sat down in the carriage and drove along with them.

But when they reached Herr Korbes's house, Herr Korbes was not at home. The mice pulled the carriage into the barn; the hen flew up onto a perch with the cock; the cat sat down by the hearth; the duck settled on the well-pole; the egg rolled itself up in the towel; the pin stuck itself into the chair cushion; the needle jumped onto the bed into the middle of the pillow; and the millstone laid itself over the door.

Then Herr Korbes came home, went to the hearth and was about to light the fire, when the cat threw a quantity of ashes in his face. He ran into the kitchen in a great hurry to wash it off, and the duck splashed water in his face. He went to dry it with the towel, and the egg rolled against him and broke and gummed up his eyes. He wanted to rest and sat down in the chair, and the pin pricked him. He lost his temper and flung himself down on his bed; but as soon as he laid his head on the pillow, the needle pricked him, so that he screamed out loud and was just going to run off into the wide world in his fury — but when he came to the house door, the millstone leapt down and struck him dead.

Herr Korbes must have been a very wicked man.


The Godfather

A poor man had so many children that he had already asked everybody in the world to be godfather; and when yet another child was born there was nobody left he could invite. He did not know what to do; and in his perplexity he lay down and fell asleep.

Then he dreamed that he was to go outside the gate and ask the first person who met him to be godfather. When he woke he decided to obey his dream, and went outside the gate and asked the first person who came up to him to be godfather.

The stranger gave him a little glass of water and said, "This is a wonderful water. With it you can heal the sick — only you must see where Death is standing. If he is standing at the patient's head, give the patient some of the water and he will be healed; but if Death is standing at his feet, all your trouble will be wasted, because the sick man must die."

From that time on the man could always say whether a patient could be saved or not, and became famous for his skill and earned a great deal of money. Once he was called in to the King's child; and when he came in he saw Death standing at the child's head, and cured it with the water. And he did the same a second time. But the third time Death was standing at its feet, and then he knew the child must die.

One day the man thought he would visit his child's godfather and tell him how he had got on with the water. But when he went into the house, what a strange establishment it was!

On the first flight of stairs the broom and the shovel were quarrelling and knocking each other about violently. He asked them, "Where does the godfather live?"

The broom answered, "One flight of stairs higher up."

When he came to the second flight he saw a heap of dead fingers lying there. He asked, "Where does the godfather live?"

One of the fingers answered, "One flight higher."

On the third flight lay a heap of dead heads, which again sent him up to the flight beyond. On the fourth flight he saw fish on the fire, frizzling in the pans and baking themselves. They too said, "One flight higher."

And when he had climbed the fifth, he came to the door of a room and peeped through the keyhole — and there he saw the godfather, with a pair of long horns on his head.

When he opened the door and went in, the godfather got into bed in a great hurry and covered himself up.

Then the man said, "Sir godfather, what a strange household you have! When I came to your first flight of stairs, the shovel and the broom were quarrelling and beating each other violently."

"How stupid you are," said the godfather. "That was the boy and the maid talking to each other."

"But on the second flight I saw dead fingers lying."

"Oh, how silly you are. Those were some roots of scorzonera."

"On the third flight lay a heap of dead men's heads."

"Foolish man, those were cabbages."

"On the fourth flight I saw fish in a pan, hissing and baking themselves." And when he had said that, the fish came in and served themselves up.

"And when I got to the fifth flight, I peeped through the keyhole of a door — and there, godfather, I saw you, and you had long, long horns."

"Oh, that's a lie!"

The man took fright and ran out; and if he had not, who knows what the godfather would have done to him.


Frau Trude

There was once a little girl who was obstinate and inquisitive; and when her parents told her to do anything she would not obey them — so how could things go well with her?

One day she said to her parents, "I've heard so much about Frau Trude that I mean to go and see her one day. People say everything about her looks so strange, and that there are such odd things in her house, that I've grown quite curious."

Her parents absolutely forbade it, and said, "Frau Trude is a bad woman who does wicked things; and if you go to her, you are no child of ours."

But the girl would not be turned aside by her parents' prohibition, and went to Frau Trude all the same.

And when she got there, Frau Trude said, "Why are you so pale?"

"Ah," she said, and her whole body trembled, "I've been so frightened by what I saw."

"What did you see?"

"I saw a black man on your steps."

"That was a charcoal burner."

"Then I saw a green man."

"That was a huntsman."

"After that I saw a blood-red man."

"That was a butcher."

"Ah, Frau Trude, I was terrified. I looked in through the window and I saw, not you, but — as I truly believe — the Devil himself, with a head of fire."

"Oho," she said, "then you've seen the witch in her proper dress. I've been waiting for you and wanting you a long time already. You shall give me some light."

Then she turned the girl into a block of wood and threw it on the fire. And when it was blazing well she sat down close to it and warmed herself at it, and said, "That gives a bright light for once."


Godfather Death

A poor man had twelve children, and had to work night and day to give them even bread. So when the thirteenth came into the world he did not know what to do in his trouble, but ran out onto the great highway and resolved to ask the first person he met to be godfather.

The first to meet him was the good God, who already knew what was in his heart, and said to him, "Poor man, I am sorry for you. I will hold your child at its christening, and take care of it and make it happy on earth."

The man said, "Who are you?"

"I am God."

"Then I don't want you for a godfather," said the man. "You give to the rich and leave the poor to go hungry."

So the man spoke, because he did not know how wisely God shares out riches and poverty. So he turned away from the Lord and went on further.

Then the Devil came to him and said, "What are you looking for? If you'll have me as godfather for your child, I'll give him gold in plenty and all the joys of the world besides."

The man asked, "Who are you?"

"I am the Devil."

"Then I don't want you for a godfather," said the man. "You deceive people and lead them astray."

He went on; and then Death came striding up to him on his withered legs and said, "Take me as godfather."

The man asked, "Who are you?"

"I am Death, and I make all men equal."

Then the man said, "You're the right one. You take the rich as well as the poor, without distinction. You shall be godfather."

Death answered, "I will make your child rich and famous, because whoever has me for a friend can lack for nothing."

The man said, "Next Sunday is the christening. Be there at the right time."

Death appeared as he had promised, and stood godfather in the usual way.

When the boy had grown up, his godfather appeared one day and told him to come with him. He led him out into a forest and showed him a herb growing there, and said, "Now you shall have your godfather's present. I make you a famous physician. When you are called to a patient, I shall always appear to you. If I stand at the sick man's head, you may say with confidence that you will make him well again, and if you give him some of this herb he will recover. But if I stand at the patient's feet, he is mine, and you must say that all remedies are useless and that no physician in the world could save him. But beware of using the herb against my will, or it may go badly with you."

It was not long before the young man was the most famous physician in the whole world. "He has only to look at a patient and he knows his condition at once, and whether he will recover or must die," people said of him; and they came to him from far and wide, and sent for him whenever anybody was ill, and gave him so much money that he soon became a rich man.

Now it happened that the King fell ill, and the physician was summoned and was to say whether recovery was possible. But when he came to the bed, Death was standing at the sick man's feet, and no herb grew that could save him.

"If I could only cheat Death for once," thought the physician. "He's sure to take it badly if I do; but as I'm his godson he'll shut one eye. I'll risk it."

So he took up the sick man and laid him the other way round, so that now Death was standing at his head. Then he gave the King some of the herb, and he recovered and grew healthy again.

But Death came to the physician, looking very black and angry, and shook his finger at him and said, "You've got the better of me. This time I'll pardon it, as you are my godson; but if you venture it again it will cost you your neck, because I'll take you away with me myself."

Soon afterwards the King's daughter fell gravely ill. She was his only child, and he wept day and night until he began to lose his sight; and he made it known that whoever rescued her from death should be her husband and inherit the crown.

When the physician came to the sick girl's bed he saw Death at her feet. He ought to have remembered his godfather's warning; but he was so infatuated by the King's daughter's great beauty and by the happiness of becoming her husband that he threw all thought to the winds. He did not see that Death was casting angry looks at him, that he was raising his hand in the air and threatening him with his withered fist. He lifted the sick girl up and put her head where her feet had been. Then he gave her some of the herb, and instantly the colour came back to her cheeks and life stirred in her again.

When Death saw that he had been cheated of his property a second time, he walked up to the physician with long strides and said, "It's all over with you, and now the lot falls on you" — and seized him so firmly with his ice-cold hand that he could not resist, and led him into a cave under the earth.

There he saw how thousands and thousands of candles were burning in countless rows, some large, some half-sized, some small. Every moment some of them went out and others flared up again, so that the flames seemed to leap here and there in perpetual change.

"Look," said Death. "These are the lights of men's lives. The big ones belong to children, the half-sized ones to married people in their prime, the little ones to old people. But children and young folk often have only a tiny candle too."

"Show me the light of my life," said the physician; and he thought it would still be very tall.

Death pointed to a little stub that was just threatening to go out, and said, "There it is."

"Ah, dear godfather," said the horrified physician, "light me a new one — do it for love of me, so that I may enjoy my life, and be King, and the husband of the King's beautiful daughter."

"I cannot," answered Death. "One must go out before a new one is lit."

"Then set the old one on top of a new one, so that it will go on burning at once when the old one has come to an end," begged the physician.

Death behaved as if he were going to grant his wish, and took hold of a tall new candle; but as he wanted his revenge, he made a mistake in fixing it on purpose, and the little stub fell down and went out. And immediately the physician fell to the ground, and now he was in Death's hands himself.
