The Six Swans

Once upon a time a certain King was hunting in a great forest, and he chased a wild beast so eagerly that none of his attendants could keep up with him. When evening came on he stopped and looked round him, and then he saw that he had lost his way. He looked for a way out and could not find one.

Then he caught sight of an old woman, whose head nodded all the time, coming towards him; but she was a witch.

"Good woman," he said to her, "can you show me the way out of the forest?"

"Oh yes, my lord King," she answered, "I certainly can — but on one condition; and if you don't keep it, you'll never get out of the forest and will starve to death in it."

"What sort of condition is it?" asked the King.

"I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as beautiful as anybody in the world, and well deserves to be your consort. If you'll make her your Queen, I'll show you the way out of the forest."

In the anguish of his heart the King consented, and the old woman led him to her little hut, where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She received the King as if she had been expecting him; and he saw that she was very beautiful, but all the same she did not please him, and he could not look at her without a secret horror.

After he had taken the girl up on his horse, the old woman showed him the way, and the King reached his royal palace again, where the wedding was celebrated.

The King had been married once before, and by his first wife he had seven children, six boys and a girl, whom he loved better than anything in the world. And as he now feared that their stepmother might not treat them well, or might even do them some harm, he took them to a lonely castle that stood in the middle of a forest. It lay so hidden, and the way was so hard to find, that he would not have found it himself if a wise woman had not given him a ball of yarn with wonderful properties: when he threw it down in front of him, it unwound itself and showed him his path.

But the King went off to his dear children so often that the Queen noticed his absences. She was curious, and wanted to know what he did when he was out alone in the forest. She gave a great deal of money to his servants, and they betrayed the secret to her and told her about the ball, which alone could show the way.

And now she had no rest until she had found out where the King kept the ball of yarn. Then she made little shirts of white silk; and as she had learned the art of witchcraft from her mother, she sewed a charm into them.

And once, when the King had ridden out hunting, she took the little shirts and went into the forest, and the ball showed her the way. The children, seeing from a distance that somebody was coming, thought it was their dear father coming to them, and ran to meet him full of joy. Then she threw one of the little shirts over each of them; and no sooner had the shirts touched their bodies than they were turned into swans and flew away over the forest.

The Queen went home quite delighted, thinking she had got rid of her stepchildren; but the girl had not run out with her brothers, and the Queen knew nothing about her.

Next day the King came to visit his children, but he found nobody there but the little girl.

"Where are your brothers?" asked the King.

"Alas, dear father," she answered, "they have gone away and left me alone" — and she told him how she had seen from her little window how her brothers had flown away over the forest as swans; and she showed him the feathers they had dropped in the courtyard, which she had picked up.

The King grieved, but he did not think the Queen had done this wicked thing; and as he was afraid the girl would be stolen away from him too, he wanted to take her home with him. But she was afraid of her stepmother, and begged the King to let her stay just one more night in the forest castle.

The poor girl thought, "I can't stay here any longer. I'll go and look for my brothers." And when night came she ran away and went straight into the forest.

She walked the whole night long, and the next day too, without stopping, until she could go no further for weariness. Then she saw a hut in the forest and went into it, and found a room with six little beds; but she did not dare get into one of them, and crept under one instead and lay down on the hard ground, meaning to spend the night there.

Just before sunset, though, she heard a rustling, and saw six swans come flying in at the window. They settled on the ground and blew at one another and blew all their feathers off, and their swan skins came off like shirts. Then the girl looked at them and recognised her brothers, and was glad, and crept out from under the bed.

The brothers were no less delighted to see their little sister, but their joy did not last long.

"You can't stay here," they told her. "This is a robbers' den. If they come home and find you, they'll kill you."

"But can't you protect me?" asked the little sister.

"No," they said. "Only for a quarter of an hour each evening can we lay our swan skins aside and have our human shape; after that we're turned into swans again."

The little sister wept and said, "Can't you be set free?"

"Alas, no," they said. "The conditions are too hard. For six years you may neither speak nor laugh, and in that time you must sew six little shirts of starwort for us. And if a single word falls from your lips, all your work will be lost."

And when the brothers had said this, the quarter of an hour was over, and they flew out of the window again as swans.

But the girl firmly resolved to set her brothers free, even if it cost her her life. She left the hut, went into the middle of the forest, settled herself in a tree and passed the night there.

Next morning she went out and gathered starwort and began to sew. She could not speak to anybody, and she had no inclination to laugh; she sat there and looked at nothing but her work.

When she had already spent a long time there, it happened that the King of the country was hunting in the forest, and his huntsmen came to the tree the girl was sitting in. They called up to her and said, "Who are you?" But she gave no answer.

"Come down to us," they said. "We won't do you any harm."

She only shook her head. And when they pressed her further with questions, she threw her golden necklace down to them, thinking to satisfy them with that. But they did not stop; and then she threw her belt down to them; and as that was no use either, her garters; and by degrees everything she had on that she could do without, until she had nothing left but her shift.

The huntsmen would not be turned aside by any of it, but climbed the tree and fetched the girl down and led her before the King.

The King asked, "Who are you? What are you doing in that tree?" But she did not answer. He put the question in every language he knew, but she stayed as mute as a fish.

As she was so beautiful, the King's heart was touched, and he was seized with a great love for her. He put his cloak round her, took her up on his horse in front of him and carried her to his castle. Then he had her dressed in rich clothes, and she shone in her beauty like bright daylight; but not a word could be got out of her.

He seated her at his side at table, and her modest bearing and her courtesy pleased him so much that he said, "She is the one I want to marry, and no other woman in the world." And after a few days he married her.

But the King had a wicked mother who was displeased with this marriage and spoke ill of the young Queen. "Who knows where this creature who can't speak comes from?" she said. "She isn't worthy of a king."

After a year had gone by, when the Queen brought her first child into the world, the old woman took it away from her and smeared her mouth with blood as she slept. Then she went to the King and accused the Queen of being an eater of human flesh. The King would not believe it, and would not let anybody do her any harm. But she went on sewing at the shirts all the time, and cared for nothing else.

The next time, when she bore another beautiful boy, the false stepmother used the same treachery; but the King could not bring himself to believe her words. He said, "She is too pious and good to do anything of that kind. If she weren't dumb and could defend herself, her innocence would come to light."

But when the old woman stole the newborn child away the third time and accused the Queen, who did not speak one word in her own defence, the King could do nothing else but hand her over to justice; and she was sentenced to be burned to death.

When the day came for the sentence to be carried out, it was the last day of the six years in which she was not to speak or laugh, and she had delivered her dear brothers from the power of the enchantment. The six shirts were ready; only the left sleeve of the sixth was missing.

So when she was led to the stake she laid the shirts over her arm; and when she was standing up there and the fire was just about to be lit, she looked round — and six swans came flying through the air towards her. Then she saw that her deliverance was near, and her heart leapt for joy.

The swans swept towards her and sank down so that she could throw the shirts over them; and as the shirts touched them, their swan skins fell away, and her brothers stood in front of her in their own bodily shape, strong and handsome. Only the youngest was missing his left arm, and had a swan's wing on his shoulder instead of it.

They hugged and kissed one another, and the Queen went to the King, who was deeply moved; and she began to speak and said, "Dearest husband, now I may speak and tell you that I am innocent and falsely accused." And she told him of the old woman's treachery, and how she had taken away her three children and hidden them.

Then, to the King's great joy, they were brought there; and as a punishment the wicked stepmother was bound to the stake and burnt to ashes. But the King and the Queen and her six brothers lived many years in happiness and peace.


Briar-Rose

A long time ago there were a King and Queen who said every day, "Ah, if only we had a child!" — and they never had one.

But it happened that once, when the Queen was bathing, a frog crept out of the water onto the land and said to her, "Your wish shall be granted. Before a year has gone by you shall have a daughter."

What the frog had said came true, and the Queen had a little girl who was so pretty that the King could not contain himself for joy, and gave orders for a great feast. He invited not only his kinsfolk and friends and acquaintances, but the Wise Women too, so that they might be kind and well disposed towards the child. There were thirteen of them in his kingdom; but as he only had twelve golden plates for them to eat off, one of them had to be left at home.

The feast was held with all possible splendour; and when it came to an end, the Wise Women bestowed their magic gifts on the baby: one gave virtue, another beauty, a third riches, and so on with everything in the world that anybody could wish for.

When eleven of them had made their promises, suddenly the thirteenth came in. She wanted to revenge herself for not having been invited; and without a greeting, or so much as looking at anybody, she cried in a loud voice, "In her fifteenth year the King's daughter shall prick herself with a spindle and fall down dead." And without another word she turned round and left the room.

They were all appalled; but the twelfth, whose good wish was still unspoken, came forward; and as she could not undo the evil sentence, but only soften it, she said, "It shall not be death, but a deep sleep of a hundred years, that the princess falls into."

The King, wanting to keep his dear child from the misfortune, gave orders that every spindle in the whole kingdom should be burnt. Meanwhile the gifts of the Wise Women were fulfilled to the full in the young girl; for she was so beautiful, modest, good-natured and wise that everybody who saw her could not help loving her.

It happened that on the very day she turned fifteen the King and Queen were not at home, and the girl was left in the palace all alone. So she went round into all sorts of places, and looked into the rooms and bedchambers just as she liked, and at last came to an old tower. She climbed the narrow winding staircase and came to a little door. There was a rusty key in the lock, and when she turned it the door sprang open — and there in a little room sat an old woman with a spindle, busily spinning her flax.

"Good day, old dame," said the King's daughter. "What are you doing there?"

"I am spinning," said the old woman, and nodded her head.

"What sort of thing is that, that rattles round so merrily?" said the girl; and she took the spindle and wanted to spin too.

But hardly had she touched the spindle before the magic decree was fulfilled, and she pricked her finger with it.

And at the very moment she felt the prick, she fell down on the bed that stood there and lay in a deep sleep. And that sleep spread over the whole palace. The King and Queen, who had just come home and had come into the great hall, began to fall asleep, and the whole court with them. The horses fell asleep in the stable, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons on the roof, the flies on the wall. Even the fire that was flaming on the hearth grew quiet and slept; the roasting meat left off sizzling; and the cook, who was just about to pull the kitchen boy's hair because he had forgotten something, let him go and fell asleep. And the wind dropped, and on the trees in front of the castle not one leaf stirred again.

But round about the castle a hedge of thorns began to grow, which got higher every year, and at last grew right up round the castle and all over it, so that there was nothing of it to be seen, not even the flag on the roof.

But the story of the beautiful sleeping Briar-Rose — for so the princess was called — went about the country, so that from time to time kings' sons came and tried to get through the thorn hedge into the castle. They found it impossible, though, because the thorns held fast together as if they had hands, and the young men were caught in them and could not get loose again, and died a miserable death.

After long, long years another King's son came to that country, and heard an old man talking about the thorn hedge, and how there was said to be a castle behind it in which a wonderfully beautiful princess named Briar-Rose had been asleep for a hundred years, and the King and Queen and the whole court were asleep as well. He had heard, too, from his grandfather, that a great many kings' sons had already come and tried to get through the thorn hedge, and had stuck fast in it and died a pitiful death.

Then the young man said, "I'm not afraid. I'm going to see the beautiful Briar-Rose." However much the good old man tried to dissuade him, he would not listen to a word of it.

But by now the hundred years had just passed, and the day had come when Briar-Rose was to wake again. When the King's son came near the thorn hedge, it was nothing but great and beautiful flowers, which parted of their own accord and let him pass unhurt, and then closed behind him like a hedge again.

In the castle yard he saw the horses and the spotted hounds lying asleep; on the roof sat the pigeons with their heads under their wings. And when he went into the house, the flies were asleep on the wall, the cook in the kitchen was still holding out his hand to grab the boy, and the maid was sitting by the black hen she had been going to pluck.

He went further, and in the great hall he saw the whole court lying asleep, and up by the throne lay the King and Queen.

Then he went further still, and everything was so quiet that he could hear his own breathing; and at last he came to the tower and opened the door into the little room where Briar-Rose was sleeping. There she lay, so beautiful that he could not take his eyes off her; and he bent down and gave her a kiss.

And as soon as he kissed her, Briar-Rose opened her eyes and woke, and looked at him quite sweetly.

Then they went downstairs together; and the King woke, and the Queen, and the whole court, and they all looked at one another in great astonishment. And the horses in the yard got up and shook themselves; the hounds jumped up and wagged their tails; the pigeons on the roof pulled their heads out from under their wings, looked round and flew off into the open country; the flies on the wall began to crawl again; the fire in the kitchen flared up and flickered and cooked the food; the joint began to turn and sizzle again; and the cook gave the boy such a box on the ear that he yelled, and the maid finished plucking the fowl for the spit.

And then the marriage of the King's son and Briar-Rose was celebrated with all splendour, and they lived contented to the end of their days.


Fundevogel (Bird-foundling)

There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt; and as he came into it he heard a sound of screaming, as if a little child were there. He followed the sound, and at last came to a tall tree, and at the top of it a little child was sitting; for the mother had fallen asleep under the tree with the child, and a bird of prey had seen it in her arms and flown down and snatched it away and set it in the tall tree.

The forester climbed up and brought the child down, and thought to himself, "You'll take him home with you and bring him up with your Lina." So he took it home, and the two children grew up together. The one he had found in a tree was called Fundevogel, because a bird had carried it away. Fundevogel and Lina loved each other so dearly that when they could not see each other they were miserable.

Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pails and began fetching water, and did not go out to the spring once only but many times over.

Lina saw it and said, "Listen, old Sanna, why are you fetching so much water?"

"If you'll never tell anybody, I'll tell you why."

So Lina said, no, she would never tell anybody; and then the cook said, "Early tomorrow morning, when the forester is out hunting, I'll heat the water; and when it's boiling in the kettle I'll throw Fundevogel in and boil him in it."

Early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting, and when he had gone the children were still in bed.

Then Lina said to Fundevogel, "If you'll never leave me, I'll never leave you either."

Fundevogel said, "Neither now nor ever will I leave you."

Then Lina said, "Then I'll tell you. Last night old Sanna carried so many buckets of water into the house that I asked her why she was doing it, and she said that if I'd promise not to tell anybody she'd tell me; and I said I'd be sure not to tell; and she said that early this morning, when father was out hunting, she'd fill the kettle with water and throw you in and boil you. But we'll get up quickly and dress and go away together."

So the two children got up, dressed quickly and went away.

When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook went into the bedroom to fetch Fundevogel and throw him in. But when she came in and went to the beds, both the children were gone. Then she was terribly alarmed, and said to herself, "What shall I say when the forester comes home and sees the children gone? They must be followed at once and brought back."

So the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and overtake the children.

The children, though, were sitting outside the forest; and when they saw the three servants running in the distance, Lina said to Fundevogel, "Never leave me, and I'll never leave you."

Fundevogel said, "Neither now nor ever."

Then Lina said, "You become a rose bush, and I'll be the rose on it."

When the three servants came to the forest there was nothing there but a rose bush with one rose on it, and the children were nowhere to be seen.

So they said, "There's nothing to be done here" — and went home and told the cook they had seen nothing in the forest but a little rose bush with one rose on it.

Then the old cook scolded them and said, "You simpletons, you should have cut the rose bush in two and broken off the rose and brought it home with you. Go and do it at once."

So they had to go out and look a second time. But the children saw them coming a long way off.

Then Lina said, "Fundevogel, never leave me, and I'll never leave you."

Fundevogel said, "Neither now nor ever."

Lina said, "Then you become a church, and I'll be the chandelier in it."

So when the three servants came, there was nothing there but a church with a chandelier in it. So they said to one another, "What can we do here? Let's go home."

When they got home the cook asked whether they had found them; and they said no, they had found nothing but a church with a chandelier in it.

And the cook scolded them and said, "You fools! Why didn't you pull the church to pieces and bring the chandelier home with you?"

And now the old cook got on her own legs and went with the three servants in pursuit of the children.

But the children saw from a long way off that the three servants were coming, with the cook waddling after them.

Then Lina said, "Fundevogel, never leave me, and I'll never leave you."

Then Fundevogel said, "Neither now nor ever."

Lina said, "Be a fishpond, and I'll be the duck on it."

The cook came up to them; and when she saw the pond she lay down beside it and was going to drink it dry. But the duck swam up quickly, seized her head in its beak and pulled her into the water; and there the old witch had to drown.

Then the children went home together and were heartily glad; and if they are not dead, they are living still.
