King Thrushbeard

A King had a daughter who was beautiful beyond all measure, but so proud and haughty with it that no suitor was good enough for her. She sent them away one after another, and made fun of them into the bargain.

Once the King held a great feast and invited to it, from far and near, all the young men who might marry her. They were drawn up in a row according to their rank and standing: first the kings, then the grand dukes, then the princes, the earls, the barons and the gentry. Then the King's daughter was led along the ranks; but she had some objection to make to every one of them.

One was too fat: "The wine barrel," she said. Another was too tall: "Long and thin has little in." The third was too short: "Short and thick is never quick." The fourth was too pale: "As pale as death." The fifth too red: "A fighting cock." The sixth was not straight enough: "A green log dried behind the stove."

So she had something to say against every one of them; but she made herself especially merry over a good king who stood quite high up in the row, and whose chin had grown a little crooked.

"Well!" she cried, laughing, "he has a chin like a thrush's beak!" And from that time he was called King Thrushbeard.

But the old King, when he saw that his daughter did nothing but mock people and despised all the suitors who had gathered there, was very angry, and swore that she should have for her husband the very first beggar who came to his door.

A few days afterwards a fiddler came and sang under the windows, trying to earn a small alms. When the King heard him he said, "Let him come up."

So the fiddler came in, in his dirty ragged clothes, and sang in front of the King and his daughter; and when he had finished he asked for some small gift.

The King said, "Your song has pleased me so well that I'll give you my daughter there for a wife."

The King's daughter shuddered; but the King said, "I have sworn an oath to give you to the very first beggar man, and I mean to keep it."

Everything she could say was useless. The priest was fetched, and she had to let herself be married to the fiddler on the spot.

When that was done the King said, "Now it isn't proper for you, a beggar woman, to stay any longer in my palace. You can just go off with your husband."

The beggar man led her out by the hand, and she had to walk away on foot with him.

When they came to a great forest she asked, "Who does that beautiful forest belong to?"

"It belongs to King Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would have been yours."

"Ah, unhappy girl that I am — if only I had taken King Thrushbeard!"

Afterwards they came to a meadow, and she asked again, "Who does this beautiful green meadow belong to?"

"It belongs to King Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would have been yours."

"Ah, unhappy girl that I am — if only I had taken King Thrushbeard!"

Then they came to a large town, and she asked again, "Who does this fine large town belong to?"

"It belongs to King Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would have been yours."

"Ah, unhappy girl that I am — if only I had taken King Thrushbeard!"

"It doesn't please me," said the fiddler, "to hear you always wishing for another husband. Am I not good enough for you?"

At last they came to a very small hut, and she said, "Oh, goodness, what a tiny house! Who does this miserable little hovel belong to?"

The fiddler answered, "That is my house and yours, where we shall live together."

She had to stoop to get in at the low door.

"Where are the servants?" said the King's daughter.

"What servants?" answered the beggar man. "You must do for yourself whatever you want done. Just make a fire at once and put water on to cook my supper. I'm quite worn out."

But the King's daughter knew nothing about lighting fires or cooking, and the beggar man had to lend a hand himself to get anything decently done. When they had finished their scanty meal they went to bed; but he made her get up very early in the morning to look after the house.

For a few days they lived like this as well as they could, and came to the end of all their provisions. Then the man said, "Wife, we can't go on eating and drinking here and earning nothing. You shall weave baskets."

He went out, cut some willows and brought them home. Then she began to weave; but the tough willows cut her delicate hands.

"I see that won't do," said the man. "You'd better spin — perhaps you can manage that better."

She sat down and tried to spin; but the hard thread soon cut her soft fingers so that the blood ran down.

"There," said the man, "you're fit for no sort of work. I've made a bad bargain in you. Now I'll try setting up in pots and earthenware. You must sit in the marketplace and sell the ware."

"Alas," she thought, "if any of the people from my father's kingdom come to the market and see me sitting there selling, how they'll mock me!" But it was no use; she had to give in unless she wanted to starve.

The first time it went well, because people were glad to buy the woman's wares since she was good-looking, and paid her what she asked; and many of them even gave her the money and left the pots with her as well.

So they lived on what she had earned as long as it lasted; and then her husband bought a great stock of new crockery. She sat down with it at a corner of the marketplace and set it out round her, ready for sale.

But suddenly a drunken cavalryman came galloping along and rode right in among the pots, so that they were all broken into a thousand pieces. She began to cry, and did not know what to do for fear.

"Oh, what will become of me?" she cried. "What will my husband say to this?"

She ran home and told him of the disaster.

"Who ever heard of sitting at the corner of a marketplace with crockery?" said the man. "Stop crying. I can see perfectly well that you can't do any ordinary work. So I've been to our King's palace and asked whether they can't find a place for a kitchen maid, and they've promised to take you. That way you'll get your food for nothing."

So now the King's daughter was a kitchen maid, and had to be at the cook's beck and call and do the dirtiest work. In both her pockets she fastened a little jar, in which she carried home her share of the leavings; and that was what they lived on.

It happened that the wedding of the King's eldest son was to be celebrated; so the poor woman went up and stood by the door of the hall to watch. And when all the candles were lit, and the people came in, each more splendid than the last, and everything was full of pomp and splendour, she thought of her lot with a heavy heart, and cursed the pride and haughtiness that had humbled her and brought her to such poverty.

The smell of the delicious dishes being carried in and out reached her, and now and then the servants threw her a few scraps of them; and these she put into her jars to take home.

All at once the King's son came in, dressed in velvet and silk, with gold chains round his neck. And when he saw the beautiful woman standing by the door, he took her by the hand and would have danced with her. But she refused and shrank back in terror, because she saw that it was King Thrushbeard, the suitor she had driven away with her scorn.

Her struggling was no use; he drew her into the hall. But the string her pockets were hung by broke, the pots fell down, the soup ran out and the scraps were scattered all over the floor. And when the people saw it, there was general laughter and mockery; and she was so ashamed that she would rather have been a thousand fathoms under the ground.

She sprang to the door and would have run away, but a man caught her on the stairs and brought her back; and when she looked at him it was King Thrushbeard again.

He said to her kindly, "Don't be afraid. I and the fiddler who has been living with you in that wretched hovel are one and the same. For love of you I disguised myself like that; and I was the cavalryman too, who rode through your crockery. All this was done to humble your proud spirit, and to punish you for the insolence with which you mocked me."

Then she wept bitterly and said, "I have done a great wrong, and I am not worthy to be your wife."

But he said, "Be comforted — the bad days are over. Now we'll celebrate our wedding."

Then the maids of honour came and dressed her in the most splendid clothes; and her father came with his whole court and wished her happiness in her marriage with King Thrushbeard; and now the rejoicing began in earnest.

I wish you and I had been there too.
