Little Snow-White

Once upon a time, in the middle of winter, when the snowflakes were falling like feathers from the sky, a queen sat sewing at a window with a frame of black ebony. And while she was sewing and looking out at the snow, she pricked her finger with the needle, and three drops of blood fell on the snow. And the red looked so beautiful on the white snow that she thought to herself, "If only I had a child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as the wood of this window frame."

Soon after that she had a little daughter, who was as white as snow and as red as blood, and her hair was as black as ebony; and so she was called Little Snow-White. And when the child was born, the Queen died.

After a year had gone by, the King took another wife. She was a beautiful woman, but proud and haughty, and she could not bear that anybody should be more beautiful than she was. She had a wonderful mirror; and when she stood in front of it and looked at herself and said:

	"Mirror, mirror on the wall,
	who is the fairest of them all?"

the mirror answered:

	"You, my Queen, are the fairest of all."

Then she was satisfied, because she knew the mirror spoke the truth.

But Snow-White was growing up, and growing more and more beautiful; and when she was seven years old she was as beautiful as the day, and more beautiful than the Queen herself. And once, when the Queen asked her mirror:

	"Mirror, mirror on the wall,
	who is the fairest of them all?"

it answered:

	"You are the fairest here, it's true,
	but Snow-White is fairer far than you."

Then the Queen was appalled, and turned yellow and green with envy. From that hour, whenever she looked at Snow-White her heart heaved in her breast, she hated the girl so much.

And envy and pride grew higher and higher in her heart like a weed, so that she had no peace day or night. She called a huntsman and said, "Take the child away into the forest. I will not have her in my sight any longer. Kill her, and bring me back her heart as proof."

The huntsman obeyed and took her away; but when he had drawn his knife and was about to pierce Snow-White's innocent heart, she began to cry and said, "Ah, dear huntsman, spare my life! I'll run away into the wild forest and never come home again."

And because she was so beautiful, the huntsman took pity on her and said, "Run away, then, you poor child."

"The wild beasts will soon have eaten you," he thought; and yet it was as though a stone had been rolled off his heart, now that he did not have to kill her. And as a young boar came running by just then, he killed it and cut out its heart and took it to the Queen as proof that the child was dead. The cook had to salt it, and the wicked Queen ate it, and thought she had eaten Snow-White's heart.

But now the poor child was all alone in the great forest, and so terrified that she stared at every leaf on every tree and did not know what to do. Then she began to run, and ran over sharp stones and through thorns; and the wild beasts ran past her but did her no harm.

She ran as long as her feet would carry her, until it was nearly evening; and then she saw a little cottage and went in to rest.

Everything in the cottage was small, but neater and cleaner than words can tell. There was a table with a white cloth on it and seven little plates, and on each plate a little spoon; and there were seven little knives and forks and seven little mugs. Against the wall stood seven little beds side by side, covered with snow-white bedspreads.

Little Snow-White was so hungry and thirsty that she ate a little of the vegetables and bread from each plate and drank a drop of wine out of each mug, because she did not want to take everything from one alone. Then, as she was so tired, she lay down on one of the little beds; but none of them suited her — one was too long, another too short — until at last she found that the seventh was just right; and there she stayed, said her prayers and went to sleep.

When it was quite dark the owners of the cottage came home. They were seven dwarfs who dug and delved in the mountains for ore. They lit their seven candles; and as the cottage was light now, they saw that somebody had been there, because not everything was in the order they had left it in.

The first said, "Who has been sitting on my chair?"

The second, "Who has been eating off my plate?"

The third, "Who has been taking some of my bread?"

The fourth, "Who has been eating my vegetables?"

The fifth, "Who has been using my fork?"

The sixth, "Who has been cutting with my knife?"

The seventh, "Who has been drinking out of my mug?"

Then the first looked round and saw that there was a little hollow in his bed, and he said, "Who has been getting into my bed?"

The others came running up and each of them called out, "Somebody has been lying in my bed too."

But when the seventh looked at his bed he saw Little Snow-White lying asleep in it. And he called the others, who came running, and they cried out in astonishment and brought their seven little candles and let the light fall on Little Snow-White.

"Oh, heavens! Oh, heavens!" they cried. "What a lovely child!" And they were so delighted that they did not wake her, but let her sleep on in the bed. And the seventh dwarf slept with his companions, an hour with each, and so got through the night.

When it was morning Little Snow-White woke, and was frightened when she saw the seven dwarfs. But they were friendly, and asked her what her name was.

"My name is Snow-White," she answered.

"How did you come to our house?" said the dwarfs.

Then she told them that her stepmother had wanted to have her killed, but that the huntsman had spared her life, and that she had run the whole day until at last she had found their house.

The dwarfs said, "If you will keep house for us — cook, make the beds, wash, sew and knit, and keep everything neat and clean — you can stay with us, and you shall want for nothing."

"Yes," said Snow-White, "with all my heart." And she stayed with them.

She kept the house in order for them. In the mornings they went off to the mountains to look for copper and gold, and in the evenings they came back, and then their supper had to be ready. The girl was alone all day, so the good dwarfs warned her and said, "Beware of your stepmother. She'll soon know you're here. Be sure you let nobody in."

But the Queen, believing that she had eaten Snow-White's heart, could not help thinking that she was the first and most beautiful of all again; and she went to her mirror and said:

	"Mirror, mirror on the wall,
	who is the fairest of them all?"

and the mirror answered:

	"My Queen, you are the fairest I can see,
	but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,
	Snow-White is still alive and well,
	and none is so fair as she."

Then she was astounded, because she knew that the mirror never spoke falsely, and she knew that the huntsman had betrayed her and that Little Snow-White was still alive.

And so she thought and thought again how she might kill her; because as long as she was not the fairest in the whole land, envy gave her no rest. And when she had at last thought of something, she painted her face and dressed herself as an old pedlar woman, and nobody could have recognised her.

In this disguise she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, and knocked at the door and called, "Pretty things to sell, very cheap, very cheap!"

Little Snow-White looked out of the window and called, "Good day, my good woman. What have you to sell?"

"Good things, pretty things," she answered. "Laces of every colour" — and she pulled one out that was woven of bright-coloured silk.

"I can let this worthy old woman in," thought Snow-White; and she unbolted the door and bought the pretty laces.

"Child," said the old woman, "what a sight you look. Come, let me lace you up properly for once."

Snow-White suspected nothing, and stood in front of her and let herself be laced with the new laces. But the old woman laced so fast and so tight that Snow-White lost her breath and fell down as if dead.

"Now I am the most beautiful," said the Queen to herself, and ran away.

Not long afterwards, in the evening, the seven dwarfs came home; and how shocked they were when they saw their dear Little Snow-White lying on the floor, not stirring or moving, and seeming to be dead. They lifted her up; and as they saw that she had been laced too tightly, they cut the laces. Then she began to breathe a little, and after a while came back to life.

When the dwarfs heard what had happened, they said, "That old pedlar woman was nobody but the wicked Queen. Take care, and let nobody in when we're not with you."

But the wicked woman, when she got home, went in front of her mirror and asked:

	"Mirror, mirror on the wall,
	who is the fairest of them all?"

and it answered as it had before:

	"My Queen, you are the fairest I can see,
	but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,
	Snow-White is still alive and well,
	and none is so fair as she."

When she heard that, all the blood rushed to her heart with fright, because she saw plainly that Little Snow-White was alive again.

"But now," she said, "I'll think of something that will be the end of you." And by the witchcraft she understood she made a poisoned comb. Then she disguised herself and took the shape of a different old woman.

So she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked at the door and called, "Good things to sell, cheap, cheap!"

Little Snow-White looked out and said, "Go away. I can't let anybody in."

"I suppose you're allowed to look," said the old woman, and pulled out the poisoned comb and held it up.

It pleased the girl so much that she let herself be tempted and opened the door. When they had struck their bargain, the old woman said, "Now let me comb your hair properly for once."

Poor Little Snow-White suspected nothing and let the old woman do as she liked; but hardly had she put the comb in her hair before the poison in it took effect, and the girl fell down senseless.

"You paragon of beauty," said the wicked woman, "you're finished now" — and went away.

But by good luck it was nearly evening, and the seven dwarfs came home. When they saw Snow-White lying on the ground as if dead, they suspected the stepmother at once, and looked, and found the poisoned comb. Hardly had they taken it out before Snow-White came to herself and told them what had happened. Then they warned her once more to be on her guard and to open the door to nobody.

At home the Queen went in front of her mirror and said:

	"Mirror, mirror on the wall,
	who is the fairest of them all?"

and it answered as it had before:

	"My Queen, you are the fairest I can see,
	but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,
	Snow-White is still alive and well,
	and none is so fair as she."

When she heard the mirror speak like that, she trembled and shook with rage. "Snow-White shall die," she cried, "even if it costs me my own life."

Then she went into a secret, lonely room where nobody ever came, and there she made a very poisonous apple. On the outside it looked beautiful — white with a red cheek — so that anybody who saw it longed for it; but whoever ate a piece of it must die.

When the apple was ready she painted her face and dressed herself up as a countrywoman, and went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs. She knocked at the door.

Snow-White put her head out of the window and said, "I can't let anybody in. The seven dwarfs have forbidden it."

"It's all the same to me," said the woman. "I shall soon get rid of my apples. Here — I'll give you one."

"No," said Snow-White, "I daren't take anything."

"Are you afraid of poison?" said the old woman. "Look — I'll cut the apple in two. You eat the red cheek and I'll eat the white."

But the apple had been so cunningly made that only the red cheek was poisoned. Snow-White longed for the beautiful apple; and when she saw the woman eating part of it she could hold out no longer, and put out her hand and took the poisoned half. But hardly had she a bit of it in her mouth before she fell down dead.

Then the Queen looked at her with a dreadful look and laughed aloud and said, "White as snow, red as blood, black as ebony! This time the dwarfs can't wake you."

And when she asked her mirror at home:

	"Mirror, mirror on the wall,
	who is the fairest of them all?"

it answered at last:

	"My Queen, in this land you are the fairest of all."

Then her envious heart had rest — so far as an envious heart can have rest.

When the dwarfs came home in the evening they found Snow-White lying on the ground. She was not breathing, and she was dead. They lifted her up and looked to see whether they could find anything poisonous; they unlaced her, combed her hair, washed her with water and with wine; but it was all no use. The poor child was dead, and stayed dead.

They laid her on a bier, and all seven of them sat round it and wept for her, and wept three whole days.

Then they were going to bury her; but she still looked as if she were living, and still had her pretty red cheeks. They said, "We can't put her into the dark ground" — and they had a transparent coffin of glass made, so that she could be seen from every side, and laid her in it and wrote her name on it in golden letters, and that she was a king's daughter. Then they set the coffin out on the mountain, and one of them always stayed by it and kept watch. And the birds came too and wept for Snow-White: first an owl, then a raven, and last a dove.

And now Snow-White lay a long, long time in the coffin, and she did not change, but looked as if she were asleep; for she was still as white as snow, as red as blood, and her hair as black as ebony.

But it happened that a king's son came into the forest and went to the dwarfs' house to spend the night. He saw the coffin on the mountain, and beautiful Snow-White inside it, and read what was written on it in golden letters.

Then he said to the dwarfs, "Let me have the coffin. I'll give you whatever you want for it."

But the dwarfs answered, "We wouldn't part with it for all the gold in the world."

Then he said, "Then give it to me, because I can't live without seeing Snow-White. I will honour her and prize her as my dearest possession."

As he spoke like that, the good dwarfs took pity on him and gave him the coffin.

And now the King's son had it carried away on his servants' shoulders. And it happened that they stumbled over a tree stump; and with the jolt the poisoned piece of apple that Snow-White had bitten off came out of her throat. And before long she opened her eyes, lifted the lid of the coffin, sat up and was alive again.

"Oh, heavens, where am I?" she cried.

The King's son, full of joy, said, "You are with me" — and told her what had happened, and said, "I love you more than anything in the world. Come with me to my father's palace, and be my wife."

And Snow-White was willing, and went with him; and their wedding was held with great show and splendour.

But Snow-White's wicked stepmother was invited to the feast as well. When she had dressed herself in beautiful clothes she went in front of her mirror and said:

	"Mirror, mirror on the wall,
	who is the fairest of them all?"

and the mirror answered:

	"My Queen, of all here the fairest are you,
	but the young Queen is fairer by far, that's true."

Then the wicked woman uttered a curse, and was so wretched, so utterly wretched, that she did not know what to do. At first she would not go to the wedding at all; but she had no peace, and had to go and see the young Queen. And when she went in she recognised Snow-White, and stood still with rage and terror and could not stir.

But iron slippers had already been put on the fire; and they were brought in with tongs and set in front of her. Then she was made to put on the red-hot shoes and to dance until she dropped down dead.
