The Knapsack, the Hat, and the Horn

There were once three brothers who had fallen deeper and deeper into poverty, until at last things were so bad that they had to go hungry and had nothing to eat or drink.

So they said, "We can't go on like this. We'd better go out into the world and seek our fortune."

So they set out, and had already walked along many a long road and over many a blade of grass, and had not yet met with any luck.

One day they came into a great forest, and in the middle of it was a hill; and when they came nearer they saw that the hill was all silver.

Then the eldest said, "Now I have found the good luck I wanted, and I want nothing more." He took as much of the silver as he could possibly carry, and then turned back and went home.

But the other two said, "We want more from good luck than mere silver" — and did not touch it, but went on.

After they had walked another two days without stopping, they came to a hill that was all gold. The second brother stopped and thought about it and could not decide.

"What shall I do?" he said. "Shall I take enough of this gold to keep me for the rest of my life, or shall I go on?"

At length he made up his mind, and putting as much into his pockets as would go in, said goodbye to his brother and went home.

But the third said, "Silver and gold don't move me. I won't give up my chance of fortune. Perhaps something better still will be given me."

He journeyed on; and when he had walked for three days he got into a forest that was even bigger than the last one, and that seemed never to come to an end; and as he found nothing to eat or drink, he was nearly exhausted.

Then he climbed a tall tree to see whether from up there he could make out the end of the forest; but as far as his eye could reach he saw nothing but treetops. So he began to climb down again; but hunger tormented him, and he thought, "If only I could eat my fill just once more!"

When he got down he saw with astonishment a table under the tree, richly spread with food, and the steam of it rising up to meet him.

"This time," he said, "my wish has been granted at just the right moment." And without asking who had brought the food or who had cooked it, he went up to the table and ate with enjoyment until his hunger was satisfied.

When he had finished he thought, "It would be a pity, after all, if this pretty little tablecloth were to be spoilt out here in the forest" — and he folded it up tidily and put it in his pocket.

Then he went on; and in the evening, when he began to feel hungry again, he wanted to test his little cloth, and spread it out and said, "I want you to be covered with good cheer again." And hardly had the wish crossed his lips before there stood on the table as many dishes of the most exquisite food as there was room for.

"Now I see what kitchen my cooking is done in," he said. "You shall be dearer to me than the mountains of silver and gold." For he saw plainly that it was a wishing-cloth.

But the cloth was still not enough to make him want to settle down quietly at home; he would rather wander about the world and go on after his fortune.

One night, in a lonely wood, he met a dusty black charcoal burner, who was burning charcoal there and had some potatoes by the fire that he was going to make a meal of.

"Good evening, blackbird," said the young man. "How do you get on in your solitude?"

"One day is like another," said the charcoal burner, "and every night potatoes. Have you a mind for some? Will you be my guest?"

"Many thanks," said the traveller, "but I won't rob you of your supper. You weren't expecting a visitor. If you'll put up with what I have, though, you're invited."

"And who's to prepare it for you?" said the charcoal burner. "I can see you have nothing with you, and there isn't a soul within two hours' walk who could give you anything."

"And yet there shall be a meal," said the young man, "and a better one than you've ever tasted."

With that he took his cloth out of his knapsack, spread it on the ground and said, "Little cloth, cover yourself" — and instantly boiled meat and roast meat stood there, as hot as if it had just come out of the kitchen.

The charcoal burner stared, but did not need much pressing; he fell to, and thrust bigger and bigger mouthfuls into his black mouth. When they had eaten everything, the charcoal burner smiled contentedly and said:

"Listen — that tablecloth of yours has my approval. It would be a fine thing for me here in this forest, where nobody ever cooks me anything good. I'll propose an exchange. Over there in the corner hangs a soldier's knapsack. It's certainly old and shabby, but there are wonderful powers hidden in it; and as I don't use it any more, I'll give it to you for the tablecloth."

"I must know first what these wonderful powers are," said the young man.

"That I'll tell you," said the charcoal burner. "Every time you tap it with your hand, a corporal comes with six men armed from head to foot, and they do whatever you command them."

"As far as I'm concerned," said the young man, "if nothing else can be done, we'll exchange." And he gave the charcoal burner the cloth, took the knapsack off its hook, put it on and said goodbye.

When he had walked a while he wanted to test the magic powers of his knapsack, and tapped it. Immediately the seven soldiers stepped up to him, and the corporal said, "What does my lord and master wish for?"

"March as fast as you can to the charcoal burner and demand my wishing-cloth back."

They turned to the left, and it was not long before they brought him what he wanted, having taken it from the charcoal burner without asking many questions.

The young man dismissed them and went on, and hoped fortune would shine on him more brightly still.

At sunset he came to another charcoal burner, who was getting his supper ready by the fire. "If you'll eat some potatoes with salt and no dripping, come and sit down with me," said the sooty fellow.

"No," he answered, "this time you shall be my guest" — and he spread out his cloth, which was instantly covered with the most beautiful dishes.

They ate and drank together and enjoyed themselves heartily. When the meal was over, the charcoal burner said, "Up there on that shelf lies a little old worn-out hat with strange properties. When anybody puts it on and turns it round on his head, the cannons go off as if twelve of them were fired together, and they shoot everything down so that nobody can stand against them. The hat is no use to me, and I'll gladly give it for your tablecloth."

"That suits me very well," he answered; and he took the hat and put it on and left his tablecloth behind him.

Hardly had he walked away, though, before he tapped his knapsack, and his soldiers had to fetch the cloth back again.

"One thing comes on top of another," he thought, "and I feel as if my luck hadn't come to an end yet."

Nor had his thoughts deceived him. After he had walked a whole day more, he came to a third charcoal burner, who invited him, like the others, to potatoes without dripping. But he let this one dine with him from his wishing-cloth too; and the charcoal burner liked it so much that at last he offered him a horn for it, which had quite different properties from the hat. When anybody blew it, all walls and fortifications fell down, and all towns and villages became ruins.

He gave the charcoal burner the cloth for it, sure enough — and afterwards sent his soldiers to demand it back again, so that in the end he had knapsack, hat and horn, all three.

"Now," he said, "I'm a made man; and it's time I went home and saw how my brothers are getting on."

When he reached home, his brothers had built themselves a handsome house with their silver and gold and were living in clover. He went to see them; but as he came in a ragged coat, with his shabby hat on his head and his old knapsack on his back, they would not acknowledge him as their brother.

They mocked him and said, "You give out that you're our brother, who despised silver and gold and wanted something better still for himself. He'll come in his carriage in full splendour like a mighty king, not like a beggar" — and they drove him out of doors.

Then he flew into a rage and tapped his knapsack until a hundred and fifty men stood in front of him, armed from head to foot. He ordered them to surround his brothers' house, and two of them to take hazel sticks with them and beat the two insolent men until they knew who he was.

A violent disturbance broke out; people came running and wanted to help the two in their trouble, but against the soldiers they could do nothing.

News of it reached the King at last, who was very angry and ordered a captain to march out with his troop and drive this disturber of the peace out of the town. But the man with the knapsack soon got a larger body of men together, who beat back the captain and his men, so that they had to retreat with bloody noses.

The King said, "This vagabond isn't brought to order yet" — and next day sent a still larger force against him; but they could do even less. The young man set still more men against them; and to have done with it sooner, he turned his hat twice round on his head, and the heavy guns began to play, and the King's men were beaten and put to flight.

"And now," he said, "I won't make peace until the King gives me his daughter for a wife and I govern the whole kingdom in his name."

He had this announced to the King; and the King said to his daughter, "Necessity is a hard nut to crack. What is there left for me but to do what he wants? If I want peace, and to keep the crown on my head, I must give you away."

So the wedding was celebrated; but the King's daughter was vexed that her husband should be a common man who wore a shabby hat and carried an old knapsack. She badly wanted to be rid of him, and thought day and night how she might manage it.

Then she thought to herself, "Is it possible that his wonderful powers lie in that knapsack?" And she dissembled and made much of him; and when his heart was softened she said, "If you would only put that ugly knapsack aside — it disfigures you so that I can't help being ashamed of you."

"Dear child," he said, "this knapsack is my greatest treasure. As long as I have it there's no power on earth I'm afraid of." And he told her what wonderful virtue it had.

Then she threw herself into his arms as if she were going to kiss him, and deftly slipped the knapsack off his shoulders and ran away with it. As soon as she was alone she tapped it and ordered the soldiers to seize their former master and take him out of the royal palace. They obeyed; and the false wife sent still more men after him to drive him right out of the country.

And then he would have been ruined, if he had not had the little hat. But his hands were hardly free before he turned it twice. Immediately the cannon began to thunder and struck everything down; and the King's daughter herself had to come and beg for mercy. And as she pleaded in such moving terms and promised to do better, he let himself be persuaded and granted her peace.

She behaved in a friendly way to him and acted as if she loved him dearly; and after some time she managed to fool him so far that he confided to her that even if somebody got the knapsack into his power, they could do nothing against him as long as the old hat was still his.

When she knew the secret she waited until he was asleep, and then took the hat away from him and had it thrown out into the street.

But the horn was still left to him; and in great anger he blew it with all his strength. Instantly all the walls, fortifications, towns and villages toppled down and crushed the King and his daughter to death. And if he had not put the horn down, and had blown just a little longer, everything would have been in ruins and not one stone left standing on another.

After that nobody opposed him any longer, and he made himself King of the whole country.


Rumpelstiltskin

Once there was a miller who was poor, but who had a beautiful daughter. Now it happened that he had to go and speak to the King; and in order to make himself seem important he said to him, "I have a daughter who can spin straw into gold."

The King said to the miller, "That is an art that pleases me well. If your daughter is as clever as you say, bring her to my palace tomorrow and I'll see what she can do."

And when the girl was brought to him, he took her into a room that was quite full of straw, gave her a spinning wheel and a reel, and said, "Now set to work; and if by early tomorrow morning you haven't spun this straw into gold during the night, you must die." Then he locked the room himself and left her in it alone.

So there sat the poor miller's daughter, and for the life of her she could not think what to do. She had no idea how straw could be spun into gold, and she grew more and more miserable, until at last she began to cry.

But all at once the door opened, and in came a little man, and said, "Good evening, Mistress Miller. Why are you crying so?"

"Alas," said the girl, "I have to spin straw into gold, and I don't know how to do it."

"What will you give me," said the little man, "if I do it for you?"

"My necklace," said the girl.

The little man took the necklace, sat down in front of the wheel, and whirr, whirr, whirr — three turns, and the reel was full. Then he put another one on, and whirr, whirr, whirr — three times round, and the second was full too. And so it went on until the morning, when all the straw was spun and all the reels were full of gold.

At daybreak the King was there already; and when he saw the gold he was astonished and delighted, but his heart only grew greedier. He had the miller's daughter taken into another room full of straw, much larger than the first, and ordered her to spin that too in one night, if she valued her life.

The girl did not know what to do, and was crying, when the door opened again and the little man appeared and said, "What will you give me if I spin that straw into gold for you?"

"The ring on my finger," said the girl.

The little man took the ring, began to turn the wheel again, and by morning had spun all the straw into glittering gold.

The King was overjoyed at the sight, but still he had not gold enough; and he had the miller's daughter taken into a still larger room full of straw, and said, "You must spin this too in the course of this night; and if you succeed, you shall be my wife."

"Even if she is a miller's daughter," he thought, "I couldn't find a richer wife in the whole world."

When the girl was alone the little man came for the third time and said, "What will you give me if I spin the straw for you this time as well?"

"I have nothing left that I could give," said the girl.

"Then promise me your first child, if you become Queen."

"Who knows whether that will ever happen?" thought the miller's daughter; and, not knowing what else to do in her difficulty, she promised the little man what he asked; and for that he once more spun the straw into gold.

And when the King came in the morning and found everything as he had wished, he married her, and the pretty miller's daughter became a Queen.

A year later she had a beautiful child, and never gave the little man a thought. But suddenly he came into her room and said, "Now give me what you promised."

The Queen was horror-struck, and offered the little man all the riches of the kingdom if he would leave her the child. But the little man said, "No. Something living is dearer to me than all the treasures in the world."

Then the Queen began to weep and lament, so that the little man took pity on her. "I'll give you three days," he said. "If in that time you find out my name, you shall keep your child."

So the Queen lay awake the whole night thinking of all the names she had ever heard, and she sent a messenger about the country to enquire far and wide for any other names there might be.

When the little man came the next day, she began with Caspar, Melchior, Balthazar, and said all the names she knew, one after another; but to every one of them the little man said, "That is not my name."

On the second day she had enquiries made in the neighbourhood about the names of the people there, and repeated the most uncommon and curious ones to the little man. "Perhaps your name is Shortribs, or Sheepshanks, or Laceleg?" But he always answered, "That is not my name."

On the third day the messenger came back and said, "I haven't been able to find a single new name; but as I came to a high mountain at the end of the forest, where the fox and the hare say good night to each other, I saw a little house; and in front of the house a fire was burning; and round the fire a quite ridiculous little man was jumping, hopping on one leg and shouting:

	'Today I bake, tomorrow I brew,
	and then the young Queen's child I'll claim.
	How glad I am that nobody knew
	that Rumpelstiltskin is my name!'"

You can imagine how glad the Queen was when she heard that name.

And when soon afterwards the little man came in and asked, "Now, Mistress Queen, what is my name?" — at first she said, "Is your name Conrad?"

"No."

"Is your name Harry?"

"No."

"Perhaps your name is Rumpelstiltskin?"

"The devil told you that! The devil told you that!" cried the little man; and in his rage he drove his right foot so deep into the earth that his whole leg went in; and then in his fury he pulled at his left leg so hard with both hands that he tore himself in two.
