Sweetheart Roland

There was once a woman who was a real witch, and she had two daughters: one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because she was her own daughter; and one beautiful and good, and this one she hated, because she was her stepdaughter.

The stepdaughter once had a pretty apron, which the other took such a fancy to that she grew envious, and told her mother she must and would have that apron.

"Be quiet, my child," said the old woman, "and you shall have it. Your stepsister has long deserved to die. Tonight, when she's asleep, I'll come and cut her head off. Only be careful to lie on the far side of the bed, and push her well to the front."

It would have been all over with the poor girl if she had not happened to be standing in a corner just then and heard the whole thing. All day long she did not dare go out of doors; and when bedtime came, the witch's daughter got into bed first so as to lie on the far side. But when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to the front and took the place at the back for herself, close against the wall.

In the night the old woman came creeping in. She had an axe in her right hand, and felt with her left to see whether anybody was lying at the outside; and then she gripped the axe in both hands and cut her own child's head off.

When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, who was called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came out she said to him, "Listen, dearest Roland, we must run for it at once. My stepmother meant to kill me, and she has struck down her own child. When daylight comes and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost."

"But," said Roland, "I advise you to take her magic wand away first, or we can't escape if she comes after us."

The girl fetched the magic wand; and she took the dead girl's head and let three drops of blood fall on the floor: one in front of the bed, one in the kitchen and one on the stairs. Then she hurried away with her sweetheart.

When the old witch got up next morning she called her daughter and was going to give her the apron; but she did not come.

Then the witch cried, "Where are you?"

"Here on the stairs — I'm sweeping," answered the first drop of blood.

The old woman went out, but saw nobody on the stairs, and called again, "Where are you?"

"Here in the kitchen — I'm warming myself," called the second drop of blood.

She went into the kitchen and found nobody. So she called again, "Where are you?"

"Ah, here in bed — I'm asleep," called the third drop of blood.

She went into the room, to the bed. And what did she see there? Her own child, whose head she had cut off, lying in her own blood.

The witch flew into a fury, sprang to the window; and as she could see a long way out into the world, she caught sight of her stepdaughter hurrying off with her sweetheart Roland.

"That won't help you," she cried. "Even if you've got a long way off, you still shan't escape me."

She put on her seven-league boots, which covered an hour's walk at every stride, and it was not long before she overtook them. But the girl, when she saw the old woman striding towards her, changed her sweetheart Roland with the magic wand into a lake, and herself into a duck swimming in the middle of it.

The witch stood on the bank and threw breadcrumbs in and took every possible pains to lure the duck over; but the duck would not be lured, and the old woman had to go home at night as she had come.

At that the girl and her sweetheart Roland took their own shapes again, and they walked on the whole night until daybreak. Then the girl changed herself into a beautiful flower standing in the middle of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart Roland into a fiddler.

It was not long before the witch came striding up to them, and said to the musician, "Dear musician, may I pick that beautiful flower for myself?"

"Oh, yes," he answered. "I'll play to you while you do it."

And as she was hurriedly creeping into the hedge and was just about to pick the flower — for she knew perfectly well who the flower was — he began to play; and whether she wanted to or not, she had to dance, because it was a magic dance. The faster he played, the more violent leaps she had to make; and the thorns tore the clothes off her body and pricked her and wounded her till she bled. And as he did not stop, she had to dance until she lay dead on the ground.

When they were free of her, Roland said, "Now I'll go to my father and arrange the wedding."

"Then in the meantime I'll stay here and wait for you," said the girl. "And so that nobody recognises me, I'll change myself into a red stone boundary marker."

So Roland went away, and the girl stood like a red boundary stone in the field and waited for her beloved.

But when Roland got home he fell into the snares of another woman, who so prevailed on him that he forgot the girl. The poor girl stayed there a long time; but at last, as he did not come back at all, she grew sad and changed herself into a flower, and thought, "Somebody is bound to come this way and trample me down."

It happened, though, that a shepherd was pasturing his sheep in the field and saw the flower; and as it was so pretty he picked it and took it home with him and put it away in his chest.

From that time on, strange things happened in the shepherd's house. When he got up in the morning, all the work was already done: the room was swept, the table and the benches cleaned, the fire lit on the hearth and the water fetched. And at noon, when he came home, the table was laid and a good dinner served. He could not imagine how it came about, because he never saw another human being in his house and nobody could have hidden in it.

He was pleased enough with such good service; but at last he was so uneasy that he went to a wise woman and asked her advice.

The wise woman said, "There is some enchantment behind it. Listen very early one morning to hear whether anything is moving in the room; and if you see anything — whatever it may be — throw a white cloth over it, and then the magic will be stopped."

The shepherd did as she told him; and next morning, just as day was breaking, he saw the chest open and the flower come out. He sprang towards it quickly and threw a white cloth over it. Instantly the transformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood in front of him, who admitted to him that she had been the flower and had been keeping house for him all this time.

She told him her story; and as she pleased him, he asked her whether she would marry him. But she answered no, because she wanted to stay faithful to her sweetheart Roland, even though he had deserted her. All the same she promised not to go away, but to go on keeping house for the shepherd.

And now the time drew near for Roland's wedding to be celebrated; and, by an old custom of that country, it was announced that all the girls were to be present at it and sing in honour of the bridal pair. When the faithful girl heard of it she grew so sad that she thought her heart would break, and she would not go; but the other girls came and fetched her.

When it came to her turn to sing, she kept stepping back, until at last she was the only one left, and then she could not refuse. But when she began her song, and it reached Roland's ears, he sprang up and cried, "I know that voice! That is the true bride, and I'll have no other!"

Everything he had forgotten, everything that had gone out of his mind, had all at once come home to his heart again.

So the faithful girl held her wedding with her sweetheart Roland; and grief came to an end and joy began.
