The Golden Bird

In the old days there was a king who had behind his palace a beautiful pleasure garden, and in it a tree that bore golden apples. When the apples were getting ripe they were counted; but on the very next morning one was missing. This was reported to the King, and he ordered a watch to be kept under the tree every night.

The King had three sons, and he sent the eldest into the garden as soon as night came on; but at midnight he could not keep himself from falling asleep, and next morning another apple was gone.

The following night the second son had to keep watch, and it went no better with him: as soon as twelve had struck he fell asleep, and in the morning an apple was gone.

Now it came to the third son's turn to watch. He was quite ready to do it, but the King had not much faith in him, and thought he would be of even less use than his brothers; but at last he let him go.

The young man lay down under the tree, but kept awake and did not let sleep get the better of him. When it struck twelve, something rustled through the air, and in the moonlight he saw a bird coming whose feathers were all shining with gold. The bird settled in the tree and had just plucked off an apple when the young man shot an arrow at it. The bird flew off, but the arrow had struck its plumage, and one of its golden feathers fell down.

The young man picked it up, and next morning took it to the King and told him what he had seen in the night. The King called his council together, and every one of them declared that a feather like this was worth more than the whole kingdom.

"If the feather is so precious," said the King, "one alone will not do for me. I must and will have the whole bird."

The eldest son set out. He trusted to his cleverness and thought he would easily find the Golden Bird. When he had gone some distance he saw a fox sitting at the edge of a wood, so he cocked his gun and took aim at him.

The fox cried, "Don't shoot me, and in return I'll give you some good advice. You are on your way to the Golden Bird; and this evening you'll come to a village where there are two inns opposite one another. One of them is brightly lit and everything goes on merrily inside; but don't go into that one. Go into the other, even though it looks a poor place."

"How can a silly animal give sensible advice?" thought the King's son, and pulled the trigger. But he missed the fox, who stretched out his tail and ran quickly into the wood.

So he went on his way, and by evening came to the village with the two inns. In one of them there was singing and dancing; the other looked poor and miserable.

"I should be a fool indeed," he thought, "if I went into the shabby tavern and passed by the good one." So he went into the cheerful one, and lived there in riot and revelry, and forgot the bird and his father and all good advice.

When some time had passed, and month after month went by and the eldest son did not come home, the second set out, meaning to find the Golden Bird. The fox met him as he had met the eldest, and gave him the good advice that he paid no attention to. He came to the two inns; and his brother was standing at the window of the one the music came from and called out to him. He could not resist, but went in and lived for nothing but pleasure.

Again some time passed, and then the King's youngest son wanted to set out and try his luck; but his father would not allow it.

"It's no use," he said. "He'll find the Golden Bird even less than his brothers did; and if some mishap befell him he wouldn't know how to help himself. He's a little wanting at the best of times."

But at last, as he got no peace, he let him go.

Again the fox was sitting outside the wood, and begged for his life and offered his good advice. The young man was good-natured, and said, "Don't worry, little fox, I won't do you any harm."

"You shan't be sorry for it," said the fox. "And so that you get along faster, climb up behind on my tail."

And hardly had he seated himself before the fox began to run, and away he went over stock and stone until his hair whistled in the wind.

When they came to the village the young man got off. He followed the good advice, and without looking round turned into the little inn, where he spent the night quietly.

The next morning, as soon as he got out into open country, there sat the fox already, and said, "I'll tell you what else you have to do. Go straight on, and at last you'll come to a castle, with a whole regiment of soldiers lying in front of it; but don't trouble yourself about them, because they'll all be asleep and snoring. Go straight through the middle of them into the castle, and go through all the rooms, until at last you come to a chamber where a golden bird is hanging in a wooden cage. Close by there stands an empty gold cage for show; but beware of taking the bird out of the common cage and putting it into the fine one, or it may go badly with you."

With these words the fox stretched out his tail again, and the King's son sat on it, and away he went over stock and stone until his hair whistled in the wind.

When he came to the castle he found everything as the fox had said. The King's son went into the chamber where the Golden Bird was shut in a wooden cage, with a golden one standing close by; and the three golden apples were lying about the room.

"But," he thought, "it would be absurd to leave the beautiful bird in the common ugly cage" — so he opened the door, took hold of it and put it into the golden cage.

But at that same moment the bird let out a shrill cry. The soldiers woke, rushed in and carried him off to prison. Next morning he was brought before a court of justice; and as he confessed everything, he was sentenced to death.

The King said, though, that he would grant him his life on one condition: if he brought him the Golden Horse, which ran faster than the wind. And in that case he should have the Golden Bird as well, over and above, as a reward.

The King's son set off, but he sighed and was full of sorrow, for how was he to find the Golden Horse? And then all at once he saw his old friend the fox sitting by the road.

"You see," said the fox, "this has happened because you didn't listen to me. Still, take heart. I'll help you and tell you how to get to the Golden Horse. You must go straight on, and you'll come to a castle where the horse is standing in the stable. The grooms will be lying in front of the stable, but they'll be asleep and snoring, and you can quietly lead the Golden Horse out. But one thing you must be careful of: put the common saddle of wood and leather on him, and not the golden one hanging close by, or it will go badly with you."

Then the fox stretched out his tail, the King's son sat on it, and away he went over stock and stone until his hair whistled in the wind.

Everything happened just as the fox had said. The prince came to the stable where the Golden Horse was standing; but just as he was going to put the common saddle on him he thought, "It will be a shame to such a beautiful animal if I don't give him the good saddle that belongs to him by right."

But hardly had the golden saddle touched the horse before he began to neigh loudly. The grooms woke, seized the young man and threw him into prison. Next morning he was sentenced to death by the court; but the King promised to grant him his life, and the Golden Horse as well, if he could bring back the beautiful princess from the Golden Castle.

With a heavy heart the young man set out; but luckily for him he soon found the trusty fox.

"I ought to leave you to your bad luck," said the fox, "but I'm sorry for you, and I'll help you out of your trouble once more. This road takes you straight to the Golden Castle; you'll reach it by evening. And at night, when everything is quiet, the beautiful princess goes to the bath-house to bathe. When she goes in, run up to her and give her a kiss, and then she'll follow you and you can take her away with you. Only don't let her go and say goodbye to her parents first, or it will go badly with you."

Then the fox stretched out his tail, the King's son sat on it, and away the fox went over stock and stone until his hair whistled in the wind.

When he reached the Golden Castle it was just as the fox had said. He waited until midnight, when everything lay in deep sleep and the beautiful princess was going to the bath-house. Then he sprang out and gave her a kiss.

She said she would gladly go with him, but she begged him piteously, with tears, to let her say goodbye to her parents first. At first he stood out against her pleading; but when she wept more and more and fell at his feet, he gave in at last.

But no sooner had the girl reached her father's bedside than he and everybody else in the castle woke, and the young man was seized and put into prison.

Next morning the King said to him, "Your life is forfeit; and you can only find mercy if you take away the hill that stands in front of my windows and stops me seeing beyond it. And you must get it all done within eight days. If you do that, you shall have my daughter as your reward."

The King's son began, and dug and shovelled without stopping; but when after seven days he saw how little he had done, and how all his work was as good as nothing, he fell into great sorrow and gave up all hope.

But on the evening of the seventh day the fox appeared and said, "You don't deserve that I should take any trouble over you. But just go away and lie down to sleep, and I'll do the work for you."

Next morning, when he woke and looked out of the window, the hill was gone. The young man ran to the King, full of joy, and told him the task was done; and whether he liked it or not, the King had to keep his word and give him his daughter.

So the two of them set out together, and it was not long before the trusty fox came up with them.

"You've certainly got the best of it," he said, "but the Golden Horse belongs to the maiden of the Golden Castle as well."

"How am I to get it?" asked the young man.

"I'll tell you," said the fox. "First take the beautiful girl to the King who sent you to the Golden Castle. There'll be unheard-of rejoicing; they'll gladly give you the Golden Horse and bring it out to you. Mount it as quickly as you can, and offer your hand to everybody in farewell — last of all to the beautiful girl. And as soon as you have taken her hand, swing her up onto the horse and gallop away; and nobody will be able to bring you back, because the horse runs faster than the wind."

It was all carried out successfully, and the King's son carried off the beautiful princess on the Golden Horse.

The fox did not stay behind, and said to the young man, "Now I'll help you get the Golden Bird. When you come near the castle where the Golden Bird is, let the girl get down, and I'll take care of her. Then ride into the castle yard with the Golden Horse. There'll be great rejoicing at the sight of it, and they'll bring the Golden Bird out to you. As soon as you have the cage in your hand, gallop back to us and take the girl up again."

When the plan had succeeded, and the King's son was about to ride home with his treasures, the fox said, "Now you shall reward me for my help."

"What do you want for it?" asked the young man.

"When you get into that wood over there, shoot me dead and chop off my head and my feet."

"That would be fine gratitude," said the King's son. "I couldn't possibly do that for you."

The fox said, "If you won't do it, I must leave you. But before I go I'll give you a piece of good advice. Be careful about two things. Buy no gallows-flesh, and don't sit on the edge of any well." And then he ran off into the wood.

The young man thought, "That's a strange animal, with strange whims. Who is ever going to buy gallows-flesh? And as for a desire to sit on the edge of a well, that has never come over me yet."

He rode on with the beautiful girl, and his road took him again through the village where his two brothers had stayed. There was a great stir and noise there; and when he asked what was going on, he was told that two men were to be hanged. As he came nearer to the place he saw that they were his brothers, who had been playing all kinds of wicked tricks and had squandered everything they had.

He asked whether they could not be set free.

"If you'll pay for them," the people said. "But why should you waste your money on wicked men and buy them their freedom?"

He did not think twice about it, but paid for them; and when they had been set free they all went on their way together.

They came to the wood where the fox had first met them; and as it was cool and pleasant in it, the two brothers said, "Let's rest a little by this well, and eat and drink."

He agreed; and while they were talking he forgot himself and sat down on the edge of the well, thinking no harm. But the two brothers threw him backwards into it, and took the girl, the horse and the bird, and went home to their father.

"Here we bring you not only the Golden Bird," they said. "We've won the Golden Horse as well, and the maiden from the Golden Castle."

Then there was great joy — but the horse would not eat, the bird would not sing, and the girl sat and wept.

But the youngest brother was not dead. By good fortune the well was dry, and he fell on soft moss without being hurt; but he could not get out again. Even in this extremity the faithful fox did not desert him: he came and leapt down to him and scolded him for forgetting his advice.

"But I can't leave it at that," he said. "I'll help you up into the daylight again." He told him to take hold of his tail and keep tight hold of it; and then he pulled him up.

"You're not out of all danger yet," said the fox. "Your brothers weren't certain you were dead, and they've surrounded the wood with watchers who are to kill you if you show yourself."

But there was a poor man sitting by the road, and the young man changed clothes with him, and in this way got to the King's palace.

Nobody knew him; but the bird began to sing, the horse began to eat, and the beautiful girl left off weeping.

The King, astonished, asked, "What does this mean?"

Then the girl said, "I don't know; but I have been so sorrowful, and now I'm so happy. I feel as if my true bridegroom had come." And she told him everything that had happened, although the other brothers had threatened her with death if she betrayed anything.

The King ordered everybody in his castle to be brought before him; and among them came the young man in his ragged clothes. But the girl knew him at once and fell on his neck. The wicked brothers were seized and put to death; but he was married to the beautiful girl and declared the King's heir.

But how did it go with the poor fox? Long afterwards the King's son was walking in the wood once again, when the fox met him and said, "You have everything now that you could wish for; but there's never an end to my misery, and it's in your power to set me free." And again he begged him, with tears, to shoot him dead and chop off his head and his feet.

So he did it; and hardly was it done before the fox was changed into a man, and was none other than the brother of the beautiful princess, freed at last from the spell that had been laid on him.

And now nothing more was wanting to their happiness as long as they lived.


The Dog and the Sparrow

A sheepdog had a bad master — one who let him go hungry. As he could stay with him no longer, he went sadly away.

On the road he met a sparrow, who said, "Brother dog, why are you so sad?"

The dog answered, "I'm hungry, and I have nothing to eat."

Then the sparrow said, "Dear brother, come into the town with me and I'll satisfy your hunger."

So they went into the town together; and when they came in front of a butcher's shop the sparrow said to the dog, "Wait there and I'll peck a bit of meat down for you." And he settled on the stall, looked about him to see that nobody was watching, and pecked and pulled and tore so long at a piece lying on the edge that it slipped down. Then the dog grabbed it, ran into a corner and ate it.

The sparrow said, "Now come with me to another shop, and I'll get you one more piece, so that you have enough."

When the dog had eaten the second piece as well, the sparrow asked, "Brother dog, have you had enough now?"

"Yes, I've had enough meat," he answered, "but I've had no bread yet."

Said the sparrow, "You shall have that too. Come with me."

Then he took him to a baker's shop and pecked at a couple of little rolls until they rolled down; and as the dog wanted still more, he led him to another stall and got him bread again. When that was eaten, the sparrow said, "Brother dog, have you had enough now?"

"Yes," he said. "Now let's walk a while outside the town."

So they both went out onto the highway. But it was warm weather; and when they had gone a little way the dog said, "I'm tired, and I'd like to sleep."

"Well, sleep, then," said the sparrow, "and in the meantime I'll perch on a branch."

So the dog lay down on the road and fell fast asleep.

While he lay sleeping there, a carter came driving by with a cart and three horses, loaded with two barrels of wine. The sparrow saw that he was not going to turn aside but was keeping to the wheel rut the dog was lying in, so he cried, "Carter, don't do it, or I'll make you poor."

But the carter growled to himself, "You won't make me poor" — and cracked his whip and drove the cart over the dog, and the wheels killed him.

Then the sparrow cried, "You've run over my brother dog and killed him. It shall cost you your cart and horses."

"Cart and horses indeed!" said the carter. "What harm can you do me?" — and drove on.

Then the sparrow crept under the cover of the cart and pecked so long at one of the bungholes that he got the bung out; and all the wine ran out without the driver noticing. But once, when he happened to look behind him, he saw the cart dripping, and looked at the barrels and saw that one of them was empty.

"Unlucky man that I am," he cried.

"Not unlucky enough yet," said the sparrow, and flew onto the head of one of the horses and pecked its eyes out.

When the driver saw that, he pulled out his axe and tried to hit the sparrow; but the sparrow flew up into the air, and he hit his horse on the head, and it fell down dead.

"Oh, what an unlucky man I am," he cried.

"Not unlucky enough yet," said the sparrow. And when the driver drove on with the two horses, the sparrow crept under the cover again and pecked the bung out of the second cask, so that all that wine was spilt too.

When the driver realised it, he cried again, "Oh, what an unlucky man I am!"

But the sparrow answered, "Not unlucky enough yet" — and settled on the second horse's head and pecked its eyes out. The driver ran up and raised his axe to strike; but the sparrow flew into the air, and the blow struck the horse, which fell.

"Oh, what an unlucky man I am!"

"Not unlucky enough yet," said the sparrow, and settled on the third horse's head and pecked out its eyes. The driver, in his rage, struck at the sparrow without looking, and missed him and killed his third horse as well.

"Oh, what an unlucky man I am," he cried.

"Not unlucky enough yet," answered the sparrow. "Now I'll make you unlucky at home" — and flew away.

The driver had to leave the wagon standing, and went home full of anger and vexation.

"Ah," he said to his wife, "what misfortunes I've had! My wine has run out, and all three horses are dead."

"Alas, husband," she answered, "what a spiteful bird has got into the house! It has gathered together every bird there is in the world, and they've got at our corn up there and are eating it."

He went upstairs, and there were thousands and thousands of birds sitting in the loft, and they had eaten all the corn, and the sparrow was sitting in the middle of them.

Then the driver cried, "Oh, what an unlucky man I am!"

"Not unlucky enough yet," answered the sparrow. "Carter, it shall cost you your life as well" — and flew out.

So now the carter had lost all his property. He went downstairs into the room, sat down behind the stove and was in a furious, bitter temper.

But the sparrow sat outside in front of the window and cried, "Carter, it shall cost you your life."

Then the carter snatched up the axe and threw it at the sparrow; but it only broke the window and did not hit the bird.

The sparrow now hopped inside, perched on the stove and cried, "Carter, it shall cost you your life."

The man, quite mad and blind with rage, smashed the stove in two; and as the sparrow flew from one place to another, so it went with all his household furniture — mirror, benches, table, and at last the walls of his house — and still he could not hit the bird.

At length, though, he caught it in his hand.

Then his wife said, "Shall I kill it?"

"No," he cried, "that would be too merciful. It shall die much more cruelly" — and he took it and swallowed it whole.

But the sparrow began to flutter about inside him, and fluttered up again into the man's mouth; and then it stuck its head out and cried, "Carter, it shall still cost you your life."

The driver handed the axe to his wife and said, "Wife, kill the bird in my mouth for me."

The woman struck, and missed her blow, and hit the carter right on the head, so that he fell down dead.

But the sparrow flew up and away.
