The Two Brothers

(Part 2 of 3)

That done, he was so faint and weary with the fire and the fighting that he said to the girl, "We're both worn out; let's sleep a while." She said yes, and they lay down on the ground; and the huntsman said to the lion, "You must keep watch, so that nobody surprises us in our sleep." Then they both fell asleep. The lion lay down beside them to watch, but he too was so tired from the fight that he called the bear and said, "Lie down near me, I must sleep a little. If anything comes, wake me." So the bear lay down beside him; but he was tired as well, and called the wolf and said, "Lie down by me, I must sleep a little; if anything comes, wake me." So the wolf lay down by him; but he was tired too, and called the fox and said, "Lie down by me, I must sleep a little. If anything comes, wake me." So the fox lay down beside him; but he was weary as well, and called the hare and said, "Lie down near me, I must sleep a little, and if anything should come, wake me." So the hare sat down by him; but the poor hare was tired too, and had nobody he could call to keep watch, and fell asleep. And now the King's daughter, the huntsman, the lion, the bear, the wolf, the fox and the hare were all sleeping a sound sleep.

The marshal, who was supposed to be watching from a distance, took courage when he did not see the dragon flying away with the girl; and finding that the whole hill had gone quiet, he climbed it. There lay the dragon, hacked and hewn to pieces on the ground; and not far off were the King's daughter and a huntsman with his animals, all of them sunk in a sound sleep. And as he was wicked and godless, he took his sword, cut off the huntsman's head, seized the girl in his arms and carried her down the hill.

Then she woke and was terrified; but the marshal said, "You're in my hands. You'll say that it was I who killed the dragon."

"I can't do that," she answered. "It was a huntsman with his animals who did it."

Then he drew his sword and threatened to kill her if she did not obey him, and forced her until she promised.

Then he took her to the King, who did not know how to contain himself for joy when he looked on his dear child alive again, whom he had believed to be torn to pieces by the monster. The marshal said to him, "I killed the dragon and delivered the girl and the whole kingdom as well; and so I claim her as my wife, as was promised."

The King said to his daughter, "Is what he says true?"

"Ah, yes," she answered, "it must indeed be true. But I won't consent to have the wedding celebrated until a year and a day have gone by" — for she thought that in that time she would hear something of her dear huntsman.

The animals, meanwhile, were still lying asleep beside their dead master on the dragon's hill. Then a great bumblebee came and settled on the hare's nose; but the hare wiped it off with his paw and went on sleeping. The bumblebee came a second time, and again the hare rubbed it off and slept on. Then it came a third time and stung his nose so that he woke up.

As soon as the hare was awake he roused the fox, and the fox the wolf, and the wolf the bear, and the bear the lion. And when the lion woke and saw that the girl was gone and his master was dead, he began to roar frightfully and cried, "Who has done that? Bear, why didn't you wake me?"

The bear asked the wolf, "Why didn't you wake me?" and the wolf the fox, "Why didn't you wake me?" and the fox the hare, "Why didn't you wake me?"

The poor hare alone did not know what answer to make, and the blame rested with him. They were just going to fall on him, but he begged them and said, "Don't kill me. I'll bring our master back to life. I know a mountain where a root grows that cures anyone of every illness and every wound, if it's put in his mouth. But the mountain lies two hundred hours' journey from here."

The lion said, "In four-and-twenty hours you must have run there and come back, and have brought the root with you."

So the hare sprang away, and in four-and-twenty hours he was back and had brought the root. The lion put the huntsman's head on again, and the hare laid the root in his mouth; and at once everything joined together again, and his heart beat, and life came back.

Then the huntsman woke and was dismayed at not seeing the girl, and thought, "She must have gone away while I was asleep, to be rid of me."

The lion in his great hurry had put his master's head on back to front, but the huntsman did not notice it, because of his gloomy thoughts about the King's daughter. It was only at noon, when he was going to eat something, that he saw his head was turned backwards, and could not understand it, and asked the animals what had happened to him in his sleep. Then the lion told him that they had all fallen asleep from weariness too, and on waking had found him dead with his head cut off; that the hare had fetched the life-giving root, and that he himself, in his haste, had taken hold of the head the wrong way round — but that he would put his mistake right. Then he tore the huntsman's head off again, turned it round, and the hare healed it with the root.

The huntsman, though, was sad at heart, and travelled about the world making his animals dance in front of people. And it came about that exactly at the end of a year he came back to the same town where he had delivered the King's daughter from the dragon; and this time the town was gaily hung with red cloth.

So he said to the innkeeper, "What does this mean? Last year the town was all hung with black crape. What is the red cloth for today?"

The host answered, "Last year our King's daughter was to have been handed over to the dragon; but the marshal fought it and killed it, and so tomorrow their wedding is to be celebrated. That's why the town was hung with black crape then for mourning, and is covered with red cloth today for joy."

Next day, when the wedding was to take place, the huntsman said to the innkeeper at midday, "Do you believe, sir host, that I shall eat bread from the King's own table here with you today?"

"No," said the host. "I'd bet a hundred pieces of gold that that won't come true."

The huntsman took the wager, and set against it a purse with just the same number of gold pieces in it. Then he called the hare and said, "Go, my dear runner, and fetch me some of the bread the King is eating."

Now the little hare was the lowest of the animals and could not pass the order on to any of the others, but had to get on his legs himself. "Oh dear," he thought, "if I go bounding through the streets alone like this, the butchers' dogs will all be after me."

It happened as he expected: the dogs came after him and wanted to make holes in his good skin. But he sprang away as you never saw a hare run, and sheltered in a sentry box without the soldier being aware of it. The dogs came and wanted to have him out; but the soldier did not understand a joke, and hit them with the butt end of his gun till they ran away yelping and howling.

As soon as the hare saw that the way was clear he ran into the palace and straight to the King's daughter, sat down under her chair and scratched at her foot.

"Will you get away?" she said, thinking it was her dog.

The hare scratched her foot a second time, and again she said, "Will you get away?" thinking it was her dog. But the hare would not be turned from his purpose, and scratched her a third time. Then she looked down and knew the hare by his collar. She took him on her lap, carried him into her room and said, "Dear Hare, what is it you want?"

He answered, "My master, who killed the dragon, is here, and has sent me to ask for a loaf of bread like the one the King eats."

Then she was full of joy, and had the baker summoned and ordered him to bring a loaf such as the King ate.

The little hare said, "But the baker must carry it there for me as well, so that the butchers' dogs do me no harm."

So the baker carried it for him as far as the door of the inn, and then the hare got up on his hind legs, took the loaf in his front paws and carried it to his master.

"There, sir host," said the huntsman, "the hundred pieces of gold are mine."

The host was astonished; but the huntsman went on, "Yes, sir host, I have the bread. Now I'll have some of the King's roast meat as well."

The host said, "I should like to see that," but he would make no more wagers.

The huntsman called the fox and said, "My little fox, go and fetch me some roast meat, such as the King eats."

The red fox knew the back ways better, and went by holes and corners without a single dog seeing him, seated himself under the King's daughter's chair and scratched her foot. Then she looked down and recognised the fox by his collar, took him into her room with her and said, "Dear Fox, what is it you want?"

He answered, "My master, who killed the dragon, is here, and has sent me. I'm to ask for some roast meat such as the King is eating."

So she sent for the cook, who had to prepare a roast joint just like the King's and carry it for the fox as far as the door. Then the fox took the dish, waved away with his tail the flies that had settled on the meat, and carried it to his master.

"There, sir host," said the huntsman, "we have bread and meat. Now I'll have the proper vegetables with it too, such as the King eats." So he called the wolf and said, "Dear Wolf, go there and fetch me vegetables such as the King eats."

The wolf went straight to the palace, since he feared nobody; and when he got to the King's daughter's room he gave the back of her dress a twitch, so that she was obliged to look round. She recognised him by his collar, took him into her room with her and said, "Dear Wolf, what is it you want?"

He answered, "My master, who killed the dragon, is here. I'm to ask for some vegetables, such as the King eats."

So she sent for the cook, who had to get ready a dish of vegetables such as the King ate, and carry it for the wolf as far as the door; and then the wolf took the dish from him and carried it to his master.

"There, sir host," said the huntsman, "now I have bread and meat and vegetables. But I'll have some pastry too, like the King's." He called the bear and said, "Dear Bear, you're fond of licking anything sweet. Go and bring me some confectionery, such as the King eats."

So the bear trotted off to the palace, and everybody got out of his way; but when he came to the guard, they levelled their muskets and would not let him into the royal palace. He got up on his hind legs, though, and gave them a few boxes on the ears, right and left, with his paws, so that the whole watch broke up; and then he went straight to the King's daughter, placed himself behind her and growled a little. She looked round, knew the bear, and told him to come into her room with her, and said, "Dear Bear, what is it you want?"

He answered, "My master, who killed the dragon, is here, and I'm to ask for some confectionery, such as the King eats."

So she summoned her confectioner, who had to bake confectionery such as the King ate and carry it to the door for the bear. Then the bear first licked up the sweets that had rolled off, and then he stood upright, took the dish and carried it to his master.

"There, sir host," said the huntsman, "now I have bread, meat, vegetables and confectionery. But I'll drink wine as well, and wine such as the King drinks." He called his lion to him and said, "Dear Lion, you like a drink yourself till you're tipsy. Go and fetch me some wine, such as the King drinks."

Then the lion strode down the streets, and the people fled from him; and when he came to the watch they tried to bar the way against him, but he only roared once and they all ran away. Then the lion went to the royal apartments and knocked on the door with his tail. The King's daughter came out and was nearly frightened of the lion; but she knew him by the golden clasp of her necklace, and told him to come with her into her room, and said, "Dear Lion, what will you have?"

He answered, "My master, who killed the dragon, is here, and I'm to ask for some wine such as the King drinks."

So she had the cup-bearer called, who was to give the lion wine like the King's.

The lion said, "I'll go with him and see that I get the right wine."

So he went down with the cup-bearer; and when they were below, the cup-bearer was going to draw him some of the ordinary wine that the King's servants drank. But the lion said, "Stop. I'll taste the wine first" — and he drew half a measure and swallowed it at one draught. "No," he said, "that isn't right."

The cup-bearer looked at him sideways, but went on and was about to give him some out of another barrel, which was the King's marshal's. The lion said, "Stop, let me taste the wine first" — and drew half a measure and drank it. "That's better, but still not right," he said.

Then the cup-bearer grew angry and said, "How can a stupid animal like you understand wine?" But the lion gave him a blow behind the ears that knocked him down by no means gently; and when he had got up again he took the lion, without a word, into a little cellar apart, where the King's own wine lay, that nobody else ever drank. The lion first drew half a measure and tried the wine, and then he said, "That may possibly be the right sort" — and told the cup-bearer to fill six bottles of it.

And now they went upstairs again; but when the lion came out of the cellar into the open air he reeled this way and that, and was rather drunk, and the cup-bearer had to carry the wine as far as the door for him. Then the lion took the handle of the basket in his mouth and brought it to his master.

The huntsman said, "There, sir host, here I have bread, meat, vegetables, confectionery and wine such as the King has; and now I'll dine with my animals." And he sat down and ate and drank, and gave the hare, the fox, the wolf, the bear and the lion food and drink too, and was in good spirits, for he could see that the King's daughter still loved him.

And when he had finished his dinner he said, "Sir host, now I've eaten and drunk as the King eats and drinks, and now I'll go to the King's court and marry the King's daughter."

Said the host, "How can that be, when she already has a betrothed husband, and when the wedding is to be celebrated today?"

Then the huntsman drew out the handkerchief the King's daughter had given him on the dragon's hill, in which the monster's seven tongues were folded, and said, "What I have in my hand will help me to do it."

The innkeeper looked at the handkerchief and said, "Whatever else I believe, I don't believe that; and I'm willing to stake my house and yard on it."

The huntsman, though, took a bag with a thousand gold pieces in it, put it on the table and said, "I stake that on it."
