The Pink

There was once a Queen to whom God had given no children. Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to grant her a son or a daughter. Then an angel came to her from heaven and said, "Be at peace. You shall have a son with the power of wishing, so that whatever in the world he wishes for, he shall have."

So she went to the King and told him the joyful news; and when the time came she gave birth to a son, and the King was filled with gladness.

Every morning she went with the child into the garden where the wild animals were kept, and washed herself there in a clear stream. It happened once, when the child was a little older, that he was lying in her arms and she fell asleep. Then the old cook came, who knew that the child had the power of wishing, and stole him away; and he took a hen and cut it in pieces and dropped some of its blood on the Queen's apron and on her dress. Then he carried the child away to a secret place, where a nurse had to feed him; and he ran to the King and accused the Queen of having let the wild beasts take her child from her.

When the King saw the blood on her apron he believed it, and fell into such a rage that he ordered a high tower to be built where neither sun nor moon could be seen, and had his wife put into it and walled up. There she was to stay for seven years without food or drink, and die of hunger. But God sent two angels down from heaven in the shape of white doves, which flew to her twice a day and brought her food until the seven years were over.

The cook, though, thought to himself, "If the child has the power of wishing, and I'm here, he might very easily get me into trouble." So he left the palace and went to the boy, who was already big enough to talk, and said to him, "Wish yourself a beautiful palace, with a garden and everything else that goes with it."

The words were hardly out of the boy's mouth before everything he had wished for was there.

After a while the cook said to him, "It isn't good for you to be so much alone. Wish for a pretty girl to keep you company."

So the King's son wished for one, and she stood before him at once, and she was more beautiful than any painter could have painted her. The two of them played together and loved each other with all their hearts, while the old cook went out hunting like a gentleman.

But it occurred to him that the King's son might one day wish to be with his father, and so bring him into great danger. So he went out and took the girl aside and said, "Tonight, when the boy is asleep, go to his bed and drive this knife into his heart, and bring me his heart and his tongue. And if you don't do it, you'll lose your life."

With that he went away; and when he came back next day she had not done it, and said, "Why should I shed the blood of an innocent boy who has never harmed anybody?"

The cook said once again, "If you don't do it, it will cost you your own life."

When he had gone away she had a little hind brought to her and ordered it to be killed, and took its heart and tongue and laid them on a plate; and when she saw the old man coming she said to the boy, "Lie down in your bed and pull the covers over you."

Then the wicked wretch came in and said, "Where are the boy's heart and tongue?"

The girl held the plate out to him — but the King's son threw off the quilt and said, "You old sinner, why did you want to kill me? Now I'll pronounce your sentence. You shall become a black poodle with a gold collar round your neck, and you shall eat burning coals until the flames come bursting out of your throat."

And when he had spoken these words, the old man was changed into a poodle dog with a gold collar round his neck; and the cooks were ordered to bring up live coals, and he ate them until the flames broke out of his throat.

The King's son stayed there a little while longer, and thought about his mother and wondered whether she was still alive. At length he said to the girl, "I'm going home to my own country. If you'll come with me, I'll take care of you."

"Ah," she answered, "the way is so long; and what should I do in a strange land where nobody knows me?"

As she did not seem quite willing, and as they could not be parted from each other, he wished her changed into a beautiful pink, and took her with him.

Then he went off to his own country, and the poodle had to run after him. He went to the tower where his mother was shut up; and as it was so high, he wished for a ladder that would reach right to the top. Then he climbed up and looked inside and cried, "Beloved mother, my lady Queen, are you still alive, or are you dead?"

She answered, "I have just eaten and am not hungry" — for she thought the angels were there.

Said he, "I'm your own dear son, the one the wild beasts were said to have torn out of your arms. But I'm alive still, and I'll set you free soon."

Then he climbed down again and went to his father, and had himself announced as a huntsman from abroad, and asked whether he could give him a position. The King said yes — if he was skilled and could get game for him, he should come; but that deer had never made their home in any part of the district or the country.

Then the huntsman promised to get him as much game as he could possibly use at the royal table. So he called all the huntsmen together and told them to come out into the forest with him. And he went with them and made them form a great circle, open at one end where he stationed himself, and began to wish. Two hundred deer and more came running into the circle at once, and the huntsmen shot them. Then they were all loaded onto sixty farm carts and driven home to the King; and for once he was able to deck his table with game, after having had none at all for years.

Now the King was overjoyed at this, and gave orders that his whole household should eat with him next day, and made a great feast. When they were all gathered together he said to the huntsman, "Since you're so clever, you shall sit beside me."

He replied, "Lord King, your majesty must excuse me. I'm a poor huntsman."

But the King insisted, and said, "You shall sit beside me" — until he did it.

While he was sitting there he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of the King's chief servants would begin to speak of her, and would ask how the Queen was faring in the tower, and whether she was still alive or had died.

Hardly had he formed the wish before the marshal began, and said, "Your majesty, we live joyfully here; but how is the Queen living in the tower? Is she still alive, or is she dead?"

But the King replied, "She let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts. I won't have her named."

Then the huntsman got up and said, "Gracious lord and father, she is alive still, and I am her son; and I was not carried off by wild beasts but by that wretch the old cook, who tore me from her arms while she was asleep and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a chicken."

And with that he took hold of the dog with the golden collar and said, "That's the wretch!" — and had live coals brought, which the dog was made to devour in front of them all, until flames came bursting out of its throat.

At this the huntsman asked the King whether he would like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back into the form of the cook, in which he stood there instantly, with his white apron and his knife at his side. When the King saw him he flew into a rage and ordered him to be thrown into the deepest dungeon.

Then the huntsman spoke again and said, "Father, will you see the girl who brought me up so tenderly, and who was afterwards ordered to murder me, and did not do it, though her own life hung on it?"

The King replied, "Yes, I should like to see her."

The son said, "Most gracious father, I'll show her to you first in the form of a beautiful flower." And he put his hand in his pocket and brought out the pink and laid it on the royal table; and it was so beautiful that the King had never seen its equal.

Then the son said, "And now I'll show her to you in her own shape" — and wished her back into a girl; and she stood there looking so beautiful that no painter could have made her more so.

And the King sent two waiting maids and two attendants to the tower to fetch the Queen and bring her to the royal table. But when she was led in she ate nothing, and said, "The gracious and merciful God who has kept me alive in the tower will soon deliver me."

She lived three days more and then died happily; and when she was buried, the two white doves that had brought her food to the tower, and were angels of heaven, followed her body and settled themselves on her grave.

The old King ordered the cook to be torn into four pieces; but grief ate away the King's own heart, and he soon died. His son married the beautiful girl he had brought home as a flower in his pocket; and whether they are still alive or not, God knows.

Clever Gretel

There was once a cook named Gretel, who wore shoes with red rosettes; and when she went out walking in them she turned this way and that, and thought, "You certainly are a pretty girl." And when she came home she drank a draught of wine out of pure gladness of heart; and as wine gives you an appetite, she tasted the best of whatever she was cooking until she had had enough, and said, "A cook has to know what the food is like."

It happened one day that her master said to her, "Gretel, there's a guest coming this evening. Get me two fowls ready, and do them nicely."

"I'll see to it, master," answered Gretel. She killed two fowls, scalded them, plucked them, put them on the spit, and towards evening set them in front of the fire to roast. The fowls began to turn brown and were nearly done, but the guest had still not arrived.

Then Gretel called out to her master, "If the guest doesn't come, I'll have to take the fowls away from the fire; but it'll be a sin and a shame if they're not eaten straight away, while they're at their juiciest."

The master said, "I'll run and fetch the guest myself."

When the master had turned his back, Gretel laid the spit with the fowls on it to one side and thought, "Standing so long by that fire makes you hot and thirsty. Who knows when they'll come? Meanwhile I'll run down to the cellar and have a drink."

She ran down, held a jug under the barrel, said, "God bless it to your use, Gretel" — and took a good drink, and then another hearty draught after it.

Then she went and put the fowls down to the fire again, basted them and turned the spit merrily round. But as the roasting meat smelled so good, Gretel thought, "There might be something wrong with them; they ought to be tasted." She touched one with her finger and said, "Ah, how good fowls are! It's certainly a sin and a shame that they're not being eaten this minute."

She ran to the window to see whether her master was coming with his guest, but she saw nobody; and she went back to the fowls and thought, "One of those wings is burning. I'd better take it off and eat it." So she cut it off and ate it and enjoyed it; and when she had finished she thought, "The other one will have to go down too, or master will notice that something's missing."

When both wings were eaten, she went and looked for her master, and did not see him. It suddenly struck her, "Who knows? Perhaps they aren't coming at all, and have turned in somewhere else." Then she said, "Well, Gretel, enjoy yourself. One fowl has been cut into already; have another drink and finish it off. Once it's eaten you'll have some peace — why should God's good gifts be spoiled?"

So she ran down to the cellar again, took an enormous drink, and ate up the whole of the one chicken in great glee.

When one of the chickens was swallowed down and her master still did not come, Gretel looked at the other one and said, "Where one is, the other ought to be as well; the two of them go together. What's right for one is right for the other. And I think another draught wouldn't do me any harm." So she took another hearty drink, and let the second chicken go and join the first.

She was right in the middle of the best of it when her master came and cried, "Hurry up, Gretel, the guest is coming along right behind me!"

"Yes, sir, I'll serve up at once," answered Gretel.

Meanwhile the master looked to see that the table was properly laid, and took the great knife he was going to carve the chickens with, and sharpened it on the steps.

Just then the guest came and knocked politely and civilly at the front door. Gretel ran and looked to see who was there; and when she saw the guest she put her finger to her lips and said, "Hush! Hush! Get away as fast as you can. If my master catches you it'll be the worse for you. He certainly did invite you to supper, but what he means to do is cut off both your ears. Just listen to him sharpening the knife for it!"

The guest heard the sharpening, and hurried back down the steps as fast as he could.

Gretel was not idle either. She ran screaming to her master and cried, "You've invited a fine guest!"

"Eh? Why, Gretel? What do you mean by that?"

"Yes," said she, "he took the chickens I was just going to serve up right off the dish, and ran away with them."

"That's a nice trick!" said her master, and grieved over the fine chickens. "If he'd only left me one, so that I'd have something to eat."

He called after him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear. Then he ran after him with the knife still in his hand, calling out, "Just one! Just one!" — meaning that the guest should leave him one chicken and not take both. But the guest could think of nothing except that he was to give up one of his ears, and ran as if there were a fire under him, so as to get them both home safe.

The Old Man and His Grandson

There was once a very old man whose eyes had grown dim and his ears dull of hearing, and whose knees shook; and when he sat at table he could hardly hold his spoon, and spilled the soup on the tablecloth or let it run out of his mouth. His son and his son's wife were disgusted at this, so in the end the old grandfather had to sit in the corner behind the stove, and they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl, and not even enough of it. And he used to look towards the table with his eyes full of tears.

Once his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it fell to the ground and broke. The young wife scolded him, but he said nothing and only sighed. Then they bought him a wooden bowl for a few pennies, and he had to eat out of that.

They were all sitting there one day when the little grandson, four years old, began to gather bits of wood together on the floor.

"What are you doing there?" asked his father.

"I'm making a little trough," answered the child, "for father and mother to eat out of when I'm big."

The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and then began to cry. Then they brought the old grandfather back to the table, and from that time on always let him eat with them, and said nothing either if he did spill a little.

The Water-Nix

A little brother and sister were once playing beside a well, and while they were playing they both fell in. A water-nix lived down below, and she said, "Now I've got you. Now you shall work hard for me!" — and carried them off with her.

She gave the girl dirty tangled flax to spin, and she had to fetch water in a bucket with a hole in it; and the boy had to chop down a tree with a blunt axe; and they got nothing to eat but dumplings as hard as stones.

At last the children grew so out of patience that they waited until one Sunday, when the nix was at church, and ran away. But when church was over the nix saw that the birds had flown, and came after them with great strides.

The children saw her a long way off, and the girl threw a brush behind her, which turned into an immense hill of bristles with thousands and thousands of spikes, and the nix had to scramble over it with great difficulty; but at last she got over.

When the children saw that, the boy threw a comb behind him, which made a great hill of combs with a thousand times a thousand teeth; but the nix managed to keep her footing on them, and at last she crossed that too.

Then the girl threw a looking glass behind her, which turned into a hill of mirrors, and was so slippery that it was impossible for the nix to cross it. Then she thought, "I'll go home quickly and fetch my axe and cut the glass hill in two."

But long before she came back and had chopped her way through the glass, the children had escaped a great distance off, and the water-nix had to take herself back to her well again.

The Death of the Little Hen

Once upon a time the little hen went with the little cock to the nut hill, and they agreed together that whichever of them found the kernel of a nut should share it with the other. Then the hen found a great big nut, but said nothing about it, meaning to eat the kernel herself. The kernel, though, was so big that she could not swallow it, and it stuck in her throat, so that she was afraid she would choke.

Then she cried, "Cock, I beg you, run as fast as you can and fetch me some water, or I shall choke."

The little cock ran as fast as he could to the spring, and said, "Stream, you're to give me some water. The little hen is lying on the nut hill, and she has swallowed a big nut and is choking."

The well answered, "First run to the bride and get her to give you some red silk."

The little cock ran to the bride and said, "Bride, you're to give me some red silk. I'm to give the red silk to the well, and the well is to give me some water, and I'm to take the water to the little hen, who is lying on the nut hill where she has swallowed a great nut kernel and is choking on it."

The bride answered, "First run and bring me my little wreath that's hanging on a willow."

So the little cock ran to the willow and pulled the wreath off the branch and took it to the bride, and the bride gave him some water for it.

Then the little cock took the water to the hen; but when he got there the hen had choked in the meantime, and lay there dead and still.

Then the cock was so grieved that he cried out loud, and every animal came to mourn for the little hen; and six mice built a little carriage to carry her to her grave, and when the carriage was ready they harnessed themselves to it, and the cock drove.

On the way, though, they met the fox, who said, "Where are you going, little cock?"

"I'm going to bury my little hen."

"May I ride with you?"

"Yes, but sit at the back of the carriage; my little horses couldn't drag you at the front."

So the fox sat down at the back, and after him the wolf, the bear, the stag, the lion and all the beasts of the forest did the same.

Then the procession went on, and they came to the stream. "How are we to get across?" said the little cock.

A straw was lying by the stream, and it said, "I'll lay myself across, and you can drive over me." But when the six mice came onto the bridge, the straw slipped and fell into the water, and all six mice fell in and were drowned.

So they were in difficulty again; and a coal came and said, "I'm big enough. I'll lay myself across and you can drive over me." So the coal laid itself across the water too; but unluckily it just touched the water, at which the coal hissed and went out and died.

When a stone saw that, it took pity on the little cock and wanted to help him, and laid itself across the water. Then the cock drew the carriage himself; but when he had got it over and reached the far side with the dead hen, and was about to draw the others across as well, the ones sitting behind, there were too many of them, and the carriage ran backwards, and they all fell into the water together and were drowned.

Then the little cock was left alone with the dead hen, and dug a grave for her and laid her in it, and made a mound over it; and he sat down on the mound and grieved until he died too. And then everybody was dead.
