Brother Lustig

There was once a great war, and when it came to an end a great many soldiers were discharged. Brother Lustig — Brother Merry, as his name went — got his discharge too, and with it nothing but a small loaf of army ration bread and four kreuzers in money; and off he went with that.

But St. Peter had put himself in his way in the shape of a poor beggar; and when Brother Lustig came up, he begged alms of him.

Brother Lustig replied, "My dear beggar-man, what am I to give you? I've been a soldier and got my discharge, and I have nothing but this little loaf of ration bread and four kreuzers. When that's gone I shall have to beg the same as you. Still, I'll give you something."

And with that he divided the loaf into four parts and gave the apostle one of them, and a kreuzer as well.

St. Peter thanked him and went on, and threw himself in the soldier's way as a beggar again, but in another shape; and when he came up he asked him for something as before. Brother Lustig said what he had said the first time, and again gave him a quarter of the loaf and one kreuzer.

St. Peter thanked him and went on; and for a third time he stationed himself in the road as a beggar in yet another shape, and spoke to Brother Lustig. Brother Lustig gave him the third quarter of the bread and the third kreuzer too.

St. Peter thanked him and Brother Lustig went on, with only a quarter of the loaf and one kreuzer left. With that he went into an inn, ate the bread and ordered a kreuzer's worth of beer. When he had drunk it he travelled on; and then St. Peter, who had taken the appearance of a discharged soldier, met him and spoke to him.

"Good day, comrade. Can you spare me a bit of bread and a kreuzer for a drink?"

"Where am I to get it?" answered Brother Lustig. "I've been discharged, and I got nothing but a loaf of ration bread and four kreuzers in money. I met three beggars on the road and gave each of them a quarter of my bread and a kreuzer. The last quarter I ate at the inn, and I had a drink with the last kreuzer. Now my pockets are empty, and if you've nothing either, the two of us can go begging together."

"No," answered St. Peter, "we needn't quite do that. I know a little about medicine, and I'll soon earn as much as I need by it."

"Well, then," said Brother Lustig, "I know nothing about that, so I'll have to go begging on my own."

"Just come with me," said St. Peter, "and if I earn anything you shall have half of it."

"All right," said Brother Lustig; and so they went off together.

Then they came to a peasant's house where they could hear loud wailing and crying; so they went in, and there the husband was lying sick to death and very near his end, and his wife was crying and weeping out loud.

"Stop that howling and crying," said St. Peter. "I'll make the man well again." And he took an ointment out of his pocket and healed the sick man in a moment, so that he could get up and was in perfect health.

In their great delight the man and his wife said, "How can we reward you? What shall we give you?"

But St. Peter would take nothing; and the more the country people offered him, the more he refused.

Brother Lustig, though, nudged St. Peter and said, "Take something. Sure enough we've need of it."

At length the woman brought a lamb and told St. Peter that he really must take it; but he would not.

Then Brother Lustig gave him a poke in the ribs and said, "Do take it, you stupid fool. We're in great want of it."

So St. Peter said at last, "Very well, I'll take the lamb, but I won't carry it. If you must have it, you must carry it."

"That's nothing," said Brother Lustig. "I'll carry it easily enough" — and took it on his shoulder.

Then they set off and came to a wood; but by then Brother Lustig was beginning to find the lamb heavy, and he was hungry, so he said to St. Peter, "Look, that's a good spot. We could cook the lamb there and eat it."

"As you like," answered St. Peter, "but I'll have nothing to do with the cooking. If you want to cook, there's a kettle for you, and in the meantime I'll walk about a little until it's ready. But you mustn't begin eating until I come back. I'll come at the right moment."

"Off you go, then," said Brother Lustig. "I understand cooking. I'll manage it."

So St. Peter went away, and Brother Lustig killed the lamb, lit a fire, threw the meat into the kettle and boiled it. But the lamb was quite done and the apostle Peter had still not come back; so Brother Lustig took it out of the kettle and cut it up, and found the heart.

"They say that's the best part," said he, and tasted it — and in the end he ate the whole of it.

At length St. Peter came back and said, "You may eat the whole lamb yourself. I'll have nothing but the heart. Give me that."

Then Brother Lustig took a knife and fork and pretended to search anxiously about among the lamb's meat without being able to find the heart, and at last said abruptly, "There isn't one here."

"But where can it be?" said the apostle.

"I don't know," replied Brother Lustig. "But look what fools the two of us are, hunting for a lamb's heart, and neither of us remembering that a lamb has no heart!"

"Oh," said St. Peter, "that's something entirely new. Every animal has a heart. Why should a lamb have none?"

"No, take my word for it, brother," said Brother Lustig, "a lamb has no heart. Just think it over seriously and you'll see that it really hasn't."

"Well, all right," said St. Peter. "If there's no heart, then I want none of the lamb. You may eat it on your own."

"What I can't eat now I'll carry away in my knapsack," said Brother Lustig — and he ate half the lamb and put the rest in his knapsack.

They went on further, and then St. Peter made a great stream of water flow right across their path, so that they had to go through it.

Said St. Peter, "You go first."

"No," answered Brother Lustig, "you must go first" — and he thought, "If the water's too deep, I'll stay behind."

Then St. Peter strode through it, and the water came only to his knee. So Brother Lustig started to go through as well; but the water grew deeper and came up to his throat. Then he cried, "Brother, help me!"

St. Peter said, "Then will you confess that you ate the lamb's heart?"

"No," said he, "I haven't eaten it."

Then the water grew deeper still and rose to his mouth. "Help me, brother!" cried the soldier.

St. Peter said, "Then will you confess that you ate the lamb's heart?"

"No," he replied, "I haven't eaten it."

But St. Peter would not let him drown, and made the water sink and helped him through.

Then they travelled on and came to a kingdom where they heard that the King's daughter lay sick to death.

"Hey there, brother!" said the soldier to St. Peter. "Here's a chance for us. If we can heal her we're provided for, for life."

But St. Peter was not half quick enough for him. "Come on, pick up your feet, my dear brother," said he, "so that we get there in time."

But St. Peter walked slower and slower, however hard Brother Lustig tried to drive and push him along; and at last they heard that the princess was dead.

"Now we're done for," said Brother Lustig. "That comes of your sleepy way of walking."

"Just be quiet," answered St. Peter. "I can do more than cure sick people. I can bring dead ones back to life."

"Well, if you can do that," said Brother Lustig, "it's all right. But you ought to earn us at least half the kingdom for it."

Then they went to the royal palace, where everyone was in deep grief; but St. Peter told the King that he would restore his daughter to life. He was taken to her, and said, "Bring me a kettle and some water"; and when that was brought he told everybody to go out, and let nobody stay with him but Brother Lustig.

Then he cut off all the dead girl's limbs and threw them in the water, lit a fire under the kettle and boiled them. And when the flesh had fallen away from the bones, he took out the beautiful white bones and laid them on a table and arranged them together in their natural order. When he had done that he stepped forward and said three times, "In the name of the holy Trinity, dead woman, arise."

And at the third time the princess rose up, living, healthy and beautiful.

Then the King was overjoyed, and said to St. Peter, "Name your reward. Even if it were half my kingdom, I would give it you."

But St. Peter said, "I want nothing for it."

"Oh, you tomfool," thought Brother Lustig to himself, and nudged his comrade in the ribs and said, "Don't be so stupid. If you have no need of anything, I have."

But St. Peter would take nothing; and as the King saw that the other would very much like to have something, he ordered his treasurer to fill Brother Lustig's knapsack with gold.

Then they went on their way; and when they came to a forest St. Peter said to Brother Lustig, "Now we'll divide the gold."

"Yes," he replied, "we will."

So St. Peter divided the gold — into three heaps.

Brother Lustig thought to himself, "What notion has he got in his head now? He's making three shares and there are only two of us."

But St. Peter said, "I've divided it exactly. There's one share for me, one for you, and one for whoever ate the lamb's heart."

"Oh, I ate that!" replied Brother Lustig, and hastily swept up the gold. "You may take my word for it."

"But how can that be true," said St. Peter, "when a lamb has no heart?"

"Eh, what, brother, what can you be thinking of? Lambs have hearts like other animals. Why should they be the only ones with none?"

"Well, so be it," said St. Peter. "Keep the gold to yourself; but I'll stay with you no longer. I'll go my way alone."

"As you like, dear brother," answered Brother Lustig. "Goodbye."

Then St. Peter took a different road; but Brother Lustig thought, "It's a good thing he's taken himself off. He's a strange sort of saint after all."

Now he had money enough, but he did not know how to handle it. He squandered it and gave it away, and after a while he had nothing again.

Then he came to a certain country where he heard that a King's daughter was dead. "Aha," thought he, "this may be a good thing for me. I'll bring her back to life and see that I'm paid properly for it."

So he went to the King and offered to raise the dead girl to life. Now the King had heard that a discharged soldier was travelling about bringing dead people back to life, and thought that Brother Lustig was the man; but as he had no confidence in him, he consulted his councillors first, who said he might as well let him try, since his daughter was dead.

Then Brother Lustig had water brought to him in a kettle, told everybody to go out, cut off the limbs, threw them in the water and lit a fire underneath, just as he had seen St. Peter do. The water began to boil, the flesh fell off; and then he took the bones out and laid them on the table — but he did not know the order they went in, and laid them all wrong and in confusion.

Then he stood in front of them and said, "In the name of the most holy Trinity, dead maiden, I bid you arise" — and he said it three times, but the bones did not stir. So he said it three times more, and that was no good either.

"You confounded girl, get up!" he cried. "Get up, or it'll be the worse for you!"

When he had said that, St. Peter suddenly appeared in his old shape as a discharged soldier. He came in by the window and said, "Godless man, what are you doing? How can the dead girl arise when you've thrown her bones about in such confusion?"

"Dear brother, I've done everything as well as I could," he answered.

"This once I'll help you out of your difficulty; but I tell you one thing, and that is that if ever you undertake anything of the sort again it will be the worse for you — and also that you must neither demand nor accept the smallest thing from the King for this."

With that St. Peter laid the bones in their right order, said to the girl three times, "In the name of the most holy Trinity, dead maiden, arise" — and the King's daughter got up, healthy and beautiful as before.

Then St. Peter went out by the window again; and Brother Lustig was glad that it had all gone off so well, but very much put out at the thought that he was not to take anything for it after all. "I should just like to know," he thought, "what notion that fellow has in his head. What he gives with one hand he takes away with the other. There's no sense in it whatever."

Then the King offered Brother Lustig whatever he wanted, but he did not dare to take anything; all the same, by hints and cunning he managed to get the King to order his knapsack filled with gold for him, and off he went with that.

When he got outside, St. Peter was standing by the door, and said, "Just look at the sort of man you are. Didn't I forbid you to take anything? And there's your knapsack full of gold."

"How can I help that," answered Brother Lustig, "if people will put it in for me?"

"Well, I tell you this: if ever you set about anything of this kind again, you shall suffer for it."

"Eh, brother, no fear of that. Now that I have money, why should I trouble myself with washing bones?"

"Faith," said St. Peter, "the gold will last a long time! But so that you never walk in forbidden paths after this, I'll give your knapsack this property: whatever you wish to have inside it shall be there. Goodbye — you'll never see me again."

"Goodbye," said Brother Lustig, and thought to himself, "I'm very glad you've taken yourself off, you strange fellow. I certainly shan't follow you." But of the magic power that had been given to his knapsack he thought no more.

Brother Lustig travelled about with his money and squandered and wasted it as he had before. When at last he had no more than four kreuzers, he came past an inn and thought, "The money will have to go," and ordered three kreuzers' worth of wine and a kreuzer's worth of bread.

As he was sitting there drinking, the smell of roast goose found its way to his nose. Brother Lustig looked about and peeped around, and saw that the landlord had two geese in the oven. Then he remembered that his comrade had said whatever he wished to have in his knapsack would be there. "Aha," said he, "I must try that with the geese."

So he went out; and when he was outside the door he said, "I wish those two roast geese out of the oven and into my knapsack." And when he had said it, he unbuckled it and looked in, and there they were inside.

"Ah, that's right," said he. "Now I'm a made man." And he went off to a meadow and took out the roast meat.

He was in the middle of his meal when two journeymen came up and looked with hungry eyes at the second goose, which had not been touched yet. Brother Lustig thought to himself, "One is enough for me," and called the two men over and said, "Take the goose and eat it to my health."

They thanked him and went off with it to the inn, ordered themselves a half bottle of wine and a loaf, took out the goose they had been given and began to eat.

The landlady saw them and said to her husband, "Those two are eating a goose. Just go and see whether it isn't one of ours out of the oven."

The landlord ran there, and behold, the oven was empty. "What!" he cried. "You thieving crew, you want to eat goose as cheap as that? Pay for it this minute, or I'll wash you down well with green hazel-sap."

The two said, "We're no thieves. A discharged soldier gave us the goose, out there in the meadow."

"You shan't throw dust in my eyes that way. The soldier was here, but he went out of the door like an honest man; I watched him go myself. You're the thieves, and you shall pay."

But as they could not pay, he took a stick and cudgelled them out of the house.

Brother Lustig went on his way and came to a place where there was a magnificent castle, and not far from it a wretched inn. He went to the inn and asked for a night's lodging, but the landlord turned him away and said, "There's no more room here. The house is full of noble guests."

"It surprises me that they should come to you and not go to that splendid castle," said Brother Lustig.

"Ah, yes," replied the host, "but it's no small matter to sleep a night there. Nobody who has tried it so far has ever come out alive."

"If others have tried it," said Brother Lustig, "I'll try it too."

"Leave it alone," said the host. "It will cost you your neck."

"It won't kill me on the spot," said Brother Lustig. "Just give me the key, and some good food and wine."

So the host gave him the key and food and wine; and with these Brother Lustig went into the castle, enjoyed his supper, and at length, as he was sleepy, lay down on the floor, since there was no bed.

He soon fell asleep, but in the night he was disturbed by a great noise; and when he woke he saw nine ugly devils in the room, who had made a ring and were dancing round him.

Brother Lustig said, "Well, dance as long as you like, but none of you come too close."

But the devils pressed nearer and nearer to him, and all but trod on his face with their hideous feet.

"Stop it, you devils' ghosts," said he; but they behaved worse than ever.

Then Brother Lustig grew angry and cried, "Hold on — I'll soon have it quiet in here!" — and got hold of a chair leg and struck out into the middle of them with it. But nine devils against one soldier were still too many; and when he struck the ones in front of him, the others got him from behind by the hair and pulled it unmercifully.

"You devils' crew," he cried, "this is getting too bad. But wait. Into my knapsack, all nine of you!"

In an instant they were in it; and then he buckled it up and threw it into a corner. After that everything was suddenly quiet, and Brother Lustig lay down again and slept till broad day.

Then the innkeeper came, and the nobleman the castle belonged to, to see how he had fared; and when they saw that he was cheerful and well they were astonished, and asked, "Have the spirits done you no harm, then?"

"The reason they haven't," answered Brother Lustig, "is that I've got the whole nine of them in my knapsack. You may live in your castle quite peacefully again — not one of them will ever haunt it any more."

The nobleman thanked him and made him rich presents, and begged him to stay in his service, and he would provide for him as long as he lived.

"No," replied Brother Lustig, "I'm used to wandering about. I'll travel on."

Then he went away and turned in at a smithy, laid the knapsack with the nine devils in it on the anvil, and asked the smith and his apprentices to strike it. So they hammered away with their great hammers with all their strength, and the devils set up howls that were quite pitiable. When he opened the knapsack afterwards, eight of them were dead; but one, which had been lying in a fold of it, was still alive, and slipped out and went back to hell.

After that Brother Lustig travelled about the world for a long time, and those who know the stories could tell you many a one about him. But at last he grew old and began to think about his end; so he went to a hermit who was known to be a pious man, and said to him, "I'm tired of wandering about, and I want to behave from now on in a way that will get me into the kingdom of Heaven."

The hermit replied, "There are two roads. One is broad and pleasant and leads to hell; the other is narrow and rough and leads to heaven."

"I'd be a fool," thought Brother Lustig, "to take the narrow, rough road."

So he set out and took the broad, pleasant one, and came at length to a great black door, which was the door of Hell. Brother Lustig knocked, and the doorkeeper peeped out to see who was there. But when he saw Brother Lustig he was terrified — for he was the very same ninth devil who had been shut up in the knapsack and had got out of it with a black eye. So he shot the bolt back again as fast as he could, ran to the devil's lieutenant and said, "There's a fellow outside with a knapsack who wants to come in. But as you value your lives, don't let him in, or he'll wish the whole of hell into his knapsack. He gave me a frightful hammering once when I was inside it."

So they called out to Brother Lustig that he was to go away again, because he was not getting in there.

"If they won't have me here," thought he, "I'll see whether I can find a place for myself in heaven; for I must be somewhere."

So he turned about and went on until he came to the door of Heaven, and knocked there. St. Peter was sitting close by as doorkeeper. Brother Lustig recognised him at once and thought, "Here's an old friend. I shall get on better now."

But St. Peter said, "I do believe you want to come into Heaven."

"Let me in, brother. I must get in somewhere. If they'd have taken me into Hell I shouldn't have come here."

"No," said St. Peter, "you shan't come in."

"Then if you won't let me in, take your knapsack back; I'll have nothing at all from you."

"Give it here, then," said St. Peter.

So Brother Lustig passed the knapsack through the bars into Heaven, and St. Peter took it and hung it up beside his seat.

Then Brother Lustig said, "And now I wish myself inside my knapsack" — and in a second he was in it, and in Heaven; and St. Peter had to let him stay there.
