The Gold-Children

There was once a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but a little cottage, and who earned their bread by fishing and always lived from hand to mouth.

But one day, as the man was sitting by the water casting his net, he drew out a fish that was made entirely of gold. As he was looking at it, full of astonishment, it began to speak and said, "Listen, fisherman: if you'll throw me back into the water, I'll turn your little hut into a splendid castle."

Then the fisherman answered, "What use is a castle to me if I've nothing to eat?"

The gold fish went on, "That will be taken care of. There will be a cupboard in the castle, and when you open it there will be dishes of the most delicate food, as many of them as you could wish for."

"If that's true," said the man, "then I can certainly do you a favour."

"Yes," said the fish, "but there's one condition: you must not tell a single soul in the world, whoever it may be, where your good luck came from. If you speak so much as one word, it will all be over."

So the man threw the wonderful fish back into the water and went home. But where his hovel had stood there now stood a great castle. He opened his eyes wide, went in, and saw his wife sitting in a splendid room dressed in beautiful clothes, and she was quite delighted, and said, "Husband, how has all this come about? It suits me very well."

"Yes," said the man, "it suits me too; but I'm terribly hungry. Give me something to eat."

Said the wife, "But I've nothing, and I don't know where to find anything in this new house."

"There's no need for you to know," said the man. "I can see a great cupboard over there — just unlock it."

When she opened it, there stood cakes, meat, fruit and wine — a fine prospect indeed.

Then the woman cried joyfully, "What more could you want, my dear?" And they sat down and ate and drank together.

When they had had enough, the woman said, "But husband, where do all these riches come from?"

"Alas," he answered, "don't ask me about that, for I daren't tell you anything. If I tell a single person, all our good fortune will fly away."

"Very good," said she. "If I'm not to know anything, then I don't want to know anything."

But she did not mean it. She gave herself no rest day or night, and she goaded her husband until, out of sheer impatience, he let out that it was all owing to a wonderful golden fish he had caught and given its freedom in return.

And as soon as the secret was out, the splendid castle with its cupboard vanished on the instant; they were back in the old fisherman's hut, and the man had to go back to his old trade and fish.

But fortune would have it that he once more drew out the golden fish. "Listen," said the fish, "if you'll throw me back into the water again, I'll give you the castle a second time, with the cupboard full of roast and boiled meat. Only stand firm — for your life's sake don't tell anybody who you had it from, or you'll lose it all again."

"I'll take good care," answered the fisherman, and threw the fish back into the water.

At home everything was in its old magnificence once more, and the wife was overjoyed at their good fortune. But curiosity left her no peace, so that after a couple of days she began asking again how it had come about and how he had managed to get it. The man kept silent for a while, but at last she made him so angry that he burst out and betrayed the secret. In an instant the castle disappeared and they were back in their old hut.

"Now you've got what you wanted," said he. "And we can go back to gnawing a bare bone."

"Ah," said the woman, "I'd rather have no riches at all than not know where they come from — for then I have no peace."

The man went back to fishing; and after a while he happened to draw out the gold fish for a third time.

"Listen," said the fish, "I can see plainly that I'm fated to fall into your hands. Take me home and cut me into six pieces. Give two of them to your wife to eat, two to your horse, and bury two of them in the ground; and then they'll bring you a blessing."

The fisherman took the fish home with him and did as it had told him. And it came about that from the two pieces buried in the ground two golden lilies sprang up; that the horse had two golden foals; and that the fisherman's wife bore two children who were made entirely of gold.

The children grew up tall and handsome, and the lilies and the horses grew as well. Then they said, "Father, we want to mount our golden horses and travel out into the world."

But he answered sorrowfully, "How shall I bear it, if you go away and I don't know how you're faring?"

Then they said, "The two golden lilies stay here. By them you can see how it is with us. If they're fresh, we're in health; if they wither, we're ill; if they die, then we're dead."

So they rode away and came to an inn where there were a great many people; and when the people saw the gold-children they began to laugh and jeer. When one of the brothers heard the mockery he was ashamed, and would not go out into the world after all, but turned back and went home to his father.

But the other rode on and came to a great forest. As he was about to enter it, the people said, "It isn't safe for you to ride through. The wood is full of robbers who'll treat you badly. You'll come off badly; and when they see that you're all of gold, and your horse too, they'll certainly kill you."

But he would not let himself be frightened, and said, "I must and I will ride through it." So he took bearskins and covered himself and his horse with them, so that the gold could not be seen any more, and rode fearlessly into the forest.

When he had ridden on a little he heard a rustling in the bushes, and heard voices talking together. From one side came cries of, "There's one!" — but from the other, "Let him go, he's an idle fellow, as poor and bare as a church mouse. What should we get out of him?"

So the gold-child rode joyfully through the forest and no harm came to him.

One day he came into a village where he saw a girl so beautiful that he did not believe any more beautiful existed in the world. And as such a mighty love took hold of him, he went up to her and said, "I love you with my whole heart. Will you be my wife?"

He too pleased the girl so much that she agreed, and said, "Yes, I'll be your wife and be true to you my whole life long."

So they were married; and just as they were at the height of their happiness, the bride's father came home; and when he saw that his daughter's wedding was being celebrated he was astonished, and said, "Where is the bridegroom?"

They pointed out the gold-child, who was still wearing his bearskins. Then the father said furiously, "No vagabond shall ever have my daughter!" — and was about to kill him.

Then the bride begged as hard as she could, and said, "He's my husband, and I love him with all my heart" — until at last he let himself be pacified.

All the same the thought never left him; so next morning he got up early, wanting to see whether his daughter's husband was a common ragged beggar. But when he peeped in, he saw a magnificent golden man in the bed, and the cast-off bearskins lying on the floor. Then he went back and thought, "What a good thing I held my anger in. I should have committed a great crime."

But the gold-child dreamed that he rode out to hunt a splendid stag; and when he woke in the morning he said to his wife, "I must go out hunting."

She was uneasy and begged him to stay, and said, "You could easily meet with some great misfortune." But he answered, "I must and I will go."

So he got up and rode out into the forest; and it was not long before a fine stag crossed his path, exactly as in his dream. He took aim and was about to shoot it, when the stag ran off. He chased it over hedges and ditches the whole day without feeling tired; but in the evening the stag vanished from his sight, and when the gold-child looked about him he was standing in front of a little house with a witch in it.

He knocked, and a little old woman came out and asked, "What are you doing so late in the middle of the great forest?"

"Haven't you seen a stag?"

"Yes," she answered, "I know that stag well." And at that a little dog, which had come out of the house with her, barked at the man furiously.

"Will you be quiet, you horrid toad," said he, "or I'll shoot you dead."

Then the witch cried out in a rage, "What? You'd kill my little dog?" — and immediately transformed him, so that he lay there like a stone. And his bride waited for him in vain, and thought, "What I dreaded so much, what lay so heavy on my heart, has come upon him."

But at home the other brother was standing by the golden lilies when one of them suddenly drooped. "Good heavens," said he, "my brother has met with some great misfortune. I must be off and see whether I can rescue him."

Then the father said, "Stay here. If I lose you as well, what shall I do?"

But he answered, "I must and I will go."

Then he mounted his golden horse and rode out and came into the great forest where his brother lay turned to stone. The old witch came out of her house and called to him, meaning to trap him too; but he would not go near her, and said, "I'll shoot you if you don't bring my brother back to life."

Very unwillingly, she touched the stone with her forefinger, and he was restored to his human shape at once. And the two gold-children rejoiced when they saw each other again, and kissed and embraced each other, and rode out of the forest together — the one home to his bride, the other to his father.

The father said, "I knew perfectly well that you had rescued your brother, for the golden lily suddenly stood up and blossomed out again."

And after that they lived happily, and everything went well with them until their deaths.

The Fox and the Geese

The fox once came to a meadow where there was a flock of fine fat geese; and he smiled at them and said, "I've come just in the nick of time. You're all sitting together so beautifully that I can eat you up one after the other."

The geese cackled with terror, sprang up, and began to wail and beg piteously for their lives. But the fox would listen to nothing, and said, "There's no mercy to be had. You must die."

At length one of them took heart and said, "If we poor geese are to give up our strong young lives, do us the one favour that's possible and allow us one last prayer, so that we don't die in our sins. And after that we'll set ourselves in a row, so that you can always pick out the fattest."

"Yes," said the fox, "that's reasonable, and a pious request. Pray away — I'll wait till you've finished."

Then the first began a good long prayer, saying, "Ga! Ga!" over and over; and as she showed no sign of finishing, the second did not wait for her turn but began as well, "Ga! Ga!" The third and the fourth followed her, and soon they were all cackling together.

When they have finished praying, the story shall be carried on further; but at present they are still praying, and have not stopped yet.

The Poor Man and the Rich Man

In the old days, when the Lord himself still walked about this earth among men, it happened once that he was tired and overtaken by darkness before he could reach an inn. Now there stood on the road in front of him two houses facing each other: one large and beautiful, the other small and poor. The large one belonged to a rich man and the small one to a poor man.

Then the Lord thought, "I shan't be any burden to the rich man; I'll spend the night with him."

When the rich man heard somebody knocking at his door, he opened the window and asked the stranger what he wanted. The Lord answered, "I only ask for a night's lodging."

Then the rich man looked the traveller over from head to foot; and as the Lord was wearing common clothes and did not look like somebody with much money in his pocket, he shook his head and said, "No, I can't take you in. My rooms are full of herbs and seeds; and if I were to lodge everybody who knocked at my door, I might soon be out begging myself. Go somewhere else for a lodging." And with that he shut the window and left the Lord standing there.

So the Lord turned his back on the rich man and went across to the small house and knocked. He had hardly done so before the poor man opened his little door and told the traveller to come in. "Spend the night with me," he said. "It's dark already; you can't go any further tonight."

This pleased the Lord, and he went in. The poor man's wife shook hands with him and welcomed him, and said he was to make himself at home and put up with what they had; they had not much to offer him, but what they had they would give him with all their hearts.

Then she put the potatoes on the fire; and while they were boiling she milked the goat, so that they could have a little milk with them. When the cloth was laid, the Lord sat down with the man and his wife, and he enjoyed their coarse food, for there were happy faces at the table.

When they had had supper and it was bedtime, the woman called her husband aside and said, "Listen, dear husband, let's make ourselves up a bed of straw tonight, so that the poor traveller can sleep in our bed and have a good rest. He's been walking the whole day through, and that makes a man weary."

"With all my heart," he answered. "I'll go and offer it to him." And he went to the stranger and invited him, if he had no objection, to sleep in their bed and rest his limbs properly.

The Lord was unwilling to take the two old people's bed from them; but they would not be satisfied until at last he did it, and lay down in their bed, while they lay on some straw on the floor.

Next morning they got up before daybreak and made as good a breakfast as they could for their guest. When the sun shone in through the little window and the Lord had got up, he ate with them again, and then made ready to set out on his journey.

But as he was standing in the doorway he turned round and said, "As you are so kind and good, you may wish three things for yourselves, and I'll grant them."

Then the man said, "What else should I wish for but eternal happiness — and that the two of us, as long as we live, should be healthy and have our daily bread every day? For the third wish, I don't know what to have."

And the Lord said to him, "Will you wish for a new house instead of this old one?"

"Oh, yes," said the man. "If I can have that too, I should like it very much."

And the Lord granted his wish and changed their old house into a new one; and gave them his blessing again, and went on his way.

The sun was high when the rich man got up and leaned out of his window and saw, on the other side of the road, a clean-looking new house with red tiles and bright windows, where the old hut used to be. He was very much astonished, and called his wife and said to her, "Tell me, what can have happened? Last night there was a miserable little hut standing there, and today there's a beautiful new house. Run over and see how that came about."

So his wife went and asked the poor man, and he said to her, "Yesterday evening a traveller came here and asked for a night's lodging; and this morning, when he took his leave of us, he granted us three wishes — eternal happiness, health in this life and our daily bread as well; and besides that, a beautiful new house instead of our old hut."

When the rich man's wife heard this she ran back in haste and told her husband how it had happened. The man said, "I could tear myself to pieces! If only I'd known! That traveller came to our house too and wanted to sleep here, and I sent him away."

"Quick," said his wife, "get on your horse. You can still catch the man up, and then you must ask to have three wishes granted to you."

The rich man took the good advice and galloped off on his horse, and soon caught up with the Lord. He spoke to him softly and pleasantly, and begged him not to take it amiss that he had not let him in straight away; he had been looking for the front-door key, and in the meantime the stranger had gone off. If he came back the same way, he must come and stay with him.

"Yes," said the Lord. "If I ever come back this way, I will."

Then the rich man asked whether he might not wish for three things too, as his neighbour had.

"Yes," said the Lord, he might; but it would not be to his advantage, and he had better not wish for anything.

But the rich man thought he could easily ask for something that would add to his happiness, if only he knew it would be granted. So the Lord said to him, "Ride home, then, and the three wishes you make shall be fulfilled."

The rich man had now got what he wanted, so he rode off home and began to consider what he should wish for. As he was thinking he let the bridle fall, and the horse began to caper about, so that he was constantly interrupted in his thoughts and could not gather them at all. He patted its neck and said, "Gently, Lisa" — but the horse only started new tricks. Then at last he lost his temper and cried out impatiently, "I wish your neck was broken!"

The moment he had said the words the horse dropped to the ground, and there it lay dead and never moved again. And that was his first wish fulfilled.

As he was a miserly man by nature, he did not like to leave the harness lying there; so he cut it off and put it on his back, and now he had to go on foot. "I still have two wishes left," said he, and comforted himself with that.

And now, as he walked slowly through the sand with the sun burning hot at midday, he grew quite hot-tempered and angry. The saddle hurt his back, and he still had no idea what to wish for. "If I were to wish for all the riches and treasures in the world," he said to himself, "I should still think of all kinds of other things later on — I know that beforehand. But I'll manage it so that there's nothing at all left for me to wish for afterwards."

Then he sighed and said, "Ah, if only I were that Bavarian peasant who had three wishes granted him too, and knew perfectly well what to do — and wished first for a great deal of beer, and second for as much beer as he was able to drink, and third for a barrel of beer into the bargain."

Many a time he thought he had hit on it, and then it seemed to him too small after all. And then it came into his mind what an easy life his wife had, staying at home in a cool room and enjoying herself. This really did vex him; and before he knew what he was doing, he said, "I just wish she was sitting there on this saddle and couldn't get off it, instead of my having to drag it along on my back."

And as the last word was spoken the saddle disappeared from his back, and he saw that his second wish had been fulfilled. Then he really did feel hot. He began to run, wanting to be quite alone in his own room at home to think of something really big for his last wish.

But when he got there and opened the parlour door, he saw his wife sitting in the middle of the room on the saddle, crying and complaining and quite unable to get off it.

So he said, "Do bear it, and I'll wish all the riches on earth for you — only stay where you are."

But she called him a fool, and said, "What good will all the riches on earth do me if I have to sit on this saddle? You wished me onto it, so you must help me off."

So, whether he wanted to or not, he was forced to make his third wish that she should be rid of the saddle and able to get off it; and the wish was fulfilled at once.

So he got nothing out of it but vexation and trouble and abuse and the loss of his horse; while the poor people lived happily, quietly and piously until their happy death.
