The Gnome

There was once a rich King who had three daughters, and they went walking every day in the palace garden. The King was a great lover of fine trees of all kinds; but there was one he was so fond of that if anybody picked an apple from it he wished them a hundred fathoms underground. And when harvest time came the apples on this tree were all as red as blood.

The three daughters went under the tree every day and looked to see whether the wind had blown an apple down; but they never once found one, and the tree was so loaded that it was almost breaking, and the branches hung down to the ground.

Then the King's youngest child had a great longing for an apple, and said to her sisters, "Our father loves us far too much to wish us underground. It's my belief that he'd only do that to strangers." And while she was speaking, the child plucked off a great big apple and ran to her sisters, saying, "Just taste it, my dear little sisters — I've never in my life tasted anything so delicious."

Then the two other sisters ate some of the apple too, whereupon all three sank deep down into the earth, where they could hear no cock crow.

When midday came the King wanted to call them in to dinner, but they were nowhere to be found. He looked for them everywhere in the palace and the garden, but could not find them. Then he was greatly distressed, and proclaimed throughout the land that whoever brought his daughters back should have one of them for a wife.

At this so many young men went about the country searching that there was no counting them, for everybody loved the three children, they were so kind to all and so fair of face.

Three young huntsmen went out too; and when they had travelled about for eight days they came to a great castle with beautiful rooms in it; and in one room a table was laid with delicate dishes on it, still so warm that they were steaming — but in the whole castle there was not a human being to be seen or heard. They waited there half a day, and the food stayed warm and steaming; and at length they were so hungry that they sat down and ate.

And they agreed with each other that they would stay and live in that castle, and that one of them, chosen by lot, should stay in the house while the other two went to look for the King's daughters. They cast lots, and the lot fell on the eldest.

So next day the two younger went out searching and the eldest had to stay at home. At midday a very small little man came and begged for a piece of bread; so the huntsman took the bread he had found there and cut a round off the loaf and was about to give it to him. But as he was handing it over, the little man let it fall, and asked the huntsman to be so good as to give him that piece back. The huntsman was about to do it and stooped down — whereupon the little man took a stick, seized him by the hair and gave him a good beating.

Next day the second stayed at home, and he fared no better. When the other two came back in the evening the eldest said, "Well, how did you get on?"

"Oh, very badly," said he. And then they lamented their misfortune together; but they said nothing about it to the youngest, for they did not like him at all, and always called him Stupid Hans, because he did not really belong to the forest.

On the third day the youngest stayed at home, and again the little man came and begged for a piece of bread. When the young man gave it to him he let it fall as before, and asked him to be so good as to give him that piece back.

Then Hans said to the little man, "What? Can't you pick that piece up yourself? If you won't take that much trouble for your daily bread, you don't deserve to have it."

Then the little man grew very angry and said he was to do it; but the huntsman would not, and took hold of my fine little man and gave him a thorough beating. Then the little man screamed terribly and cried, "Stop, stop, and let me go, and I'll tell you where the King's daughters are."

When Hans heard that he left off beating him; and the little man told him that he was an earth gnome, and that there were more than a thousand like him, and that if Hans would come with him he would show him where the King's daughters were.

Then he showed him a deep well with no water in it. And the gnome said he knew very well that the companions Hans had with him did not mean to deal honourably with him; so if he wanted to deliver the King's children he must do it alone. The other two brothers would be very glad to get the King's daughters back, but they did not want any trouble or danger. So Hans was to take a large basket, and get into it with his short sword and a bell, and be let down. Down below there were three rooms, and in each of them was a princess with a many-headed dragon whose heads she had to comb and dress; and he must cut them off.

And having said all this, the gnome vanished.

When evening came the two brothers arrived and asked how he had got on; and he said, "Well enough so far" — and that he had seen nobody except at midday, when a little man had come and begged for a piece of bread; and that he had given him some, but the little man had let it fall and asked him to pick it up again, and as he did not choose to do that, the fellow had lost his temper; and that he had done what he ought not, and given him a beating — whereupon he had told him where the King's daughters were.

The two were so angry at this that they turned green and yellow.

Next morning they went to the well together and drew lots for who should get into the basket first, and again the lot fell on the eldest, and he had to get in and take the bell with him. Then he said, "If I ring, you must draw me up again at once."

When he had gone down a short way he rang, and they drew him up again immediately. Then the second got into the basket, but he did exactly the same as the first. And then it was the youngest's turn, and he let himself be lowered right to the bottom.

When he had got out of the basket he took his short sword, and went and stood outside the first door and listened, and heard the dragon snoring loudly. He opened the door slowly; and there sat one of the princesses with nine dragons' heads lying in her lap, combing them. Then he took his sword and hacked at them, and the nine heads fell off. The princess sprang up and threw her arms round his neck and hugged and kissed him again and again, and took her bodice, which was made of pure gold, and hung it round his neck.

Then he went to the second princess, who had a dragon with five heads to comb, and delivered her too; and to the youngest, who had a dragon with four heads, he went likewise. And they were all overjoyed, and hugged him and kissed him without stopping.

Then he rang very loudly, so that the men above heard him; and he put the princesses one after the other into the basket and had them all drawn up. But when it came to his own turn he remembered the gnome's words, that his comrades did not mean well by him. So he took a great stone that was lying there and put it in the basket; and when it was about halfway up his false brothers cut the rope, so that the basket with the stone fell to the ground. They thought he was dead, and ran off with the three princesses, making them promise to tell their father that it was they who had rescued them; and then they went to the King, and each of them demanded a princess in marriage.

Meanwhile the youngest huntsman was wandering about the three chambers in great distress, fully expecting to end his days down there, when he saw a flute hanging on the wall. "Why are you hanging there?" said he. "Nobody can be merry here." He looked at the dragons' heads too and said, "You can't help me now either."

He walked backwards and forwards for such a long time that he wore the floor quite smooth. But at last other thoughts came into his mind, and he took the flute down from the wall and played a few notes on it; and suddenly a number of gnomes appeared, and with every note he sounded one more came. Then he played until the room was completely full of them. They all asked what he wanted; so he said he wanted to get above ground, back to the daylight. At that they seized him by every hair on his head, and flew up with him onto the earth again.

When he was above ground he went straight to the King's palace, just as the wedding of one of the princesses was about to be celebrated, and went to the room where the King and his three daughters were. When the princesses saw him they fainted. At this the King was angry and ordered him to be put in prison at once, because he thought he must have done the girls some harm.

When the princesses came to themselves, though, they begged the King to set him free again. The King asked why, and they said they were not allowed to tell that; but their father said they were to tell it to the stove. And he went out and listened at the door and heard everything.

Then he had the two brothers hanged on the gallows, and gave the third his youngest daughter. And on that occasion I wore a pair of glass shoes, and I struck them against a stone, and they went klink and broke.

The King of the Golden Mountain

There was once a merchant who had two children, a boy and a girl; they were both little, and could not walk yet. And two richly laden ships of his sailed out to sea with all his property on board; and just as he was expecting to make a great deal of money by them, news came that they had gone to the bottom. So now, instead of being a rich man, he was a poor one, and had nothing left but one field outside the town.

To drive his misfortune a little out of his mind he went out to this field; and as he was walking up and down in it, a little black man suddenly stood beside him and asked why he was so sad, and what it was he was taking so much to heart.

Then said the merchant, "If you could help me, I'd gladly tell you."

"Who knows?" replied the black dwarf. "Perhaps I can help you."

So the merchant told him that everything he had owned had gone to the bottom of the sea, and that he had nothing left but this field.

"Don't trouble yourself," said the dwarf. "If you'll promise to give me the first thing that rubs against your leg when you get home, and to bring it here to this spot in twelve years' time, you shall have as much money as you like."

The merchant thought, "What can that be but my dog?" — and did not remember his little boy; so he said yes, and gave the black man a written and sealed promise, and went home.

When he reached home, his little boy was so delighted that he held on to a bench and tottered over to him and caught him tight by the legs. The father was horrified, for he remembered his promise and now knew what he had pledged himself to do. But as he still found no money in his chest, he thought the dwarf had only been joking.

A month afterwards he went up to the attic, meaning to collect some old tin and sell it, and saw a great heap of money lying there. Then he was happy again, and made purchases, and became a greater merchant than before, and felt that this world was well governed.

Meanwhile the boy grew tall, and sharp and clever with it. But the nearer the twelfth year came, the more anxious the merchant grew, so that his distress could be read in his face. One day his son asked what was the matter with him, but his father would not say. The boy, though, kept on so long that at last he told him: that without knowing what he was doing he had promised him to a black dwarf, and been given a great deal of money for it. He said too that he had set his hand and seal to it, and that now the twelve years had gone by he would have to give him up.

Then his son said, "Oh, father, don't be uneasy. It will all go well. The black man has no power over me."

The son had himself blessed by the priest; and when the time came, father and son went out to the field together, and the son drew a circle and placed himself inside it with his father.

Then the black dwarf came and said to the old man, "Have you brought what you promised me?"

He was silent; but the son asked, "What do you want here?"

Then said the black dwarf, "I have to speak with your father, not with you."

The son replied, "You cheated and misled my father. Give back the writing."

"No," said the black dwarf, "I won't give up my rights."

They argued together a long while after that; but at last they agreed that the son, since he belonged neither to the enemy of mankind nor to his father any longer, should seat himself in a little boat on water that was flowing away from them, and that the father should push it off with his own foot, and then the son should be left given up to the water.

So he took leave of his father and got into a little boat, and the father had to push it off with his own foot. The boat capsized, so that the keel was uppermost; and the father believed his son was lost, and went home and mourned for him.

But the boat did not sink. It floated quietly away with the boy sitting safely inside it, and it floated on for a long time until at last it came to rest on an unknown shore. Then he landed, and saw a beautiful castle in front of him, and set out towards it.

But when he went in, he found that it was under a spell. He went through every room, and they were all empty until he reached the last, where a snake lay coiled in a ring. The snake, though, was an enchanted girl, who rejoiced to see him, and said, "Have you come, my deliverer? I've been waiting twelve years for you. This kingdom is under a spell and you must set it free."

"How can I do that?" he asked.

"Tonight twelve black men covered with chains will come and ask what you're doing here. Keep silent; give them no answer, and let them do whatever they like with you. They'll torment you, beat you, stab you; let it all pass, only don't speak. At twelve o'clock they must go away again. On the second night twelve others will come, and on the third four-and-twenty, who will cut off your head; but at twelve o'clock their power will be over. And then, if you've endured it all and haven't spoken the slightest word, I shall be released. I'll come to you, and I'll have some of the water of life in a bottle. I'll rub you with it, and then you'll come back to life and be as well as before."

Then he said, "I'll gladly set you free."

And everything happened just as she had said. The black men could not force a single word out of him; and on the third night the snake became a beautiful princess, who came with the water of life and brought him back to life again. So she threw herself into his arms and kissed him, and there was joy and gladness in the whole castle. After this their marriage was celebrated, and he was King of the Golden Mountain.

They lived very happily together, and the Queen bore a fine boy. Eight years had gone by when the King's thoughts turned to his father; his heart was moved, and he wanted to visit him. The Queen, though, would not let him go, and said, "I know beforehand that it will bring me unhappiness." But he gave her no rest until she agreed.

At their parting she gave him a wishing ring and said, "Take this ring and put it on your finger, and then you'll be carried at once wherever you want to be. Only you must promise me not to use it to wish me away from this place and to your father."

He promised her that, put the ring on his finger, and wished himself home, just outside the town where his father lived. Instantly he was there, and made for the town; but when he came to the gate the sentries would not let him in, because his clothes were so strange, and yet so rich and magnificent. So he went to a hill where a shepherd was watching his sheep, and changed clothes with him and put on his old shepherd's coat, and then went into the town without any trouble.

When he came to his father he made himself known to him; but his father did not in the least believe that the shepherd was his son, and said that he certainly had had a son, but that he had died long ago. Still, as he could see he was a poor, needy shepherd, he would give him something to eat.

Then the shepherd said to his parents, "I truly am your son. Don't you know of any mark on my body that you could recognise me by?"

"Yes," said his mother, "our son had a raspberry mark under his right arm."

He pushed his shirt back, and they saw the raspberry mark under his right arm, and doubted no longer that he was their son.

Then he told them that he was King of the Golden Mountain, and that a king's daughter was his wife, and that they had a fine son of seven years old.

Then his father said, "That certainly isn't true. A fine sort of king, who goes about in a ragged shepherd's coat!"

At this the son flew into a temper, and without thinking of his promise turned his ring round and wished both his wife and his child there with him. They were there in a second; but the Queen wept and reproached him and said that he had broken his word and brought misfortune on her.

He said, "I did it thoughtlessly, and not with any bad intention" — and tried to calm her; and she pretended to believe him, but she had mischief in her mind.

Then he led her out of the town into the field and showed her the stream where the little boat had been pushed off; and then he said, "I'm tired. Sit down; I'll sleep a while on your lap." And he laid his head on her lap and fell asleep.

When he was asleep she first drew the ring off his finger; then she drew away the foot that was under him, leaving only the slipper behind her; and she took her child in her arms and wished herself back in her own kingdom.

When he woke, there he lay, quite deserted; his wife and child were gone, and so was the ring from his finger, and only the slipper was still there as a token.

"You can't go home to your parents," he thought. "They'd say you were a wizard. You must be off, and walk on until you come to your own kingdom."

So he went away, and came at length to a hill where three giants were standing, arguing with each other because they did not know how to divide their father's property. When they saw him going by they called to him and said that little men had quick wits, and he was to divide their inheritance for them.

The inheritance consisted of a sword, which had the property that if anybody took it in his hand and said, "All heads off but mine," every head would fall to the ground; secondly, of a cloak that made whoever put it on invisible; and thirdly, of a pair of boots that could carry the wearer wherever he wanted in a moment.

He said, "Give me the three things, so that I can see whether they're still in good order."

They gave him the cloak; and when he had put it on he was invisible and had changed into a fly. Then he took his own form again and said, "The cloak's a good one. Now give me the sword."

They said, "No, we won't give you that. If you were to say, 'All heads off but mine,' all our heads would be off and you alone would be left with yours."

All the same they gave it to him, on condition that he only tried it on a tree. He did that, and the sword cut a tree trunk in two as if it had been a straw.

Then he wanted the boots as well; but they said, "No, we won't give you those. If you had them on your feet and wished yourself at the top of the hill, we should be left down here with nothing."

"Oh, no," said he, "I won't do that." So they gave him the boots too.

And now, when he had got all three things, he thought of nothing but his wife and his child, and said as if to himself, "Oh, if I were only on the Golden Mountain" — and at that same moment he vanished from the giants' sight; and so their inheritance was divided.

When he was near his palace he heard sounds of rejoicing, and fiddles and flutes; and the people told him that his wife was celebrating her wedding with another man. Then he flew into a rage and said, "False woman — she betrayed and deserted me while I was asleep."

So he put on his cloak and went into the palace, unseen by anybody. When he came into the dining hall a great table was spread with delicious food, and the guests were eating and drinking and laughing and joking. She sat on a royal seat in the middle of them in splendid clothes, with a crown on her head.

He placed himself behind her, and nobody saw him. When she put a piece of meat on a plate for herself, he took it away and ate it; and when she poured herself out a glass of wine, he took it away and drank it. She kept helping herself to something and never got anything, for plate and glass disappeared at once.

Then, dismayed and ashamed, she got up and went to her room and wept; but he followed her there.

She said, "Has the devil power over me — or did my deliverer never come?"

Then he struck her in the face and said, "Did your deliverer never come? It's he who has you in his power, traitor. Have I deserved this from you?"

Then he made himself visible and went into the hall and cried, "The wedding is over. The true King has come back."

The kings and princes and councillors who were gathered there jeered at him and mocked him; but he did not trouble to answer them, and said, "Will you go, or not?"

At this they tried to seize him and pressed in on him; but he drew his sword and said, "All heads off but mine" — and all the heads rolled on the ground, and he alone was master, and King of the Golden Mountain once more.
