The Raven

There was once a Queen who had a little daughter, still so young that she had to be carried. One day the child was naughty, and her mother could say what she liked but the child would not be quiet. Then she lost patience; and as the ravens were flying about the palace, she opened the window and said, "I wish you were a raven and would fly away — then I should have some peace."

She had hardly spoken the words before the child was changed into a raven, and flew out of her arms and out of the window. It flew into a dark forest and stayed there a long time, and the parents heard nothing of their child.

Then one day a man was making his way through this forest and heard the raven calling, and followed the voice; and when he came nearer, the bird said, "I'm a king's daughter by birth, and I'm under a spell; but you can set me free."

"What am I to do?" he asked.

She said, "Go further into the forest and you'll find a house with an old woman sitting in it, who'll offer you food and drink; but you mustn't take anything, for if you eat or drink anything you'll fall asleep, and then you won't be able to deliver me. In the garden behind the house there's a great heap of tanbark; stand on that and wait for me. For three days I'll come every afternoon at two o'clock in a carriage. On the first day it will have four white horses harnessed to it, then four chestnut horses, and last of all four black ones; but if you're not awake, and are sleeping, I shan't be set free."

The man promised to do everything she asked; but the raven said, "Alas, I know already that you won't deliver me. You'll take something from the woman."

Then the man promised once more that he would certainly touch nothing, either to eat or to drink.

But when he came into the house the old woman came up to him and said, "Poor man, how faint you look. Come and refresh yourself — eat and drink."

"No," said the man, "I won't eat or drink."

But she gave him no peace, and said, "If you won't eat, take one drink out of the glass. One is nothing."

Then he let himself be persuaded, and drank.

Shortly before two o'clock in the afternoon he went out into the garden to the tanbark heap to wait for the raven. As he was standing there his weariness all at once became so great that he could not fight it off, and he lay down for a short while — but he was determined not to go to sleep. Hardly had he lain down, though, before his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell asleep and slept so soundly that nothing in the world could have roused him.

At two o'clock the raven came driving up with four white horses; but she was already in deep grief and said, "I know he's asleep." And when she came into the garden, there indeed he lay, asleep on the heap of tanbark. She got down from the carriage and went to him and shook him and called him, but he did not wake.

Next day about noon the old woman came again and brought him food and drink, but he would take none of it. But she gave him no rest and kept at him until at last he took one drink out of the glass again.

Towards two o'clock he went into the garden to the tanbark heap to wait for the raven; but all at once he felt such a great weariness that his legs would no longer hold him up. He could not help himself, and had to lie down, and fell into a heavy sleep.

When the raven drove up with four brown horses, she was already full of grief, and said, "I know he's asleep." She went to him, but there he lay sleeping, and there was no waking him.

Next day the old woman asked what this meant. He was neither eating nor drinking anything; did he want to die?

He replied, "I'm not allowed to eat or drink, and I won't do it."

But she set a dish of food and a glass of wine in front of him; and when he smelt it he could not resist, and swallowed a deep draught.

When the time came he went out into the garden to the tanbark heap and waited for the King's daughter; but he was wearier still than the day before, and lay down and slept as soundly as a stone.

At two o'clock the raven came with four black horses, and the coachman and everything else was black. She was already in the deepest grief, and said, "I know he's asleep and can't deliver me." When she came to him, there he lay, fast asleep. She shook him and called him, but she could not wake him.

Then she laid a loaf beside him, and after that a piece of meat, and thirdly a bottle of wine; and he might eat and drink as much of them as he liked, but they would never grow any less. After that she took a gold ring off her finger and put it on his, and her name was engraved on it. And last of all she laid a letter beside him, saying what she had given him and that none of the things would ever grow less; and in it was written too, "I see very well that you'll never be able to deliver me here. But if you're still willing to deliver me, come to the golden castle of Stromberg. It's in your power to do it, of that I'm certain."

And when she had given him all these things she got into her carriage and drove to the golden castle of Stromberg.

When the man woke and saw that he had slept, he was sick at heart, and said, "She's certainly driven past, and I haven't set her free." Then he noticed the things lying beside him, and read the letter that said how it had all happened.

So he got up and went away, meaning to go to the golden castle of Stromberg — but he did not know where it was. After he had wandered about the world for a long time, he came into a dark forest and walked in it for a fortnight and still could not find his way out. Then it was evening again, and he was so tired that he lay down in a thicket and fell asleep.

Next day he went on; and in the evening, as he was about to lie down under some bushes again, he heard such a howling and crying that he could not get to sleep. And at the hour when people light their candles, he saw one glimmering, and got up and went towards it. Then he came to a house that looked very small, for a great giant was standing in front of it.

He thought to himself, "If I go in and the giant sees me, it will very likely cost me my life."

At length he risked it and went in. When the giant saw him he said, "It's a good thing you've come, for it's a long while since I've eaten. I'll have you for my supper straight away."

"I'd rather you left that alone," said the man. "I don't like being eaten. But if you have any wish to eat, I've quite enough here to satisfy you."

"If that's true," said the giant, "you may be easy. I was only going to devour you because I had nothing else."

Then they went and sat down at the table, and the man brought out the bread and wine and meat that would never come to an end.

"This pleases me well," said the giant, and ate to his heart's content.

Then the man said to him, "Can you tell me where the golden castle of Stromberg is?"

The giant said, "I'll look at my map. Every town and village and house is on it." He fetched the map he kept in the room and looked for the castle, but it was not to be found on it.

"Never mind," said he. "I have some still bigger maps in my cupboard upstairs; we'll look in those." But there too it was no use.

The man now wanted to go on, but the giant begged him to wait a few days longer, until his brother, who had gone out to fetch provisions, came home. When the brother came home, they asked him about the golden castle of Stromberg.

He replied, "When I've eaten and had enough, I'll look at my map."

Then he went up to his room with them and they searched his map, but could not find it. Then he brought out still older maps, and they did not rest until they had found the golden castle of Stromberg — but it was many thousand miles away.

"How am I to get there?" asked the man.

The giant said, "I have two hours to spare, and I'll carry you into the neighbourhood of it; but after that I must be at home to nurse the child we have."

So the giant carried the man to about a hundred leagues from the castle, and said, "You can easily walk the rest of the way alone." And he turned back; but the man went on day and night, until at length he came to the golden castle of Stromberg.

It stood on a glass mountain; and the bewitched girl drove round the castle in her carriage and then went inside. He was overjoyed when he saw her and wanted to climb up to her; but every time he started he slipped down the glass again. And when he saw that he could not reach her he was filled with distress, and said to himself, "I'll stay down here and wait for her."

So he built himself a hut and stayed in it a whole year, and saw the King's daughter driving about up above every day, and could never get to her.

Then one day he saw from his hut three robbers who were beating each other, and called out to them, "God be with you!"

They stopped when they heard the cry; but as they could see nobody, they began beating each other again, and dangerously hard at that. So he called out again, "God be with you!" Again they stopped and looked about them; but as they could see nobody, they went on beating each other.

Then he called for the third time, "God be with you" — and thought, "I must see what these three are about" — and went over and asked why they were beating each other so furiously.

One of them said he had found a stick, and that when he struck a door with it, that door would spring open. The next said he had found a cloak, and that whenever he put it on he was invisible. But the third said he had found a horse that a man could ride anywhere on, even up the glass mountain. And now they did not know whether they ought to hold these things in common or divide them up.

Then the man said, "I'll give you something in exchange for these three things. Money I haven't got, but I have other things of more value. Only first I must try yours out, to see whether you've told me the truth."

So they put him on the horse, threw the cloak round him and gave him the stick in his hand; and when he had all these things they could see him no longer. So he gave them a few vigorous blows and cried, "Now then, you vagabonds, you've got what you deserve. Are you satisfied?"

And he rode up the glass mountain. But when he came to the front of the castle at the top, it was shut. So he struck the door with his stick and it sprang open at once. He went in and climbed the stairs until he came to the hall, where the girl was sitting with a golden cup of wine in front of her. But she could not see him, because he had the cloak on.

And when he came up to her, he drew the ring she had given him off his finger and dropped it into the cup, so that it rang.

Then she cried, "That's my ring — so the man who is to set me free must be here."

They searched the whole castle and did not find him; but he had gone out and seated himself on the horse and thrown off the cloak. When they came to the door they saw him and cried aloud in their delight. Then he got down and took the King's daughter in his arms; and she kissed him and said, "Now you have set me free, and tomorrow we'll celebrate our wedding."

The Peasant’s Wise Daughter

There was once a poor peasant who had no land, only a small house and one daughter.

Then the daughter said, "We ought to ask our lord the King for a bit of newly cleared land."

When the King heard of their poverty he made them a present of a piece of land, which she and her father dug over, meaning to sow it with a little corn and grain of that sort. When they had dug nearly the whole field, they found in the earth a mortar made of pure gold.

"Listen," said the father to the girl, "since our lord the King has been so gracious and made us a present of the field, we ought to give him this mortar in return."

But the daughter would not agree to it, and said, "Father, if we have the mortar and not the pestle as well, we shall be made to produce the pestle. You had far better say nothing about it."

He would not listen to her, though, but took the mortar and carried it to the King, and said he had found it in the cleared land, and asked whether he would accept it as a present.

The King took the mortar and asked whether he had found nothing else besides.

"No," answered the countryman.

Then the King said that he must now bring him the pestle. The peasant said they had not found it — but he might as well have been talking to the wind. He was put in prison, and was to stay there until he produced the pestle.

The servants had to bring him bread and water every day, which is what people get in prison; and they heard how the man cried out continually, "Ah, if only I'd listened to my daughter! Alas, alas, if only I'd listened to my daughter!" — and would neither eat nor drink.

So the King ordered the servants to bring the prisoner before him, and asked the peasant why he was always crying, "Ah, if only I'd listened to my daughter!" — and what it was his daughter had said.

"She told me I oughtn't to bring you the mortar, because I'd be made to produce the pestle as well."

"If you have a daughter as wise as that, let her come here."

So she had to appear before the King, who asked whether she really was so wise, and said he would set her a riddle, and if she could guess it he would marry her. She said at once that yes, she would guess it.

Then said the King, "Come to me not clothed and not naked, not riding and not walking, not on the road and not off the road; and if you can do that, I'll marry you."

So she went away and took off everything she had on, and then she was not clothed; and she took a great fishing net and sat down in it and wrapped it right round and round her, so that she was not naked; and she hired a donkey and tied the fisherman's net to its tail, so that it had to drag her along, and that was neither riding nor walking. And the donkey had to drag her along in the wheel ruts, so that she touched the ground only with her big toe, and that was neither being on the road nor off it.

And when she arrived in that fashion, the King said she had guessed the riddle and met all the conditions. Then he ordered her father to be released from prison, took her for his wife, and put all the royal property into her care.

Now when some years had gone by, the King was once drawing up his troops on parade, when it happened that some peasants who had been selling wood stopped with their wagons in front of the palace; some of them had oxen yoked to them and some had horses. There was one peasant who had three horses, and one of them gave birth to a foal, and it ran away and lay down between two oxen that were in front of another wagon.

When the peasants came together they began to argue, and to hit each other and make a disturbance; and the peasant with the oxen wanted to keep the foal, and said one of the oxen had given birth to it, and the other said his horse had had it and it was his.

The quarrel came before the King, and he gave the verdict that the foal should stay where it had been found; and so the peasant with the oxen, who had no right to it, got it.

Then the other went away and wept and lamented over his foal. Now he had heard how gracious his lady the Queen was, because she herself came of poor peasant stock; so he went to her and begged her to see whether she could not help him get his foal back.

Said she, "Yes, I'll tell you what to do, if you'll promise not to give me away. Early tomorrow morning, when the King parades the guard, station yourself in the middle of the road he has to pass along; take a great fishing net and pretend to be fishing. Go on fishing, and empty the net out as if you'd got it full." And then she told him too what he was to say if the King questioned him.

So next day the peasant stood there, fishing on dry ground. When the King passed and saw it, he sent his messenger to ask what the stupid fellow was doing.

He answered, "I'm fishing."

The messenger asked how he could be fishing when there was no water there.

The peasant said, "It's as easy for me to fish on dry land as it is for an ox to have a foal."

The messenger went back and took the answer to the King, who ordered the peasant to be brought to him, and told him this was not his own idea, and he wanted to know whose it was; the peasant must confess it at once.

The peasant, though, would not do it, and kept saying, God forbid, the idea was his own. But they laid him on a heap of straw and beat him and tormented him so long that at last he admitted he had got the idea from the Queen.

When the King reached home again he said to his wife, "Why have you dealt so falsely with me? I won't have you for a wife any longer. Your time is up — go back where you came from, to your peasant's hut."

One favour, though, he granted her: she might take with her the one thing that was dearest and best in her eyes. And so she was dismissed.

She said, "Yes, my dear husband, if that's your command, I'll do it" — and she embraced him and kissed him and said she would take her leave of him. Then she ordered a strong sleeping draught to be brought, to drink a farewell with him. The King took a long draught of it, but she took only a little.

He soon fell into a deep sleep; and when she saw it she called a servant and took a fine white linen cloth and wrapped the King in it, and the servant had to carry him out to a carriage that stood before the door; and she drove away with him to her own little house. She laid him in her own little bed, and he slept a day and a night without waking.

And when he woke he looked round and said, "Good God, where am I?" He called his attendants, but not one of them was there.

At length his wife came to his bedside and said, "My dear lord and King, you told me I might take away with me from the palace whatever was dearest and most precious in my eyes. I have nothing more precious or dear than you, so I've brought you with me."

Tears rose to the King's eyes, and he said, "Dear wife, you shall be mine and I will be yours." And he took her back with him to the royal palace and was married to her again; and at this present time they are very likely still living.
