The Water of Life

There was once a King who fell ill, and nobody believed that he would come out of it alive. He had three sons, who were greatly distressed about it, and went down into the palace garden and wept. There they met an old man who asked them the cause of their grief. They told him that their father was so ill that he would certainly die, for nothing seemed to cure him.

Then the old man said, "I know of one more remedy, and that's the water of life. If he drinks of it he'll be well again — but it's hard to find."

The eldest said, "I'll manage to find it" — and went to the sick King and begged to be allowed to go out in search of the water of life, since that alone could save him.

"No," said the King. "The danger is too great. I'd rather die."

But he begged so long that the King consented. The prince thought in his heart, "If I bring back the water, then I shall be my father's favourite and inherit the kingdom."

So he set out; and when he had ridden a little way, a dwarf stood there in the road who called out to him, "Where are you off to in such a hurry?"

"You silly little shrimp," said the prince very haughtily, "it's nothing to do with you" — and rode on.

But the little dwarf had grown angry, and had wished an evil wish. Soon after this the prince rode into a ravine; and the further he rode, the closer the mountains drew together, until at last the road became so narrow that he could not go a step further. It was impossible either to turn his horse or to get down from the saddle, and he was shut in there as if in prison.

The sick King waited a long while for him, but he did not come.

Then the second son said, "Father, let me go and look for the water" — and thought to himself, "If my brother is dead, then the kingdom will fall to me."

At first the King would not let him go either, but at last he gave way. So the prince set out along the same road his brother had taken, and he too met the dwarf, who stopped him to ask where he was going in such haste.

"You little shrimp," said the prince, "that's nothing to do with you" — and rode on without giving him another look.

But the dwarf put a spell on him, and he too rode into a ravine and could go neither forwards nor backwards. That is how it goes with haughty people.

As the second son stayed away as well, the youngest begged to be allowed to go and fetch the water, and at last the King had to let him go.

When he met the dwarf, and the dwarf asked him where he was going in such haste, he stopped and explained, and said, "I'm looking for the water of life, because my father is sick to death."

"Do you know, then, where it's to be found?"

"No," said the prince.

"As you've behaved yourself properly, and not haughtily like your false brothers, I'll give you the information and tell you how you may get the water of life. It springs from a fountain in the courtyard of an enchanted castle; but you'll never be able to make your way to it unless I give you an iron wand and two small loaves of bread. Strike three times with the wand on the castle's iron door, and it will spring open. Inside lie two lions with gaping jaws; but if you throw a loaf to each of them they'll be quiet. Then hurry and fetch some of the water of life before the clock strikes twelve, or the door will shut again and you'll be shut in."

The prince thanked him, took the wand and the bread, and set out on his way.

When he arrived, everything was as the dwarf had said. The door sprang open at the third stroke of the wand; and when he had quieted the lions with the bread, he went into the castle and came to a large and splendid hall, where some enchanted princes were sitting, and he drew the rings off their fingers. A sword and a loaf of bread were lying there, and he carried them away.

After this he came into a chamber where there was a beautiful girl, who rejoiced when she saw him and kissed him, and told him that he had delivered her and should have the whole of her kingdom; and that if he would come back in a year, their wedding should be celebrated. She told him too where the spring of the water of life was, and that he must hurry and draw some of it before the clock struck twelve.

Then he went on, and at last came into a room where there was a beautiful, freshly made bed; and as he was very weary he felt inclined to rest a little. So he lay down and fell asleep.

When he woke it was striking a quarter to twelve. He sprang up in a fright, ran to the spring, drew some water in a cup that stood beside it, and hurried away. But just as he was passing through the iron door the clock struck twelve, and the door slammed with such violence that it carried away a piece of his heel.

All the same, rejoicing that he had got the water of life, he set off home, and passed the dwarf again. When the dwarf saw the sword and the loaf he said, "With those you've won great wealth. With the sword you can slay whole armies, and the bread will never come to an end."

But the prince would not go home to his father without his brothers, and said, "Dear dwarf, can't you tell me where my two brothers are? They went out before I did in search of the water of life, and they haven't come back."

"They're shut up between two mountains," said the dwarf. "I condemned them to stay there, because they were so haughty."

Then the prince begged until the dwarf released them; but he warned him, and said, "Beware of them, for they have bad hearts."

When his brothers came, he rejoiced, and told them how things had gone with him: that he had found the water of life and brought a cupful away with him, and had rescued a beautiful princess who was willing to wait a year for him, and that then their wedding was to be held and he would come into a great kingdom.

After that they rode on together, and came to a land where war and famine were raging, and the King already thought he must perish, the scarcity was so great. Then the prince went to him and gave him the loaf, with which he fed and satisfied his whole kingdom; and then the prince gave him the sword as well, with which he defeated the armies of his enemies, so that he could now live in rest and peace. The prince then took back his loaf and his sword, and the three brothers rode on.

But after that they came into two more countries where war and famine were raging, and each time the prince gave his loaf and his sword to the King; and so he had now delivered three kingdoms.

After that they went on board a ship and sailed over the sea. During the voyage the two eldest talked apart, and said, "The youngest found the water of life and we didn't, so our father will give him the kingdom — the kingdom that belongs to us — and he'll rob us of all our fortune."

So they began to seek revenge, and plotted together to destroy him. They waited until they found him fast asleep, and then poured the water of life out of his cup and took it for themselves, and poured salt sea water into the cup instead.

So when they arrived home, the youngest took his cup to the sick King so that he might drink out of it and be cured. But he had hardly drunk a very little of the salt sea water before he was worse than before. And as he was lamenting over this, the two eldest brothers came in and accused the youngest of having meant to poison him, and said that they had brought him the true water of life, and handed it to him. He had hardly tasted it before he felt his sickness leaving him, and became as strong and healthy as in the days of his youth.

After that the two of them went to the youngest and mocked him, and said, "You certainly found the water of life, but you had the pain and we have the gain. You should have been sharper and kept your eyes open. We took it from you while you were asleep at sea; and when the year is up, one of us will go and fetch the beautiful princess. But mind you don't say a word of this to our father. He doesn't trust you anyway; and if you say one word you'll lose your life into the bargain — but if you keep quiet, we'll make you a present of it."

The old King was angry with his youngest son, and thought he had plotted against his life. So he called the court together and had sentence pronounced on his son: that he should be secretly shot.

And once, when the prince was riding out to the hunt suspecting no evil, the King's huntsman had to go with him; and when they were quite alone in the forest the huntsman looked so sorrowful that the prince said to him, "Dear huntsman, what's the matter with you?"

The huntsman said, "I can't tell you — and yet I ought to."

Then the prince said, "Say straight out what it is. I'll pardon you."

"Alas," said the huntsman, "I'm to shoot you dead. The King has ordered me to."

Then the prince was appalled, and said, "Dear huntsman, let me live. Here — I'll give you my royal clothes; give me your common ones in their place."

The huntsman said, "I'll do it willingly. Indeed, I could never have shot you."

So they exchanged clothes, and the huntsman went home; but the prince went on deeper into the forest.

After a time three wagonloads of gold and precious stones came to the King for his youngest son, sent by the three Kings who had defeated their enemies with the prince's sword and fed their people with his bread, and who wanted to show their gratitude for it.

Then the old King thought, "Can my son have been innocent?" — and said to his people, "If only he were still alive! How it grieves me that I let him be killed."

"He is still alive," said the huntsman. "I couldn't find it in my heart to carry out your command" — and told the King how it had happened.

Then a stone fell from the King's heart, and he had it proclaimed in every country that his son might come back and be received into favour again.

The princess, meanwhile, had had a road made up to her palace that was all bright and golden, and told her people that whoever came riding straight along it to her would be the right suitor and was to be let in; and whoever rode at the side of it was not the right one and was not to be let in.

As the time was now close at hand, the eldest thought he would hurry and go to the King's daughter and give himself out as her deliverer, and so win her for his bride and the kingdom into the bargain. So he rode off; and when he came in front of the palace and saw the splendid golden road, he thought it would be a sin and a shame to ride over it, and turned aside and rode along the right-hand side of it. But when he came to the door, the servants told him that he was not the right man, and was to go away again.

Soon after this the second prince set out; and when he came to the golden road and his horse had put one foot on it, he thought it would be a sin and a shame to tread a piece of it away, and he turned aside and rode along the left-hand side of it. And when he reached the door, the attendants told him he was not the right one, and he was to go away again.

When at last the year was fully up, the third son also wanted to ride out of the forest to his beloved, and forget his sorrows with her. So he set out, and thought about her so constantly, and wanted so much to be with her, that he never noticed the golden road at all. So his horse went straight up the middle of it; and when he came to the door it was opened, and the princess received him with joy and said he was her deliverer and lord of the kingdom; and their wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing.

When it was over she told him that his father had invited him to come to him, and had forgiven him. So he rode there and told him everything: how his brothers had betrayed him, and how he had kept silent all the same. The old King wanted to punish them; but they had put to sea, and never came back as long as they lived.

Doctor Knowall

There was once a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove a load of wood to town with two oxen and sold it to a doctor for two thalers. As the money was being counted out to him it happened that the doctor was sitting at table; and when the peasant saw how daintily he ate and drank, his heart longed for what he saw, and he would gladly have been a doctor too.

So he stood there a while, and at length asked whether he too could not be a doctor.

"Oh, yes," said the doctor, "that's soon managed."

"What must I do?" asked the peasant.

"In the first place, buy yourself an ABC book of the kind that has a cock on the front. Secondly, turn your cart and your two oxen into money and get yourself some clothes and whatever else belongs to medicine. And thirdly, have a sign painted for yourself with the words 'I am Doctor Knowall' on it, and have it nailed up over your front door."

The peasant did everything he had been told to do. And when he had been doctoring people for a while — but not long — a rich and great lord had some money stolen. He was told about Doctor Knowall, who lived in such and such a village and must know what had become of the money. So the lord had the horses put to his carriage and drove out to the village and asked Crabb whether he was Doctor Knowall.

Yes, he said, he was.

Then he was to come with him and bring back the stolen money.

"Oh, yes — but Grete, my wife, must come too."

The lord was willing, and let both of them have a seat in the carriage, and they all drove off together.

When they came to the nobleman's castle the table was laid, and Crabb was told to sit down and eat.

"Yes — but my wife Grete too," said he; and he sat down at the table with her.

And when the first servant came in with a dish of delicate food, the peasant nudged his wife and said, "Grete, that was the first" — meaning that was the servant who brought the first dish. But the servant thought he meant by it, "That is the first thief"; and as he actually was, he was terrified, and said to his comrade outside, "The doctor knows everything. It will go badly with us — he said I was the first."

The second did not want to go in at all, but was made to. So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his wife and said, "Grete, that's the second." This servant was just as alarmed, and got out as fast as he could.

The third fared no better, for the peasant again said, "Grete, that's the third."

The fourth had to carry in a dish that was covered, and the lord told the doctor he was to show his skill and guess what was under the cover. The doctor looked at the dish and had no idea what to say, and cried, "Ah, poor Crabb!"

When the lord heard that, he cried, "There! He knows it — he knows who has the money!"

At this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to the doctor that they wanted him to step outside for a moment. So when he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen the money, and said that they would gladly give it back and give him a heavy sum into the bargain if he would not denounce them, for if he did they would be hanged. And they led him to the place where the money was hidden.

With that the doctor was satisfied, and went back into the hall and sat down at the table and said, "My lord, now I'll search in my book to find where the gold is hidden."

The fifth servant, though, crept into the stove to hear whether the doctor knew still more. The doctor sat still and opened his ABC book and turned the pages backwards and forwards, looking for the cock. And as he could not find it straight away, he said, "I know you're in there, so you'd better show yourself."

Then the fellow in the stove thought the doctor meant him, and sprang out in terror, crying, "That man knows everything!"

Then Doctor Knowall showed the count where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it; and he was given a great deal of money in reward by both sides, and became a famous man.
