The Spirit in the Bottle

There was once a poor woodcutter who toiled from early morning till late at night. When at last he had put a little money by, he said to his boy, "You're my only child. I'll spend the money I've earned by the sweat of my brow on your education. If you learn some honest trade, you can support me in my old age, when my limbs have grown stiff and I have to stay at home."

So the boy went to a good school and studied hard, so that his masters praised him, and he stayed there a long time. But when he had worked his way through two classes, and was still not perfect in everything, the little store his father had earned was all spent, and the boy had to go back home to him.

"Ah," said his father sorrowfully, "I can give you no more; and in these hard times I can't earn a farthing beyond what's needed for our daily bread."

"Dear father," answered the son, "don't trouble yourself about it. If it's God's will, it will turn out to my advantage. I shall soon get used to it."

When his father was going into the forest to earn money by helping to pile and stack wood, and to chop it as well, his son said, "I'll come with you and help you."

"No, my son," said his father, "that would be hard for you. You're not used to rough work and you won't be able to stand it; and besides, I've only one axe and no money left to buy another."

"Just go to the neighbour," answered the son. "He'll lend you his axe until I've earned one for myself."

So the father borrowed an axe from the neighbour; and next morning at daybreak they went out into the forest together. The son helped his father and was quite merry and brisk about it.

But when the sun was right over their heads the father said, "We'll rest and have our dinner, and then we'll work all the better."

The son took his bread in his hands and said, "You rest, father. I'm not tired. I'll walk up and down in the forest a little and look for birds' nests."

"Oh, you fool," said his father, "why should you want to go running about? Afterwards you'll be tired and won't be able to lift your arm. Stay here and sit down beside me."

But the son went off into the forest and ate his bread, very cheerful, and peered in among the green branches to see whether he could spot a bird's nest anywhere. So he went up and down, looking; until at last he came to a great dangerous-looking oak, which was certainly many hundreds of years old, and which five men together could not have spanned. He stood still and looked at it and thought, "Many a bird must have built its nest in that."

Then all at once it seemed to him that he heard a voice. He listened, and realised that somebody was calling out in a very smothered voice, "Let me out! Let me out!"

He looked around, but could see nothing; all the same, he had the idea that the voice was coming out of the ground. So he cried, "Where are you?"

The voice answered, "I'm down here among the roots of the oak tree. Let me out! Let me out!"

The student began to loosen the earth under the tree and search among the roots, until at last he found a glass bottle in a little hollow. He lifted it up and held it against the light, and then saw a creature shaped like a frog springing up and down inside it.

"Let me out! Let me out!" it cried again; and the student, meaning no harm, drew the cork out of the bottle.

Immediately a spirit rose out of it and began to grow — and grew so fast that within a very few moments he stood in front of the student, a terrible fellow as big as half the tree he was standing beside.

"Do you know," he cried in an awful voice, "what your wages are for letting me out?"

"No," replied the student fearlessly. "How should I know that?"

"Then I'll tell you," cried the spirit. "I must strangle you for it."

"You should have told me that sooner," said the student, "for then I'd have left you shut up. But my head shall stay where it is for anything you can do — more people than one must be consulted about that."

"More people here, more people there," said the spirit. "You shall have the wages you've earned. Do you think I was shut up in there all that time as a favour? No — it was a punishment. I am the mighty Mercurius. Whoever releases me, him I must strangle."

"Gently," answered the student, "not so fast. First I must know that you really were shut up in that little bottle, and that you're the right spirit. If you can indeed get in again, I'll believe it — and then you may do what you like with me."

The spirit said haughtily, "That's a very trifling feat" — and drew himself together and made himself as small and slender as he had been at first, so that he crept in through the same opening and right down through the neck of the bottle.

He was hardly inside before the student thrust the cork he had drawn back into the bottle, and threw it among the roots of the oak in its old place; and the spirit was tricked.

And now the student was about to go back to his father, when the spirit cried out very piteously, "Ah, do let me out! Ah, do let me out!"

"No," answered the student, "not a second time. Somebody who has once tried to take my life shan't be set free by me, now that I've caught him again."

"If you'll set me free," said the spirit, "I'll give you enough to have plenty all the days of your life."

"No," answered the boy, "you'd cheat me the way you did the first time."

"You're throwing away your own good luck," said the spirit. "I'll do you no harm, but reward you richly."

The student thought, "I'll risk it. Perhaps he'll keep his word — and in any case he shan't get the better of me."

So he took out the cork, and the spirit rose up out of the bottle as he had before, and stretched himself and grew as big as a giant.

"Now you shall have your reward," said he — and handed the student a little rag like a strip of plaster, and said, "If you spread one end of this over a wound it will heal; and if you rub steel or iron with the other end, it will be turned into silver."

"I must just try that," said the student; and he went to a tree and tore off the bark with his axe and rubbed it with one end of the plaster. It closed up at once and was healed.

"Now it's all right," he said to the spirit, "and we can part."

The spirit thanked him for his release, and the boy thanked the spirit for his present, and went back to his father.

"Where have you been running about?" said his father. "Why have you forgotten your work? I said straight away that you'd never get on with anything."

"Don't worry, father, I'll make it up."

"Make it up, indeed," said his father angrily. "There's no art in that."

"You watch, father. I'll chop that tree over there so that it splits."

Then he took his plaster and rubbed the axe with it, and struck a mighty blow; but as the iron had turned into silver, the edge bent over.

"Hey, father, just look what a bad axe you've given me — it's gone quite crooked."

His father was appalled and said, "Ah, what have you done? Now I shall have to pay for that, and I've nothing to pay with; and that's all the good I've got out of your work."

"Don't get angry," said his son. "I'll pay for the axe soon enough."

"Oh, you blockhead," cried his father, "what will you pay for it with? You have nothing but what I give you. These are students' tricks stuck in your head, but you know nothing about woodcutting."

After a while the student said, "Father, I really can't work any more. We'd better take a holiday."

"Eh, what!" he answered. "Do you think I'm going to sit with my hands in my lap like you? I must go on working, but you may take yourself off home."

"Father, this is the first time I've been in this wood; I don't know my way alone. Do come with me."

As his anger had died down by now, the father at last let himself be persuaded and went home with him. Then he said to his son, "Go and sell your damaged axe and see what you can get for it; and I must earn the difference, to pay the neighbour."

The son took the axe and carried it into town to a goldsmith, who tested it and laid it in the scales and said, "It's worth four hundred thalers. I haven't as much as that here."

The son said, "Give me what you have. I'll lend you the rest."

The goldsmith gave him three hundred thalers and stayed a hundred in his debt.

The son then went home and said, "Father, I've got the money. Go and ask the neighbour what he wants for the axe."

"I know that already," answered the old man. "One thaler and six groschen."

"Then give him two thalers and twelve groschen — that's double, and more than enough. Look, I've money in plenty." And he gave his father a hundred thalers and said, "You shall never know want. Live as comfortably as you like."

"Good heavens," said his father, "how did you come by these riches?"

The student then told him how it had all come about, and how, trusting to his luck, he had made such a good stroke. But with the money that was left he went back to school and went on learning; and as he could heal every kind of wound with his plaster, he became the most famous doctor in the whole world.

The Devil’s Sooty Brother

A discharged soldier had nothing to live on and did not know how to get by. So he went out into the forest; and when he had walked a little way he met a little man — who was in fact the Devil.

The little man said to him, "What's the matter with you? You look so very downcast."

Then the soldier said, "I'm hungry, and I've no money."

The Devil said, "If you'll hire yourself out to me and be my serving man, you shall have enough for the rest of your life. You shall serve me for seven years, and after that you'll be free again. But there's one thing I must tell you, and that is that you mustn't wash, or comb or tidy yourself, or cut your hair or your nails, or wipe the water out of your eyes."

The soldier said, "All right, if there's no help for it" — and went off with the little man, who led him straight down into hell.

Then he told him what he had to do. He was to poke the fire under the kettles where the hell-broth was stewing, keep the house clean, sweep all the dirt behind the doors, and see that everything was in order — but if he once peeped into the kettles, it would go badly for him.

The soldier said, "Good, I'll take care."

And then the old Devil went out again on his travels, and the soldier began his new duties: made up the fire and swept the dirt well behind the doors, just as he had been told. When the old Devil came back he looked to see whether it had all been done, seemed satisfied, and went off a second time.

Now the soldier took a good look about him on every side. The kettles were standing all round hell with a mighty fire under them, and inside they were boiling and spitting. He would have given anything to look inside them, if the Devil had not so particularly forbidden it. At last he could restrain himself no longer, and raised the lid of the first kettle a little and peeped in; and there he saw his old corporal shut up inside.

"Aha, old bird," said he, "do I meet you here? You once had me in your power; now I have you." And he quickly let the lid fall, poked the fire and threw on a fresh log.

After that he went to the second kettle and raised its lid a little too, and peeped in; his old ensign was in that one. "Aha, old bird, so I find you here! You once had me in your power; now I have you." He closed the lid again and fetched another log, to make it really hot.

Then he wanted to see who might be sitting in the third kettle — and it turned out to be no less than a general. "Aha, old bird, do I meet you here? Once you had me in your power; now I have you." And he fetched the bellows and made the hell-fire blaze right under him.

So he did his work in hell for seven years, and did not wash or comb or tidy himself, or cut his hair or his nails, or wash the water out of his eyes; and the seven years seemed so short to him that he thought he had only been there half a year.

Now when the time was fully up, the Devil came and said, "Well, Hans, what have you done?"

"I poked the fire under the kettles, and I've swept all the dirt well behind the doors."

"But you peeped into the kettles as well. It's lucky for you that you put fresh logs on them, or your life would have been forfeit. Now that your time is up, will you go home again?"

"Yes," said the soldier, "I should very much like to see what my father is doing at home."

The Devil said, "So that you get the wages you've earned, go and fill your knapsack full of the sweepings and take it home with you. And you must go unwashed and uncombed, with long hair on your head and your chin, and with uncut nails and dim eyes; and when you're asked where you come from, you must say, 'From hell'; and when you're asked who you are, you're to say, 'The Devil's sooty brother, and my own King as well.'"

The soldier held his tongue and did as the Devil told him, but he was not at all satisfied with his wages. And then, as soon as he was up in the forest again, he took his knapsack off his back to empty it — and on opening it he found the sweepings had turned into pure gold.

"I should never have expected that," said he, and was well pleased, and went into the town.

The landlord was standing in front of the inn; and when he saw the soldier coming he was terrified, because Hans looked so horrible — worse than a scarecrow. He called out to him and asked, "Where do you come from?"

"From hell."

"Who are you?"

"The Devil's sooty brother, and my own King as well."

Then the landlord would not let him in; but when Hans showed him the gold he came and unlatched the door himself.

Hans then ordered the best room and full attendance, and ate and drank his fill; but he neither washed nor combed himself, as the Devil had told him, and at last lay down to sleep.

But the knapsack full of gold stayed in front of the landlord's eyes and left him no peace; and in the night he crept in and stole it away.

Next morning, though, when Hans got up and wanted to pay the landlord and travel on, behold — his knapsack was gone. But he soon calmed himself, and thought, "You've had bad luck through no fault of your own" — and went straight back to hell and complained of his misfortune to the old Devil, and begged for his help.

The Devil said, "Sit down. I'll wash you and comb you and tidy you up, and cut your hair and nails and wash your eyes for you." And when he had finished with him, he gave him back the knapsack full of sweepings, and said, "Go and tell the landlord that he must give you back your money, or else I'll come and fetch him, and he shall poke the fire in your place."

Hans went up and said to the landlord, "You stole my money. If you don't give it back, you'll go down to hell in my place, and you'll look as horrible as I did."

Then the landlord gave him the money, and more besides, only begging him to keep it quiet; and Hans was now a rich man.

He set out for home to his father, and bought himself a shabby smock to wear, and strolled about making music, for he had learned to do that while he was with the Devil in hell.

Now there was an old King in that country, before whom he had to play; and the King was so delighted with his playing that he promised him his eldest daughter in marriage. But when she heard that she was to marry a common fellow in a smock, she said, "Rather than that, I'd go into the deepest water."

So the King gave him the youngest, who was quite willing to do it to please her father. And so the Devil's sooty brother got the King's daughter — and when the old King died, the whole kingdom as well.
