Wise Folks

One day a peasant took his good hazel stick out of the corner and said to his wife, "Trina, I'm going across country and shan't be back for three days. If the cattle dealer should happen to call in that time and want to buy our three cows, you may strike a bargain at once — but not unless you can get two hundred thalers for them. Nothing less, do you hear?"

"For heaven's sake, just go in peace," answered the woman. "I'll manage that."

"You, indeed," said the man. "You fell on your head once when you were a little child, and it affects you to this day. But let me tell you this: if you do anything foolish, I'll make your back black and blue — and not with paint, I assure you, but with the stick I have in my hand; and the colouring will last a whole year, you may rely on it."

And having said that, the man went on his way.

Next morning the cattle dealer came, and the woman had no need to say many words to him. When he had seen the cows and heard the price, he said, "I'm quite willing to give that. To speak honestly, they're worth it. I'll take the beasts away with me at once."

He unfastened their chains and drove them out of the byre; but just as he was going out of the yard gate the woman caught him by the sleeve and said, "You must give me the two hundred thalers now, or I can't let the cows go."

"True enough," answered the man, "but I've forgotten to buckle on my money belt. Don't be afraid, though — you shall have security that I'll pay. I'll take two cows with me and leave one, and then you'll have a good pledge."

The woman saw the force of this, and let the man go off with the cows, and thought to herself, "How pleased Hans will be when he finds out how cleverly I've managed it!"

The peasant came home on the third day, as he had said he would, and asked at once whether the cows were sold.

"Yes indeed, dear Hans," answered his wife, "and for two hundred thalers, just as you said. They're hardly worth so much, but the man took them without a word of objection."

"Where's the money?" asked the peasant.

"Oh, I haven't got the money," replied the woman. "He'd happened to forget his money belt, but he'll bring it soon, and he left good security behind him."

"What sort of security?" asked the man.

"One of the three cows, which he shan't have until he's paid for the other two. I managed it very cunningly, because I kept the smallest one, which eats the least."

The man was enraged and lifted his stick, and was just about to give her the beating he had promised her. But suddenly he let the stick drop and said, "You're the stupidest goose that ever waddled on God's earth — but I'm sorry for you. I'll go out onto the highways and wait for three days to see whether I can find anybody still stupider than you. If I do, you shall go free; but if I don't find him, you shall have your well-deserved reward without any discount."

He went out onto the great highways, sat down on a stone, and waited to see what would happen.

Then he saw a peasant's wagon coming towards him, with a woman standing bolt upright in the middle of it instead of sitting on the bundle of straw that lay beside her, or walking beside the oxen and leading them. The man thought to himself, "There's certainly one of the sort I'm looking for" — and jumped up and ran backwards and forwards in front of the wagon like somebody not quite right in the head.

"What do you want, my friend?" the woman said to him. "I don't know you. Where do you come from?"

"I've fallen down out of heaven," replied the man, "and I don't know how to get back again. Couldn't you drive me up?"

"No," said the woman, "I don't know the way. But if you come from heaven, you can surely tell me how my husband is; he's been there these three years. You must have seen him."

"Oh yes, I've seen him — but not everybody can do well. He keeps sheep, and the sheep give him a great deal of trouble. They run up the mountains and lose their way in the wilderness, and he has to run after them and drive them together again. His clothes are all torn to pieces too, and will soon fall off his body. There's no tailor there, for Saint Peter won't let any of them in, as you know from the story."

"Who would have thought it?" cried the woman. "I'll tell you what: I'll fetch his Sunday coat, which is still hanging at home in the cupboard. He can wear that and look respectable. You'll be so kind as to take it with you."

"That won't do at all," answered the peasant. "People aren't allowed to take clothes into heaven; they're taken away from you at the gate."

"Then listen," said the woman. "I sold my fine wheat yesterday and got a good lot of money for it. I'll send that to him. If you hide the purse in your pocket, nobody will know that you have it."

"If you can't manage it any other way," said the peasant, "I'll do you that favour."

"Just sit still where you are," said she, "and I'll drive home and fetch the purse. I'll soon be back. I don't sit down on the bundle of straw — I stand up in the wagon, because it makes it lighter for the cattle."

She drove her oxen away, and the peasant thought, "That woman has a perfect gift for folly. If she really brings the money, my wife may count herself lucky, for she'll get no beating."

It was not long before she came back in a great hurry with the money, and put it in his pocket with her own hands. Before she went away she thanked him a thousand times over for his courtesy.

When the woman got home again she found her son, who had come in from the field. She told him about the unlooked-for things that had happened to her, and then added, "I'm truly delighted to have found a chance of sending something to my poor husband. Who would ever have imagined that he could be in want of anything up in heaven?"

The son was full of astonishment. "Mother," said he, "it isn't every day that a man comes down from heaven like that. I'll go out at once and see whether he's still to be found. He must tell me what it's like up there and how the work is done."

He saddled the horse and rode off at full speed. He found the peasant sitting under a willow tree, just about to count the money in the purse.

"Have you seen the man who fell down out of heaven?" the young man called to him.

"Yes," answered the peasant. "He's set off on his way back there, and gone up that hill, since it's rather nearer from there. You could still catch him up if you rode fast."

"Alas," said the young man, "I've been doing tiring work all day, and the ride here has completely worn me out. You know the man — be so kind as to get on my horse and go and persuade him to come here."

"Aha," thought the peasant, "here's another with no wick in his lamp." — "Why shouldn't I do you that favour?" said he; and mounted the horse and rode off at a quick trot.

The young man sat there till nightfall, but the peasant never came back. "The man from heaven must have been in a great hurry and wouldn't turn back," he thought, "and the peasant has no doubt given him the horse to take to my father."

He went home and told his mother what had happened, and that he had sent his father the horse so that he would not have to be always running about.

"You did well," she answered. "Your legs are younger than his, and you can go on foot."

When the peasant got home he put the horse in the stable beside the cow he had as a pledge, and then went to his wife and said, "Trina, as your luck would have it, I've found two who are still sillier fools than you. This time you escape without a beating; I'll store it up for another occasion."

Then he lit his pipe and sat down in his grandfather's chair and said, "It was a good stroke of business, getting a sleek horse and a great purse full of money into the bargain, for two lean cows. If stupidity always brought in as much as that, I'd be quite willing to hold it in honour."

That is what the peasant thought — but no doubt you prefer the simple folk.

Stories about Snakes

First Story

There was once a little child whose mother gave her a small bowl of milk and bread every afternoon, and the child sat down in the yard with it. But when she began to eat, a snake came creeping out of a crack in the wall, dipped its little head in the dish, and ate with her.

The child was pleased by this; and when she was sitting there with her little dish and the snake did not come at once, she called:

	"Snake, snake, come swiftly,
	come here, you tiny thing;
	you shall have your crumbs of bread,
	you shall drink your fill of milk."

Then the snake came in a hurry and enjoyed its food. What is more, it showed its gratitude, for it brought the child all kinds of pretty things out of its hidden treasures: bright stones, pearls and golden playthings.

But the snake only drank the milk and left the breadcrumbs alone. So one day the child took her little spoon and tapped the snake gently on the head with it, and said, "Eat the breadcrumbs as well, little thing."

The mother, who was standing in the kitchen, heard the child talking to somebody; and when she saw that she was hitting a snake with her spoon, she ran out with a log of wood and killed the good little creature.

From that time on a change came over the child. As long as the snake had eaten with her she had grown tall and strong; but now she lost her pretty rosy cheeks and wasted away. It was not long before the owl began to cry in the night, and the robin to gather little twigs and leaves for a funeral wreath; and soon afterwards the child lay on her bier.

Second Story

An orphan child was sitting on the town walls spinning, when she saw a snake coming out of a hole low down in the wall. She quickly spread out beside it one of the blue silk handkerchiefs that snakes are so fond of, and that are the only things they will creep onto.

As soon as the snake saw it, it went back; and then it returned, bringing a small golden crown with it, and laid it on the handkerchief, and went away again. The girl picked up the crown; it glittered, and was of delicate golden filigree work.

It was not long before the snake came back a second time; but when it no longer saw the crown, it crept up to the wall and in its grief beat its little head against it as long as it had the strength, until at last it lay there dead.

If the girl had only left the crown where it was, the snake would certainly have brought still more of its treasures out of the hole.

Third Story

A snake cries, "Huhu, huhu."

A child says, "Come out."

The snake comes out; then the child asks after her little sister: "Haven't you seen little Red-stockings?"

The snake says, "No."

"Neither have I."

"Then I'm like you. Huhu, huhu, huhu."

The Poor Miller’s Boy and the Cat

In a certain mill there lived an old miller who had neither wife nor child, and three apprentices served under him. As they had been with him several years, he said to them one day, "I'm old, and I want to sit in the chimney corner. Go out; and whichever of you brings me home the best horse, to him I'll give the mill, and in return he shall take care of me until my death."

The third of the boys, though, was the drudge, whom the others thought a fool. They grudged him the mill, and afterwards he would not take it.

So the three of them went out together; and when they came to the village the two said to stupid Hans, "You may as well stay here. As long as you live you'll never get a horse."

But Hans went along with them; and when it was night they came to a cave and lay down there to sleep. The two sharp ones waited until Hans had fallen asleep, and then got up and went away, leaving him where he was. And they thought they had done a very clever thing — but it was certain to turn out badly for them.

When the sun rose and Hans woke up, he was lying in a deep cave. He looked round on every side and exclaimed, "Oh, heavens, where am I?"

Then he got up and clambered out of the cave and went into the forest, and thought, "Here I am, all alone and deserted. How am I to get a horse now?"

And while he was walking along full of these thoughts, he met a small tabby cat, which said quite kindly, "Hans, where are you going?"

"Alas, you can't help me."

"I know very well what you want," said the cat. "You want a beautiful horse. Come with me and be my faithful servant for seven years, and then I'll give you one more beautiful than any you've seen in your whole life."

"Well, this is a wonderful cat," thought Hans. "But I'm determined to see whether she's telling the truth."

So she took him with her to her enchanted castle, where there was nobody but cats, who were her servants. They leapt nimbly up and down the stairs and were merry and happy.

In the evening, when they sat down to dinner, three of them had to make music. One played the bassoon, another the fiddle, and the third put a trumpet to his lips and blew his cheeks out as far as he possibly could.

When they had dined, the table was carried away, and the cat said, "Now, Hans, come and dance with me."

"No," said he, "I won't dance with a pussycat. I've never done that yet."

"Then take him to bed," said she to the cats.

So one of them lit him to his bedroom, one pulled his shoes off, one his stockings, and at last one of them blew out the candle. Next morning they came back and helped him out of bed: one put his stockings on for him, one tied his garters, one brought his shoes, one washed him, and one dried his face with her tail.

"That feels very soft," said Hans.

But he had to serve the cat and chop wood every day; and to do it he had an axe of silver, and the wedge and the saw were silver too, and the mallet was copper. So he chopped the wood small, and stayed there in the house and had good food and drink — but he never saw anybody except the tabby cat and her servants.

Once she said to him, "Go and mow my meadow and dry the grass" — and gave him a scythe of silver and a whetstone of gold, but told him to hand them back carefully. So Hans went and did as he was told; and when he had finished the work he carried the scythe and the whetstone and the hay back to the house, and asked whether it was not yet time for her to give him his reward.

"No," said the cat, "you must first do something more for me of the same kind. Here is timber of silver, a carpenter's axe, a square and everything else that's needed, all of silver. With these, build me a small house."

So Hans built the small house, and said that he had now done everything, and still had no horse. All the same, the seven years had gone by for him as if they were six months.

The cat asked whether he would like to see her horses. "Yes," said Hans. Then she opened the door of the small house; and when she had opened it, there stood twelve horses — such horses, so bright and shining, that his heart rejoiced at the sight of them.

And now she gave him food and drink, and said, "Go home. I won't give you your horse to take with you; but in three days' time I'll follow you and bring it."

So Hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill. But she had never once given him a new coat, and he had had to keep on the dirty old smock he had brought with him, which in seven years had grown too small for him everywhere.

When he reached home, the two other apprentices were back as well, and each of them had certainly brought a horse with him — but one of them was blind and the other lame. They asked Hans where his horse was.

"It will follow me in three days' time."

Then they laughed and said, "Really, stupid Hans, where would you get a horse? It'll be a fine one!"

Hans went into the parlour, but the miller said he should not sit down at the table, since he was so ragged and torn that they would all be ashamed of him if anybody came in. So they gave him a mouthful of food outside; and at night, when they went to bed, the other two would not let him have a bed, and at last he had to creep into the goose house and lie down on a little hard straw.

In the morning, when he woke, the three days had passed; and a coach came with six horses, and they shone so brightly that it was a delight to see them; and a servant brought a seventh as well, which was for the poor miller's boy. And a magnificent princess got down from the coach and went into the mill — and this princess was the little tabby cat whom poor Hans had served for seven years.

She asked the miller where the miller's boy, the drudge, was.

Then the miller said, "We can't have him here in the mill, he's so ragged. He's lying in the goose house."

Then the King's daughter said that they were to bring him at once. So they brought him out, and he had to hold his little smock together to cover himself. The servants unpacked splendid clothes, and washed him and dressed him; and when that was done, no king could have looked handsomer.

Then the lady asked to see the horses the other apprentices had brought home, and one of them was blind and the other lame. So she ordered her servant to bring the seventh horse; and when the miller saw it, he said that such a horse as that had never come into his yard before.

"And that's for the third miller's boy," said she.

"Then he must have the mill," said the miller.

But the King's daughter said that the horse was there, and that he was to keep his mill as well; and she took her faithful Hans and set him in the coach and drove away with him.

They drove first to the little house he had built with the silver tools — and behold, it was a great castle, and everything inside it was of silver and gold. And then she married him, and he was rich, so rich that he had enough for the rest of his life.

After this, let nobody ever say that somebody who seems silly can never become a person of importance.
