The Two Travellers

Hill and valley never meet, but the children of men do, good and bad. And so it happened that a shoemaker and a tailor once met on their travels.

The tailor was a handsome little fellow, always merry and full of enjoyment. He saw the shoemaker coming towards him from the other side; and as he could tell by his bag what trade he followed, he sang him a little mocking song:

	"Sew me the seam,
	draw me the thread,
	spread it over with pitch,
	knock the nail on the head."

But the shoemaker could not take a joke. He pulled a face as if he had drunk vinegar, and made a movement as though he were about to take the tailor by the throat. The little fellow, though, began to laugh, and held out his bottle to him and said, "No harm was meant. Take a drink and swallow your anger down."

The shoemaker took a very hearty drink, and the storm on his face began to clear. He gave the bottle back to the tailor and said, "I spoke civilly to you. A man speaks well after plenty of drink, but not after plenty of thirst. Shall we travel together?"

"All right," answered the tailor, "so long as it suits you to go to a big town where there's no shortage of work."

"That's exactly where I want to go," answered the shoemaker. "In a little nest there's nothing to earn, and out in the country people like to go barefoot."

So they travelled on together, always setting one foot in front of the other like a weasel in the snow.

Both of them had time enough, but little to bite on. When they reached a town they went round and paid their respects to the tradesmen; and because the tailor looked so lively and merry, and had such pretty red cheeks, everybody gave him work willingly — and when his luck was good, the masters' daughters gave him a kiss under the porch as well. When he met the shoemaker again, the tailor always had the more in his bundle.

The ill-tempered shoemaker pulled a sour face and thought, "The greater the rascal, the greater the luck." But the tailor began to laugh and sing, and shared everything he got with his comrade. If a couple of pennies jingled in his pockets he ordered good cheer, and thumped the table in his joy till the glasses danced; and it was lightly come, lightly go with him.

When they had travelled some time, they came to a great forest that the road to the capital ran through. There were two footpaths through it, though, one of which was a seven days' journey and the other only two; but neither of the travellers knew which was the short one. They sat down under an oak tree and took counsel together about how they should judge it, and how many days' bread they should take with them.

The shoemaker said, "A man must look before he leaps. I'll take bread for a week with me."

"What!" said the tailor. "Drag bread for seven days on my back like a beast of burden, and not be able to look about me? I shall trust in God and not trouble myself about anything. The money I have in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter; but in hot weather bread goes dry, and mouldy into the bargain. Even my coat doesn't reach as far as it might. Besides, why shouldn't we find the right way? Bread for two days, and that's enough."

So each of them bought his own bread, and then they tried their luck in the forest.

It was as quiet in there as in a church. No wind stirred, no brook murmured, no bird sang, and no sunbeam forced its way through the thick-leaved branches. The shoemaker never said a word; the heavy bread weighed his back down until the sweat streamed down his cross, gloomy face. The tailor, though, was quite merry; he jumped about, whistled on a leaf, or sang a song, and thought to himself, "God in heaven must be pleased to see me so happy."

This lasted two days; but on the third the forest showed no sign of ending, and the tailor had eaten all his bread, so his heart did after all sink a yard deeper. Still he did not lose courage, but relied on God and on his luck. On the third day he lay down in the evening hungry under a tree, and got up next morning hungry still. So the fourth day passed too; and when the shoemaker sat down on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner, the tailor could only look on.

If he begged for a little piece of bread, the other laughed mockingly and said, "You've always been so merry — now you can find out for once what it's like to be sad. The birds that sing too early in the morning are struck by the hawk in the evening." In short, he was pitiless.

But on the fifth morning the poor tailor could no longer stand up, and was hardly able to get out one word for weakness; his cheeks were white and his eyes red.

Then the shoemaker said to him, "I'll give you a bit of bread today; but in return I'll put out your right eye."

The unlucky tailor, who still wanted to save his life, could do it no other way. He wept once more with both eyes, and then held them out; and the shoemaker, who had a heart of stone, put out his right eye with a sharp knife.

The tailor remembered what his mother used to say to him when he had been eating secretly in the pantry: "Eat what you can, and suffer what you must."

When he had eaten his dearly bought bread he got on his legs again, forgot his misery and comforted himself with the thought that he could always see enough with one eye.

But on the sixth day hunger made itself felt again, and gnawed him almost to the heart. In the evening he collapsed by a tree, and on the seventh morning he could not raise himself for faintness, and death was close at hand.

Then the shoemaker said, "I'll show mercy and give you bread once more; but you shan't have it for nothing. I shall put out your other eye for it."

And now the tailor felt how thoughtless his life had been, and prayed to God for forgiveness, and said, "Do what you will; I'll bear what I must. But remember that our Lord God doesn't always look on without doing anything, and that an hour will come when the evil deed you've done to me, and which I never deserved of you, will be paid back. When times were good with me, I shared what I had with you. My trade is of the kind where every stitch has to be exactly like the last. If I no longer have my eyes and can sew no more, I must go begging. At least don't leave me here alone when I'm blind, or I shall die of hunger."

But the shoemaker, who had driven God out of his heart, took the knife and put out his left eye. Then he gave him a bit of bread to eat, held out a stick to him, and led him along behind him.

When the sun went down they came out of the forest, and in the open country in front of them stood the gallows. The shoemaker led the blind tailor over to it, and then left him there alone and went his way.

Weariness, pain and hunger made the wretched man fall asleep, and he slept the whole night through. When day dawned he woke, but did not know where he was lying. Two poor sinners were hanging on the gallows, and a crow sat on each of their heads.

Then one of the hanged men began to speak, and said, "Brother, are you awake?"

"Yes, I'm awake," answered the second.

"Then I'll tell you something," said the first. "The dew that has fallen down over us from the gallows tonight gives anybody who washes himself with it his eyes back. If blind people only knew that, how many would get their sight again who don't believe such a thing is possible!"

When the tailor heard that, he took his handkerchief and pressed it on the grass; and when it was wet with dew, he washed his empty eye sockets with it. Immediately what the man on the gallows had said came true, and a pair of healthy new eyes filled the sockets.

It was not long before the tailor saw the sun rise behind the mountains. On the plain in front of him lay the great royal city with its magnificent gates and its hundred towers, and the golden balls and crosses on the spires began to shine. He could make out every leaf on the trees, and see the birds flying past and the midges dancing in the air. He took a needle out of his pocket; and as he could thread it as well as he ever had, his heart danced with delight.

He threw himself on his knees and thanked God for the mercy he had shown him, and said his morning prayer. And he did not forget to pray as well for the poor sinners hanging there, swinging against each other in the wind like the pendulums of clocks. Then he took his bundle on his back and soon forgot the pain of heart he had suffered, and went on his way singing and whistling.

The first thing he met was a brown foal running loose about the fields. He caught it by the mane and wanted to spring onto it and ride into the town. But the foal begged to be let go.

"I'm still too young," it said. "Even a light tailor like you would break my back in two. Let me go until I've grown strong. A time may come when I can repay you for it."

"Off you go," said the tailor. "I can see you're still a giddy thing." And he gave it a touch of a switch across its back, whereupon it kicked up its hind legs for joy, leapt over hedges and ditches, and galloped away into the open country.

But the little tailor had eaten nothing since the day before. "The sun fills my eyes, to be sure," said he, "but the bread doesn't fill my mouth. The first thing that comes my way and is even half edible will have to suffer for it."

Just then a stork came stepping solemnly over the meadow towards him. "Halt, halt!" cried the tailor, and seized him by the leg. "I don't know whether you're good to eat or not, but my hunger doesn't leave me much choice. I must cut your head off and roast you."

"Don't do that," replied the stork. "I'm a sacred bird that brings people great good, and nobody does me any harm. Leave me my life, and I may do you a good turn some other way."

"Well, be off, Cousin Longlegs," said the tailor. The stork rose up, let its long legs hang down, and flew gently away.

"What's to be the end of this?" the tailor said to himself at last. "My hunger grows greater and greater and my stomach emptier and emptier. Whatever comes my way now is lost."

At that moment he saw a couple of young ducks on a pond come swimming towards him. "You come just at the right moment," said he — and caught hold of one of them and was about to wring its neck.

At this an old duck that was hidden among the reeds began to scream loudly, and swam up to him with her beak open, and begged him urgently to spare her dear children. "Can't you imagine," said she, "how your own mother would grieve if somebody wanted to carry you off and finish you?"

"Be quiet, now," said the good-natured tailor. "You shall keep your children" — and he put his prisoner back in the water.

When he turned round he was standing in front of an old tree that was partly hollow, and saw some wild bees flying in and out of it. "There I shall find the reward of my good deed straight away," said the tailor. "The honey will refresh me."

But the queen bee came out and threatened him, and said, "If you touch my people and destroy my nest, our stings shall pierce your skin like ten thousand red-hot needles. But if you'll leave us in peace and go your way, we'll do you a service for it another time."

The little tailor saw that here too there was nothing to be done. "Three dishes empty and nothing on the fourth is a poor dinner."

So he dragged himself with his starved-out stomach into the town; and as it was just striking twelve, everything was cooked and ready for him at the inn, and he could sit straight down to dinner.

When he had had enough he said, "Now I'll get to work." He went round the town, looked for a master, and soon found a good place. And as he had thoroughly learned his trade, it was not long before he became famous, and everybody wanted his new coat made by the little tailor, whose importance grew daily.

"I can go no further in skill," said he, "and yet things improve every day."

At last the King appointed him court tailor.

But see how things happen in this world! On the very same day his old comrade the shoemaker became court shoemaker. And when the shoemaker caught sight of the tailor and saw that he had two healthy eyes again, his conscience troubled him. "Before he takes his revenge on me," he thought, "I must dig a pit for him." But he who digs a pit for another falls into it himself.

In the evening, when work was over and it had grown dusk, he stole to the King and said, "My lord King, the tailor is an arrogant fellow, and he has boasted that he'll get back the gold crown that was lost in ancient times."

"That would please me very much," said the King; and he had the tailor brought before him next morning and ordered him to get the crown back, or leave the town for ever.

"Oho," thought the tailor, "a rogue gives more than he has got. If the surly King wants me to do what nobody can do, I won't wait till morning — I'll go out of the town this very day."

So he packed his bundle; but once he was outside the gate he could not help being sorry to give up his good fortune and turn his back on the town where everything had gone so well for him.

He came to the pond where he had made the acquaintance of the ducks; and at that very moment the old duck whose young ones he had spared was sitting there on the bank, preening herself with her beak. She recognised him at once, and asked why he was hanging his head so.

"You won't be surprised when you hear what's happened to me," replied the tailor, and told her his story.

"If that's all," said the duck, "we can help you. The crown fell into the water and is lying down there at the bottom; we'll soon bring it up again for you. Meanwhile, just spread your handkerchief out on the bank."

She dived down with her twelve young ones; and in five minutes she was up again, sitting with the crown resting on her wings, while the twelve young ones swam round about with their beaks under it, helping to carry it. They swam to the bank and laid the crown on the handkerchief.

Nobody could imagine how magnificent that crown was; when the sun shone on it, it gleamed like a hundred thousand rubies. The tailor tied his handkerchief together by its four corners and carried it to the King, who was full of joy, and put a gold chain round the tailor's neck.

When the shoemaker saw that one stroke had failed, he contrived a second, and went to the King and said, "My lord King, the tailor has become insolent again. He boasts that he'll make a copy in wax of the whole royal palace, with everything belonging to it, loose or fixed, inside and out."

The King sent for the tailor and ordered him to make a copy in wax of the whole royal palace, with everything belonging to it, movable or immovable, inside and out; and if he did not manage it, or if so much as a single nail in the wall were missing, he should be imprisoned underground for the rest of his life.

The tailor thought, "It gets worse and worse. Nobody can stand this." And he threw his bundle on his back and went out.

When he came to the hollow tree he sat down and hung his head. The bees came flying out, and the queen bee asked him whether he had a stiff neck, since he was holding his head so crookedly.

"Alas, no," answered the tailor. "Something quite different is weighing me down" — and he told her what the King had demanded of him.

The bees began to buzz and hum among themselves, and the queen bee said, "Just go home again; but come back tomorrow at this time and bring a large sheet with you, and then all will be well."

So he turned back; but the bees flew to the royal palace and straight in at the open windows, and crept round into every corner and inspected everything most carefully. Then they hurried back and modelled the palace in wax so quickly that anybody watching would have thought it was growing in front of his eyes.

By the evening it was all ready; and when the tailor came next morning, the whole splendid building was there, and not one nail in the wall or tile on the roof was missing; and it was delicate too, and white as snow, and it smelt as sweet as honey.

The tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and took it to the King, who could not admire it enough, and set it up in his largest hall, and in return presented the tailor with a large stone house.

The shoemaker, though, did not give up, but went to the King a third time and said, "My lord King, it has come to the tailor's ears that no water will spring up in the castle courtyard, and he has boasted that it shall rise up in the middle of the courtyard as high as a man and be as clear as crystal."

Then the King had the tailor brought before him and said, "If a stream of water doesn't rise in my courtyard by tomorrow, as you've promised, the executioner shall make you shorter by the head on that very spot."

The poor tailor did not take long to think about it, but hurried out to the gate; and because this time it was a matter of life and death for him, tears rolled down his face.

And as he was going out like that, full of sorrow, the foal he had once given its freedom to, and which had now become a beautiful chestnut horse, came leaping towards him.

"The time has come," it said to the tailor, "when I can repay you for your good deed. I know already what you need, but you shall soon have help. Get on my back — it can carry two such as you."

The tailor's courage came back to him. He jumped up at a single bound, and the horse went at full speed into the town and right up into the castle courtyard. It galloped round it three times as quick as lightning, and the third time it fell violently to the ground.

At that same instant there was a terrific clap of thunder; a lump of earth in the middle of the courtyard flew up into the air like a cannonball, and right over the castle; and directly after it a jet of water rose as high as a man on horseback, and the water was as pure as crystal, and the sunbeams began to dance on it.

When the King saw that, he got up in amazement and went and embraced the tailor in front of everybody.

But his good fortune did not last long. The King had daughters in plenty, one prettier than the next, but he had no son. So the malicious shoemaker took himself to the King for the fourth time, and said, "My lord King, the tailor hasn't given up his arrogance. Now he has boasted that if he liked, he could have a son brought to my lord King through the air."

The King had the tailor summoned, and said, "If you have a son brought to me within nine days, you shall have my eldest daughter for a wife."

"The reward is indeed great," thought the little tailor. "A man would gladly do something for that; but the cherries grow too high for me. If I climb for them, the branch will break under me and I shall fall."

He went home, sat himself down cross-legged on his work table and thought over what was to be done. "It can't be managed," he cried at last. "I'll go away. After all, I can't live in peace here."

He tied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate. When he got to the meadow he caught sight of his old friend the stork, walking up and down like a philosopher. Now and then he stood still, gave a frog his close consideration, and at length swallowed it down.

The stork came over and greeted him. "I see," he began, "that you've got your pack on your back. Why are you leaving the town?"

The tailor told him what the King had demanded of him, and how he could not do it, and lamented his misfortune.

"Don't let your hair go grey over that," said the stork. "I'll help you out of your difficulty. I've been carrying children in swaddling clothes into the town for a long while now, so for once in a way I can fetch a little prince out of the well. Go home and set your mind at rest. Nine days from now, go to the royal palace, and I'll come there."

The little tailor went home; and at the appointed time he was at the castle. It was not long before the stork came flying up and tapped at the window. The tailor opened it, and Cousin Longlegs came carefully in and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marble floor. And he had a baby in his beak, as lovely as an angel, that stretched out its little hands to the Queen. The stork laid it in her lap, and she caressed it and kissed it, and was beside herself with delight.

Before the stork flew away he took his travelling bag off his back and handed it over to the Queen. In it were little paper parcels of coloured sweets, and they were shared out among the little princesses. The eldest, though, got none of them — she got the merry tailor for a husband.

"It seems to me," said he, "just as if I'd won the highest prize of all. My mother was right after all: she always said that whoever trusts in God and has good luck can never fail."

The shoemaker had to make the shoes the little tailor danced in at the wedding feast, and after that he was ordered to leave the town for ever. The road to the forest led him past the gallows. Worn out with anger and rage and the heat of the day, he threw himself down. And when he had closed his eyes and was about to sleep, the two crows flew down from the heads of the hanged men and pecked his eyes out.

In his madness he ran off into the forest, and he must have died there of hunger, for nobody has ever seen him again or heard of him since.
