Hans the Hedgehog

There was once a countryman who had money and land in plenty; but rich as he was, one thing was still missing from his happiness: he had no children. Often, when he went into the town with the other farmers, they mocked him and asked why he had no children. At last he grew angry, and when he got home he said, "I will have a child, even if it's a hedgehog."

Then his wife had a child that was a hedgehog in the upper part of its body and a boy in the lower; and when she saw the child she was horrified, and said, "There, you see what ill luck you've brought on us."

Then the man said, "What can be done now? The boy must be christened — but we'll never get a godfather for him."

The woman said, "And we can't call him anything but Hans the Hedgehog."

When he was christened, the parson said, "He can't go into any ordinary bed because of his spikes." So a little straw was put behind the stove, and Hans the Hedgehog was laid on it. His mother could not nurse him, for he would have pricked her with his quills. So he lay there behind the stove for eight years; and his father grew tired of him and thought, "If only he would die!" But he did not die; he went on lying there.

Now it happened that there was a fair in the town, and the farmer was about to go to it, and asked his wife what he should bring her back.

"A little meat and a couple of white rolls that are wanted for the house," said she.

Then he asked the servant girl, and she wanted a pair of slippers and some stockings with clocks embroidered on them. And at last he said, "And what will you have, Hans my Hedgehog?"

"Dear father," he said, "do bring me bagpipes."

So when the father came home again, he gave his wife what he had bought her, meat and white rolls; and then he gave the maid the slippers and the stockings with clocks; and last of all he went behind the stove and gave Hans the Hedgehog his bagpipes.

And when Hans the Hedgehog had the bagpipes, he said, "Dear father, do go to the forge and have the cock shod, and then I'll ride away and never come back again."

At this his father was delighted at the thought of getting rid of him, and had the cock shod for him. And when it was done, Hans the Hedgehog got on it and rode away — but took pigs and donkeys with him, which he meant to keep in the forest.

When they got there he made the cock fly up to the top of a high tree with him, and there he sat for many a long year and watched his donkeys and his pigs until the herd was very large; and his father knew nothing about him. And as he sat in the tree he played his bagpipes, and made music that was very beautiful.

Once a King came travelling by who had lost his way, and heard the music. He was astonished at it, and sent his servant out to look all round and see where this music came from. The servant looked about, but saw nothing except a little animal sitting up aloft in the tree, which looked like a cock with a hedgehog on it, and which was making this music.

Then the King told the servant to ask why he was sitting there, and whether he knew the road that led to his kingdom. So Hans the Hedgehog came down out of the tree, and said he would show the way if the King would write out a bond and promise him whatever first met him in the royal courtyard when he reached home.

Then the King thought, "I can easily do that. Hans the Hedgehog understands nothing, and I can write what I like."

So the King took pen and ink and wrote something; and when he had done it, Hans the Hedgehog showed him the way, and he got safely home.

But his daughter, when she saw him from a distance, was so overjoyed that she ran to meet him and kissed him. Then he remembered Hans the Hedgehog, and told her what had happened: that he had been forced to promise whatever first met him when he got home to a very strange animal that sat on a cock as if it were a horse and made beautiful music — but that instead of writing that he should have what he wanted, he had written that he should not have it.

At this the princess was glad, and said he had done well, for she would never have gone away with the hedgehog.

Hans the Hedgehog, meanwhile, looked after his donkeys and pigs, and was always merry, and sat in the tree and played his bagpipes.

Now it happened that another King came journeying by with his attendants and his runners; and he too had lost his way, and did not know how to get home again, because the forest was so large. He too heard the beautiful music from a distance, and asked his runner what it could be, and told him to go and see.

Then the runner went under the tree and saw the cock sitting at the top of it and Hans the Hedgehog on the cock. The runner asked him what he was doing up there.

"I'm keeping my donkeys and my pigs. But what is it you want?"

The messenger said that they had lost their way and could not get back into their own kingdom, and asked whether he would not show them the way.

Then Hans the Hedgehog came down out of the tree with the cock, and told the old King that he would show him the way if he would give him for his own whatever first met him in front of his royal palace. The King said yes, and wrote out a promise to Hans the Hedgehog that he should have it.

That done, Hans rode on ahead of him on the cock and pointed out the way, and the King reached his kingdom again safely.

When he got to the courtyard there was great rejoicing. Now he had an only daughter who was very beautiful; she ran to meet him and threw her arms round his neck, delighted to have her old father back again. She asked him where in the world he had been so long.

So he told her how he had lost his way and had very nearly not come back at all; but that as he was travelling through a great forest, a creature half hedgehog and half man, sitting astride a cock in a high tree and making music, had shown him the way and helped him out — but that in return he had promised him whatever first met him in the royal courtyard, and that was herself, which made him unhappy now.

But at this she promised that, for love of her father, she would gladly go with this Hans if he came.

Hans the Hedgehog, meanwhile, took care of his pigs, and the pigs multiplied until there were so many of them that the whole forest was full. So Hans the Hedgehog decided not to live in the forest any longer, and sent word to his father to have every sty in the village emptied, for he was coming with such a great herd that anybody who wanted to could kill.

When his father heard that he was troubled, for he thought Hans the Hedgehog had died long ago. But Hans the Hedgehog seated himself on the cock and drove the pigs into the village before him, and ordered the slaughter to begin. And there was such a killing and a chopping as might have been heard two miles off.

After this Hans the Hedgehog said, "Father, let me have the cock shod once more at the forge, and then I'll ride away and never come back as long as I live."

So his father had the cock shod once more, and was pleased that Hans the Hedgehog would never come back again.

Hans the Hedgehog rode away to the first kingdom. There the King had commanded that anybody who came riding on a cock and carrying bagpipes should be shot at, cut down or stabbed by everyone, so that he should not get into the palace.

So when Hans the Hedgehog came riding up, they all pressed forward against him with their pikes; but he spurred the cock, and it flew up over the gate and in front of the King's window and settled there; and Hans cried that the King must give him what he had promised, or he would take both his life and his daughter's.

Then the King began to speak kindly to his daughter, and to beg her to go away with Hans in order to save her own life and her father's. So she dressed herself in white, and her father gave her a carriage with six horses and magnificent attendants, and gold and property with them. She seated herself in the carriage and put Hans the Hedgehog beside her, with the cock and the bagpipes; and then they took their leave and drove away, and the King thought he would never see her again.

But he was wrong in what he expected. When they were a short way out of the town, Hans the Hedgehog stripped her pretty clothes off her and pierced her with his hedgehog's skin until she bled all over. "That's the reward of your falseness," said he. "Go your way — I won't have you." And with that he chased her home again, and she was disgraced for the rest of her life.

Hans the Hedgehog, though, rode on further on the cock, with his bagpipes, to the lands of the second King, the one he had shown the way to. This King, however, had given orders that if anybody resembling Hans the Hedgehog should come, they were to present arms, give him safe conduct, cry long life to him, and lead him to the royal palace.

But when the King's daughter saw him she was terrified, for he looked altogether too strange. All the same she remembered that she could not change her mind, because she had given her promise to her father. So Hans the Hedgehog was made welcome by her and married to her, and had to go with her to the royal table; and she sat down beside him, and they ate and drank.

When evening came and they wanted to go to sleep, she was afraid of his quills; but he told her she need not be afraid, for no harm would come to her. And he told the old King to appoint four men to keep watch by the door of the room and light a great fire; and said that when he went into the room and was about to get into bed, he would creep out of his hedgehog's skin and leave it lying beside the bed, and the men were to run quickly and pick it up and throw it in the fire, and stay by it until it was burnt up.

When the clock struck eleven he went into the room, stripped off the hedgehog's skin and left it lying by the bed. Then the men came and snatched it up quickly and threw it in the fire; and when the fire had burnt it up, he was released, and lay there in bed in human shape — but he was coal-black, as if he had been burnt. The King sent for his physician, who washed him with precious salves and anointed him; and he became white, and was a handsome young man.

When the King's daughter saw that, she was glad; and next morning they got up joyfully and ate and drank, and then the marriage was properly celebrated, and Hans the Hedgehog received the kingdom from the old King.

When several years had gone by, he went with his wife to his father and said that he was his son. His father, though, declared that he had no son — he had had only one, and it had been born like a hedgehog, with spikes, and had gone out into the world. Then Hans made himself known, and the old father rejoiced and went with him to his kingdom.

	My tale is done,
	and away it has run
	to little August's house.

The Shroud

There was once a mother who had a little boy of seven years old, who was so handsome and so lovable that nobody could look at him without liking him; and she herself worshipped him above everything in the world.

Now it happened that he suddenly fell ill, and God took him to himself; and the mother could not be comforted for it, and wept both day and night.

But soon afterwards, when the child had been buried, it appeared at night in the places where it had sat and played while it was alive; and if the mother wept, it wept too, and when morning came it disappeared.

But as the mother would not stop crying, it came one night in the little white shroud it had been laid in its coffin in, with its wreath of flowers round its head, and stood at the foot of her bed and said, "Oh, mother, do stop crying, or I shall never fall asleep in my coffin; my shroud won't dry, because of all your tears falling on it."

The mother was frightened when she heard that, and wept no more.

The next night the child came again, holding a little light in its hand, and said, "Look, mother, my shroud is nearly dry, and I can rest in my grave."

Then the mother gave her sorrow into God's keeping and bore it quietly and patiently; and the child came no more, but slept in its little bed beneath the earth.

The Jew Among Thorns

[Editor's note: this tale, and two others in this collection — "The Good Bargain" and "The Bright Sun Brings It to Light" — turn on hostile caricatures of Jews. Others turn on skin colour, most sharply "The White Bride and the Black One", where blackness is a punishment God inflicts on the rude and whiteness is the reward of the kind. This edition prints all two hundred and eleven tales the Grimms gathered, and prints them whole: nothing has been cut and nothing softened. The note is set once, here, to say what the edition has done and why — an edition that quietly dropped these tales would misrepresent both the book and the century that made it. It makes no further comment on them. They stand as the Grimms printed them.]

There was once a rich man who had a servant who served him diligently and honestly. He was the first out of bed every morning and the last to go to rest at night; and whenever there was a hard job to be done that nobody else cared to take on, he was always the first to set about it. What is more, he never complained, but was contented with everything, and always cheerful.

When a year was up, his master gave him no wages, for he said to himself, "That's the cleverest way; I shall save something, and he won't go away, but will stay quietly in my service."

The servant said nothing, but did his work the second year as he had the first; and when at the end of that he got no wages either, he made the best of it and still stayed on.

When the third year had gone by as well, the master thought it over, put his hand in his pocket, but pulled nothing out. Then at last the servant said, "Master, I've served you honestly for three years. Be so good as to give me what I'm owed, for I want to leave and look about me a little more in the world."

"Yes, my good fellow," answered the old miser, "you've served me industriously, and so you shall be cheerfully rewarded." And he put his hand in his pocket, but counted out only three farthings, saying, "There — a farthing for each year. That's large and liberal pay, such as you'd have got from few masters."

The honest servant, who understood little about money, put his fortune in his pocket and thought, "Ah, now that my purse is full, why should I trouble and plague myself any longer with hard work?"

So on he went, up hill and down dale, singing and jumping to his heart's content.

Now it happened that as he was going past a thicket, a little man stepped out and called to him, "Where away, merry brother? I can see you don't carry many cares."

"Why should I be sad?" answered the servant. "I have plenty. Three years' wages are jingling in my pocket."

"How much is your treasure?" the dwarf asked him.

"How much? Three farthings sterling, all told."

"Look here," said the dwarf, "I'm a poor needy man. Give me your three farthings. I can work no longer, but you're young and can easily earn your bread."

And as the servant had a good heart and felt sorry for the old man, he gave him the three farthings, saying, "Take them in heaven's name; I shall be none the worse for it."

Then the little man said, "As I can see you have a good heart, I grant you three wishes — one for each farthing; and they shall all be fulfilled."

"Aha," said the servant, "you're one of those who can work wonders. Well, then, if that's how it is, I wish, first, for a gun that will hit everything I aim at; secondly, for a fiddle that will make everybody who hears me play it dance; and thirdly, that if I ask a favour of anybody, he won't be able to refuse it."

"All that you shall have," said the dwarf; and he put his hand into the bush — and only think, there lay a fiddle and a gun, all ready, just as if they had been ordered. He gave them to the servant, and then said to him, "Whatever you may ask at any time, no man in the world shall be able to refuse you."

"Heart alive! What more could anybody want?" said the servant to himself, and went merrily on.

Soon afterwards he met a Jew with a long goat's beard, who was standing listening to the song of a bird sitting at the top of a tree. "Good heavens," he was exclaiming, "that such a small creature should have such a fearfully loud voice! If only it were mine! If only somebody would sprinkle salt on its tail!"

"If that's all," said the servant, "the bird shall soon be down here." And taking aim, he pulled the trigger, and down fell the bird into the thorn bushes. "Go on, you rogue," he said to the Jew, "and fetch the bird out for yourself."

"Oh," said the Jew, "leave out the rogue, my master, and I'll do it at once. I'll get the bird out for myself, since you really have hit it." Then he lay down on the ground and began to crawl into the thicket.

When he was well in among the thorns, the good servant's humour so tempted him that he took up his fiddle and began to play. In a moment the Jew's legs began to move and to jump into the air; and the more the servant fiddled, the better the dance went. But the thorns tore his shabby coat off him, combed his beard, and pricked and plucked him all over his body.

"Oh dear," cried the Jew, "what do I want with your fiddling? Leave the fiddle alone, master; I don't want to dance."

But the servant did not listen to him, and thought, "You've fleeced people often enough — now the thorn bushes shall do the same to you." And he began to play again, so that the Jew had to jump higher than ever, and scraps of his coat were left hanging on the thorns.

"Oh, woe is me!" cried the Jew. "I'll give the gentleman whatever he asks, if only he'll leave off fiddling — a purse full of gold."

"If you're so liberal," said the servant, "I'll stop my music. But this I must say to your credit: you dance to it so well that it's quite an art." And having taken the purse, he went his way.

The Jew stood still and watched the servant quietly until he was far off and out of sight, and then he screamed out with all his might, "You miserable musician, you beer-house fiddler! Wait till I catch you alone — I'll hunt you till the soles of your shoes fall off! You ragamuffin! Just put five farthings in your mouth, and then you might be worth three halfpence!" — and went on abusing him as fast as he could speak.

As soon as he had refreshed himself a little this way and got his breath back, he ran into the town to the justice.

"My lord judge," he said, "I've come to make a complaint. See how a rascal has robbed and ill-treated me on the public highway! A stone on the ground might pity me. My clothes all torn, my body pricked and scratched, my little all gone along with my purse — good ducats, every piece better than the last. For God's sake let the man be thrown into prison!"

"Was it a soldier," said the judge, "who cut you about like that with his sabre?"

"Nothing of the sort," said the Jew. "It was no sword he had, but a gun hanging on his back and a fiddle at his neck. The wretch can easily be known."

So the judge sent his people out after the man, and they found the good servant, who had been going along quite slowly; and they found the purse with the money on him too.

As soon as he was brought before the judge he said, "I never touched the Jew or took his money. He gave it to me of his own free will, so that I'd leave off fiddling, because he couldn't bear my music."

"Heaven defend us!" cried the Jew. "His lies are as thick as flies on a wall."

But the judge did not believe his tale either, and said, "This is a poor defence. No Jew would do that." And because he had committed robbery on the public highway, he sentenced the good servant to be hanged.

As he was being led away, the Jew screamed after him again, "You vagabond! You dog of a fiddler! Now you're going to get your well-earned reward!"

The servant walked quietly up the ladder with the hangman; but on the last step he turned round and said to the judge, "Grant me just one request before I die."

"Yes — as long as you don't ask for your life," said the judge.

"I'm not asking for my life," answered the servant. "But as a last favour, let me play once more on my fiddle."

The Jew raised a great cry of "Murder! Murder! For goodness' sake don't allow it! Don't allow it!"

But the judge said, "Why shouldn't I let him have this short pleasure? It's been granted to him and he shall have it." And in any case he could not have refused, because of the gift that had been given to the servant.

Then the Jew cried, "Oh, woe is me! Tie me, tie me fast!"

Meanwhile the good servant took his fiddle from his neck and made ready. As he gave the first scrape, they all began to quiver and shake — the judge, his clerk, the hangman and his men; and the cord fell out of the hand of the one who was going to tie the Jew fast. At the second scrape they all raised their legs, and the hangman let go of the good servant and got himself ready to dance. At the third scrape they all leapt up and began to dance, the judge and the Jew being the best jumpers of them all.

Soon everybody who had gathered in the marketplace out of curiosity was dancing with them, old and young, fat and thin, one with another. The dogs that had run over got up on their hind legs and capered about too; and the longer he played, the higher the dancers sprang, until they knocked their heads together and began to shriek terribly.

At length the judge cried, quite out of breath, "I'll give you your life, if you'll only stop fiddling."

The good servant took pity on him, and took his fiddle and hung it round his neck again, and came down the ladder. Then he went up to the Jew, who was lying on the ground gasping for breath, and said, "You rascal, now confess where you got that money, or I'll take my fiddle and start playing again."

"I stole it, I stole it!" cried he. "But you've honestly earned it."

So the judge had the Jew taken to the gallows and hanged as a thief.
