The Two Kings’ Children

There was once a King who had a little boy about whom it had been foretold that he would be killed by a stag when he was sixteen years old. And when he had reached that age, the huntsmen went hunting with him one day.

In the forest the King's son was separated from the others, and all at once he saw a great stag that he wanted to shoot but could not hit. At length he chased the stag so far that they were right out of the forest; and then suddenly a great tall man was standing there instead of the stag, and said, "It's a good thing I've got you. I've already worn out six pairs of glass skates running after you, and never managed to catch you."

Then he took the King's son with him and dragged him through a great lake to a great palace, and then he had to sit down at table with him and eat something.

When they had eaten together, the King said, "I have three daughters. You must keep watch over the eldest for one night, from nine in the evening till six in the morning; and every time the clock strikes I'll come myself and call. If you give me no answer, tomorrow morning you shall be put to death; but if you always give me an answer, you shall have her for your wife."

When the young people went to the bedroom, there stood a stone image of St. Christopher, and the King's daughter said to it, "My father will come at nine o'clock, and every hour until it strikes three. When he calls, answer him instead of the King's son."

Then the stone image of St. Christopher nodded its head quite quickly, and then more and more slowly, until at last it stood still.

Next morning the King said to him, "You've done the business well; but I can't give my daughter away. Now you must watch a night by my second daughter, and then I'll consider with myself whether you can have my eldest daughter for a wife. But I shall come every hour myself; and when I call you, answer me — and if I call you and you don't reply, your blood shall flow."

Then they both went into the bedroom, and there stood a still larger stone image of St. Christopher, and the King's daughter said to it, "If my father calls, you answer him."

Then the great stone image of St. Christopher again nodded its head quite quickly, and then more and more slowly, until at last it stood still again. And the King's son lay down on the threshold, put his hand under his head and slept.

Next morning the King said to him, "You've done the business really well; but I can't give my daughter away. Now you must watch a night by the youngest princess, and then I'll consider with myself whether you can have my second daughter for a wife. But I shall come every hour myself; and when I call you, answer me — and if I call you and you don't answer, your blood shall flow for me."

So they went to the bedroom together once more, and there was a much greater and much taller image of St. Christopher than either of the first two. The King's daughter said to it, "When my father calls, you answer."

Then the great tall stone image of St. Christopher nodded its head for a good half hour, until at length the head stood still again. And the King's son lay down on the threshold of the door and slept.

Next morning the King said, "You've watched well indeed; but I can't give you my daughter yet. I have a great forest. If you cut it down for me between six o'clock this morning and six tonight, I'll think about it."

Then he gave him a glass axe, a glass wedge and a glass mallet. When he got into the wood he began cutting at once, but the axe broke in two. Then he took the wedge and struck it once with the mallet, and it crumbled as short and as small as sand.

Then he was greatly troubled and believed he would have to die, and sat down and wept.

Now when it was noon the King said, "One of you girls must take him something to eat."

"No," said the two eldest. "We won't take it to him. The one he watched by last can take him something."

So the youngest had to go and take him something to eat. When she got into the forest she asked him how he was getting on.

"Oh," said he, "I'm getting on very badly."

Then she said he was to come and just eat a little.

"No," said he, "I can't do that. I shall have to die anyway, so I'll eat no more."

But she spoke so kindly to him and begged him just to try, that he came and ate something.

When he had eaten, she said, "I'll comb your hair a while, and then you'll feel happier."

So she combed his hair, and he grew drowsy and fell asleep. And then she took her handkerchief and made a knot in it and struck it three times on the earth, and said, "Earth-workers, come out."

In a moment numbers of little earth-men came out, and asked what the King's daughter commanded. Then she said, "In three hours' time the great forest must be cut down, and the whole of the wood laid in heaps."

So the little earth-men went about and gathered all their kindred together to help them with the work. They began at once; and when the three hours were over it was all done, and they came back to the King's daughter and told her so.

Then she took her white handkerchief again and said, "Earth-workers, go home." At which they all disappeared.

When the King's son woke he was delighted, and she said, "Come home when it's struck six o'clock." He did as she told him; and then the King asked, "Have you done away with the forest?"

"Yes," said the King's son.

When they were sitting at table, the King said, "I can't give you my daughter for a wife yet. You must do something more for her sake."

So he asked what it was to be, then.

"I have a great fishpond," said the King. "You must go to it tomorrow morning and clear all the mud out of it until it's as bright as a mirror, and fill it with every kind of fish."

Next morning the King gave him a glass shovel and said, "The fishpond must be done by six o'clock."

So he went off; and when he came to the fishpond he stuck his shovel into the mud and it broke in two; then he stuck his hoe into the mud, and broke that as well. Then he was greatly troubled.

At noon the youngest daughter brought him something to eat, and asked him how he was getting on. So the King's son said that everything was going very badly for him and he would certainly lose his head. "My tools have broken to pieces again."

"Oh," said she, "just come and eat something, and then you'll be in a different frame of mind."

"No," said he, "I can't eat. I'm far too unhappy for that."

But she gave him so many good words that at last he came and ate something. Then she combed his hair again and he fell asleep; and once more she took her handkerchief and tied a knot in it and struck the ground three times with the knot, and said, "Earth-workers, come out."

In a moment a great many little earth-men came and asked what she wanted; and she told them that in three hours' time the fishpond must be entirely cleaned out, and so clear that people could see themselves reflected in it, and every kind of fish must be in it.

The little earth-men went away and called all their kindred to help them, and in two hours it was done. Then they came back to her and said, "We've done as you commanded."

The King's daughter took the handkerchief and struck the ground three times with it once more, and said, "Earth-workers, go home again." Then they all went away.

When the King's son woke, the fishpond was finished. Then the King's daughter went away too, telling him that he was to come to the house at six. When he got to the house the King asked, "Have you got the fishpond done?"

"Yes," said the King's son. That was very good.

When they were sitting at table again the King said, "You've certainly done the fishpond; but I can't give you my daughter yet. You must just do one more thing."

"What's that, then?" asked the King's son.

The King said he had a great mountain with nothing on it but briars, which must all be cut down; and at the top of it the young man must build a great castle, as strong as anybody could imagine, and all the furniture and fittings belonging to a castle must be inside it.

And when he got up next morning, the King gave him a glass axe and a glass gimlet, and he was to have it all done by six o'clock.

As he was cutting down the first briar with the axe it snapped off short, and into pieces so small that they flew all round about; and he could not use the gimlet either. Then he was quite miserable, and waited for his dearest to see whether she would not come and help him in his need.

At midday she came and brought him something to eat. He went to meet her and told her everything, and ate something, and let her comb his hair, and fell asleep.

Then once more she took the knot and struck the earth with it and said, "Earth-workers, come out!" And once again numbers of earth-men came and asked what she wanted.

Then she said, "Within three hours the whole of the briars must be cut down, and a castle must be built on the top of the mountain, as strong as anybody could imagine, and all the furniture that belongs to a castle must be inside it."

They went away and called their kindred to help them; and when the time came it was all ready. Then they came to the King's daughter and told her so; and the King's daughter took her handkerchief and struck the earth three times with it and said, "Earth-workers, go home" — at which they all disappeared.

So when the King's son woke and saw everything done, he was as happy as a bird in the air.

When it had struck six they went home together. Then the King said, "Is the castle ready?"

"Yes," said the King's son.

When they sat down at table the King said, "I can't give my youngest daughter away until the two eldest are married."

Then the King's son and the King's daughter were quite dismayed, and the King's son had no idea what to do. But he went by night to the King's daughter and ran away with her.

When they had got a little distance off, the King's daughter looked round and saw her father behind them. "Oh," said she, "what are we to do? My father is behind us and will take us back with him. I'll change you at once into a briar and myself into a rose, and I'll shelter in the middle of the bush."

When her father reached the place, there stood a briar with one rose on it; and he was about to pick the rose when a thorn came and pricked his finger, so that he had to go home again.

His wife asked why he had not brought their daughter back with him. So he said he had nearly caught up with her, but that all at once he had lost sight of her, and a briar with one rose on it was growing on the spot.

Then the Queen said, "If you'd only picked the rose, the briar would have had to come too."

So he went back again to fetch the rose; but meanwhile the two of them were already far out over the plain, and the King ran after them.

Then the daughter looked round once more and saw her father coming, and said, "Oh, what shall we do now? I'll change you this instant into a church and myself into a priest, and I'll stand up in the pulpit and preach."

When the King got to the place, there stood a church, and in the pulpit was a priest preaching. So he listened to the sermon and then went home again.

Then the Queen asked why he had not brought their daughter with him, and he said, "No — I ran after her a long time; and just as I thought I should soon overtake her, a church was standing there and a priest was in the pulpit preaching."

"You should just have brought the priest," said his wife, "and then the church would soon have come. It's no use sending you. I must go there myself."

When she had walked for a while and could see the two of them in the distance, the King's daughter looked round and saw her mother coming, and said, "Now we're undone, for my mother is coming herself. I'll change you this instant into a fishpond and myself into a fish."

When her mother came to the place, there was a large fishpond, and in the middle of it a fish was leaping about and peeping out of the water, quite merrily. She tried to catch the fish, but she could not. Then she was very angry, and drank up the whole pond in order to catch the fish; but it made her so ill that she had to be sick, and she brought the whole pond up again.

Then she cried, "I can see very well that nothing can be done now" — and said that they might come back to her.

So the King's daughter went back; and the Queen gave her daughter three walnuts and said, "With these you can help yourself when you're in your greatest need."

So the young people went away together once more. And when they had walked a good ten miles, they came to the castle the King's son had come from, and close beside it was a village.

When they reached it, the King's son said, "Stay here, my dearest. I'll just go up to the castle, and then I'll come with a carriage and attendants to fetch you."

When he got to the castle they were all overjoyed to have the King's son back again; and he told them that he had a bride who was in the village now, and they must go with the carriage to fetch her. So they harnessed the horses at once, and a great many attendants took their places outside the carriage.

But as the King's son was about to get in, his mother gave him a kiss — and he forgot everything that had happened, and what he was about to do as well. At this his mother ordered the horses to be taken out of the carriage again, and everybody went back into the house.

But the girl sat in the village and watched and watched, and thought he would come and fetch her; and nobody came. Then the King's daughter took service at the mill belonging to the castle, and had to sit by the pond every afternoon and clean the tubs.

And one day the Queen came down on foot from the castle and went walking by the pond, and saw the well-grown girl sitting there, and said, "What a fine strong girl that is! She pleases me well." Then she and everybody with her looked at the girl, but nobody knew her.

So a long time went by, and the girl served the miller honourably and faithfully.

Meanwhile the Queen had found a wife for her son, who came from a quite distant part of the world. When the bride arrived, they were to be married at once; and a great many people came hurrying together, all of whom wanted to see everything.

Then the girl asked the miller if he would be so good as to give her leave to go too. So the miller said, "Yes, do go."

When she was about to go she opened one of the three walnuts, and a beautiful dress lay inside it. She put it on, and went into the church and stood by the altar.

Presently the bride and bridegroom came and sat down in front of the altar; and just as the priest was about to bless them, the bride glanced half round and saw the girl standing there. Then she stood up again and said she would not be given away until she had as beautiful a dress as that lady's.

So they went back to the house again and sent to ask the lady whether she would sell that dress. No, she would not sell it — but the bride might perhaps earn it. Then the bride asked how she was to do that. And the girl said that if she might sleep one night outside the King's son's door, the bride might have what she wanted. So the bride said yes, she was willing to do that.

But the servants were ordered to give the King's son a sleeping draught; and then the girl lay down on the threshold and lamented all night long. She had had the forest cut down for him; she had had the fishpond cleaned out for him; she had had the castle built for him; she had changed him into a briar, and then into a church, and at last into a fishpond — and yet he had forgotten her so quickly.

The King's son did not hear one word of it; but the servants had woken up and had listened to it, and did not know what it could mean.

Next morning, when they were all up, the bride put on the dress and went off to the church with the bridegroom. Meanwhile the girl opened the second walnut, and a still more beautiful dress was inside it. She put it on, and went and stood by the altar in the church, and everything happened as it had the time before.

And again the girl lay all night on the threshold leading to the King's son's room, and the servant was once more to give him a sleeping draught. The servant, though, went to him and gave him something to keep him awake; and then the King's son went to bed, and the miller's girl lamented as before on the threshold of the door and told of everything she had done.

The King's son heard it all, and was sorely troubled, and everything that was past came back to him. Then he wanted to go to her, but his mother had locked the door.

Next morning, though, he went straight to his beloved and told her everything that had happened to him, and begged her not to be angry with him for having forgotten her.

Then the King's daughter opened the third walnut, and inside it was a still more magnificent dress. She put it on and went with her bridegroom to church; and crowds of children came and gave them flowers and offered them gay ribbons to tie round their feet; and they were blessed by the priest and had a merry wedding.

But the false mother and the bride had to go away.

And the mouth of the person who told all this last is still warm.
