The Cunning Little Tailor

There was once a princess who was extremely proud. If a suitor came, she set him some riddle to guess; and if he could not find it out, he was sent contemptuously away. She had it made known, too, that whoever solved her riddle should marry her, whoever he might be.

At length three tailors fell in with each other. The two eldest thought that they had brought off so many clever bits of work successfully that they could not fail to succeed at this as well; the third was a useless little vagabond who did not even know his trade, but thought he must have some luck coming in this venture — for where else was it to come from?

Then the other two said to him, "Just stay at home. You won't get far with your little bit of understanding."

But the little tailor would not let himself be discouraged, and said he had set his mind to work on this for once, and he would manage well enough; and off he went as if the whole world belonged to him.

All three of them announced themselves to the princess, and said she was to set them her riddle, and that the right men had come now, with understandings so fine that they could be threaded through a needle.

Then the princess said, "I have two kinds of hair on my head. What colour are they?"

"If that's all," said the first, "they must be black and white, like the cloth they call pepper and salt."

The princess said, "Wrongly guessed. Let the second answer."

Then the second said, "If they're not black and white, then they're brown and red, like my father's best coat."

"Wrongly guessed," said the princess. "Let the third give the answer, for I can see very well that he knows it for certain."

Then the little tailor stepped boldly forward and said, "The princess has one silver hair and one gold hair on her head, and those are the two different colours."

When the princess heard that she turned pale and nearly fell down with terror, for the little tailor had guessed her riddle, and she had firmly believed that no man on earth could find it out.

When her courage came back she said, "You haven't won me yet by that. There's still something else you must do. Down in the stable is a bear, and you shall spend the night with it; and when I get up in the morning, if you're still alive, you shall marry me."

She expected to be rid of the tailor this way, for the bear had never yet left anybody alive who had fallen into his clutches.

The little tailor did not let himself be frightened off, but was quite delighted, and said, "Boldly ventured is half won."

So when evening came, our little tailor was taken down to the bear. The bear was about to go for the little fellow at once and give him a hearty welcome with his paws.

"Gently, gently," said the little tailor. "I'll soon quiet you down." And quite calmly, as if he had not a care in the world, he took some nuts out of his pocket, cracked them and ate the kernels.

When the bear saw that, he was seized with a longing to have some nuts as well. The tailor felt in his pockets and handed him a handful; but they were not nuts, they were pebbles. The bear put them in his mouth, but could get nothing out of them, bite as he would.

"Eh," he thought, "what a stupid blockhead I am! I can't even crack a nut." And then he said to the tailor, "Here, crack me the nuts."

"There, see what a stupid fellow you are," said the little tailor, "to have such a great mouth and not be able to crack a little nut!" And he took the pebble and nimbly put a nut in his mouth in its place — and crack, it was in two.

"I must try the thing again," said the bear. "When I watch you doing it, I think I ought to be able to do it too."

So the tailor gave him another pebble, and the bear tried and tried to bite into it with all the strength in his body. But nobody will suppose that he managed it.

When that was over, the tailor took a violin out from under his coat and played himself a tune on it. When the bear heard the music he could not help beginning to dance; and when he had danced a while the thing pleased him so much that he said to the little tailor, "Listen — is a fiddle heavy?"

"Light enough for a child. Look: with my left hand I lay my fingers on it, and with my right I stroke it with the bow, and then it goes merrily, hop sa sa vivallalera!"

"So," said the bear. "Fiddling is a thing I should like to understand too, so that I could dance whenever I felt like it. What do you say to that? Will you give me lessons?"

"With all my heart," said the tailor, "if you have a talent for it. But just let me see your claws — they're terribly long. I must cut your nails a little."

So a vice was brought, and the bear put his claws in it, and the little tailor screwed it up tight and said, "Now wait until I come with the scissors" — and he let the bear growl as much as he liked, and lay down in the corner on a bundle of straw and fell asleep.

When the princess heard the bear growling so fiercely in the night, she believed nothing else than that he was growling for joy, and had made an end of the tailor. In the morning she got up carefree and happy; but when she peeped into the stable, there stood the tailor in front of her looking cheerful, and as healthy as a fish in water.

Now she could not say another word against the wedding, because she had given her promise in front of everybody; and the King ordered a carriage to be brought for her to drive to church in with the tailor, and there she was to be married.

When they had got into the carriage, the two other tailors, who had false hearts and envied him his good luck, went into the stable and unscrewed the bear again. The bear ran after the carriage in a great fury. The princess heard him snorting and growling; she was terrified, and cried, "Ah, the bear is behind us and wants to get you!"

The tailor was quick. He stood on his head, stuck his legs out of the window and cried, "Do you see this vice? If you don't be off, you'll be put in it again."

When the bear saw that, he turned round and ran away. The tailor drove quietly on to church; and the princess was married to him at once, and he lived with her as happy as a lark.

Whoever doesn't believe this must pay a thaler.

The Bright Sun Brings It to Light

A tailor's apprentice was travelling about the world looking for work; and at one time he could find none, and his poverty was so great that he had not a farthing to live on.

Presently he met a Jew on the road; and as he thought he would have a great deal of money on him, the tailor thrust God out of his heart, fell on the Jew, and said, "Give me your money, or I'll strike you dead."

Then the Jew said, "Grant me my life; I have no money, only eight farthings."

But the tailor said, "You have money, and it shall be produced" — and used violence and beat him until he was near death. And when the Jew was dying, the last words he said were, "The bright sun will bring it to light." And with that he died.

The tailor's apprentice felt in his pockets and searched for money, but he found nothing except eight farthings, exactly as the Jew had said. Then he picked him up and carried him behind a clump of trees, and went on to look for work.

After he had travelled about a long while he got work in a town, with a master who had a pretty daughter, whom he fell in love with and married; and he lived in good and happy wedlock.

After a long time, when he and his wife had two children, the wife's father and mother died, and the young people kept house alone.

One morning, when the husband was sitting on the table in front of the window, his wife brought him his coffee; and when he had poured it out into the saucer and was just about to drink, the sun shone on it, and the reflection gleamed to and fro on the wall above and made circles on it.

Then the tailor looked up and said, "Yes — it would very much like to bring it to light, and it can't."

His wife said, "Oh, my dear husband, and what's that, then? What do you mean by it?"

He answered, "I mustn't tell you."

But she said, "If you love me, you must tell me" — and used her most affectionate words, and said that nobody should ever know it, and gave him no rest.

Then he told her how, years ago, when he was travelling about looking for work and was quite worn out and penniless, he had killed a Jew; and that in his last agonies the Jew had spoken the words, "The bright sun will bring it to light." And now the sun had wanted to bring it to light, and had gleamed and made circles on the wall, and had not been able to do it.

After this he charged her again, most particularly, never to tell it, or he would lose his life; and she did promise.

But when he had sat down to work again, she went to her closest friend and confided the story to her — but she was never to repeat it to any living soul. And within two days the whole town knew it, and the tailor was brought to trial and condemned.

And so, after all, the bright sun did bring it to light.

The Blue Light

There was once a soldier who had served the King faithfully for many years; but when the war came to an end he could serve no longer, because of the many wounds he had received.

The King said to him, "You may go home. I don't need you any more, and you won't get any more money; for only the man who does me service gets wages from me."

So the soldier did not know how to earn a living, and went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the evening he came into a forest.

When darkness came on he saw a light, and went towards it, and came to a house where a witch lived. "Do give me a night's lodging and a little to eat and drink," he said to her, "or I shall starve."

"Oho," she answered, "who gives anything to a runaway soldier? Still, I'll be merciful and take you in — if you'll do what I want."

"What do you want?" said the soldier.

"That you dig all round my garden for me tomorrow."

The soldier agreed, and next day laboured with all his strength, but could not finish it by evening.

"I can see well enough," said the witch, "that you can do no more today. But I'll keep you another night; and in payment you must chop me a load of wood tomorrow, and chop it small."

The soldier spent the whole day doing it; and in the evening the witch proposed that he should stay one more night.

"Tomorrow you shall do me only a very trifling piece of work. Behind my house there's an old dry well, and my light has fallen into it; it burns blue and never goes out, and you shall bring it up again for me."

Next day the old woman took him to the well and let him down in a basket. He found the blue light and signalled to her to draw him up again. She did draw him up; but when he came near the edge she stretched down her hand and tried to take the blue light away from him.

"No," said he, seeing her evil intention. "I won't give you the light until I'm standing with both feet on the ground."

The witch flew into a rage, let him down into the well again and went away.

The poor soldier fell without hurting himself on the damp ground, and the blue light went on burning — but what use was that to him? He saw very well that he could not escape death. He sat there for a while, very sorrowful; and then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, still half full.

"This shall be my last pleasure," he thought — and pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke.

When the smoke had circled about the cavern, a little black dwarf suddenly stood in front of him and said, "Lord, what are your commands?"

"What commands should I have to give you?" replied the soldier, quite astonished.

"I must do everything you tell me," said the little man.

"Good," said the soldier. "Then in the first place, help me out of this well."

The little man took him by the hand and led him through an underground passage — but he did not forget to take the blue light with him. On the way the dwarf showed him the treasures the witch had gathered and hidden there, and the soldier took as much gold as he could carry.

When he was up above, he said to the little man, "Now go and tie up the old witch and carry her before the judge."

In a short time she came riding by with frightful cries, as swift as the wind, on a wild tomcat; and it was not long after that before the little man reappeared.

"It's all done," said he. "The witch is hanging on the gallows already. What further commands has my lord?"

"For the moment, none," answered the soldier. "You can go home; only be at hand at once if I call you."

"Nothing more is needed than that you light your pipe at the blue light, and I'll appear before you at once."

And with that he vanished from his sight.

The soldier went back to the town he had come from. He went to the best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then told the landlord to furnish him a room as handsomely as possible. When it was ready and the soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the little black man and said, "I served the King faithfully, and he dismissed me and left me to go hungry; and now I mean to take my revenge."

"What am I to do?" asked the little man.

"Late at night, when the King's daughter is in bed, bring her here in her sleep. She shall do servant's work for me."

The little man said, "That's an easy thing for me to do, but a very dangerous thing for you; for if it's discovered, it will go badly with you."

When twelve o'clock had struck, the door sprang open and the little man carried the princess in.

"Aha! Are you there?" cried the soldier. "Get to your work at once! Fetch the broom and sweep the room."

When she had done that, he ordered her to come to his chair; and then he stretched out his feet and said, "Pull off my boots for me" — and then he threw them in her face and made her pick them up again and clean them and polish them. And she did everything he told her, without resistance, silently, with her eyes half shut.

When the first cock crowed, the little man carried her back to the royal palace and laid her in her bed.

Next morning, when the princess got up, she went to her father and told him that she had had a very strange dream. "I was carried through the streets as fast as lightning," said she, "and taken into a soldier's room, and I had to wait on him like a servant, and sweep his room and clean his boots and do all kinds of menial work. It was only a dream, and yet I'm just as tired as if I'd really done it all."

"The dream may have been true," said the King. "I'll give you a piece of advice. Fill your pocket full of peas and make a small hole in it; and then if you're carried away again, they'll fall out and leave a trail in the streets."

But unseen by the King, the little man was standing beside him as he said it, and heard everything. And at night, when the sleeping princess was carried through the streets again, some peas certainly did fall out of her pocket — but they made no trail, for the crafty little man had scattered peas in every street in the town just beforehand. And again the princess was made to do servant's work until cockcrow.

Next morning the King sent his people out to look for the trail; but it was all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting picking up peas and saying, "It must have rained peas last night."

"We must think of something else," said the King. "Keep your shoes on when you go to bed; and before you come back from the place they take you to, hide one of them there. I'll soon manage to find it."

The black dwarf heard this plan; and at night, when the soldier again ordered him to bring the princess, he told him about it, and said that he knew of no way to counter this stratagem, and that if the shoe were found in the soldier's house it would go badly with him.

"Do what I tell you," replied the soldier. And so this third night the princess had to work like a servant again; but before she went away she hid her shoe under the bed.

Next morning the King had the whole town searched for his daughter's shoe. It was found at the soldier's; and the soldier himself, who had gone outside the gate at the dwarf's urging, was soon brought back and thrown into prison. In his flight he had forgotten the most valuable things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in his pocket.

And now, loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of his cell when he happened to see one of his old comrades going by. The soldier tapped on the pane; and when the man came up, he said to him, "Be so kind as to fetch me the little bundle I've left lying at the inn, and I'll give you a ducat for it."

His comrade ran there and brought him what he wanted. And as soon as the soldier was alone again he lit his pipe and summoned the black dwarf.

"Have no fear," said the dwarf to his master. "Go wherever they take you and let them do what they will — only take the blue light with you."

Next day the soldier was tried; and although he had done nothing wicked, the judge condemned him to death. When he was led out to die, he begged one last favour of the King.

"What is it?" asked the King.

"That I may smoke one more pipe on the way."

"You may smoke three," answered the King, "but don't imagine that I'll spare your life."

Then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lit it at the blue light; and as soon as a few wreaths of smoke had risen, the little man was there with a small cudgel in his hand, and said, "What does my lord command?"

"Strike that false judge to the ground, and his constable — and don't spare the King, who has treated me so badly."

Then the little man fell on them like lightning, darting this way and that; and whoever was so much as touched by his cudgel fell to the ground and did not dare stir again.

The King was terrified; he threw himself on the soldier's mercy, and merely to be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his own, and the princess for a wife.

The Wilful Child

Once upon a time there was a child who was wilful and would not do what her mother wanted. For this reason God took no pleasure in her, and let her fall ill; and no doctor could do her any good, and in a short time she lay on her deathbed.

When she had been lowered into her grave and the earth spread over her, all at once her arm came out again and stretched upwards; and when they had put it back in and spread fresh earth over it, it was all no use, for the arm always came out again.

Then the mother herself had to go to the grave and strike the arm with a rod; and when she had done that, it was drawn in, and then at last the child had rest beneath the ground.
