The Three Army-Surgeons

Three army surgeons who thought they knew their art perfectly were travelling about the world, and they came to an inn where they wanted to spend the night. The landlord asked where they came from and where they were going.

"We're roaming about the world practising our art."

"Just show me for once what you can do," said the landlord.

Then the first said he would cut off his hand and put it back on early next morning; the second said he would tear out his heart and put it back next morning; the third said he would cut out his eyes and heal them again next morning.

"If you can do that," said the innkeeper, "you've learned everything there is."

But they had a salve they rubbed themselves with, which joined parts back together, and they always carried the little bottle it was in with them.

So they cut the hand and heart and eyes out of their bodies as they had said they would, and laid them all together on a plate and gave it to the innkeeper. The innkeeper gave it to a servant girl, who was to put it in the cupboard and take good care of it.

But the girl had a lover in secret, who was a soldier. So when the innkeeper and the three army surgeons and everybody else in the house were asleep, the soldier came and wanted something to eat. The girl opened the cupboard and brought him some food; and being in love she forgot to shut the cupboard door again. She sat down at the table beside her lover and they chattered away together.

And while she was sitting there so contentedly, thinking of no ill luck, the cat came creeping in and found the cupboard open, and took the hand and the heart and the eyes of the three army surgeons and ran off with them.

When the soldier had finished eating, and the girl was clearing the things away and going to shut the cupboard, she saw that the plate the innkeeper had given her to look after was empty.

Then she said to her lover in a fright, "Oh, wretched girl that I am, what shall I do? The hand is gone, and the heart and the eyes are gone too. What will become of me in the morning?"

"Be easy," said he. "I'll help you out of your trouble. There's a thief hanging outside on the gallows; I'll cut off his hand. Which hand was it?"

"The right one."

Then the girl gave him a sharp knife, and he went and cut the poor sinner's right hand off and brought it to her. After that he caught the cat and cut its eyes out; and now nothing was missing but the heart.

"Haven't you been killing pigs? Aren't there dead pigs in the cellar?" said he.

"Yes," said the girl.

"That's good," said the soldier — and he went down and fetched a pig's heart.

The girl put them all together on the plate and put it in the cupboard; and when her lover had taken his leave of her after this, she went quietly to bed.

In the morning, when the three army surgeons got up, they told the girl to bring them the plate with the hand and the heart and the eyes on it. So she brought it out of the cupboard; and the first fixed the thief's hand on and smeared it with his salve, and it grew onto his arm directly. The second took the cat's eyes and put them into his own head. The third fixed the pig's heart firmly in the place where his own had been. And the innkeeper stood by and admired their skill, and said that he had never seen such a thing done before, and would sing their praises and recommend them to everybody.

Then they paid their bill and travelled on.

As they went along their way, the one with the pig's heart would not stay with them at all, but wherever there was a corner he ran to it and rooted about in it with his nose, the way pigs do. The others tried to hold him back by the tail of his coat, but it was no use; he tore himself loose and ran wherever the dirt was thickest.

The second behaved very strangely as well. He rubbed his eyes and said to the others, "Comrades, what's the matter? I can't see at all. Will one of you lead me, so that I don't fall?"

So with difficulty they travelled on until the evening, when they reached another inn. They went into the bar together; and there at a table in the corner sat a rich man counting money. The one with the thief's hand walked round about him, made a sudden movement twice with his arm, and at last, when the stranger turned away, snatched at the pile of money and took a handful of it.

One of them saw this and said, "Comrade, what are you doing? You mustn't steal! Shame on you."

"Eh," said he, "but how can I stop myself? My hand twitches, and I'm forced to snatch at things whether I want to or not."

After this they lay down to sleep; and as they lay there it was so dark that nobody could see his own hand. All at once the one with the cat's eyes woke up and roused the others and said, "Brothers, just look up. Do you see the white mice running about there?"

The two sat up but could see nothing. Then he said, "Things aren't right with us. We haven't got our own back again. We must go back to the innkeeper — he's deceived us."

So next morning they went back and told the landlord that they had not got their own back again: that the first had a thief's hand, the second cat's eyes and the third a pig's heart.

The innkeeper said that the girl must be to blame for it, and was going to call her; but when she had seen the three of them coming she had run out by the back door, and had not come back.

Then the three said he must give them a great deal of money, or they would set his house on fire. He gave them what he had and whatever else he could get together, and the three went away with it. It was enough for the rest of their lives — but they would rather have had their own proper organs.

The Seven Swabians

Seven Swabians were once together. The first was Master Schulz, the second Jackli, the third Marli, the fourth Jergli, the fifth Michal, the sixth Hans and the seventh Veitli. All seven of them had made up their minds to travel about the world, seek adventures and perform great deeds.

But so that they could go in safety and with weapons in their hands, they thought it would be sensible to have a single spear made for them, but a very strong and very long one. All seven of them took hold of this spear at once; in front walked the boldest and bravest, and that was Master Schulz; all the others followed in a row, and Veitli was last.

Now it happened one day in the haymaking month of July, when they had walked a long way and still had a long way to go before they reached the village they were to spend the night in, that as they were crossing a meadow in the twilight, a great beetle or hornet flew past them from behind a bush and hummed in a menacing manner.

Master Schulz was so terrified that he nearly dropped the spear, and a cold sweat broke out all over his body. "Listen! Listen!" he cried to his comrades. "Good heavens, I hear a drum!"

Jackli, who was behind him holding the spear, and who caught some kind of smell, said, "Something is certainly going on, for I can taste powder and matches."

At these words Master Schulz took to flight, and in a trice jumped over a hedge; but as he happened to land on the teeth of a rake that had been left lying there after the haymaking, the handle of it flew up and struck his face and gave him a tremendous blow.

"Oh dear! Oh dear!" screamed Master Schulz. "Take me prisoner! I surrender! I surrender!"

The other six all leapt over one on top of another, crying, "If you surrender, I surrender too! If you surrender, I surrender too!"

At length, as there was no enemy there to tie them up and take them away, they saw that they had been mistaken; and so that the story should not get about and they be treated as fools and laughed at, they all swore to each other to hold their peace about it, until one of them should let it out by accident.

Then they travelled on.

The second danger they came through cannot be compared with the first. Some days afterwards their path led them through a fallow field where a hare was sitting asleep in the sun. Her ears were standing straight up and her great glassy eyes were wide open.

They were all alarmed at the sight of this horrible wild beast, and consulted together about what would be the least dangerous thing to do. For if they ran away, they knew the monster would chase them and swallow them whole.

So they said, "We must go through a great and dangerous struggle. Boldly ventured is half won." And all seven grasped the spear, Master Schulz in front and Veitli behind. Master Schulz kept trying to hold the spear back; but Veitli had grown quite brave back there, and wanted to dash forward, and cried:

	"Strike home, in every Swabian's name,
	or else I hope you go home lame."

But Hans knew how to answer that, and said:

	"Thunder and lightning, it's fine to prate,
	but for dragon-hunting you're always late."

Michal cried:

	"There's nothing missing, not even a hair;
	be sure the Devil himself is there."

Then it was Jergli's turn to speak:

	"If it's not him, it's at least his mother,
	or else it's the Devil's own step-brother."

And now Marli had a bright idea, and said to Veitli:

	"Advance there, Veitli, advance, advance,
	and I'll stay behind and hold the lance."

Veitli, though, paid no attention to that; and Jackli said:

	"It's Schulz's place the first to be —
	nobody deserves that honour but he."

Then Master Schulz plucked up his courage and said gravely:

	"Then let us boldly advance to the fight,
	and so we shall show our valour and might."

At this they all set on the dragon together. Master Schulz crossed himself and prayed for God's help; but as none of it did any good, and he was getting nearer and nearer to the enemy, he screamed, "Oho! Oho! Ho! Ho! Ho!" in the greatest anguish.

This woke the hare, which darted swiftly away in great alarm. And when Master Schulz saw her flying from the field of battle like that, he cried out in his joy:

	"Quick, Veitli, quick, look there, look there —
	the monster's nothing but a hare!"

But the Swabian allies went off in search of further adventures, and came to the Moselle, a mossy, quiet, deep river with few bridges over it, which in many places people have to cross by boat.

As the seven Swabians did not know this, they called out to a man who was working on the opposite bank, to ask how people managed to get across. The distance and their way of speaking made the man unable to understand what they wanted, and he said "Wat? Wat?" — which is how people say "What?" in the country round Trier.

Master Schulz thought he was saying, "Wade, wade through the water"; and as he was the first, he set off and went into the Moselle. It was not long before he sank in the mud and the deep waves that drove against him. But his hat was blown to the opposite bank by the wind, and a frog sat down beside it and croaked, "Wat, wat, wat."

The other six on the near bank heard that and said, "Oho, comrades, Master Schulz is calling us. If he can wade across, why can't we?"

So they all jumped into the water together in a great hurry, and were drowned. And so one frog took the lives of all six of them, and not one of the Swabian allies ever reached home again.

The Three Apprentices

There were once three apprentices who had agreed always to stay together on their travels and always to work in the same town. At one time, though, their masters had no more work to give them, so that at last they were in rags and had nothing to live on.

Then one of them said, "What shall we do? We can't stay here any longer. We'll travel on once more; and if we find no work in the town we go to, we'll arrange with the innkeeper there that we're to write and tell him where we're staying, so that we can always have news of one another; and then we'll separate."

That seemed best to the others too. They set out, and on the way they met a richly dressed man who asked who they were.

"We're apprentices looking for work. Up to now we've kept together, but if we can't find anything to do we're going to separate."

"There's no need for that," said the man. "If you'll do what I tell you, you shall want for neither gold nor work; indeed, you shall become great lords and drive about in your carriages."

One of them said, "If our souls and our salvation aren't endangered, we'll certainly do it."

"They won't be," replied the man. "I have no claim on you."

But one of the others had looked at his feet; and when he saw a horse's hoof and a man's foot, he wanted nothing to do with him. The Devil, though, said, "Be easy. I have no designs on you, but on another soul, which is half mine already, and whose measure has only to run full."

As they were safe now, they agreed; and the Devil told them what he wanted. The first was to answer, "All three of us," to every question; the second was to say, "For money"; and the third, "And quite right too!" They were always to say this, one after another; but they were not to say one word more. And if they disobeyed this order, all their money would disappear at once; but as long as they kept to it, their pockets would always be full.

To begin with, he gave them as much as they could carry there and then, and told them to go to such and such an inn when they got to the town.

They went there, and the innkeeper came to meet them and asked whether they wanted anything to eat.

The first replied, "All three of us."

"Yes," said the landlord, "that's what I mean."

The second said, "For money."

"Of course," said the landlord.

The third said, "And quite right too!"

"Certainly it's right," said the landlord.

Good food and drink were brought to them now, and they were well waited on. After dinner came the reckoning, and the innkeeper gave the bill to the one who said, "All three of us"; the second said, "For money"; and the third, "And quite right too!"

"Indeed it's right," said the landlord. "All three pay; and without money I can give nothing."

But they paid still more than he had asked.

The other guests, who were looking on, said, "These people must be mad."

"Yes, indeed they are," said the landlord. "They're not very wise."

So they stayed some time at the inn and said nothing else but "All three of us," "For money" and "And quite right too!" But they saw and knew everything that went on.

It happened that a great merchant came with a large sum of money, and said, "Landlord, take care of my money for me. There are three crazy apprentices here who might steal it from me."

The landlord did as he was asked. As he was carrying the trunk into his room he felt how heavy it was with gold. So he gave the three apprentices a lodging downstairs, but the merchant went up to a separate room.

When it was midnight, and the landlord thought that everybody was asleep, he came with his wife, and they had an axe, and they struck the rich merchant dead; and after they had murdered him they went back to bed.

When it was day there was a great outcry: the merchant lay dead in bed, bathed in blood. All the guests came running at once; but the landlord said, "The three crazy apprentices have done this" — and the other guests confirmed it and said, "It can have been nobody else."

The innkeeper, though, had them called in and said to them, "Did you kill the merchant?"

"All three of us," said the first.

"For money," said the second.

And the third added, "And quite right too!"

"There now, you hear," said the landlord. "They confess it themselves."

So they were taken to prison and were to be tried. When they saw that things were becoming so serious, they were afraid after all; but at night the Devil came and said, "Bear it just one day longer, and don't throw away your luck. Not a hair of your heads shall be hurt."

Next morning they were led into court, and the judge said, "Are you the murderers?"

"All three of us."

"Why did you kill the merchant?"

"For money."

"You wicked wretches, have you no horror of your sins?"

"And quite right too!"

"They've confessed and they're still defiant," said the judge. "Take them to their deaths at once."

So they were taken out, and the landlord had to go with them into the circle. And when they had been taken hold of by the executioner's men and were just about to be led up to the scaffold where the headsman stood with his naked sword, a coach drawn by four blood-red chestnut horses came up suddenly, driving so fast that sparks flew from the stones; and somebody made signs from the window with a white handkerchief.

Then the headsman said, "It's a pardon coming" — and "Pardon! Pardon!" was called from the carriage as well.

Then the Devil stepped out as a very noble gentleman, beautifully dressed, and said, "You three are innocent. You may speak now — make known what you've seen and heard."

Then the eldest said, "We didn't kill the merchant. The murderer is standing there in the circle" — and he pointed to the innkeeper. "In proof of it, go into his cellar, where many others he has killed are still hanging."

Then the judge sent the executioner's men there, and they found it was as the apprentices had said; and when they had told the judge of it, he had the innkeeper led up, and his head was cut off.

Then the Devil said to the three, "Now I have the soul I wanted; and you are free, and have money for the rest of your lives."
