The King’s Son Who Feared Nothing

There was once a King's son who was no longer content to stay at home in his father's house; and as he was afraid of nothing, he thought, "I'll go out into the wide world. Time won't hang heavy on me there, and I shall see wonders enough."

So he took leave of his parents and went out, on and on from morning till night; and whichever way his path led, it was all the same to him.

It happened that he came to a giant's house; and as he was so tired, he sat down by the door and rested. And as he let his eyes wander here and there, he saw the giant's playthings lying in the yard. They were a couple of enormous balls and skittles as tall as a man.

After a while he took a fancy to set the skittles up, and then rolled the balls at them, and shouted and cried out when the skittles fell, and had a merry time of it.

The giant heard the noise and stuck his head out of the window, and saw a man no taller than other men, and yet playing with his skittles.

"Little worm," cried he, "why are you playing with my balls? Who gave you the strength to do it?"

The King's son looked up, saw the giant, and said, "Oh, you blockhead, you really think you're the only one with strong arms. I can do anything I want to do."

The giant came down and watched the bowling with great admiration, and said, "Child of man, if you're of that sort, go and bring me an apple from the tree of life."

"What do you want with it?" said the King's son.

"I don't want the apple for myself," answered the giant, "but I have a betrothed bride who wants it. I've travelled far about the world and can't find the tree."

"I'll soon find it," said the King's son, "and I don't know what could stop me getting the apple down."

The giant said, "You really think it's as easy as that? The garden the tree stands in is surrounded by an iron railing, and in front of the railing lie wild beasts, each one close beside the next, and they keep watch and let nobody in."

"They'll let me in, sure enough," said the King's son.

"Yes; but even if you do get into the garden and see the apple hanging on the tree, it's still not yours. There's a ring hanging in front of it, and anybody who wants to reach the apple and break it off has to put his hand through it — and nobody yet has had the luck to do it."

"That luck will be mine," said the King's son.

Then he took his leave of the giant, and went out over mountain and valley and through plains and forests, until at length he came to the wonderful garden.

The beasts lay round about it, but they had put their heads down and were asleep. What is more, they did not wake when he went up to them; so he stepped over them and climbed the fence and got safely into the garden.

There in the very middle of it stood the tree of life, with the red apples shining on the branches. He climbed up the trunk to the top; and as he was about to reach out for an apple, he saw a ring hanging in front of it. But he pushed his hand through it without any difficulty and picked the apple. The ring closed tightly round his arm, and all at once he felt a prodigious strength flowing through his veins.

When he had come down out of the tree with the apple, he would not climb back over the fence, but took hold of the great gate; and he had no need to shake it more than once before it sprang open with a loud crash. Then he went out; and the lion that had been lying there was awake now, and sprang after him — not in rage or fierceness, but following him humbly as its master.

The King's son took the giant the apple he had promised him, and said, "You see, I've brought it without any difficulty."

The giant was glad that his wish had been granted so soon, and hurried off to his bride and gave her the apple she had wanted. She was a beautiful and clever girl; and as she did not see the ring on his arm, she said, "I shall never believe you brought the apple until I see the ring on your arm."

The giant said, "I've only to go home and fetch it" — and thought it would be easy to take by force from the weak man what he would not give of his own free will.

So he demanded the ring from him; but the King's son refused it.

"Where the apple is, the ring must be too," said the giant. "If you won't give it of your own accord, you must fight me for it."

They wrestled with each other for a long time, but the giant could not get the better of the King's son, who was strengthened by the magic power of the ring. Then the giant thought of a trick, and said, "I've grown hot with fighting, and so have you. Let's bathe in the river and cool ourselves before we begin again."

The King's son, who knew nothing of falsehood, went with him to the water, and pulled the ring off his arm along with his clothes, and sprang into the river. The giant instantly snatched the ring and ran off with it; but the lion, which had seen the theft, chased the giant and tore the ring out of his hand and brought it back to its master.

Then the giant stationed himself behind an oak tree; and while the King's son was busy putting his clothes on again, he took him by surprise and put out both his eyes.

And now the unhappy King's son stood there blind, and did not know how to help himself. Then the giant came back to him and took him by the hand as if he were somebody who meant to guide him, and led him to the top of a high rock. There he left him standing, and thought, "Just two steps more, and he'll fall and kill himself, and I can take the ring off him."

But the faithful lion had not deserted its master. It held him fast by the clothes and drew him gradually back again. And when the giant came to rob the dead man, he saw that his cunning had been for nothing.

"Is there no way at all of destroying a weak child of man like that?" he said to himself angrily. And he took hold of the King's son and led him back to the precipice by another way; but the lion, seeing his evil design, helped its master out of danger here too.

When they had got close to the edge, the giant let the blind man's hand drop and was going to leave him there alone; but the lion pushed the giant so that he was thrown over and fell and was dashed to pieces on the ground.

The faithful animal drew its master back from the precipice again and guided him to a tree with a clear brook running past it. The King's son sat down there, but the lion lay down and splashed the water into his face with its paws.

Hardly had a couple of drops wetted his empty eye sockets before he could see something again; and he noticed a little bird flying past quite close, which struck itself against a tree trunk. At this it went down to the water and bathed in it, and then it soared up and swept between the trees without touching them, as if it had got its sight back.

Then the King's son recognised a sign from God, and stooped down to the water and washed and bathed his face in it. And when he stood up he had his eyes again, brighter and clearer than they had ever been.

The King's son thanked God for his great mercy, and travelled on through the world with his lion. And it happened that he came to a castle that was under a spell. In the gateway stood a girl of beautiful figure and fine face; but she was black from head to foot.

She spoke to him and said, "Ah, if only you could deliver me from the evil spell that has been cast over me!"

"What must I do?" said the King's son.

The girl answered, "You must spend three nights in the great hall of this enchanted castle; but you must let no fear into your heart. When they're doing their worst to torment you, if you bear it without letting a sound escape you, I shall be free. Your life they dare not take."

Then said the King's son, "I have no fear. With God's help I'll try it."

So he went cheerfully into the castle; and when it grew dark he sat down in the great hall and waited. Everything was quiet, though, until midnight, when all at once a great uproar began, and out of every hole and corner came little devils. They behaved as if they did not see him, and settled down in the middle of the room and lit a fire and began to gamble.

When one of them lost, he said, "This isn't right. There's somebody here who doesn't belong to us; it's his fault I'm losing."

"Wait, you fellow behind the stove, I'm coming," said another.

The screeching grew louder and louder, so that nobody could have heard it without terror. But the King's son went on sitting quite quietly and was not afraid. At last, though, the devils jumped up from the floor and fell on him, and there were so many of them that he could not defend himself. They dragged him about the floor, pinched him, pricked him, beat him and tormented him — but not a sound escaped him.

Towards morning they disappeared, and he was so exhausted that he could hardly move his limbs. But when day dawned the girl came to him. She carried in her hand a little bottle with the water of life in it, and she washed him with it; and at once he felt all the pain leave him and new strength flow through his veins.

She said, "You've held out successfully for one night, but two more lie ahead of you."

Then she went away again; and as she went, he noticed that her feet had turned white.

The next night the devils came and began their games afresh. They fell on the King's son and beat him far more severely than the night before, until his body was covered with wounds. But as he bore it all quietly, they had to leave him; and when dawn came the girl came and healed him with the water of life. And as she went away, he saw with joy that she had turned white already to the tips of her fingers.

And now he had only one night more to get through — but it was the worst. The goblins came again. "Are you still there?" they cried. "You shall be tormented till your breath stops."

They pricked him and beat him and threw him about, and pulled him by the arms and legs as if they wanted to tear him to pieces; but he bore it all and never uttered a cry.

At last the devils vanished; but he lay there fainting and did not stir, and could not even raise his eyes to look at the girl who came in and sprinkled him and bathed him with the water of life. But suddenly he was freed from all pain, and felt fresh and healthy, as if he had woken out of sleep; and when he opened his eyes he saw the girl standing beside him, snow-white and as fair as day.

"Get up," said she, "and swing your sword three times over the stairs, and then everything will be delivered."

And when he had done that, the whole castle was released from its enchantment, and the girl was a rich King's daughter.

The servants came and said that the table was already laid in the great hall and dinner was served. So they sat down and ate and drank together; and in the evening the wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing.
