The Devil and his Grandmother

There was a great war, and the King had many soldiers but gave them small pay — so small that they could not live on it. So three of them agreed among themselves to desert.

One of them said to the others, "If we're caught we shall be hanged on the gallows. How are we to manage it?"

Another said, "Look at that great cornfield. If we hid ourselves in there, nobody could find us; the troops aren't allowed into it, and tomorrow they're to march away."

So they crept into the corn. Only the troops did not march away, but stayed lying all round about it. They stayed in the corn two days and two nights, and were so hungry that they nearly died; but if they had come out, their death would have been certain.

Then they said, "What was the use of deserting, if we have to die miserably here?"

But just then a fiery dragon came flying through the air; and it came down to them and asked why they were hiding there.

They answered, "We're three soldiers who deserted because the pay was so bad; and now we shall have to die of hunger if we stay here, or dangle on the gallows if we go out."

"If you'll serve me for seven years," said the dragon, "I'll carry you through the army so that nobody catches you."

"We've no choice, and are forced to accept," they replied.

Then the dragon took hold of them in his claws and carried them away through the air over the army, and set them down on the earth again a long way off. But the dragon was none other than the Devil.

He gave them a small whip and said, "Whip with it and crack it, and then as much gold will spring up round about as you could wish for. Then you can live like great lords, keep horses and drive about in your carriages. But when the seven years have come to an end, you are my property."

Then he put a book in front of them, which all three of them were made to sign.

"I'll set you a riddle, though," said he. "And if you can guess it, you shall be free and released from my power."

Then the dragon flew away from them; and they went off with their whip, and had gold in plenty, and ordered themselves rich clothes and travelled about the world. Wherever they went they lived in pleasure and magnificence, rode on horseback, drove in carriages, ate and drank — but did nothing wicked.

The time slipped quickly away; and when the seven years were coming to an end, two of them were terribly anxious and alarmed. But the third took the business easily, and said, "Brothers, fear nothing. My head is sharp enough — I shall guess the riddle."

They went out into the open country and sat down, and the two pulled sorrowful faces. Then an old woman came up to them and asked why they were so sad.

"Alas," said they, "what business is that of yours? You can't help us anyway."

"Who knows?" said she. "Tell me your trouble."

So they told her that they had been the Devil's servants for nearly seven years, and that he had provided them with gold as plentifully as if it had been blackberries; but that they had sold themselves to him, and were forfeit to him if at the end of the seven years they could not guess a riddle.

The old woman said, "If you're to be saved, one of you must go into the forest. There he'll come to a fallen rock that looks like a little house; he must go into it, and then he'll get help."

The two gloomy ones thought to themselves, "That still won't save us" — and stayed where they were. But the third, the merry one, got up and walked on into the forest until he found the rock house.

In the little house, though, a very old woman was sitting, who was the Devil's grandmother; and she asked the soldier where he came from and what he wanted there. He told her everything that had happened; and as he pleased her well, she took pity on him and said she would help him.

She lifted up a great stone that lay over a cellar, and said, "Hide yourself down there. You can hear everything that's said up here; only sit still and don't stir. When the dragon comes I'll question him about the riddle — he tells me everything — so listen carefully to his answer."

At twelve o'clock at night the dragon came flying in and asked for his dinner. The grandmother laid the table and served food and drink, so that he was pleased; and they ate and drank together.

In the course of the conversation she asked him what sort of day he had had, and how many souls he had got.

"Nothing went very well today," he answered, "but I've laid hold of three soldiers. I have them safe."

"Indeed — three soldiers? That's something. But they may escape you yet."

The Devil said mockingly, "They're mine. I'll set them a riddle they'll never in this world be able to guess."

"What riddle is that?" she asked.

"I'll tell you. In the great North Sea lies a dead dogfish, and that shall be your roast meat; and the rib of a whale shall be your silver spoon; and a hollow old horse's hoof shall be your wineglass."

When the Devil had gone to bed, the old grandmother raised the stone and let the soldier out. "Did you pay careful attention to it all?"

"Yes," said he. "I know enough, and I'll contrive to save myself."

Then he had to go back another way, out through the window, secretly and at full speed, to his companions. He told them how the Devil had been outwitted by his old grandmother, and how he had learned the answer to the riddle from him.

Then they were all joyful and in good spirits, and took the whip and whipped up so much gold for themselves that it ran all over the ground.

When the seven years were fully up, the Devil came with the book and showed them their signatures and said, "I'll take you with me to hell. There you shall have a meal. If you can guess what kind of roast meat you'll have to eat, you shall be free and released from your bargain, and may keep the whip as well."

Then the first soldier began and said, "In the great North Sea lies a dead dogfish; that, no doubt, is the roast meat."

The Devil was angry, and began to mutter, "Hm! Hm! Hm!" And he asked the second, "But what will your spoon be?"

"The rib of a whale — that's to be our silver spoon."

The Devil pulled a sour face, growled again, "Hm! Hm! Hm!" — and said to the third, "And do you know too what your wineglass is to be?"

"An old horse's hoof is to be our wineglass."

Then the Devil flew away with a loud cry and had no more power over them; but the three kept the whip and whipped up as much money for themselves with it as they wanted, and lived happily to the end of their days.

Ferdinand the Faithful

Once upon a time there lived a man and a woman who had no children as long as they were rich; but when they were poor, they had a little boy. They could find no godfather for him, though; so the man said he would go to another place and see whether he could get one there.

As he went, a poor man met him and asked where he was going. He said he was going to see whether he could find a godfather, since he was poor and nobody would stand godfather for him.

"Oh," said the poor man, "you're poor and I'm poor. I'll be godfather for you; but I'm so badly off that I can give the child nothing. Go home and tell the nurse to come to the church with the child."

When they all got to the church together, the beggar was already there, and he gave the child the name of Ferdinand the Faithful.

As he was going out of the church the beggar said, "Now go home. I can give you nothing, and you likewise ought to give me nothing." But he gave a key to the nurse, and told her that when she got home she was to give it to the father, who was to take care of it until the child was fourteen years old; and then he was to go out onto the heath, where there was a castle that the key would fit, and everything in it should be his.

Now when the child was seven years old and had grown very big, he went out one day to play with some other boys, and each of them boasted that he had got more from his godfather than the rest; but the child could say nothing, and he was upset, and went home and said to his father, "Did I get nothing at all, then, from my godfather?"

"Oh, yes," said his father, "you got a key. If there's a castle standing on the heath, just go there and open it."

So the boy went there; but no castle was to be seen or heard of.

Seven years later, when he was fourteen, he went there again — and there stood the castle. When he had opened it, there was nothing inside but a horse, a white one. Then the boy was so full of joy at having a horse that he mounted it and galloped back to his father.

"Now I have a white horse, and I'm going travelling," said he.

So he set out; and as he was on his way, a pen was lying in the road. At first he thought he would pick it up; but then he thought to himself, "You should leave it lying there. You'll easily find a pen where you're going, if you need one."

And as he was riding away, a voice called after him, "Ferdinand the Faithful, take it with you."

He looked round, but saw nobody. So he went back and picked it up.

When he had ridden a little further he passed a lake, and a fish was lying on the bank gasping and panting for breath. So he said, "Wait, my dear fish, I'll help you into the water" — and took hold of it by the tail and threw it into the lake.

Then the fish put its head out of the water and said, "As you've helped me out of the mud, I'll give you a flute. When you're in any trouble, play on it, and then I'll help you; and if you ever let anything fall into the water, just play and I'll fetch it out for you."

Then he rode away, and a man came up to him who asked him where he was going. "Oh, to the next town."

Then what was his name? "Ferdinand the Faithful."

"Well! Then we have almost the same name. I'm called Ferdinand the Unfaithful."

And the two of them set off to the inn in the next town.

Now unfortunately Ferdinand the Unfaithful knew everything the other had ever thought and everything he was about to do; he knew it by all kinds of wicked arts.

There was, though, an honest girl at the inn, with a bright face and very pretty ways. She fell in love with Ferdinand the Faithful, because he was a handsome man, and she asked him where he was going.

"Oh, I'm just travelling about," said he.

Then she said he ought to stay there, because the King of that country wanted an attendant or an outrider, and he ought to enter his service. He answered that he could not very well go to somebody like that and offer himself.

Then the girl said, "Oh, but I'll soon do that for you."

And she went straight to the King and told him she knew of an excellent servant for him. He was well pleased with that, and had Ferdinand the Faithful brought to him, and wanted to make him his servant. But he would rather be an outrider, for wherever his horse was, there he wanted to be too; so the King made him an outrider.

When Ferdinand the Unfaithful learned that, he said to the girl, "What? You help him and not me?"

"Oh," said the girl, "I'll help you too." She thought, "I must keep friends with that man, for he isn't to be trusted."

So she went to the King and offered him as a servant, and the King was willing.

Now when the King met his lords in the morning, he always lamented and said, "Oh, if only I had my love here with me."

But Ferdinand the Unfaithful was always hostile to Ferdinand the Faithful. So once, when the King was complaining like this, he said, "You have the outrider; send him off to fetch her, and if he doesn't do it, his head must come off."

Then the King sent for Ferdinand the Faithful and told him that in such and such a place there was a girl he loved, and that he was to bring her to him, and if he did not do it he should die.

Ferdinand the Faithful went into the stable to his white horse, and complained and lamented, "Oh, what an unhappy man I am!"

Then somebody behind him cried, "Ferdinand the Faithful, why are you weeping?"

He looked round but saw nobody, and went on lamenting. "Oh, my dear little white horse, now I must leave you; now I must die."

Then somebody cried once more, "Ferdinand the Faithful, why are you weeping?"

And then for the first time he realised that it was his little white horse that was asking.

"Do you speak, my little white horse? Can you do that?" And he went on, "I'm to go to such and such a place and bring back the bride. Can you tell me how I'm to set about it?"

Then the little white horse answered, "Go to the King and say that if he'll give you what you must have, you'll get her for him. If he'll give you a ship full of meat and a ship full of bread, it will succeed. Great giants live on the lake, and if you take no meat with you for them they'll tear you to pieces; and there are the great birds, which would pick the eyes out of your head if you had no bread for them."

So the King made all the butchers in the land slaughter and all the bakers bake, so that the ships could be filled. And when they were full, the little white horse said to Ferdinand the Faithful, "Now mount me and come with me onto the ship; and then when the giants come, say:

	'Peace, peace, my dear little giants,
	I have had you in my thoughts;
	something I have brought for you.'

And when the birds come, you shall say again:

	'Peace, peace, my dear little birds,
	I have had you in my thoughts;
	something I have brought for you.'

Then they'll do nothing to you; and when you come to the castle the giants will help you. Then go up to the castle and take a couple of giants with you. The princess is lying there asleep; but you mustn't wake her — the giants must lift her up and carry her in her bed to the ship."

And now everything happened as the little white horse had said. Ferdinand the Faithful gave the giants and the birds what he had brought with him for them, and that made the giants willing; and they carried the princess in her bed to the King.

And when she came to the King, she said she could not live without her papers, which had been left behind in her castle. Then, at Ferdinand the Unfaithful's prompting, Ferdinand the Faithful was called, and the King told him he must fetch the papers from the castle, or he should die.

So he went into the stable once more and lamented and said, "Oh, my dear little white horse, now I'm to go away again. How am I to do it?"

Then the little white horse said he was simply to load the ships full again. So it all happened as it had happened before, and the giants and the birds were satisfied and made gentle by the meat.

When they came to the castle, the white horse told Ferdinand the Faithful that he must go in, and that the papers were lying on the table in the princess's bedroom. And Ferdinand the Faithful went in and fetched them.

When they were out on the lake he let his pen fall into the water; and the white horse said, "Now I can't help you at all."

But he remembered his flute and began to play on it, and the fish came with the pen in its mouth and gave it to him.

So he took the papers to the castle, where the wedding was celebrated.

The Queen, however, did not love the King, because he had no nose; but she would very much have liked to love Ferdinand the Faithful.

So once, when all the lords of the court were together, the Queen said that she could do feats of magic — that she could cut off anybody's head and put it on again, and that one of them ought to try it. But none of them would be the first; so Ferdinand the Faithful, again at Ferdinand the Unfaithful's prompting, undertook it. And she struck off his head and put it on again for him, and it healed together directly, so that it looked as though he had a red thread round his throat.

Then the King said to her, "My child, where did you learn that?"

"Yes," she said, "I understand the art. Shall I try it on you as well?"

"Oh, yes," said he.

But she cut off his head and did not put it back on; she pretended that she could not get it on, and that it would not stay fixed.

So the King was buried; and she married Ferdinand the Faithful.

He, though, always rode on his white horse; and once, when he was mounted on it, it told him that he was to ride out to the heath he knew and gallop three times round it. And when he had done that, the white horse stood up on its hind legs and was changed into a King's son.
