The Iron Stove

In the days when wishing was still of some use, a King's son was bewitched by an old witch and shut up in an iron stove in a forest. There he passed many years, and nobody could deliver him.

Then a King's daughter came into the forest who had lost her way and could not find her father's kingdom again. After she had wandered about for nine days, she came at length to the iron stove. Then a voice came out of it and asked her, "Where do you come from, and where are you going?"

She answered, "I've lost my father's kingdom and can't get home again."

Then the voice inside the iron stove said, "I'll help you get home again, and very quickly too, if you'll promise to do what I ask of you. I'm the son of a far greater King than your father, and I'll marry you."

Then she was afraid, and thought, "Good heavens, what should I do with an iron stove?" But as she badly wanted to get home to her father, she promised to do as he asked.

But he said, "You must come back here and bring a knife with you, and scrape a hole in the iron."

Then he gave her a companion who walked beside her but did not speak, and in two hours he brought her home. There was great joy in the castle when the King's daughter came home, and the old King fell on her neck and kissed her.

She, though, was sorely troubled, and said, "Dear father, what I've been through! I should never have got home again out of that great wild forest if I hadn't come to an iron stove; but I've had to give my word that I'll go back to it and set it free and marry it."

Then the old King was so horrified that he nearly fainted, for she was his only daughter. So they decided that they would send the miller's daughter in her place, who was very beautiful. They took her there and gave her a knife and said she was to scrape at the iron stove.

So she scraped at it for four-and-twenty hours, but could not get the least particle off it. When day dawned, a voice in the stove said, "It seems to me it's day outside."

Then she answered, "It seems so to me too. I fancy I can hear the noise of my father's mill."

"So you're a miller's daughter! Then go your way at once, and let the King's daughter come here."

So she went away at once and told the old King that the man out there would have nothing to do with her; he wanted the King's daughter.

They still had a swineherd's daughter, though, who was even prettier than the miller's daughter; and they decided to give her a piece of gold to go to the iron stove in the King's daughter's place. So she was taken there, and she too had to scrape for four-and-twenty hours. But she made nothing of it.

When day broke, a voice inside the stove cried, "It seems to me it's day outside."

Then she answered, "So it seems to me too. I fancy I can hear my father's horn blowing."

"Then you're a swineherd's daughter! Go away at once, and tell the King's daughter to come; and tell her that everything must be done as promised, and if she doesn't come, everything in the kingdom shall be ruined and destroyed, and not one stone left standing on another."

When the King's daughter heard that, she began to weep; but now there was nothing for it but to keep her promise. So she took her leave of her father, put a knife in her pocket and went out to the iron stove in the forest.

When she got there she began to scrape, and the iron gave way; and when two hours were over she had already scraped a small hole. Then she peeped in and saw a young man so handsome, and so brilliant with gold and precious jewels, that her very soul was delighted. So she went on scraping and made the hole so large that he could get out.

Then he said, "You are mine and I am yours. You are my bride, and you have set me free."

He wanted to take her away with him to his kingdom, but she begged him to let her go to her father just once more; and the King's son allowed it, but she was not to say more than three words to her father, and then she was to come back again.

So she went home; but she said more than three words. And instantly the iron stove disappeared and was carried far away over glass mountains and piercing swords. But the King's son was set free and no longer shut up in it.

After this she said goodbye to her father, took some money with her, though not much, and went back to the great forest and looked for the iron stove; but it was nowhere to be found. For nine days she searched for it, and then her hunger grew so great that she did not know what to do, for she could not live any longer.

When it was evening she sat herself up in a small tree and made up her mind to spend the night there, since she was afraid of wild beasts. As midnight drew near she saw a small light in the distance, and thought, "Ah, there I might be saved."

She climbed down out of the tree and went towards the light; but as she went, she prayed. Then she came to a little old house with a great deal of grass grown up all round it and a small heap of wood lying in front. She thought, "Ah, where have I come to?" — and peeped in at the window; but she saw nothing inside except toads, big and little, and a table well covered with wine and roast meat, with plates and glasses of silver.

Then she took courage and knocked at the door. The fat toad cried:

	"Little green waiting-maid,
	waiting-maid with the limping leg,
	little dog with the limping leg,
	hop hither and thither
	and quickly see who's outside."

And a small toad came walking up and opened the door to her. When she came in, they all bade her welcome and made her sit down. They asked, "Where have you come from, and where are you going?"

Then she told them everything that had happened to her: how, because she had broken the order she had been given not to say more than three words, the stove had disappeared, and the King's son with it, and how she meant now to look for him over hill and dale until she found him.

Then the old fat one said:

	"Little green waiting-maid,
	waiting-maid with the limping leg,
	little dog with the limping leg,
	hop hither and thither
	and bring me the great box."

Then the little one went and brought the box.

After this they gave her food and drink and took her to a well-made bed, which felt like silk and velvet; and she lay down in it in God's name and slept.

When morning came she got up, and the old toad gave her three needles out of the great box to take with her. She would need them, for she had to cross a high glass mountain and go over three piercing swords and a great lake. If she did all this, she would get her lover back again.

So she gave her three things to take the greatest care of: three large needles, a plough wheel and three nuts.

With these she travelled on. And when she came to the glass mountain, which was so slippery, she stuck the three needles first behind her feet and then in front of them, and so got over it; and when she was over, she hid them in a place she marked carefully.

After this she came to the three piercing swords; and then she seated herself on her plough wheel and rolled over them.

At last she arrived at a great lake; and when she had crossed it, she came to a large and beautiful castle. She went and asked for a place: she was a poor girl, she said, and would like to be taken on. But she knew that the King's son whom she had released from the iron stove in the great forest was in that castle. So she was taken on as a scullery maid at low wages.

But the King's son already had another girl at his side whom he meant to marry, for he thought that she had long been dead.

In the evening, when she had finished washing up, she felt in her pocket and found the three nuts the old toad had given her. She cracked one with her teeth and was going to eat the kernel, when — lo and behold — there was a stately royal gown inside it.

But when the bride heard of this, she came and asked for the dress and wanted to buy it, and said, "That's not a dress for a servant girl."

But she said no, she would not sell it; but if the bride would grant her one thing she should have it, and that was leave to sleep one night in the bridegroom's room. The bride gave her permission, because the dress was so pretty and she had never had one like it.

When evening came she said to her bridegroom, "That silly girl is going to sleep in your room."

"If you're willing, so am I," said he.

But she gave him a glass of wine into which she had poured a sleeping draught. So the bridegroom and the scullery maid went to sleep in the room, and he slept so soundly that she could not wake him.

She wept the whole night and cried, "I set you free when you were in an iron stove in the wild forest; I searched for you, and walked over a glass mountain and three sharp swords and a great lake before I found you — and yet you won't hear me!"

The servants sat by the bedroom door and heard how she wept the whole night through, and in the morning they told their lord about it.

And the next evening, when she had washed up, she opened the second nut, and there was a far more beautiful dress inside it. When the bride saw it, she wanted to buy that as well. But the girl would take no money, and asked that she might sleep once more in the bridegroom's room.

The bride, though, gave him a sleeping draught, and he slept so soundly that he could hear nothing. But the scullery maid wept the whole night long and cried, "I set you free when you were in an iron stove in the wild forest; I searched for you, and walked over a glass mountain and over three sharp swords and a great lake before I found you — and yet you won't hear me!"

The servants sat by the bedroom door and heard her weeping the whole night through, and in the morning told their lord about it.

And on the third evening, when she had washed up, she opened the third nut, and inside it was a still more beautiful dress, stiff with pure gold. When the bride saw it she wanted to have it; but the girl would only give it up on condition that she might sleep in the bridegroom's room for a third time.

The King's son, though, was on his guard, and threw the sleeping draught away. So now, when she began to weep and cry, "Dearest love, I set you free when you were in the iron stove in that terrible wild forest," the King's son leapt up and said, "You are the true one. You are mine and I am yours."

And with that, while it was still night, he got into a carriage with her; and they took away the false bride's clothes so that she could not get up.

When they came to the great lake they sailed across it; and when they reached the three sharp swords they seated themselves on the plough wheel; and when they got to the glass mountain they stuck the three needles into it. And so at length they came to the little old house — but when they went inside it, it was a great castle, and the toads were all disenchanted and were king's children, and full of happiness.

Then the wedding was celebrated, and the King's son and the princess stayed in the castle, which was much larger than either of their fathers' castles. But as the old King grieved at being left alone, they fetched him away and brought him to live with them; and they had two kingdoms, and lived in happy marriage.

	A mouse did run;
	this story's done.

The Lazy Spinner

In a certain village there once lived a man and his wife; and the wife was so idle that she would never work at anything. Whatever her husband gave her to spin she never got done; and what she did spin she did not wind, but let it all lie tangled in a heap.

If the man scolded her, she was always ready with her tongue, and said, "Well, how am I to wind it, when I have no reel? You just go into the forest and get me one."

"If that's all," said the man, "then I'll go into the forest and get some wood to make reels with."

Then the woman was afraid that if he had the wood he would make her a reel out of it, and she would have to wind her yarn off and then start spinning again. She thought about it a little, and then a lucky idea came to her; and she secretly followed the man into the forest. And when he had climbed a tree to choose and cut his wood, she crept into the thicket below, where he could not see her, and cried:

	"He who cuts wood for reels shall die,
	and he who winds shall perish."

The man listened, laid his axe down for a moment, and began to think about what that could mean. "Hallo," he said at last, "what can that have been? My ears must have been singing. I won't alarm myself for nothing."

So he took up the axe again and began to chop; and then there came a cry from below again:

	"He who cuts wood for reels shall die,
	and he who winds shall perish."

He stopped, and felt afraid and alarmed, and pondered over it. But when a few moments had gone by, he took heart again, and a third time he stretched out his hand for the axe and began to cut.

But somebody called out a third time, and said loudly:

	"He who cuts wood for reels shall die,
	and he who winds shall perish."

That was enough for him, and all his inclination had gone; so he climbed hastily down out of the tree and set off home.

The woman ran as fast as she could by side paths so as to get home first. So when he came into the parlour she put on an innocent face, as though nothing had happened, and said, "Well, have you brought a nice piece of wood for reels?"

"No," said he. "I can see very well that winding won't do." And he told her what had happened to him in the forest, and from that time on left her in peace about it.

All the same, after some time the man began to complain again about the disorder in the house. "Wife," said he, "it's really a shame that the spun yarn should lie there all tangled up."

"I'll tell you what," said she. "Since we still haven't come by any reel, you go up into the loft and I'll stand down below and throw the yarn up to you, and you throw it down to me; and so we'll get a skein after all."

"Yes, that will do," said the man.

So they did that; and when it was done he said, "The yarn's in skeins; now it must be boiled."

The woman was distressed again. She did say, "Yes, we'll boil it early tomorrow morning" — but she was secretly contriving another trick.

Early in the morning she got up, lit a fire and put the kettle on; only instead of the yarn she put in a lump of tow, and let it boil. After that she went to the man, who was still lying in bed, and said to him, "I have to go out. You must get up and look after the yarn in the kettle on the fire — but you must be there at once, mind that. For if the cock should happen to crow and you're not attending to the yarn, it will turn into tow."

The man was willing, and took good care not to loiter. He got up as quickly as he could and went into the kitchen. But when he reached the kettle and peeped in, he saw to his horror nothing but a lump of tow.

Then the poor man was as still as a mouse, thinking that he had neglected it and was to blame; and in future he said no more about yarn and spinning.

But you must admit yourself that she was an odious woman.
