The Four Skilful Brothers

There was once a poor man who had four sons; and when they were grown up he said to them, "My dear children, you must go out into the world now, for I have nothing to give you. So set out, and go some distance off and learn a trade, and see how you can make your way."

So the four brothers took their sticks, said goodbye to their father, and went out through the town gate together. When they had travelled for some time, they came to a crossroads that branched off in four different directions.

Then the eldest said, "Here we must separate; but four years from today we'll meet each other again at this spot, and in the meantime we'll seek our fortunes."

Then each of them went his own way. The eldest met a man who asked him where he was going and what he meant to do.

"I want to learn a trade," he replied.

Then the other said, "Come with me and be a thief."

"No," he answered. "That's no longer thought a respectable trade, and the end of it is that a man swings on the gallows."

"Oh," said the man, "you needn't be afraid of the gallows. I'll only teach you to get hold of things no other man could ever lay hands on, and nobody will ever catch you at it."

So he let himself be talked into it; and while he was with the man he became an accomplished thief, and so dexterous that nothing was safe from him once he took a fancy to it.

The second brother met a man who put the same question to him: what did he want to learn in the world?

"I don't know yet," he replied.

"Then come with me and be an astronomer. There's nothing better than that, for nothing is hidden from you."

He liked the idea, and became such a skilful astronomer that when he had learned everything and was about to travel on, his master gave him a telescope and said to him, "With this you can see whatever happens either on earth or in heaven, and nothing can stay hidden from you."

A huntsman took the third brother into training, and gave him such excellent instruction in everything to do with huntsmanship that he became an experienced hunter. When he went away his master gave him a gun and said, "It will never fail you. Whatever you aim at, you're certain to hit."

The youngest brother also met a man, who spoke to him and asked what his intentions were. "Wouldn't you like to be a tailor?" said he.

"Not that I know of," said the young man. "Sitting doubled up from morning till night, driving the needle and the pressing iron backwards and forwards, is not to my taste."

"Oh, but you're speaking in ignorance," answered the man. "With me you'd learn a very different kind of tailoring, one that's respectable and proper, and for the most part very honourable."

So he let himself be persuaded and went with the man, and learned his art from the very beginning. When they parted, the man gave the young man a needle and said, "With this you can sew together whatever is given you, whether it's as soft as an egg or as hard as steel; and it will all become one piece of stuff, so that no seam is visible."

When the appointed four years were over, the four brothers arrived at the crossroads at the same time, embraced and kissed each other, and went home together to their father.

"So now," said he, quite delighted, "the wind has blown you back to me again."

They told him everything that had happened to them, and that each of them had learned his own trade.

Now they were sitting just in front of the house under a large tree, and their father said, "I'll put you all to the test and see what you can do." Then he looked up and said to his second son, "Between two branches at the top of this tree there's a chaffinch's nest. Tell me how many eggs are in it."

The astronomer took his glass, looked up and said, "There are five."

Then the father said to the eldest, "Fetch the eggs down without disturbing the bird that's sitting on them."

The skilful thief climbed up and took the five eggs from under the bird, which never noticed what he was doing and stayed quietly sitting where she was; and he brought them down to his father.

The father took them and put one of them on each corner of the table and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, "With one shot you shall shoot me all five eggs in two, through the middle."

The huntsman took aim and shot the eggs, all five of them, just as his father had asked, and all at one shot. He must certainly have had some of that powder that shoots round corners.

"Now it's your turn," said the father to the fourth son. "You shall sew the eggs together again, and the young birds inside them as well; and you must do it so that they're not harmed by the shot."

The tailor brought his needle and sewed them as his father wanted. When he had done it, the thief had to climb the tree again and carry them back to the nest and put them under the bird without her noticing.

The bird sat her full time; and after a few days the young ones crept out, and they had a red line round their necks where the tailor had sewn them together.

"Well," said the old man to his sons, "I begin to think you're worth more than green clover. You've used your time well and learned something good. I can't say which of you deserves the most praise. That will be proved if you only get an early chance to use your talents."

Not long after this there was a great uproar in the country, for the King's daughter had been carried off by a dragon. The King was full of trouble about it, day and night, and had it proclaimed that whoever brought her back should have her for a wife.

The four brothers said to each other, "This would be a fine opportunity for us to show what we can do." And they decided to go out together and set the King's daughter free.

"I'll soon know where she is," said the astronomer — and looked through his telescope and said, "I can see her already. She's far away from here on a rock in the sea, and the dragon is beside her, watching her."

Then he went to the King and asked for a ship for himself and his brothers, and sailed with them over the sea until they came to the rock. There the King's daughter was sitting, with the dragon lying asleep in her lap.

The huntsman said, "I daren't fire; I should kill the beautiful girl at the same time."

"Then I'll try my art," said the thief; and he crept over and stole her away from under the dragon so quietly and dexterously that the monster never noticed, but went on snoring.

Full of joy, they hurried off with her on board ship and steered out into the open sea. But the dragon, who when he woke found no princess there, came after them, snorting angrily through the air. And just as he was circling above the ship and about to come down on it, the huntsman shouldered his gun and shot him through the heart.

The monster fell down dead; but he was so large and heavy that his fall smashed the whole ship to pieces. Luckily, though, they got hold of a couple of planks and swam about on the wide sea.

Then again they were in great danger; but the tailor was not idle. He took his wonderful needle and with a few stitches sewed the planks together, and they seated themselves on them and collected all the fragments of the vessel. Then he sewed those together so skilfully that in a very short time the ship was seaworthy again and they could go home in safety.

When the King saw his daughter once more there were great rejoicings. He said to the four brothers, "One of you shall have her for a wife; but which of you it's to be, you must settle among yourselves."

Then a warm dispute arose among them, for each of them pressed his own claim.

The astronomer said, "If I hadn't seen the princess, all your arts would have been useless. So she's mine."

The thief said, "What use would your seeing have been if I hadn't got her away from the dragon? So she's mine."

The huntsman said, "You and the princess and all the rest of you would have been torn to pieces by the dragon if my ball hadn't hit him. So she's mine."

The tailor said, "And if I hadn't sewn the ship together again with my art, every one of you would have been miserably drowned. So she's mine."

Then the King delivered this judgement: "Each of you has an equal right; and since all of you can't have the girl, none of you shall have her. But I'll give each of you half a kingdom as a reward."

The brothers were pleased with this decision, and said, "It's better this way than that we should quarrel with one another."

So each of them received half a kingdom, and they lived with their father in the greatest happiness as long as it pleased God.
