One-eye, Two-eyes, and Three-eyes

There was once a woman who had three daughters. The eldest was called One-eye, because she had only one eye, in the middle of her forehead; the second Two-eyes, because she had two eyes like other people; and the youngest Three-eyes, because she had three eyes, and her third eye was in the middle of her forehead too.

But because Two-eyes saw just as other human beings did, her sisters and her mother could not endure her. They said to her, "You, with your two eyes, are no better than the common people. You don't belong to us." They pushed her about and threw old clothes at her and gave her nothing to eat but what they left, and did everything they could to make her unhappy.

It happened that Two-eyes had to go out into the fields and mind the goat; and she was still quite hungry, because her sisters had given her so little to eat. So she sat down on a bank and began to weep, and so bitterly that two streams ran down out of her eyes.

And once, when she looked up in her grief, a woman was standing beside her, who said, "Why are you weeping, little Two-eyes?"

Two-eyes answered, "Haven't I reason to weep? I have two eyes like other people, and my sisters and my mother hate me for it and push me from one corner to another, and throw old clothes at me, and give me nothing to eat but the scraps they leave. Today they've given me so little that I'm still quite hungry."

Then the wise woman said, "Wipe away your tears, Two-eyes, and I'll tell you something that will stop you ever going hungry again. Just say to your goat:

	'Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	cover the table with something to eat' —

and then a clean, well-spread little table will stand in front of you with the most delicious food on it, and you may eat as much of it as you like. And when you've had enough and have no more need of the little table, just say:

	'Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	and take the table quite away' —

and then it will vanish from your sight again."

With that the wise woman went away. But Two-eyes thought, "I must try it at once and see whether what she said is true, for I'm far too hungry." And she said:

	"Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	cover the table with something to eat."

And hardly had she spoken the words before a little table stood there covered with a white cloth, and on it a plate with a knife and fork and a silver spoon; and the most delicious food was there too, warm and steaming as if it had just come out of the kitchen.

Then Two-eyes said the shortest prayer she knew — "Lord God, be with us always, amen" — and helped herself to some food and enjoyed it. And when she had had enough, she said what the wise woman had taught her:

	"Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	and take the table quite away."

And immediately the little table and everything on it was gone.

"That's a delightful way of keeping house," thought Two-eyes, and was quite glad and happy.

In the evening, when she went home with her goat, she found a small earthenware dish with some food in it that her sisters had set out for her; but she did not touch it. Next day she went out with her goat again, and left the few bits of broken bread they had handed her lying untouched.

The first and second time she did this her sisters did not notice at all; but as it happened every time, they did notice, and said, "There's something wrong about Two-eyes. She always leaves her food untasted; and she used to eat up everything she was given. She must have found other ways of getting food."

So that they could learn the truth, they decided to send One-eye out with Two-eyes when she drove the goat to pasture, to watch what Two-eyes did there, and whether anybody brought her something to eat and drink.

So when Two-eyes set out next time, One-eye came to her and said, "I'll come with you to the pasture and see that the goat is properly looked after and driven where there's food."

But Two-eyes knew what was in One-eye's mind, and drove the goat into high grass and said, "Come, One-eye, we'll sit down and I'll sing you something."

One-eye sat down; and she was tired from the unaccustomed walk and the heat of the sun. And Two-eyes sang over and over again:

	"One eye, are you waking?
	One eye, are you sleeping?"

until One-eye shut her one eye and fell asleep. And as soon as Two-eyes saw that One-eye was fast asleep and could find nothing out, she said:

	"Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	cover the table with something to eat."

And she sat down at her table and ate and drank until she had had enough; and then she said again:

	"Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	and take the table quite away."

And in an instant it was all gone.

Then Two-eyes woke One-eye and said, "One-eye, you meant to look after the goat, and you go to sleep doing it; and meanwhile the goat could have run off all over the world. Come, let's go home again."

So they went home; and again Two-eyes left her little dish untouched, and One-eye could not tell her mother why she would not eat it, and said, to excuse herself, "I fell asleep out there."

Next day the mother said to Three-eyes, "This time you shall go and watch whether Two-eyes eats anything when she's out, and whether anybody brings her food and drink; for she must be eating and drinking in secret."

So Three-eyes went to Two-eyes and said, "I'll come with you and see whether the goat is properly looked after and driven where there's food."

But Two-eyes knew what was in Three-eyes' mind, and drove the goat into high grass and said, "We'll sit down and I'll sing you something, Three-eyes."

Three-eyes sat down, and she was tired from the walk and the heat of the sun; and Two-eyes began the same song as before, and sang:

"Three eyes, are you waking?"

But then, instead of singing:

"Three eyes, are you sleeping?"

as she should have done, she thoughtlessly sang:

"Two eyes, are you sleeping?"

and went on singing all the time:

	"Three eyes, are you waking?
	Two eyes, are you sleeping?"

Then two of the eyes Three-eyes had shut and fell asleep; but the third, because it had not been named in the song, did not sleep. Three-eyes shut it, it is true — but only out of cunning, to pretend that it was asleep too; and it blinked, and could see everything perfectly well.

And when Two-eyes thought that Three-eyes was fast asleep, she used her little charm:

	"Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	cover the table with something to eat."

And she ate and drank as much as her heart desired, and then ordered the table to go away again:

	"Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	and take the table quite away."

And Three-eyes had seen everything.

Then Two-eyes came to her and woke her and said, "Have you been asleep, Three-eyes? You're a fine caretaker! Come, we'll go home."

And when they got home Two-eyes again did not eat; and Three-eyes said to her mother, "Now I know why that stuck-up thing there doesn't eat. When she's out, she says to the goat:

	'Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	cover the table with something to eat' —

and then a little table appears in front of her covered with the best of food, much better than anything we have here. And when she's eaten all she wants, she says:

	'Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	and take the table quite away' —

and it all disappears. I watched everything closely. She put two of my eyes to sleep with a certain form of words, but luckily the one in my forehead stayed awake."

Then the envious mother cried, "Do you want to fare better than we do? That wish shall soon pass off." And she fetched a butcher's knife and drove it into the heart of the goat, which fell down dead.

When Two-eyes saw that, she went out full of grief and sat down on the grassy bank at the edge of the field and wept bitter tears.

Suddenly the wise woman was standing beside her once more, and said, "Two-eyes, why are you weeping?"

"Haven't I reason to weep?" she answered. "The goat that covered the table for me every day when I spoke your charm has been killed by my mother, and now I shall have to bear hunger and want again."

The wise woman said, "Two-eyes, I'll give you a piece of good advice. Ask your sisters to give you the innards of the slaughtered goat, and bury them in the ground in front of the house, and your fortune will be made."

Then she vanished; and Two-eyes went home and said to her sisters, "Dear sisters, do give me some part of my goat. I don't ask for anything good — just give me the innards."

Then they laughed and said, "If that's all you want, you can have it."

So Two-eyes took the innards and buried them quietly in the evening in front of the house door, as the wise woman had advised her.

Next morning, when they all woke and came to the house door, there stood a strangely magnificent tree with leaves of silver and fruit of gold hanging among them, so that in all the wide world there was nothing more beautiful or precious. They did not know how the tree could have come there in the night; but Two-eyes saw that it had grown up out of the innards of the goat, for it was standing on the exact spot where she had buried them.

Then the mother said to One-eye, "Climb up, my child, and gather some of the fruit of the tree for us."

One-eye climbed up; but when she was about to take hold of one of the golden apples, the branch escaped out of her hands; and that happened every time, so that she could not pick a single apple, do what she might.

Then the mother said, "Three-eyes, you climb up. You with your three eyes can look about you better than One-eye."

One-eye slid down and Three-eyes climbed up. But Three-eyes was no more skilful, and search as she liked, the golden apples always escaped her.

At length the mother lost patience and climbed up herself; but she could get hold of the fruit no better than One-eye and Three-eyes, for she always clutched empty air.

Then Two-eyes said, "I'll just go up. Perhaps I shall do better."

The sisters cried, "You, indeed — with your two eyes! What can you do?"

But Two-eyes climbed up, and the golden apples did not get out of her way, but came into her hand of their own accord, so that she could pick them one after another; and she brought a whole apronful down with her.

Her mother took them away from her; and instead of treating poor Two-eyes any better for it, she and One-eye and Three-eyes were only envious that Two-eyes alone had been able to get the fruit, and they treated her still more cruelly.

Now it happened once, when they were all standing together by the tree, that a young knight came up.

"Quick, Two-eyes," cried the two sisters, "get under this, and don't disgrace us!" And with all speed they turned an empty barrel that was standing close by the tree over poor Two-eyes, and pushed the golden apples she had been gathering under it as well.

When the knight came nearer, he turned out to be a handsome lord; and he stopped and admired the magnificent gold and silver tree, and said to the two sisters, "Whose is this fine tree? Anybody who would give me one branch of it might ask whatever he wanted in return."

Then One-eye and Three-eyes replied that the tree belonged to them, and that they would give him a branch. They both took great trouble over it, but they could not do it, for the branches and the fruit moved away from them every time.

Then the knight said, "It's very strange that the tree should belong to you and you still can't break a piece off it."

They insisted again that the tree was their property. But while they were saying so, Two-eyes rolled a couple of golden apples out from under the barrel to the knight's feet, for she was annoyed with One-eye and Three-eyes for not telling the truth.

When the knight saw the apples he was astonished, and asked where they came from. One-eye and Three-eyes answered that they had another sister, who was not allowed to show herself, because she had only two eyes, like any common person.

The knight, though, wanted to see her, and cried, "Two-eyes, come out."

Then Two-eyes, quite comforted, came out from under the barrel; and the knight was struck by her great beauty, and said, "You, Two-eyes, can surely break a branch off the tree for me."

"Yes," replied Two-eyes, "I shall certainly be able to, for the tree belongs to me." And she climbed up and with the greatest ease broke off a branch with beautiful silver leaves and golden fruit, and gave it to the knight.

Then the knight said, "Two-eyes, what shall I give you for it?"

"Alas," answered Two-eyes, "I suffer hunger and thirst and grief and want from early morning till late at night. If you would take me with you and free me from all this, I should be happy."

So the knight lifted Two-eyes onto his horse and took her home with him to his father's castle; and there he gave her beautiful clothes and food and drink to her heart's content. And as he loved her so much, he married her, and the wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing.

When Two-eyes had been carried away like this by the handsome knight, her two sisters grudged her her good fortune in downright earnest. "The wonderful tree is still ours, though," they thought, "and even if we can gather no fruit from it, everybody will still stop and look at it, and come to us and admire it. Who knows what good things may be in store for us?"

But next morning the tree had vanished, and all their hopes were at an end. And when Two-eyes looked out of the window of her own little room, there it was standing in front of it, to her great delight; and so it had followed her.

Two-eyes lived a long time in happiness. Once two poor women came to her at her castle and begged for alms. She looked in their faces and recognised her sisters, One-eye and Three-eyes, who had fallen into such poverty that they had to wander about and beg their bread from door to door.

But Two-eyes made them welcome and was kind to them and took care of them; so that both of them repented with all their hearts of the wrong they had done their sister in their youth.

Fair Katrinelje and Pif-Paf-Poltrie

"Good day, Father Hollenthe."

"Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie."

"May I have your daughter?"

"Oh, yes — if Mother Malcho, and Brother High-and-Mighty, and Sister Käsetraut, and fair Katrinelje are willing, you can have her."

"Where's Mother Malcho, then?"

"She's in the cowshed, milking the cow."

"Good day, Mother Malcho."

"Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie."

"May I have your daughter?"

"Oh, yes — if Father Hollenthe, and Brother High-and-Mighty, and Sister Käsetraut, and fair Katrinelje are willing, you can have her."

"Where's Brother High-and-Mighty, then?"

"He's in the room chopping wood."

"Good day, Brother High-and-Mighty."

"Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie."

"May I have your sister?"

"Oh, yes — if Father Hollenthe, and Mother Malcho, and Sister Käsetraut, and fair Katrinelje are willing, you can have her."

"Where's Sister Käsetraut, then?"

"She's in the garden cutting cabbages."

"Good day, Sister Käsetraut."

"Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie."

"May I have your sister?"

"Oh, yes — if Father Hollenthe, and Mother Malcho, and Brother High-and-Mighty, and fair Katrinelje are willing, you may have her."

"Where's fair Katrinelje, then?"

"She's in the room counting out her farthings."

"Good day, fair Katrinelje."

"Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie."

"Will you be my bride?"

"Oh, yes — if Father Hollenthe, and Mother Malcho, and Brother High-and-Mighty, and Sister Käsetraut are willing, I'm ready."

"Fair Katrinelje, how much dowry have you?"

"Fourteen farthings in ready money, three and a half groschen owing to me, half a pound of dried apples, a handful of fried bread and a handful of spices.

	And many other things are mine —
	haven't I a dowry fine?

"Pif-paf-poltrie, what's your trade? Are you a tailor?"

"Something better."

"A shoemaker?"

"Something better."

"A farmer?"

"Something better."

"A joiner?"

"Something better."

"A smith?"

"Something better."

"A miller?"

"Something better."

"Perhaps a broom-maker?"

"Yes, that's what I am. Isn't that a fine trade?"

The Fox and the Horse

A peasant had a faithful horse that had grown old and could do no more work; so his master would give him nothing more to eat, and said, "I can certainly make no more use of you; but still, I mean you well. If you prove yourself still strong enough to bring me a lion, I'll keep you. But for now, take yourself off out of my stable." And with that he chased him out into the open country.

The horse was sad, and went to the forest to look for a little shelter there from the weather. Then the fox met him and said, "Why are you hanging your head like that, and going about all alone?"

"Alas," replied the horse, "greed and loyalty don't live together in one house. My master has forgotten the services I've done him all these years; and because I can no longer plough well, he'll give me no more food and has driven me out."

"Without giving you a chance?" asked the fox.

"The chance was a bad one. He said that if I were still strong enough to bring him a lion he'd keep me; but he knows perfectly well that I can't do that."

The fox said, "I'll help you. Just lie down and stretch yourself out as though you were dead, and don't stir."

The horse did as the fox asked; and the fox went to the lion, who had his den not far off, and said, "There's a dead horse lying out there. Just come with me — you can have a rich meal."

The lion went with him; and when they were both standing beside the horse, the fox said, "After all, it isn't very comfortable for you here. I'll tell you what — I'll tie it to you by the tail, and then you can drag it into your cave and devour it in peace."

This advice pleased the lion. He lay down; and so that the fox could tie the horse fast to him, he kept quite still.

But the fox tied the lion's legs together with the horse's tail, and twisted and fastened it all so well and so strongly that no strength could break it. And when he had finished his work he tapped the horse on the shoulder and said, "Pull, white horse, pull."

Then up sprang the horse at once and dragged the lion away with him. The lion began to roar so that all the birds in the forest flew up in terror; but the horse let him roar, and drew him and dragged him over the country to his master's door.

When the master saw the lion he was of a better mind, and said to the horse, "You shall stay with me and fare well." And he gave him plenty to eat until he died.
