The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces

There was once a King who had twelve daughters, each one more beautiful than the last. They all slept together in one room, with their beds standing side by side; and every night, when they were in them, the King locked the door and bolted it. But in the morning, when he unlocked the door, he saw that their shoes were worn out with dancing, and nobody could find out how it came about.

So the King had it proclaimed that whoever could discover where they danced at night should choose one of them for a wife and be King after his death — but that whoever came forward and had not discovered it within three days and nights should forfeit his life.

It was not long before a King's son presented himself and offered to undertake the business. He was well received, and in the evening was taken into a room next to the princesses' bedroom. His bed was set up there, and he was to watch where they went and danced; and so that they could do nothing in secret or go off somewhere else, the door of their room was left open.

But the prince's eyelids grew heavy as lead and he fell asleep; and when he woke in the morning, all twelve of them had been to the dance, for their shoes were standing there with holes in the soles. On the second and third nights it happened just the same; and then his head was struck off without mercy.

Many others came after this and undertook the business, but all of them forfeited their lives.

Now it happened that a poor soldier who had a wound and could serve no longer found himself on the road to the town where the King lived. There he met an old woman, who asked him where he was going.

"I hardly know myself," he answered — and added as a joke, "I had half a mind to discover where the princesses dance their shoes into holes, and so become King."

"That's not so difficult," said the old woman. "You mustn't drink the wine that will be brought to you at night, and you must pretend to be fast asleep." And with that she gave him a little cloak and said, "If you put that on, you'll be invisible, and then you can steal after the twelve of them."

When the soldier had been given this good advice, he went into the business in earnest, took heart, went to the King and announced himself as a suitor. He was as well received as the others, and royal clothes were put on him.

That evening at bedtime he was taken into the antechamber; and as he was about to go to bed, the eldest princess came and brought him a cup of wine. But he had tied a sponge under his chin and let the wine run down into it, without drinking a drop.

Then he lay down; and when he had lain a while he began to snore, as though in the deepest sleep. The twelve princesses heard that and laughed, and the eldest said, "He might as well have saved his life too."

And with that they got up and opened wardrobes and chests and cupboards and brought out pretty dresses, and dressed themselves in front of their mirrors and sprang about, delighted at the prospect of the dance.

Only the youngest said, "I don't know how it is. You're all very happy, but I feel very strange. Some misfortune is certainly going to come to us."

"You're a goose, always frightened," said the eldest. "Have you forgotten how many kings' sons have already come here for nothing? I hardly needed to give the soldier a sleeping draught; the clown wouldn't have woken anyway."

When they were all ready they looked carefully at the soldier; but he had shut his eyes and did not move or stir, so they felt themselves quite safe.

The eldest then went to her bed and tapped it. It sank into the earth at once; and one after another they went down through the opening, the eldest going first. The soldier, who had watched everything, waited no longer, put on his little cloak and went down last, with the youngest.

Halfway down the stairs he trod a little on her dress. She was terrified at that and cried out, "What's that? Who's pulling my dress?"

"Don't be so silly," said the eldest. "You've caught it on a nail."

Then they went all the way down; and when they were at the bottom they were standing in a wonderfully pretty avenue of trees, all of whose leaves were of silver and shone and glistened.

The soldier thought, "I must carry away some token with me" — and broke off a twig from one of them, at which the tree cracked with a loud report.

The youngest cried out again. "Something's wrong! Did you hear that crack?"

But the eldest said, "That's a gun fired for joy, because we've got rid of our prince so quickly."

After that they came into an avenue where all the leaves were of gold, and at last into a third where they were of bright diamonds. He broke a twig off in each, and each time it made such a crack that the youngest started back in terror; but the eldest still insisted that they were salutes.

They went on and came to a great lake, on which stood twelve little boats, and in every boat sat a handsome prince, all of them waiting for the twelve. Each took one of them with him; but the soldier seated himself beside the youngest.

Then her prince said, "I can't think why the boat is so much heavier today. I shall have to row with all my strength if I'm to get it across."

"What would cause that," said the youngest, "except the warm weather? I feel very warm too."

On the other side of the lake stood a splendid, brightly lit castle, from which came the joyful music of trumpets and kettledrums. They rowed over there and went in; and each prince danced with the girl he loved. But the soldier danced along with them unseen; and when one of them had a cup of wine in her hand, he drank it up, so that the cup was empty when she raised it to her mouth. The youngest was alarmed at this, but the eldest always made her be quiet.

They danced there till three o'clock in the morning, when all their shoes were danced into holes and they had to leave off. The princes rowed them back across the lake, and this time the soldier seated himself beside the eldest. On the shore they took their leave of their princes and promised to come back the following night.

When they reached the stairs the soldier ran on ahead and lay down in his bed; and when the twelve came up slowly and wearily, he was already snoring so loudly that they could all hear him, and they said, "As far as he's concerned, we're safe."

They took off their beautiful dresses and put them away, and set their worn-out shoes under the bed, and lay down.

Next morning the soldier decided to say nothing, but to watch the wonderful goings-on again; and he went with them again. Then everything happened just as it had the first time, and each time they danced until their shoes were worn to pieces. But the third time he took a cup away with him as a token.

When the hour came for him to give his answer, he took the three twigs and the cup and went to the King; but the twelve stood behind the door and listened for what he was going to say.

When the King put the question, "Where have my twelve daughters danced their shoes to pieces in the night?" he answered, "In an underground castle, with twelve princes" — and told how it had all come about, and brought out the tokens.

The King then summoned his daughters and asked whether the soldier had told the truth; and when they saw that they were betrayed and that lying would be no use, they had to confess it all.

At this the King asked him which of them he would have for a wife. He answered, "I'm no longer young, so give me the eldest."

Then the wedding was celebrated on that very day, and the kingdom was promised him after the King's death. But the princes were kept under their spell for as many days as they had danced nights with the twelve.

The Six Servants

In former times there lived an old Queen who was a sorceress, and her daughter was the most beautiful girl under the sun. The old woman, though, had no thought in her head but how to lure men to their destruction; and when a suitor appeared, she said that whoever wanted her daughter must first perform a task, or die.

Many had been dazzled by the daughter's beauty and had actually risked it; but they could never accomplish what the old woman set them to do, and then no mercy was shown: they had to kneel down and their heads were struck off.

A certain King's son who had also heard of the girl's beauty said to his father, "Let me go there. I want to ask for her in marriage."

"Never," answered the King. "If you went, you'd be going to your death."

At this his son lay down and was sick to death; and he lay there seven years, and no physician could heal him. When his father saw that all hope was gone, he said to him with a heavy heart, "Go there and try your luck; I know no other way of curing you."

When his son heard that, he rose from his bed and was well again, and set out joyfully on his way.

And it happened that as he was riding across a heath, he saw from a distance something like a great heap of hay lying on the ground; and when he came nearer he could see that it was the belly of a man who had laid himself down there — but the belly looked like a small mountain.

When the fat man saw the traveller he stood up and said, "If you're in need of anybody, take me into your service."

The prince answered, "What can I do with such a great big man?"

"Oh," said the Stout One, "this is nothing. When I stretch myself out properly, I'm three thousand times fatter."

"If that's the case," said the prince, "I can make use of you. Come with me."

So the Stout One followed the prince; and after a while they found another man lying on the ground with his ear laid to the turf.

"What are you doing there?" asked the King's son.

"I'm listening," replied the man.

"What are you listening to so attentively?"

"I'm listening to what's going on in the world at this moment, for nothing escapes my ears. I can even hear the grass growing."

"Tell me," said the prince, "what you hear at the court of the old Queen who has the beautiful daughter."

Then he answered, "I hear the whizzing of the sword that's striking off a suitor's head."

The King's son said, "I can make use of you. Come with me."

They went on, and then saw a pair of feet lying there, and part of a pair of legs, but could not see the rest of the body. When they had walked on a great distance they came to the body, and at last to the head as well.

"Why," said the prince, "what a tall rascal you are!"

"Oh," replied the Tall One, "that's nothing at all yet. When I really stretch out my limbs, I'm three thousand times as tall, and taller than the highest mountain on earth. I'll gladly enter your service, if you'll take me."

"Come with me," said the prince. "I can make use of you."

They went on and found a man sitting by the road who had bound up his eyes. The prince said to him, "Have you weak eyes, that you can't look at the light?"

"No," replied the man. "But I mustn't take the bandage off, for whatever I look at with my eyes splits to pieces, my gaze is so powerful. If you can use that, I'll gladly serve you."

"Come with me," replied the King's son. "I can make use of you."

They journeyed on and found a man lying in the hot sunshine, trembling and shivering all over his body, so that not a limb of him was still.

"How can you be shivering when the sun's shining so warm?" said the King's son.

"Alas," replied the man, "I'm of quite a different nature. The hotter it is, the colder I am, and the frost cuts through all my bones; and the colder it is, the hotter I am. In the middle of ice I can't endure the heat, nor in the middle of fire the cold."

"You're a strange fellow," said the prince, "but if you'll enter my service, follow me."

They travelled on and saw a man standing there who stretched out a long neck and looked about him and could see over all the mountains.

"What are you looking at so eagerly?" said the King's son.

The man replied, "I have such sharp eyes that I can see into every forest and field and hill and valley all over the world."

The prince said, "Come with me if you will, for I'm still in want of somebody like you."

And now the King's son and his six servants came to the town where the old Queen lived. He did not tell her who he was, but said, "If you'll give me your beautiful daughter, I'll perform any task you set me."

The sorceress was delighted to get such a handsome young man as this into her net, and said, "I'll set you three tasks; and if you can perform them all, you shall be my daughter's husband and master."

"What's the first to be?"

"You shall fetch me my ring, which I dropped into the Red Sea."

So the King's son went home to his servants and said, "The first task is not easy. A ring has to be got out of the Red Sea. Come, find some way of doing it."

Then the man with the sharp sight said, "I'll see where it's lying" — and looked down into the water and said, "It's caught there, on a pointed stone."

The Tall One carried them there and said, "I'd soon get it out, if I could only see it."

"Oh, is that all?" cried the Stout One — and lay down and put his mouth to the water, at which all the waves fell into it as if it were a whirlpool; and he drank the whole sea up until it was as dry as a meadow. The Tall One stooped down a little and brought out the ring with his hand.

Then the King's son rejoiced to have the ring, and took it to the old Queen. She was astonished, and said, "Yes, that's the right ring. You've safely performed the first task; but now comes the second. Do you see the meadow in front of my palace? Three hundred fat oxen are grazing there, and you must eat them — skin, hair, bones, horns and all. And down below in my cellar lie three hundred casks of wine, and you must drink those up as well. And if one hair of the oxen or one little drop of the wine is left, your life will be forfeit to me."

"May I invite no guests to this meal?" asked the prince. "No dinner is good without some company."

The old woman laughed maliciously and replied, "You may invite one, for the sake of the company — but no more."

The King's son went to his servants and said to the Stout One, "You shall be my guest today, and eat your fill."

At this the Stout One stretched himself out and ate the three hundred oxen without leaving a single hair; and then he asked whether he was to have nothing but his breakfast. He drank the wine straight out of the casks without feeling any need of a glass, and licked the last drop off his fingernails.

When the meal was over, the prince went to the old woman and told her that the second task was performed too. She wondered at this and said, "Nobody has ever done so much before; but one task still remains." And she thought to herself, "You shan't escape me, and you shan't keep your head on your shoulders."

"Tonight," said she, "I'll bring my daughter to you in your room, and you shall put your arms round her; but when the two of you are sitting there together, beware of falling asleep. When twelve o'clock strikes I'll come; and if she's no longer in your arms then, you are lost."

The prince thought, "The task is easy. I shall certainly keep my eyes open." All the same he called his servants and told them what the old woman had said, and remarked, "Who knows what treachery lies behind this? Foresight is a good thing. Keep watch, and take care that the girl doesn't go out of my room again."

When night fell, the old woman came with her daughter and put her into the prince's arms; and then the Tall One wound himself round the two of them in a circle, and the Stout One placed himself at the door, so that no living creature could come in.

There the two of them sat, and the girl never spoke a word; but the moon shone on her face through the window, and the prince could see her wonderful beauty. He did nothing but gaze at her, and was filled with love and happiness, and his eyes never grew weary.

This lasted until eleven o'clock, when the old woman cast such a spell over all of them that they fell asleep; and at that same moment the girl was carried away.

Then they all slept soundly until a quarter to twelve, when the magic lost its power and they all woke again.

"Oh, misery and misfortune!" cried the prince. "Now I'm lost."

The faithful servants began to lament too; but the Listener said, "Be quiet, I want to listen." Then he listened for an instant and said, "She's on a rock three hundred leagues from here, bewailing her fate. You alone, Tall One, can help her; if you stand up, you'll be there in a couple of steps."

"Yes," answered the Tall One, "but the one with the sharp eyes must come with me, so that we can destroy the rock."

Then the Tall One took the one with the bandaged eyes on his back, and in the twinkling of an eye they were on the enchanted rock. The Tall One immediately took the bandage off the other's eyes; and he had only to look round, and the rock shivered into a thousand pieces.

Then the Tall One took the girl in his arms and carried her back in a second, and fetched his companion just as fast; and before it struck twelve they were all sitting as they had sat before, quite merry and happy.

When twelve struck, the old sorceress came stealing in with a malicious face that seemed to say, "Now he's mine!" — for she believed that her daughter was on the rock three hundred leagues away. But when she saw her in the prince's arms she was alarmed, and said, "Here's one who knows more than I do."

She dared not raise any objection, and had to give him her daughter. But she whispered in the girl's ear, "It's a disgrace for you to have to obey common people, and not to be allowed to choose a husband to your own liking."

At this the girl's proud heart filled with anger, and she plotted revenge.

Next morning she had three hundred great bundles of wood gathered together, and told the prince that although the three tasks were performed, she still would not be his wife until somebody was willing to sit in the middle of the wood and bear the fire. She thought that none of his servants would let himself be burnt for him, and that out of love for her he would climb onto it himself, and then she would be free.

But the servants said, "Every one of us has done something except the Frosty One; he must get to work." And they set him in the middle of the pile and set fire to it.

Then the fire began to burn, and burned for three days until all the wood was consumed; and when the flames had burned out, the Frosty One was standing among the ashes, trembling like an aspen leaf, and saying, "I never felt such a frost in the whole course of my life. If it had lasted much longer, I should have been numb."

As no other excuse was to be found, the beautiful girl now had to take the unknown young man as her husband.

But when they drove away to church, the old woman said, "I can't endure the disgrace" — and sent her warriors after them with orders to cut down everybody who opposed them and bring her daughter back.

But the Listener had sharpened his ears and heard the old woman's secret orders. "What shall we do?" he said to the Stout One.

But the Stout One knew what to do, and spat out behind the carriage, once or twice, some of the sea water he had drunk; and a great sea rose up, in which the warriors were caught and drowned.

When the sorceress saw that, she sent her armoured knights. But the Listener heard the rattling of their armour, and undid the bandage from one of Sharp-eyes' eyes; and he looked rather fixedly at the enemy troops for a while, at which they all sprang to pieces like glass.

Then the young man and the girl went on their way undisturbed; and when the two of them had been blessed in church, the six servants took their leave and said to their master, "Your wishes are satisfied now; you need us no longer. We'll go our way and seek our fortunes."

Half a league from the palace of the prince's father there was a village, and near it a swineherd was minding his herd. And when they came there, the prince said to his wife, "Do you know who I really am? I'm no prince, but a herder of swine; and the man over there with that herd is my father. We two shall have to set to work as well and help him."

Then he took her into the inn, and told the innkeepers secretly to take away her royal clothes during the night. So when she woke in the morning she had nothing to put on; and the innkeeper's wife gave her an old gown and a pair of worsted stockings, and at the same time seemed to think it a great present, and said, "If it weren't for your husband's sake, I should have given you nothing at all."

Then the princess believed that he really was a swineherd, and minded the herd with him, and thought to herself, "I've deserved this for my haughtiness and pride."

This lasted a week, and then she could bear it no longer, for she had sores on her feet.

And now a couple of people came who asked her whether she knew who her husband was.

"Yes," she answered, "he's a swineherd, and he's just gone out with cords and ropes to try to drive a little bargain."

But they said, "Just come with us, and we'll take you to him." And they brought her up to the palace; and when she came into the hall, there stood her husband in kingly clothes. But she did not recognise him until he took her in his arms and kissed her and said, "I suffered much for you, and now you too have had to suffer for me."

And then the wedding was celebrated; and the man who has told you all this wishes that he had been there too.
