The White Bride and the Black One

A woman was going about the open land with her daughter and her stepdaughter, cutting fodder, when the Lord came walking towards them in the shape of a poor man, and asked, "Which is the way into the village?"

"If you want to know," said the mother, "find it for yourself." And the daughter added, "If you're afraid you won't find it, take a guide with you."

But the stepdaughter said, "Poor man, I'll take you there. Come with me."

Then God was angry with the mother and the daughter, and turned his back on them, and wished that they should become as black as night and as ugly as sin.

To the poor stepdaughter, though, God was gracious, and went with her; and when they were near the village he spoke a blessing over her and said, "Choose three things for yourself, and I'll grant them to you."

Then the girl said, "I should like to be as beautiful and bright as the sun." And instantly she was white and bright as day.

"And then I should like to have a purse of money that never grows empty."

The Lord gave her that as well; but he said, "Don't forget what is best of all."

She said, "For my third wish, I ask that after my death I may live in the eternal kingdom of Heaven."

That too was granted her; and then the Lord left her.

When the stepmother came home with her daughter and they saw that they were both as black as coal and ugly, but that the stepdaughter was white and beautiful, the wickedness in their hearts grew greater still, and they thought of nothing but how they could do her some injury.

The stepdaughter, though, had a brother called Reginer, whom she loved dearly, and she told him everything that had happened.

Once Reginer said to her, "Dear sister, I want to paint your likeness, so that I can see you before my eyes all the time; for my love for you is so great that I should like always to be looking at you."

Then she answered, "But I beg you, let nobody see the picture."

So he painted his sister and hung the picture up in his room. He lived in the King's palace, though, for he was the King's coachman. Every day he went and stood in front of the picture and thanked God for the happiness of having such a dear sister.

Now it happened that the King he served had just lost his wife, who had been so beautiful that nobody could be found to compare with her; and on this account the King was in deep grief.

But the attendants about the court noticed that the coachman stood in front of this beautiful picture every day, and they were jealous of him, and told the King.

Then the King ordered the picture to be brought to him; and when he saw that it was like his lost wife in every way, only still more beautiful, he fell mortally in love with it. He had the coachman brought before him and asked whom the portrait showed. The coachman said it was his sister.

So the King decided to take nobody but her for his wife, and gave him a carriage and horses and splendid clothes of cloth of gold, and sent him off to fetch his chosen bride.

When Reginer came on this errand his sister was glad; but the black girl was jealous of her good fortune and grew angry beyond all measure, and said to her mother, "What use are all your arts to us now, if you can't get me a piece of luck like that?"

"Be quiet," said the old woman. "I'll soon turn it your way."

And by her arts of witchcraft she so troubled the coachman's eyes that he was half blind, and stopped the white girl's ears so that she was half deaf.

Then they got into the carriage: first the bride in her noble royal clothes, then the stepmother with her daughter; and Reginer sat on the box to drive.

When they had been on the road some time, the coachman called out:

	"Cover yourself well, my sister dear,
	so that the rain may not wet you,
	so that the wind may not load you with dust,
	so that you may be fair and beautiful
	when you come before the King."

The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?"

"Ah," said the old woman, "he says you ought to take off your golden dress and give it to your sister."

So she took it off and put it on the black girl, who gave her a shabby grey gown in exchange for it.

They drove on; and a short time afterwards the brother called out again:

	"Cover yourself well, my sister dear,
	so that the rain may not wet you,
	so that the wind may not load you with dust,
	so that you may be fair and beautiful
	when you come before the King."

The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?"

"Ah," said the old woman, "he says you ought to take off your golden hood and give it to your sister."

So she took off the hood and put it on her sister, and sat there with her own head uncovered.

And they drove on further. After a while the brother called out once more:

	"Cover yourself well, my sister dear,
	so that the rain may not wet you,
	so that the wind may not load you with dust,
	so that you may be fair and beautiful
	when you come before the King."

The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?"

"Ah," said the old woman, "he says you must look out of the carriage."

But they were just then on a bridge crossing deep water. When the bride stood up and leaned forward out of the carriage, the two of them pushed her out, and she fell into the middle of the water.

At the same moment that she sank, a snow-white duck rose out of the mirror-smooth water and swam away down the river.

The brother had noticed nothing of it, and drove the carriage on until they reached the court. Then he brought the black girl to the King as his sister, and believed that she really was, because his eyes were dim and he saw the golden clothes glittering.

When the King saw the boundless ugliness of his intended bride he was very angry, and ordered the coachman to be thrown into a pit full of adders and nests of snakes. But the old witch knew so well how to flatter the King and deceive his eyes by her arts that he kept her and her daughter until she seemed quite bearable to him, and he actually married her.

One evening, when the black bride was sitting on the King's knee, a white duck came swimming up the gutter to the kitchen, and said to the kitchen boy, "Boy, light a fire, so that I can warm my feathers."

The kitchen boy did it, and lit a fire on the hearth. Then the duck came and sat down by it, and shook herself and smoothed her feathers straight with her bill.

And while she was sitting there enjoying herself, she asked, "What is my brother Reginer doing?"

The kitchen boy replied, "He's shut up in the pit with the adders and the snakes."

Then she asked, "What is the black witch doing in the house?"

The boy answered, "She's loved by the King, and happy."

"May God have mercy on him," said the duck, and swam out again by the sink.

The next night she came again and asked the same questions, and the third night too. Then the kitchen boy could bear it no longer, and went to the King and told him everything.

But the King wanted to see it for himself, and went there the next evening; and when the duck put her head in through the sink, he took his sword and cut through her neck — and suddenly she changed into a most beautiful girl, exactly like the picture her brother had painted of her.

The King was full of joy; and as she stood there quite wet, he had splendid clothes brought and had her dressed in them. Then she told him how she had been betrayed by cunning and falsehood and at last thrown down into the water; and her first request was that her brother should be brought up out of the pit of snakes.

And when the King had granted this request, he went into the room where the old witch was and asked, "What does she deserve who does such and such a thing?" — and told what had happened.

Then she was so blinded that she saw nothing at all, and said, "She deserves to be stripped naked and put into a barrel full of nails, and a horse harnessed to the barrel and sent off with it all over the world."

All of which was done to her, and to her black daughter. But the King married the white and beautiful bride, and rewarded her faithful brother and made him a rich and distinguished man.
