Iron John

There was once a King who had a great forest near his palace, full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent a huntsman out to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back.

"Perhaps some accident has happened to him," said the King; and next day he sent out two more huntsmen to search for him — but they stayed away too.

Then on the third day he sent for all his huntsmen and said, "Scour the whole forest through, and don't give up until you've found all three."

But of these too, none came home again; and of the pack of hounds they had taken with them, not one was ever seen again.

From that time on nobody would venture into the forest any more, and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen of it except sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over.

This lasted for many years; and then a huntsman from abroad presented himself to the King, looking for a position, and offered to go into the dangerous forest. But the King would not give his consent, and said, "It isn't safe in there. I'm afraid it would go no better with you than with the others, and you'd never come out again."

The huntsman replied, "My lord, I'll venture it at my own risk. I know nothing of fear."

So the huntsman took himself off to the forest with his dog. It was not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way and wanted to chase it; but the dog had hardly run two steps before it stood in front of a deep pool and could go no further, and a naked arm stretched itself out of the water and seized it and dragged it under.

When the huntsman saw that, he went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale the water out. And when they could see to the bottom, there lay a wild man whose body was brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung down over his face to his knees. They bound him with cords and led him away to the castle.

There was great astonishment at the wild man; and the King had him put in an iron cage in his courtyard, and forbade anybody to open the door on pain of death, and the Queen herself was to keep the key. And from that time on everybody could go into the forest in safety again.

The King had a son of eight years old, who was playing in the courtyard one day; and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the cage. The boy ran over and said, "Give me my ball back."

"Not until you've opened the door for me," answered the man.

"No," said the boy, "I won't do that. The King has forbidden it" — and ran away.

Next day he went again and asked for his ball; the wild man said, "Open my door" — but the boy would not.

On the third day the King had ridden out hunting, and the boy went once more and said, "I couldn't open the door even if I wanted to, for I haven't the key."

Then the wild man said, "It lies under your mother's pillow; you can get it there."

The boy, who wanted his ball back, threw all caution to the winds and fetched the key. The door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers. When it was open, the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball and hurried away.

The boy had grown frightened; he called and cried after him, "Oh, wild man, don't go away, or I shall be beaten!"

The wild man turned back, picked him up, set him on his shoulder and went off into the forest with hasty steps.

When the King came home he noticed the empty cage, and asked the Queen how that had happened. She knew nothing about it, and looked for the key, but it was gone. She called the boy, but nobody answered. The King sent people out to look for him in the fields, but they did not find him. Then he could easily guess what had happened, and there was great grief in the royal court.

When the wild man had reached the dark forest again, he took the boy down off his shoulder and said to him, "You'll never see your father and mother again; but I'll keep you with me, for you set me free and I feel pity for you. If you do everything I tell you, you shall fare well. Of treasure and gold I have enough, and more than anybody in the world."

He made the boy a bed of moss to sleep on; and next morning the man took him to a well and said, "Look — the gold well is as bright and clear as crystal. You shall sit beside it and take care that nothing falls into it, or it will be spoiled. I'll come every evening to see whether you've obeyed my order."

The boy sat down at the edge of the well, and often saw a golden fish or a golden snake show itself in it, and took care that nothing fell in. But as he was sitting there, his finger hurt him so violently that without meaning to he put it in the water. He drew it out again quickly, but saw that it was entirely gilded; and however hard he tried to wash the gold off, it was no use.

In the evening Iron John came back, looked at the boy and said, "What has happened to the well?"

"Nothing, nothing," he answered, and held his finger behind his back so that the man should not see it.

But he said, "You've dipped your finger in the water. This time it may pass; but take care you don't let anything go in again."

By daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and watching it. His finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head, and then unluckily a hair fell down into the well. He took it out quickly, but it was already quite gilded.

Iron John came and knew already what had happened. "You've let a hair fall into the well," said he. "I'll let you watch by it once more; but if it happens a third time, then the well is spoiled and you can stay with me no longer."

On the third day the boy sat by the well and did not stir his finger, however much it hurt him. But the time hung heavy on him, and he looked at the reflection of his face on the surface of the water. And as he bent down more and more, trying to look straight into his own eyes, his long hair fell down from his shoulders into the water. He straightened up quickly, but all the hair on his head was already golden and shone like the sun.

You can imagine how terrified the poor boy was. He took his handkerchief and tied it round his head, so that the man should not see it. But when he came he knew everything already, and said, "Take the handkerchief off."

Then the golden hair streamed out; and the boy might excuse himself as he liked, it was no use.

"You haven't stood the test, and you can stay here no longer. Go out into the world; there you'll learn what poverty is. But as you haven't a bad heart, and as I mean you well, there's one thing I'll grant you: if you ever fall into any difficulty, come to the forest and call 'Iron John,' and then I'll come and help you. My power is great, greater than you think, and I have gold and silver in abundance."

So the King's son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten paths, always onwards, until at length he reached a great city. There he looked for work, but could find none, and he had learned nothing that could help him. At length he went to the palace and asked whether they would take him in. The people about the court did not at all know what use they could make of him; but they liked him, and told him to stay. At length the cook took him into his service and said he might carry wood and water and rake the cinders together.

Once, when it happened that nobody else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the royal table; but as he did not want to let his golden hair be seen, he kept his little cap on. Such a thing as that had never come under the King's notice before, and he said, "When you come to the royal table you must take your hat off."

He answered, "Ah, my lord, I can't; I have a bad sore place on my head."

Then the King had the cook called before him and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his service, and said he was to turn him off at once. The cook, though, had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener's boy.

And now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and bear the wind and bad weather. Once in summer, when he was working alone in the garden, the day was so warm that he took his little cap off to let the air cool him. And as the sun shone on his hair, it glittered and flashed so that the rays fell into the King's daughter's bedroom, and up she sprang to see what it could be.

Then she saw the boy, and called out to him, "Boy, bring me a wreath of flowers."

He put his cap on in all haste, and gathered wild field flowers and bound them together. As he was going up the stairs with them, the gardener met him and said, "How can you take the King's daughter a garland of such common flowers? Go quickly and get another, and pick out the prettiest and rarest."

"Oh, no," replied the boy, "the wild ones have more scent, and will please her better."

When he came into the room, the King's daughter said, "Take your cap off. It isn't proper to keep it on in my presence."

He said again, "I mustn't; I have a sore head."

She, though, caught at his cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair rolled down on his shoulders, and it was splendid to see. He wanted to run out, but she held him by the arm and gave him a handful of ducats. He went off with them, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces. He took them to the gardener and said, "I make a present of them to your children; they can play with them."

The following day the King's daughter called to him again to bring her a wreath of field flowers; and when he came in with it she instantly snatched at his cap and tried to take it off him, but he held it fast with both hands. She gave him a handful of ducats again, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the gardener as playthings for his children.

On the third day it went just the same: she could not get his cap off him, and he would not have her money.

Not long afterwards the country was overrun by war. The King gathered his people together and did not know whether he could put up any resistance to the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty army.

Then the gardener's boy said, "I'm grown up, and I'll go to the war too; only give me a horse."

The others laughed and said, "Look for one yourself when we've gone; we'll leave one behind in the stable for you."

When they had ridden out, he went into the stable and got the horse out. It was lame in one foot and went hobbling along, hobblety-jig, hobblety-jig; all the same he mounted it and rode away to the dark forest.

When he came to the edge of it, he called "Iron John" three times, so loudly that it echoed through the trees. At this the wild man appeared immediately and said, "What do you want?"

"I want a strong horse, for I'm going to the war."

"That you shall have, and more than you ask for."

Then the wild man went back into the forest; and it was not long before a stable boy came out of it leading a horse that snorted through its nostrils and could hardly be held in; and behind them followed a great troop of soldiers all equipped in iron, and their swords flashed in the sun.

The young man handed his three-legged horse over to the stable boy, mounted the other and rode at the head of the soldiers.

When he got near the battlefield, a great part of the King's men had already fallen, and it needed very little to make the rest give way. Then the young man galloped up with his iron soldiers, broke like a hurricane over the enemy and beat down everybody who stood against him. They began to run, but the young man pursued them and never stopped until there was not a single man left.

Instead of going back to the King, though, he led his troop by side roads back to the forest and called out Iron John.

"What do you want?" asked the wild man.

"Take back your horse and your troops, and give me my three-legged horse again."

Everything he asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged horse.

When the King returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him and wished him joy of his victory.

"I'm not the one who carried off the victory," said he, "but a strange knight who came to my help with his soldiers."

His daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was; but the King did not know, and said, "He followed the enemy, and I never saw him again."

She asked the gardener where his boy was; but he smiled and said, "He's just come home on his three-legged horse, and the others have been mocking him and crying, 'Here comes our hobblety-jig back again!' And they asked him too, 'Under what hedge have you been lying asleep all this time?' But he said, 'I did the best of anybody, and it would have gone badly without me.' And then they laughed at him all the more."

The King said to his daughter, "I'll proclaim a great feast that shall last three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Perhaps the stranger will come to it."

When the feast was announced, the young man went out to the forest and called Iron John.

"What do you want?" he asked.

"That I may catch the King's daughter's golden apple."

"It's as safe as if you had it already," said Iron John. "You shall have a suit of red armour for the occasion too, and ride a spirited chestnut horse."

When the day came, the young man galloped to the place and took his stand among the knights, and nobody recognised him. The King's daughter came forward and threw a golden apple to the knights; but none of them caught it but he — only, as soon as he had it, he galloped away.

On the second day Iron John equipped him as a white knight and gave him a white horse. Again he was the only one to catch the apple, and he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it.

The King grew angry and said, "That isn't allowed. He must come before me and tell me his name." And he gave orders that if the knight who caught the apple should go away again, they were to pursue him; and if he would not come back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.

On the third day he received from Iron John a suit of black armour and a black horse, and again he caught the apple. But as he was riding off with it the King's attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near that he wounded the young man's leg with the point of his sword. The young man escaped from them all the same; but his horse leapt so violently that the helmet fell off his head and they could see that he had golden hair. They rode back and reported this to the King.

The following day the King's daughter asked the gardener about his boy.

"He's at work in the garden. The queer creature has been at the festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; and he has shown my children three golden apples that he won."

The King had him summoned into his presence; and he came, and again had his little cap on his head. But the King's daughter went up to him and took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and he was so handsome that they were all amazed.

"Are you the knight who came to the festival every day, always in different colours, and who caught the three golden apples?" asked the King.

"Yes," answered he, "and here the apples are" — and he took them out of his pocket and gave them back to the King. "If you want further proof, you can see the wound your people gave me when they chased me. But I'm also the knight who helped you to your victory over your enemies."

"If you can perform such deeds as that, you're no gardener's boy. Tell me, who is your father?"

"My father is a mighty King, and I have gold in plenty, as much as I need."

"I can see plainly," said the King, "that I owe you thanks. Is there anything I can do to please you?"

"Yes," answered he, "there certainly is. Give me your daughter for a wife."

The girl laughed and said, "He doesn't stand much on ceremony; but I could see already by his golden hair that he was no gardener's boy" — and then she went and kissed him.

His father and mother came to the wedding and were in great delight, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear son again. And as they were sitting at the wedding feast, the music suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately King came in with a great retinue. He went up to the young man and embraced him and said, "I am Iron John, and I was a wild man by enchantment; but you set me free. All the treasures I possess shall be yours."

The Three Black Princesses

East India was besieged by an enemy who would not withdraw until he had been given six hundred dollars. Then the townspeople had it proclaimed by beat of drum that whoever could provide the money should be burgomaster.

Now there was a poor fisherman who fished on the lake with his son, and the enemy came and took his son prisoner and gave the father six hundred dollars for him. So the father went and gave the money to the great men of the town, and the enemy went away, and the fisherman became burgomaster. Then it was proclaimed that whoever did not say "Mr. Burgomaster" should be put to death on the gallows.

The son got away from the enemy again, and came to a great forest on a high mountain. The mountain opened, and he went into a great enchanted castle where the chairs and tables and benches were all hung with black.

Then three young princesses came who were dressed entirely in black, and whose faces were black too, except for a little white; and they told him he was not to be afraid, they would not hurt him, and that he could deliver them.

He said he would gladly do that, if only he knew how. At this they told him that for a whole year he must not speak to them and must not look at them either; and that whatever he wanted to have, he was just to ask for, and if they were allowed to give him an answer they would.

When he had been there a long while he said he should like to go to his father, and they told him he might go. He was to take this purse of money with him and put on this coat, and in a week he must be back there again.

Then he was caught up, and was instantly in East India. He could no longer find his father in the fisherman's hut, and asked the people where the poor fisherman might be; and they told him he must not say that, or he would come to the gallows.

Then he went to his father and said, "Fisherman, how did you get here?"

Then his father said, "You mustn't say that. If the great men of the town knew, you'd come to the gallows."

But he would not stop, and he was brought to the gallows. When he was there he said, "Oh, my masters, just give me leave to go to the old fisherman's hut."

Then he put on his old smock and came back to the great men and said, "Don't you see now? Am I not the poor fisherman's son? Didn't I earn bread for my father and mother in these clothes?"

At this his father knew him again, and begged his pardon and took him home with him. And then he told them everything that had happened to him: how he had come to a forest on a high mountain, and the mountain had opened, and he had gone into an enchanted castle where everything was black, and three young princesses had come to him who were black except for a little white on their faces. And they had told him not to be afraid, and that he could deliver them.

Then his mother said that might very well not be a good thing to do, and that he ought to take a holy-water vessel with him and drop some boiling water on their faces.

He went back again, and he was in great fear; and he dropped the water on their faces as they were sleeping, and they all turned half white.

Then all three princesses sprang up and said, "You accursed dog, our blood shall cry out for vengeance on you! Now there's no man born into the world, nor ever will be born, who can set us free. We still have three brothers who are bound with seven chains — they shall tear you to pieces."

Then there was a loud shrieking all over the castle, and he sprang out of the window and broke his leg; and the castle sank into the earth again, and the mountain closed up again, and nobody ever knew where the castle had stood.

Knoist and his Three Sons

Between Werrel and Soest there lived a man whose name was Knoist, and he had three sons. One was blind, another lame, and the third stark naked.

Once they went out into a field, and there they saw a hare. The blind one shot it, the lame one caught it, and the naked one put it in his pocket.

Then they came to a mighty big lake, on which there were three boats: one sailed, one sank, and the third had no bottom to it. All three of them got into the one with no bottom.

Then they came to a mighty big forest, and in it there was a mighty big tree; and in the tree was a mighty big chapel; and in the chapel was a sexton made of beechwood and a boxwood parson, who dealt out holy water with cudgels.

	How truly happy is that one
	who from the holy water can run.

The Maid of Brakel

A girl from Brakel once went to St. Anne's Chapel at the foot of the Hinnenberg; and as she wanted a husband and thought there was nobody else in the chapel, she sang:

	"Oh, holy Saint Anne,
	help me soon to a man.
	You know him right well,
	by Suttmer gate does he dwell,
	his hair it is golden —
	you know him right well."

The clerk, though, was standing behind the altar and heard it; so he cried out in a very gruff voice, "You shan't have him! You shan't have him!"

The girl thought that it was the child Mary, who stood beside her mother Anne, who had called that out to her; and she was angry, and cried, "Fiddle-de-dee, you conceited thing, hold your tongue and let your mother speak!"
