Domestic Servants

"Where are you going?"

"To Walpe."

"I to Walpe, you to Walpe — so, so, together we'll go."

"Have you a man? What's your man's name?"

"Tame."

"My man Tame, your man Tame; I to Walpe, you to Walpe — so, so, together we'll go."

"Have you a child? How is the child styled?"

"Wild."

"My child Wild, your child Wild; my man Tame, your man Tame; I to Walpe, you to Walpe — so, so, together we'll go."

"Have you a cradle? What do you call your cradle?"

"Hippodadle."

"My cradle Hippodadle, my child Wild, your child Wild, my man Tame, your man Tame; I to Walpe, you to Walpe — so, so, together we'll go."

"And have you a drudge? What's the name of your drudge?"

"From-your-work-don't-budge."

"My drudge From-your-work-don't-budge, my cradle Hippodadle, my child Wild, your child Wild, my man Tame, your man Tame; I to Walpe, you to Walpe — so, so, together we'll go."

The Lambkin and the Little Fish

There were once a little brother and a little sister who loved each other with all their hearts. Their own mother was dead, though, and they had a stepmother who was not kind to them, and secretly did everything she could to hurt them.

It happened that the two of them were playing with some other children in a meadow in front of the house; and there was a pond in the meadow that came right up to one side of the house. The children ran about it and chased each other and played at counting out:

	"Eneke Beneke, let me live,
	and I to you my bird will give.
	The little bird, it straw shall seek,
	the straw I'll give the cow to eat.
	The pretty cow shall give me milk,
	the milk I'll to the baker take.
	The baker he shall bake a cake,
	the cake I'll give unto the cat.
	The cat shall catch some mice for that,
	the mice I'll hang up in the smoke —
	and then you'll see the snow."

They stood in a circle while they played this; and whoever the word "snow" fell on had to run away, and all the others ran after him and caught him.

And as they were running about so merrily, the stepmother watched them from the window and grew angry. And as she understood the arts of witchcraft, she bewitched them both, and changed the little brother into a fish and the little sister into a lamb.

Then the fish swam here and there about the pond and was very sad, and the lamb walked up and down the meadow and was miserable, and could not eat or touch a single blade of grass.

A long time passed like this, and then strangers came to the castle as visitors. The false stepmother thought, "This is a good opportunity" — and called the cook and said to him, "Go and fetch the lamb from the meadow and kill it; we have nothing else for the visitors."

So the cook went and got the lamb and took it into the kitchen and tied its feet; and it bore all this patiently.

And when he had drawn out his knife and was whetting it on the doorstep to kill the lamb, he noticed a little fish swimming backwards and forwards in the water in front of the kitchen sink, and looking up at him. This, though, was the brother; for when the fish saw the cook take the lamb away, it followed them and swam along the pond to the house.

Then the lamb called down to it:

	"Ah, brother, in the pond so deep,
	how sad is my poor heart!
	Even now the cook he whets his knife
	to take away my tender life."

The little fish answered:

	"Ah, little sister, up on high,
	how sad is my poor heart
	while in this pond I lie."

When the cook heard that the lamb could speak and was saying such sad words to the fish down below, he was terrified, and thought this could be no ordinary lamb, but must have been bewitched by the wicked woman in the house.

So he said, "Be easy, I won't kill you" — and took another sheep and prepared it for the guests, and took the lamb to a good peasant woman, and told her everything he had seen and heard.

But the peasant woman was the very one who had been foster-mother to the little sister, and she guessed at once who the lamb was, and went with it to a wise woman. Then the wise woman spoke a blessing over the lamb and the little fish, by which they got their human shapes back again; and after this she took them both to a little hut in a great forest, where they lived alone, but were contented and happy.

Simeli Mountain

There were once two brothers, one rich and the other poor. The rich one, though, gave the poor one nothing; and he made a scanty living by trading in corn, and often did so badly that he had no bread for his wife and children.

Once, as he was wheeling a barrow through the forest, he saw a great bare, naked-looking mountain at one side of him; and as he had never seen it before, he stood still and stared at it in amazement.

And while he was standing there he saw twelve great wild men coming towards him; and as he thought they were robbers, he pushed his barrow into the thicket and climbed up a tree and waited to see what would happen.

The twelve men, though, went up to the mountain and cried, "Semsi Mountain, Semsi Mountain, open" — and immediately the barren mountain opened down the middle, and the twelve went into it, and as soon as they were inside it shut.

After a short time, though, it opened again, and the men came out carrying heavy sacks on their shoulders; and when they were all in the daylight again they said, "Semsi Mountain, Semsi Mountain, shut yourself." Then the mountain closed up, and there was no entrance to it to be seen any more; and the twelve went away.

When they were quite out of sight, the poor man got down from the tree and was curious to know what really was hidden away in the mountain. So he went up to it and said, "Semsi Mountain, Semsi Mountain, open" — and the mountain opened for him too.

Then he went inside; and the whole mountain was a cavern full of silver and gold, and at the back lay great piles of pearls and sparkling jewels, heaped up like corn. The poor man hardly knew what to do, or whether he might take any of these treasures for himself or not; but at last he filled his pockets with gold, though he left the pearls and precious stones where they were.

When he came out again he said too, "Semsi Mountain, Semsi Mountain, shut yourself" — and the mountain closed itself up, and he went home with his barrow.

And now he had no more cause for worry, but could buy bread for his wife and children with his gold, and wine into the bargain. He lived joyfully and honestly, gave help to the poor, and did good to everybody.

When the money came to an end, though, he went to his brother and borrowed a bushel measure, and fetched himself some more — but did not touch any of the more valuable things. And when he wanted to fetch something for the third time, he borrowed his brother's measure again.

The rich man, though, had long been envious of his brother's possessions and of the handsome way of life he had set up, and could not understand where the riches came from, or what his brother wanted with the measure. So he thought of a cunning trick, and covered the bottom of the measure with pitch; and when he got the measure back, a piece of money was sticking to it.

He went straight to his brother and asked him, "What have you been measuring in the bushel measure?"

"Corn and barley," said the other.

Then he showed him the piece of money, and threatened that if he did not tell the truth he would accuse him before a court of justice. So the poor man told him everything, just as it had happened.

But the rich man ordered his carriage to be got ready, and drove off, determined to use the opportunity better than his brother had and to bring back quite different treasures.

When he came to the mountain he cried, "Semsi Mountain, Semsi Mountain, open." The mountain opened and he went inside. There lay all the treasures in front of him, and for a long time he did not know what to snatch at first. At length he loaded himself with as many precious stones as he could carry.

He wanted to carry his burden outside; but as his heart and soul were entirely full of the treasures, he had forgotten the name of the mountain, and cried, "Simeli Mountain, Simeli Mountain, open."

But that was not the right name, and the mountain never stirred, but stayed shut. Then he grew alarmed; but the longer he thought about it, the more confused his thoughts became, and his treasures were of no use to him at all.

In the evening the mountain opened and the twelve robbers came in; and when they saw him they laughed and cried out, "Bird, have we caught you at last? Did you think we'd never noticed that you'd been in here twice? We couldn't catch you then; this third time you shan't get out again."

Then he cried, "It wasn't me, it was my brother" — but beg for his life and say what he might, they cut his head off.

Going A-Travelling

There was once a poor woman who had a son who very much wanted to travel; but his mother said, "How can you travel? We have no money at all for you to take with you."

Then her son said, "I'll manage very well for myself. I'll always say, 'Not much, not much, not much.'"

So he walked a long time and always said, "Not much, not much, not much."

Then he passed a company of fishermen and said, "God speed you! Not much, not much, not much."

"What do you say, you lout — 'not much'?"

And when the net was drawn in they had not caught much fish. So one of them set on the young man with a stick and said, "Have you never seen me threshing?"

"What ought I to say, then?" asked the young man.

"You must say, 'Get it full, get it full.'"

After this he walked a long time again and said, "Get it full, get it full" — until he came to the gallows, where they had a poor sinner they were about to hang.

Then he said, "Good morning; get it full, get it full."

"What do you say, you rogue — 'get it full'? Do you want to make out that there are still more wicked people in the world? Isn't this enough?"

And he got some more blows on his back.

"What am I to say, then?" said he.

"You must say, 'May God have pity on the poor soul.'"

Again the young man walked on a long while and said, "May God have pity on the poor soul!" Then he came to a pit where a knacker was standing, cutting up a horse.

The young man said, "Good morning; God have pity on the poor soul!"

"What do you say, you ill-tempered rogue?" — and the knacker gave him such a box on the ear that he could not see out of his eyes.

"What am I to say, then?"

"You must say, 'There lies the carrion in the pit.'"

So he walked on and always said, "There lies the carrion in the pit, there lies the carrion in the pit." And he came to a cart full of people, so he said, "Good morning; there lies the carrion in the pit!"

Then the cart pushed him into a hole, and the driver took his whip and cracked it over the young man until he had to crawl back to his mother; and as long as he lived he never went out travelling again.

The Donkey

Once upon a time there lived a King and a Queen who were rich and had everything they wanted, but no children. The Queen lamented over this day and night, and said, "I'm like a field where nothing grows."

At last God granted her her wish; but when the child came into the world it did not look like a human child, but was a little donkey.

When the mother saw that, her lamenting and crying began in real earnest. She said she would far rather have had no child at all than have a donkey, and that they were to throw it into the water for the fish to devour.

But the King said, "No. Since God has sent him, he shall be my son and heir, and after my death he shall sit on the royal throne and wear the kingly crown."

So the donkey was brought up and grew bigger, and his ears grew up beautifully high and straight. He was of a merry disposition, though; he jumped about and played, and took a particular pleasure in music, so that he went to a famous musician and said, "Teach me your art, so that I can play the lute as well as you do."

"Ah, dear little master," answered the musician, "that would come very hard to you. Your fingers are certainly not made for it, and are far too big. I'm afraid the strings wouldn't last."

But no excuses were any use. The donkey was determined to play the lute; he was persevering and hard-working, and at last learned to do it as well as the master himself.

The young lordling went out walking one day full of thought, and came to a well; he looked into it, and in the mirror-clear water he saw his donkey's shape. He was so distressed about it that he went out into the wide world, and took only one faithful companion with him.

They travelled up and down, and at last came into a kingdom where an old King reigned who had an only daughter, and she was wonderfully beautiful.

The donkey said, "We'll stay here" — and knocked at the gate and cried, "A guest is outside; open, so that he can come in."

But as the gate was not opened, he sat down and took his lute and played it in the most delightful manner with his two forefeet. Then the doorkeeper opened his eyes wonderfully wide, and ran to the King and said, "Outside by the gate sits a young donkey that plays the lute as well as an experienced master."

"Then let the musician come to me," said the King.

But when a donkey came in, everybody began to laugh at the lute player. And now the donkey was asked to sit down and eat with the servants. But he was unwilling, and said, "I'm no common stable ass, I'm a noble one."

Then they said, "If that's what you are, sit yourself down with the men of war."

"No," said he, "I'll sit by the King."

The King smiled and said good-humouredly, "Yes, it shall be as you wish, little ass. Come here to me." Then he asked, "Little ass, how does my daughter please you?"

The donkey turned his head towards her, looked at her, nodded and said, "I like her beyond measure. I've never yet seen anybody as beautiful as she is."

"Well then, you shall sit next to her too," said the King.

"That's exactly what I want," said the donkey — and placed himself at her side, and ate and drank, and knew how to behave himself daintily and cleanly.

When the noble beast had stayed a long while at the King's court, he thought, "What good does all this do me? I shall have to go home again in the end" — and let his head hang sadly, and went to the King and asked for his leave to go.

But the King had grown fond of him and said, "Little ass, what's the matter with you? You look as sour as a jug of vinegar. I'll give you whatever you want. Do you want gold?"

"No," said the donkey, and shook his head.

"Do you want jewels and rich clothes?"

"No."

"Do you want half my kingdom?"

"Indeed, no."

Then the King said, "If only I knew what would make you content. Will you have my pretty daughter for a wife?"

"Ah, yes," said the ass, "I should indeed like her." And all at once he grew quite merry and full of happiness, for that was exactly what he had been wishing for.

So a great and splendid wedding was held. And in the evening, when the bride and bridegroom were led into their bedroom, the King wanted to know whether the ass would behave well, and ordered a servant to hide himself there.

When the two of them were inside, the bridegroom bolted the door and looked round; and as he believed they were quite alone, he suddenly threw off his ass's skin and stood there in the shape of a handsome royal youth.

"Now," said he, "you see who I am; and you see too that I'm not unworthy of you."

Then the bride was glad, and kissed him and loved him dearly.

When morning came he jumped up and put his animal's skin on again, and nobody could have guessed what sort of shape was hidden beneath it.

Soon the old King came. "Ah," cried he, "is the little ass merry? But surely you're sad," he said to his daughter, "that you haven't got a proper man for a husband?"

"Oh, no, dear father. I love him as much as if he were the handsomest man in the world, and I'll keep him as long as I live."

The King was surprised; but the servant who had hidden himself came and told him everything.

The King said, "That can't be true."

"Then watch yourself the next night and you'll see it with your own eyes. And listen, my lord King: if you were to take his skin away and throw it in the fire, he'd be forced to show himself in his true shape."

"Your advice is good," said the King. And at night, when they were asleep, he stole in; and when he got to the bed he saw by the light of the moon a noble-looking young man lying there, with the skin stretched out on the floor. So he took it away and had a great fire lit outside and threw the skin into it, and stayed by it himself until it was all burnt to ashes.

But as he was anxious to see how the robbed man would behave, he stayed awake the whole night and watched.

When the young man had slept his sleep out, he got up at the first light of morning and wanted to put the ass's skin on; but it was not to be found. At this he was alarmed, and full of grief and anxiety said, "Now I shall have to find some way of escaping."

But when he went out, there stood the King, who said, "My son, where away in such haste? What have you in mind? Stay here — you're such a handsome man, you shan't go away from me. I'll give you half my kingdom now, and after my death you shall have the whole of it."

"Then I hope that what begins so well may end well; and I'll stay with you," said the young man.

And the old man gave him half the kingdom; and in a year's time, when he died, the young man had the whole of it. And after his own father's death he had another kingdom as well, and lived in all magnificence.

The Ungrateful Son

A man and his wife were once sitting by the door of their house with a roast chicken set in front of them, and were about to eat it together.

Then the man saw that his aged father was coming, and hastily took the chicken and hid it, for he would not let him have any of it. The old man came, took a drink, and went away.

Now the son wanted to put the roast chicken back on the table; but when he picked it up, it had turned into a great toad, which jumped into his face and sat there and never went away again. And if anybody tried to take it off, it looked venomously at him as if it would jump in his face too, so that nobody dared touch it.

And the ungrateful son was forced to feed the toad every day, or else it fed itself on his face; and so he went about the world without ever knowing rest.
