The Star-Money

There was once a little girl whose father and mother were dead, and she was so poor that she no longer had any little room to live in or bed to sleep in, and at last had nothing at all but the clothes she was wearing and a little bit of bread in her hand that some charitable soul had given her. She was good and pious, though.

And as she was forsaken like this by the whole world, she went out into the open country, trusting in the good God.

Then a poor man met her, who said, "Ah, give me something to eat — I'm so hungry!" She held out the whole of her piece of bread to him and said, "May God bless it to your use" — and went on.

Then came a child who moaned and said, "My head is so cold; give me something to cover it with." So she took off her hood and gave it to him.

And when she had walked a little further she met another child who had no jacket and was frozen with cold; so she gave the child her own. And a little further on one begged for a frock, and she gave that away as well.

At length she came into a forest, and it had already grown dark; and there came yet another child and asked for a little shirt. And the good little girl thought to herself, "It's a dark night and nobody can see you; you can easily give your little shirt away" — and took it off and gave that away too.

And as she stood there, without one single thing left, suddenly some stars fell down out of heaven; and they were nothing else but hard, smooth pieces of money. And although she had just given her little shirt away, she had a new one on, of the very finest linen. So she gathered the money together into it, and was rich all the days of her life.

The Stolen Farthings

A father was sitting at dinner one day with his wife and his children, and a good friend who had come on a visit was with them.

And as they were sitting there, and it was striking twelve o'clock, the visitor saw the door open and a very pale child dressed in snow-white clothes come in. It did not look round, and it did not speak, but went straight into the next room. Soon afterwards it came back and went out at the door again in the same quiet way.

On the second and the third day it came in exactly the same way.

At last the visitor asked the father whom the beautiful child belonged to that went into the next room every day at noon.

"I've never seen it," said he — nor did he know whom it could belong to.

Next day, when it came again, the visitor pointed it out to the father; but he did not see it, and the mother and the children saw nothing either.

At this the visitor got up and went to the door of the room and opened it a little way and looked in. And then he saw the child sitting on the floor, digging and searching busily among the cracks between the floorboards; but when it saw the visitor it disappeared.

He told them now what he had seen, and described the child exactly; and the mother recognised it and said, "Ah, it's my dear child who died a month ago."

They took up the boards and found two farthings that the child had once been given by its mother to give to a poor man. But it had thought, "You can buy yourself a biscuit with that" — and had kept the farthings and hidden them in the gaps between the boards. And so it had had no rest in its grave, and had come every day at noon to search for these farthings.

The parents gave the money at once to a poor man, and after that the child was never seen again.

Brides On Their Trial

There was once a young shepherd who very much wanted to marry, and who knew three sisters who were all equally pretty, so that it was hard for him to make a choice and he could not decide which of them to prefer.

So he asked his mother for advice, and she said, "Invite all three, and set some cheese in front of them, and watch how they eat it."

The young man did so. The first, though, swallowed the cheese with the rind on. The second cut the rind off the cheese in a hurry — but she cut it so fast that she left a lot of good cheese on it and threw that away too. The third peeled the rind off carefully, and cut away neither too much nor too little.

The shepherd told his mother all this, and she said, "Take the third for your wife." And he did, and lived contentedly and happily with her.

Odds And Ends

There was once a girl who was pretty, but idle and careless. When she had to spin she got so out of temper that if there was a little knot in the flax she pulled out a whole heap of it at once and strewed it about on the ground beside her.

Now she had a servant who was hard-working, and who gathered up the bits of flax that were thrown away, and cleaned them and spun them fine and had a beautiful gown made out of them for herself.

A young man had courted the lazy girl, and the wedding was to take place. On the eve of the wedding the hard-working one was dancing merrily about in her pretty dress, and the bride said:

"Ah, how that girl does jump about, dressed in my odds and ends."

The bridegroom heard that, and asked the bride what she meant by it. Then she told him that the girl was wearing a dress made out of the flax she had thrown away.

When the bridegroom heard that, and saw how idle she was and how hard-working the poor girl was, he gave her up and went to the other and chose her for his wife.

The Sparrow And His Four Children

A sparrow had four young ones in a swallow's nest. When they were fledged, some naughty boys pulled the nest down; but luckily all the birds got safely away in the high wind.

Then the old bird was grieved that his sons had all gone out into the world without his having first warned them of every kind of danger and given them good instruction in how to deal with each.

In the autumn a great many sparrows gathered together in a wheatfield, and there the old bird met his four children again, and full of joy took them home with him.

"Ah, my dear sons, what pain I've been in about you all through the summer, because you got away in the wind without my teaching. Listen to my words, obey your father, and be well on your guard. Little birds have great dangers to meet."

And then he asked the eldest where he had spent the summer and how he had supported himself.

"I stayed in the gardens and looked for caterpillars and small worms, until the cherries got ripe."

"Ah, my son," said the father, "titbits are not bad, but there's great risk about them. On that account take great care of yourself from now on — and particularly when people are going about the gardens carrying long green poles that are hollow inside and have a little hole at the top."

"Yes, father; but what if a little green leaf is stuck over the hole with wax?" said the son.

"Where have you seen that?"

"In a merchant's garden," said the youngster.

"Oh, my son, merchant folk are quick folk," said the father. "If you've been among the children of the world, you've learned worldly shiftiness enough. Only see that you use it well, and don't be too confident."

After this he asked the next, "Where have you passed your time?"

"At court," said the son.

"Sparrows and silly little birds are of no use in that place. There you find plenty of gold, velvet, silk, armour, harness, sparrowhawks, screech owls and hen harriers. Keep to the horses' stable, where they winnow oats or thresh; and then fortune may give you your daily grain of corn in peace."

"Yes, father," said the son, "but when the stable boys make traps and set their gins and snares in the straw, many a bird is caught fast."

"Where have you seen that?" said the old bird.

"At court, among the stable boys."

"Oh, my son, court boys are bad boys. If you've been to court and among the lords and left no feathers there, you've learned a fair amount and will know very well how to go about the world; but look around you and above you, for the wolves devour the wisest dogs."

The father examined the third as well. "Where did you seek your safety?"

"I've broken up tubs and ropes on the cart roads and highways, and sometimes came upon a grain of corn or barley."

"That's dainty fare indeed," said the father, "but take care what you're about and look carefully around you — especially when you see anybody stooping down and about to pick up a stone; there isn't much time to linger then."

"That's true," said the son, "but what if somebody has a bit of rock or ore ready beforehand in his shirt or his pocket?"

"Where have you seen that?"

"Among the mountain men, dear father. When they go out they generally take little bits of ore with them."

"Mountain folk are working folk, and clever folk. If you've been among mountain lads you've seen and learned something; but when you go there, beware, for many a sparrow has come to a bad end through a mountain boy."

At length the father came to the youngest son. "You, my dear chirping nestling, were always the silliest and weakest. Stay with me. The world has many rough, wicked birds in it, with crooked beaks and long claws, that lie in wait for poor little birds and swallow them. Keep with your own kind, and pick up little spiders and caterpillars from the trees or the house, and then you'll live long in peace."

"My dear father, whoever feeds himself without harming other people fares well; and no sparrowhawk or eagle or kite will hurt him, if he faithfully commits himself and his lawful food to God, evening and morning — God, who is the Creator and Preserver of all forest and village birds, who hears the cry and prayer of the young ravens too; for no sparrow or wren ever falls to the ground except by his will."

"Where did you learn this?"

The son answered, "When the great blast of wind tore me away from you I came to a church; and there through the summer I've picked up the flies and spiders from the windows, and heard this preached. The Father of all sparrows fed me all the summer through, and kept me from all mischance and from savage birds."

"In truth, my dear son, if you take refuge in the churches and help to clear away the spiders and the buzzing flies, and cry out to God like the young ravens and commend yourself to the eternal Creator, all will be well with you — and that even if the whole world were full of wild, malicious birds.

	He who to God commits his ways,
	in silence suffers, waits and prays,
	preserves his faith and conscience pure —
	he is of God's protection sure."

The Story of Schlauraffen Land

In the time of Schlauraffen I went there, and saw Rome and the Lateran hanging by a small silken thread, and a man without feet who outran a swift horse, and a keen sharp sword that cut through a bridge.

There I saw a young donkey with a silver nose that chased two swift hares, and a lime tree that was very large, on which hot cakes were growing.

There I saw a lean old goat that carried about a hundred cartloads of fat on his body, and sixty loads of salt.

Have I not told enough lies?

There I saw a plough ploughing without horse or cow; and a child of one year old threw four millstones from Regensburg to Trier, and from Trier to Strasbourg; and a hawk swam over the Rhine, which he had a perfect right to do.

There I heard some fishes start making such a commotion with each other that it echoed as far as heaven; and sweet honey flowed like water from a deep valley at the top of a high mountain; and these were strange things.

There were two crows mowing a meadow, and I saw two gnats building a bridge, and two doves tore a wolf to pieces; two children gave birth to two kids, and two frogs threshed corn together.

There I saw two mice consecrating a bishop, and two cats scratching out a bear's tongue. Then a snail came running up and killed two furious lions.

There stood a barber shaving a woman's beard off; and two suckling children told their mother to hold her tongue.

There I saw two greyhounds bringing a mill out of the water; and a sorry old horse stood beside it and said it was right. And four horses were standing in the yard threshing corn with all their might, and two goats were heating the stove, and a red cow shot the bread into the oven.

Then a cock crowed, "Cock-a-doodle-doo!" The story is all told — cock-a-doodle-doo!

The Ditmarsch Tale of Wonders

I'll tell you something. I saw two roast fowls flying; they flew quickly, and had their breasts turned to heaven and their backs to hell; and an anvil and a millstone swam across the Rhine prettily, slowly and gently; and a frog sat on the ice at Whitsuntide and ate a ploughshare.

Three fellows who wanted to catch a hare went on crutches and stilts; one of them was deaf, the second blind, the third could not speak, and the fourth could not stir a step. Do you want to know how it was done? First the blind man saw the hare running across the field, the one who could not speak called to the lame one, and the lame one seized it by the neck.

There were certain men who wanted to sail on dry land, and they set their sails in the wind and sailed away over great fields. Then they sailed over a high mountain, and there they were miserably drowned.

A crab was chasing a hare that was running away at full speed; and high up on the roof lay a cow that had climbed up there. In that country the flies are as big as the goats are here.

Open the window, so that the lies can fly out.

A Riddling Tale

Three women were changed into flowers that grew in a field; but one of them was allowed to be in her own home at night.

Then once, when day was drawing near and she had to go back to her companions in the field and become a flower again, she said to her husband, "If you'll come this afternoon and pick me, I shall be set free and stay with you from then on." And he did so.

Now the question is: how did her husband know her, when the flowers were exactly alike, without any difference between them?

Answer: as she had been at her home during the night and not in the field, no dew fell on her as it did on the others; and by this her husband knew her.
