Snow-White and Rose-Red

There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In front of the cottage was a garden with two rose trees in it, one of which bore white roses and the other red. She had two children who were like the two rose trees, and one was called Snow-White and the other Rose-Red. They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful, as any two children in the world ever were — only Snow-White was more quiet and gentle than Rose-Red.

Rose-Red liked better to run about the meadows and fields looking for flowers and catching butterflies; but Snow-White sat at home with her mother and helped her with the housework, or read to her when there was nothing to do.

The two children were so fond of each other that they always held each other by the hand when they went out together; and when Snow-White said, "We won't leave each other," Rose-Red answered, "Never, as long as we live" — and their mother would add, "What one of you has, she must share with the other."

They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no animals did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The little hare would eat a cabbage leaf out of their hands, the roe deer grazed at their side, the stag leapt merrily past them, and the birds sat still on the boughs and sang whatever they knew.

No mishap ever came to them. If they had stayed too late in the forest and night came on, they lay down next to each other on the moss and slept until morning came; and their mother knew this and felt no distress about them.

Once, when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had woken them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near their bed. He got up and looked at them quite kindly, but said nothing, and went away into the forest. And when they looked round they found that they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would certainly have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few steps further. And their mother told them that it must have been the angel who watches over good children.

Snow-White and Rose-Red kept their mother's little cottage so neat that it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer Rose-Red took care of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother's bed before she woke, with a rose from each tree in it. In the winter Snow-White lit the fire and hung the kettle on the hook over it. The kettle was of copper and shone like gold, it was polished so brightly.

In the evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said, "Go, Snow-White, and bolt the door" — and then they sat round the hearth, and their mother took her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls listened as they sat and spun. And close beside them a lamb lay on the floor, and behind them a white dove sat on a perch with its head hidden under its wing.

One evening, as they were sitting comfortably together like this, somebody knocked at the door as if he wanted to be let in.

Their mother said, "Quick, Rose-Red, open the door; it must be a traveller looking for shelter."

Rose-Red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a poor man; but it was not. It was a bear, that stretched his broad black head in at the door.

Rose-Red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered, and Snow-White hid behind her mother's bed. But the bear began to speak, and said, "Don't be afraid, I'll do you no harm. I'm half frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside you."

"Poor bear," said the mother, "lie down by the fire; only take care you don't burn your coat." Then she called, "Snow-White, Rose-Red, come out; the bear will do you no harm, he means well."

So they both came out; and by and by the lamb and the dove came nearer too, and were not afraid of him.

The bear said, "Here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a little." So they brought the broom and swept the bear's hide clean; and he stretched himself out by the fire and growled contentedly and comfortably.

It was not long before they grew quite at home with him and played tricks on their clumsy guest. They tugged his hair with their hands, put their feet on his back and rolled him about, or took a hazel switch and beat him; and when he growled, they laughed. But the bear took it all in good part; only when they were too rough he called out, "Leave me alive, children:

	Snowy-White, Rosy-Red,
	will you beat your lover dead?"

When it was bedtime, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the bear, "You can lie there by the hearth, and then you'll be safe from the cold and the bad weather." And as soon as day dawned the two children let him out, and he trotted away across the snow into the forest.

From then on the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself down by the hearth and let the children amuse themselves with him as much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were never fastened until their black friend had arrived.

When spring had come and everything outside was green, the bear said one morning to Snow-White, "Now I must go away, and I can't come back the whole summer."

"Where are you going, then, dear bear?" asked Snow-White.

"I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they have to stay down below and can't work their way through; but now, when the sun has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it and come out to pry and steal. And whatever once gets into their hands and into their caves doesn't easily see daylight again."

Snow-White was quite sorry that he was going away; and as she unbolted the door for him and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off; and it seemed to Snow-White as if she had seen gold shining through it, though she was not sure about it. The bear ran away quickly and was soon out of sight behind the trees.

A short time afterwards their mother sent the children into the forest to get firewood. There they found a big tree lying felled on the ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and forwards in the grass, though they could not make out what it was.

When they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was caught in a crack in the tree, and the little fellow was jumping backwards and forwards like a dog tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.

He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried, "Why are you standing there? Can't you come over and help me?"

"What are you doing there, little man?" asked Rose-Red.

"You stupid, prying goose!" answered the dwarf. "I was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking. The little bit of food that one of us needs gets burnt up at once with thick logs; we don't swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. I'd just driven the wedge safely in and everything was going as I wanted; but the wretched wood was too smooth and suddenly sprang apart, and the tree closed so quickly that I couldn't pull out my beautiful white beard. So now it's held fast and I can't get away — and the silly, sleek, milk-faced things laugh! Ugh, how odious you are!"

The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out; it was caught too fast.

"I'll run and fetch somebody," said Rose-Red.

"You senseless goose!" snarled the dwarf. "Why should you fetch somebody? There are two of you already, and that's two too many for me. Can't you think of something better?"

"Don't be impatient," said Snow-White, "I'll help you" — and she pulled her scissors out of her pocket and cut off the end of the beard.

As soon as the dwarf felt himself free, he took hold of a bag that lay among the roots of the tree, which was full of gold, and lifted it up, grumbling to himself, "Uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine beard. Bad luck to you!" And then he swung the bag onto his back and went off without so much as looking at the children once.

Some time after that, Snow-White and Rose-Red went to catch a dish of fish. As they came near the brook they saw something like a large grasshopper hopping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in. They ran to it and found it was the dwarf.

"Where are you going?" said Rose-Red. "You surely don't want to go into the water?"

"I'm not such a fool!" cried the dwarf. "Don't you see that the accursed fish wants to pull me in?"

The little man had been sitting there fishing, and unluckily the wind had twisted his beard round the fishing line. Just then a big fish bit, and the feeble creature had not the strength to pull it out; the fish had the upper hand and was dragging the dwarf towards it. He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it was of little use; he had to follow the movements of the fish, and was in real danger of being dragged into the water.

The girls came just in time. They held him fast and tried to free his beard from the line, but all in vain: beard and line were tangled fast together. Nothing was left but to bring out the scissors and cut the beard, by which a small part of it was lost.

When the dwarf saw that, he screamed out, "Is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man's face? Wasn't it enough to clip off the end of my beard? Now you've cut off the best part of it. I can't let myself be seen by my own people. I wish you'd been made to run the soles off your shoes!"

Then he took out a sack of pearls that was lying in the rushes, and without another word he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon afterwards their mother sent the two children into the town to buy needles and thread and laces and ribbons. The road led them across a heath where huge pieces of rock lay strewn here and there.

Now they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round and round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near a rock not far off. Directly afterwards they heard a loud, piteous cry. They ran up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf and was about to carry him off.

The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man and pulled against the eagle so long that at last it let its prey go. As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried in his shrill voice, "Couldn't you have done it more carefully? You dragged at my brown coat so that it's all torn and full of holes, you helpless, clumsy creatures!"

Then he took up a sack full of precious stones and slipped away again under the rock into his hole. The girls, who by this time were used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their business in the town.

As they crossed the heath again on their way home, they came upon the dwarf by surprise. He had tipped his bag of precious stones out on a clean patch of ground, and had not thought that anybody would come that way so late. The evening sun shone on the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled in all colours so beautifully that the children stood still and looked at them.

"Why are you standing there gaping?" cried the dwarf, and his ash-grey face turned copper-red with rage.

He was going on with his bad words when a loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out of the forest. The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could not get to his cave, for the bear was already close by.

Then in the dread of his heart he cried, "Dear Mr. Bear, spare me, and I'll give you all my treasures! Look — the beautiful jewels lying there! Grant me my life; what do you want with a slender little fellow like me? You wouldn't feel me between your teeth. Come, take these two wicked girls; they're tender morsels for you, fat as young quails. For mercy's sake, eat them!"

The bear took no notice of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single blow with his paw, and he never moved again.

The girls had run away; but the bear called after them, "Snow-White and Rose-Red, don't be afraid. Wait — I'll come with you."

Then they knew his voice and waited; and when he came up to them, his bearskin suddenly fell off, and he stood there a handsome man, clothed all in gold.

"I'm a King's son," he said, "and I was bewitched by that wicked dwarf, who had stolen my treasures. I've had to run about the forest as a savage bear until I was freed by his death. Now he's had his well-deserved punishment."

Snow-White was married to him, and Rose-Red to his brother; and they divided between them the great treasure the dwarf had gathered together in his cave. Their old mother lived peacefully and happily with her children for many years. She took the two rose trees with her, and they stood in front of her window and bore the most beautiful roses every year, white and red.

The Wise Servant

How fortunate the master is, and how well everything goes in his house, when he has a wise servant who listens to his orders and does not obey them, but prefers to follow his own wisdom.

A clever John of this kind was once sent out by his master to look for a lost cow. He stayed away a long time, and his master thought, "Faithful John spares no pains over his work."

But as he did not come back at all, his master began to fear that some misfortune had happened to him, and set out himself to look for him. He had to search a long time, but at last he caught sight of the boy running up and down a large field.

"Now, dear John," said his master when he had got up to him, "have you found the cow I sent you to look for?"

"No, master," he answered, "I haven't found the cow — but then I haven't looked for it."

"Then what have you been looking for, John?"

"Something better; and luckily I've found it."

"What's that, John?"

"Three blackbirds," answered the boy.

"And where are they?" asked his master.

"I can see one of them, I can hear the second, and I'm running after the third," answered the wise boy.

Take an example from this: don't trouble yourselves about your masters or their orders, but do whatever comes into your head and pleases you, and then you'll be acting just as wisely as prudent John.
