The Glass Coffin

Let nobody ever say that a poor tailor can't do great things and win high honours. All that's needed is that he should go to the right smithy — and, what matters most, that he should have good luck.

A civil, capable tailor's apprentice once went out travelling and came into a great forest; and as he did not know the way, he lost himself. Night fell, and nothing was left for him to do but look for a bed in that painful solitude. He could certainly have found a good bed on the soft moss, but his fear of wild animals gave him no rest there, and at last he had to make up his mind to spend the night in a tree. He picked out a high oak, climbed to the top of it, and thanked God that he had his pressing iron with him, for otherwise the wind blowing over the top of the tree would have carried him away.

After he had spent some hours in the darkness — not without fear and trembling — he saw the glimmer of a light a very short way off; and as he thought there might be a human dwelling there, where he would be better off than on the branches of a tree, he climbed carefully down and went towards the light.

It led him to a small hut woven together out of reeds and rushes. He knocked boldly; the door opened, and by the light that came out he saw a little hoary old man wearing a coat made of scraps of coloured stuff sewn together.

"Who are you, and what do you want?" the man asked in a grumbling voice.

"I'm a poor tailor," he answered, "whom night has caught out here in the wilderness; and I beg you earnestly to take me into your hut until morning."

"Go your way," replied the old man in a surly voice. "I'll have nothing to do with vagabonds. Find yourself a shelter somewhere else."

And after these words he was about to slip back into his hut; but the tailor held him so tightly by the corner of his coat and pleaded so piteously that the old man, who was not as ill-natured as he wanted to appear, was softened at last, and took him into the hut, where he gave him something to eat and then pointed out a very good bed in a corner.

The weary tailor needed no rocking, but slept sweetly till morning; and even then he would not have thought of getting up if he had not been roused by a great noise. A violent sound of screaming and roaring forced its way through the thin walls of the hut. The tailor, full of unaccustomed courage, jumped up, put his clothes on in haste and hurried out.

Then close by the hut he saw a great black bull and a beautiful stag just preparing for a violent struggle. They rushed at each other with such extreme rage that the ground shook with their trampling and the air rang with their cries. For a long time it was uncertain which of the two would win; but at length the stag drove his horns into his opponent's body, whereupon the bull fell to the earth with a terrific roar and was thoroughly finished off by a few strokes from the stag.

The tailor, who had watched the fight in astonishment, was still standing there motionless when the stag came bounding up to him at full speed; and before he could get away, it caught him up on its great horns. He had not much time to collect his thoughts, for it went at a swift race over stock and stone, mountain and valley, wood and meadow. He held on with both hands to the tops of the horns and gave himself up to his fate. It seemed to him just as if he were flying.

At length the stag stopped in front of a wall of rock and gently let the tailor down. The tailor, more dead than alive, needed a good while longer than that to come to himself.

When he had recovered a little, the stag, which had stayed standing beside him, pushed its horns with such force against a door in the rock that it sprang open. Flames of fire shot out, and after them came a great cloud of smoke that hid the stag from his sight.

The tailor did not know what to do or where to turn to get out of this wilderness and back among human beings again. But while he was standing there undecided, a voice sounded out of the rock and cried to him, "Come in without fear; no harm shall come to you."

He hesitated; but driven by some mysterious force he obeyed the voice and went through the iron door into a large, spacious hall, whose ceiling and walls and floor were made of shining polished squared stones, and on every one of them were carved letters he did not know. He looked at everything full of wonder, and was on the point of going out again, when he heard the voice once more, saying to him, "Step on the stone that lies in the middle of the hall, and great good fortune awaits you."

His courage had already grown so great that he obeyed the order. The stone began to give way under his feet and sank slowly down into the depths. When it was firm again and the tailor looked round, he found himself in a hall like the first one in size. Here, though, there was more to look at and to admire.

Hollow places were cut in the walls, and in them stood vases of transparent glass filled with coloured spirit or with a bluish vapour. On the floor of the hall two great glass chests stood facing each other, and these at once roused his curiosity.

When he went to one of them he saw inside it a handsome building like a castle, surrounded by farm buildings, stables and barns and a quantity of other good things. Everything was small, but made with exceeding care and delicacy, and seemed to have been cut out by a skilful hand with the greatest exactness.

He might not have taken his eyes off this rarity for some while, if the voice had not made itself heard once more. It told him to turn round and look at the glass chest standing opposite.

How his wonder grew when he saw in it a girl of the greatest beauty! She lay there as if asleep, and was wrapped in her long fair hair as in a precious mantle. Her eyes were tightly shut; but the brightness of her complexion, and a ribbon that her breathing stirred to and fro, left no doubt that she was alive.

The tailor was gazing at this beauty with a beating heart, when she suddenly opened her eyes and started up at the sight of him in joyful terror.

"Just heaven!" cried she. "My deliverance is at hand! Quick, quick, help me out of my prison — if you push back the bolt of this glass coffin I shall be free."

The tailor obeyed without delay, and she at once raised the glass lid and came out and hurried into the corner of the hall, where she covered herself with a large cloak. Then she seated herself on a stone and told the young man to come to her; and after she had planted a friendly kiss on his lips, she said, "My long-desired deliverer, kind heaven has guided you to me and put an end to my sorrows. On the very day they end, your happiness shall begin. You are the husband heaven has chosen for me, and you shall pass your life in unbroken joy, loved by me and richer than you can spend in every earthly possession. Sit down and listen to the story of my life.

"I am the daughter of a rich count. My parents died when I was still very young, and in their last will they commended me to my elder brother, who brought me up. We loved each other so tenderly, and were so alike in our way of thinking and in our tastes, that we both took the resolution never to marry, but to stay together to the end of our lives.

"There was no lack of company in our house; neighbours and friends visited us often, and we showed the greatest hospitality to everybody. So it came about one evening that a stranger came riding to our castle and, on the excuse that he could not get on to the next place, begged for shelter for the night. We granted his request with ready courtesy, and during supper he entertained us in the most agreeable way with conversation and stories mixed together. My brother liked the stranger so much that he begged him to spend a couple of days with us, to which, after some hesitation, he agreed.

"We did not get up from the table until late in the night; the stranger was shown to his room, and I hurried away, as I was tired, to lay my limbs in my soft bed.

"I had hardly slept a short while when the sound of faint and delightful music woke me. As I could not imagine where it came from, I wanted to call my waiting maid, who slept in the next room; but to my astonishment I found that my speech had been taken away from me by some unknown force. I felt as if a mountain were weighing down my chest, and I was unable to make the slightest sound.

"Meanwhile, by the light of my night lamp, I saw the stranger come into my room through two doors that were firmly bolted. He came up to me and said that by the magic arts at his command he had made this lovely music sound in order to wake me, and that he had now forced his way through all the fastenings with the intention of offering me his hand and heart.

"My revulsion at his magic arts was so great, though, that I gave him no answer. He stood there for a time without moving, apparently expecting a favourable decision; but as I went on keeping silent, he angrily declared that he would take his revenge and find means to punish my pride, and left the room.

"I passed the night in the greatest disquiet, and only fell asleep towards morning. When I woke I hurried to my brother, but did not find him in his room; and the servants told me that he had ridden out with the stranger to the hunt at daybreak.

"I suspected at once that nothing good was afoot. I dressed quickly, ordered my horse to be saddled, and rode off at full gallop to the forest with only one servant. The servant fell with his horse and could not follow me, for the horse had broken its leg. I went on my way without stopping; and in a few minutes I saw the stranger coming towards me with a beautiful stag, which he was leading on a cord.

"I asked him where he had left my brother, and how he had come by this stag, out of whose great eyes I saw tears flowing. Instead of answering me, he began to laugh loudly. I flew into a great rage at this, pulled out a pistol and fired it at the monster; but the ball rebounded from his chest and went into my horse's head. I fell to the ground, and the stranger muttered some words that took away my consciousness.

"When I came to my senses again, I found myself in this underground cave in a glass coffin. The magician appeared once more and said that he had changed my brother into a stag; that my castle and everything belonging to it, shrunk in size by his arts, he had shut up in the other glass chest; and that my people, all of whom he had turned into smoke, he had confined in glass bottles. He told me that if I would now comply with his wish, it was an easy thing for him to put everything back as it had been, since he had only to open the vessels and everything would return to its natural form.

"I answered him as little as I had the first time. He vanished and left me in my prison, where a deep sleep came over me. Among the visions that passed before my eyes, the most comforting was one in which a young man came and set me free; and when I opened my eyes today I saw you, and saw my dream fulfilled.

"Help me to accomplish the other things that happened in those visions. The first is that we lift the glass chest with my castle in it onto that broad stone."

As soon as the stone was loaded it began to rise up with the girl and the young man, and went up through the opening in the ceiling into the upper hall, from where they could easily reach the open air.

Here the girl opened the lid; and it was marvellous to see how the castle and the houses and the farm buildings inside it stretched themselves out and grew to their natural size with the greatest rapidity.

After this the girl and the tailor went back to the cave underground and had the vessels full of smoke carried up by the stone. The girl had hardly opened the bottles when the blue smoke rushed out and changed itself into living men, in whom she recognised her servants and her people.

Her joy was greater still when her brother, who had killed the magician in the shape of the bull, came out of the forest towards them in his human form; and on that very day the girl, keeping her promise, gave her hand at the altar to the lucky tailor.

Lazy Harry

Harry was lazy; and although he had nothing else to do but drive his goat out to pasture every day, he still groaned when he went home after his day's work was done.

"It's a heavy burden, indeed," said he, "and a wearisome business, driving a goat into the field like this year after year, right into late autumn. If a man could only lie down and sleep! But no — you have to keep your eyes open in case it damages the young trees, or squeezes through the hedge into a garden, or runs away altogether. How is a man to get any rest, or any peace in his life?"

He sat down and collected his thoughts and considered how he might get this burden off his shoulders. For a long time all his thinking was no use; but suddenly it was as though scales fell from his eyes.

"I know what I'll do," he cried. "I'll marry fat Trina, who has a goat as well, and she can take mine out with hers, and then I'll have no more need to trouble myself."

So Harry got up and set his weary legs in motion and went right across the street — for it was no further than that — to where fat Trina's parents lived, and asked for their hard-working and virtuous daughter in marriage. The parents did not think it over long. "Birds of a feather flock together," they thought, and gave their consent.

So fat Trina became Harry's wife, and took both the goats out. Harry had a good time of it, and had no work to rest from but his own idleness. He only went out with her now and then, and said, "I only do it so that I can enjoy the rest more afterwards; otherwise a man loses all feeling for it."

But fat Trina was no less idle. "Dear Harry," said she one day, "why should we make our lives so toilsome when there's no need for it, and ruin the best days of our youth? Wouldn't it be better to give the two goats — which disturb us every morning in our sweetest sleep with their bleating — to our neighbour, and he'll give us a beehive for them? We'll put the beehive in a sunny place behind the house and trouble ourselves about it no more. Bees don't need to be looked after, or driven out into the field; they fly out and find their own way home again, and collect honey without giving the least trouble."

"You've spoken like a sensible woman," replied Harry. "We'll carry out your proposal without delay. And besides all that, honey tastes better and nourishes a man better than goat's milk, and it keeps longer too."

The neighbour willingly gave a beehive for the two goats. The bees flew in and out from early morning till late evening without ever tiring, and filled the hive with the most beautiful honey, so that in the autumn Harry was able to take a whole pitcherful out of it.

They put the jug on a board fixed to the wall of their bedroom; and as they were afraid it might be stolen from them, or that the mice might find it, Trina brought in a stout hazel stick and put it beside her bed, so that she could reach it with her hand without needlessly getting up, and drive the uninvited guests away.

Lazy Harry did not like to leave his bed before noon. "He who rises early," said he, "wastes his substance."

One morning, when he was still lying among the feathers in broad daylight, resting after his long sleep, he said to his wife, "Women are fond of sweet things, and you're always tasting the honey in secret. It would be better for us to trade it for a goose with a young gosling, before you eat the whole of it."

"But," answered Trina, "not before we have a child to look after them! Am I to worry myself with the little geese and spend all my strength on them for nothing?"

"Do you think," said Harry, "that the youngster will look after geese? Children don't obey any more nowadays; they do as they please, because they think themselves cleverer than their parents — just like that lad who was sent to look for the cow and chased three blackbirds."

"Oh," replied Trina, "this one will fare badly if he doesn't do as I say. I'll take a stick and belabour his skin for him with more blows than I can count. Look, Harry," cried she in her zeal, and seized the stick she used for driving the mice away, "this is the way I'll fall on him!"

She reached her arm out to strike — and unluckily hit the honey pitcher above the bed. The pitcher struck against the wall and fell down in pieces, and the fine honey streamed down onto the floor.

"There lie the goose and the young gosling," said Harry, "and they want no looking after. But it's lucky the pitcher didn't fall on my head. We have every reason to be satisfied with our lot."

And then, as he saw that there was still some honey in one of the pieces, he reached out his hand for it and said quite cheerfully, "The remains, wife, we'll still eat with a relish; and then we'll rest a little after the fright we've had. What does it matter if we get up a little later? The day is always long enough."

"Yes," answered Trina, "we shall always get to the end of it at the proper time. Do you know that the snail was once invited to a wedding and set out to go, but arrived at the christening? In front of the house it fell over the fence, and said, 'Hurrying does no good.'"
