The Griffin

There was once a King — but where he reigned and what he was called, I don't know. He had no son, but an only daughter who had always been ill, and no doctor had been able to cure her.

Then it was foretold to the King that his daughter would eat herself well with an apple. So he had it proclaimed throughout his whole kingdom that whoever brought his daughter an apple she could eat herself well with should have her for a wife, and be King.

This came to the ears of a peasant who had three sons; and he said to the eldest, "Go out into the garden and take a basketful of those beautiful apples with the red cheeks and carry them to the court. Perhaps the King's daughter will be able to eat herself well with them, and then you'll marry her and be King."

The lad did so, and set out. When he had gone a short way he met a little iron man, who asked him what he had there in the basket. Uele — for that was his name — replied, "Frogs' legs."

At this the little man said, "Well, so it shall be, and so it shall stay" — and went away.

At length Uele arrived at the palace and announced that he had brought apples that would cure the King's daughter if she ate them. This delighted the King hugely, and he had Uele brought before him. But alas — when he opened the basket, instead of apples he had frogs' legs in it, still kicking about. At this the King grew angry and had him driven out of the house.

When he got home he told his father how it had gone with him. So the father sent the next son, who was called Seame; but it all went with him just as it had with Uele. He too met the little iron man, who asked what he had there in the basket. Seame said, "Hogs' bristles" — and the iron man said, "Well, so it shall be, and so it shall stay."

When Seame got to the King's palace and said he had brought apples the King's daughter could eat herself well with, they did not want to let him in, and said that one fellow had been there already and had treated them as if they were fools. Seame, though, insisted that he certainly did have the apples, and that they ought to let him in. At length they believed him and took him to the King. But when he uncovered the basket, all he had was hogs' bristles.

This enraged the King most terribly, and he had Seame whipped out of the house.

When he got home he told them everything that had happened to him. And then the youngest boy, whose name was Hans but who was always called Stupid Hans, came and asked his father whether he might go with some apples.

"Oh," said his father, "you'd be just the right fellow for a thing like that. If the clever ones can't manage it, what can you do?"

The boy, though, did not believe him, and said, "Indeed, father, I want to go."

"Just get away, you stupid fellow; you must wait till you're wiser," said his father to that, and turned his back.

But Hans pulled at the back of his smock and said, "Indeed, father, I want to go."

"Well then, as far as I'm concerned you may go — but you'll soon be home again," replied the old man in a spiteful voice.

The boy, though, was tremendously delighted and jumped for joy.

"Well, act like a fool! You grow more stupid every day," said his father again.

But Hans did not care about that, and would not let it spoil his pleasure. And as it was night by then, he thought he might as well wait until the next day, for he could not get to court that day. All night long he could not sleep in his bed; and if he did doze for a moment, he dreamed of beautiful girls, of palaces, of gold and silver and all kinds of things of that sort.

Early in the morning he set out on his way; and directly afterwards the little shabby-looking man in his iron clothes came up to him and asked what he was carrying in the basket. Hans answered that he was carrying apples for the King's daughter to eat herself well with.

"Then," said the little man, "so they shall be, and so they shall stay."

But at the court not one of them would let Hans in, for they said two had already been there who had told them they were bringing apples, and one of them had had frogs' legs and the other hogs' bristles. Hans, though, insisted stoutly that he most certainly had no frogs' legs, but some of the most beautiful apples in the whole kingdom. And as he spoke so pleasantly, the doorkeeper thought he could not be telling a lie, and asked him to come in.

And he was right; for when Hans uncovered his basket in the King's presence, golden-yellow apples came tumbling out. The King was delighted, and had some of them taken to his daughter, and then waited in anxious expectation until news should be brought him of the effect they had.

But before much time had gone by, news was brought him — and who do you think it was that came? It was his daughter herself. As soon as she had eaten some of those apples she was cured, and sprang out of her bed.

The joy the King felt cannot be described. But now he did not want to give his daughter in marriage to Hans, and said he must first make him a boat that would go faster on dry land than on water.

Hans agreed to the condition and went home and told them how it had gone with him. Then his father sent Uele into the forest to make a boat of that kind. He worked hard, and whistled all the time.

At midday, when the sun was at its highest, the little iron man came and asked what he was making. Uele answered, "Wooden bowls for the kitchen."

The iron man said, "So it shall be, and so it shall stay."

By evening Uele thought he had made the boat; but when he tried to get into it, he had nothing but wooden bowls.

Next day Seame went into the forest, but it all went with him just as it had with Uele.

On the third day Stupid Hans went. He worked away most industriously, so that the whole forest rang with his heavy strokes; and all the while he sang and whistled right merrily.

At midday, when it was hottest, the little man came again and asked what he was making.

"A boat that will go faster on dry land than on water," replied Hans; "and when I've finished it, I'm to have the King's daughter for my wife."

"Well," said the little man, "such a one it shall be, and such it shall stay."

In the evening, when the sun had turned to gold, Hans finished his boat and everything that was needed for it. He got into it and rowed to the palace. The boat went as swiftly as the wind.

The King saw it from a long way off; but he still would not give his daughter to Hans, and said he must first take a hundred hares out to pasture from early morning until late evening — and if one of them got away, he should not have his daughter.

Hans was content with this, and next day went out to pasture with his flock and took great care that none of them ran away.

Before many hours had passed a servant girl came from the palace and told Hans that he must give her a hare instantly, because some visitors had arrived unexpectedly. But Hans knew very well what that meant, and said he would not give her one; the King could set some hare soup in front of his guests the next day.

The maid, though, would not accept his refusal, and at last she began to get angry with him. Then Hans said that if the King's daughter came herself, he would give her a hare.

The maid reported this at the palace, and the daughter did come herself. Meanwhile, though, the little man came to Hans again and asked what he was doing there. He said he had to watch a hundred hares and see that none of them ran away, and then he could marry the King's daughter and be King.

"Good," said the little man. "Here's a whistle for you; and if one of them runs away, just blow it and it will come back again."

When the King's daughter came, Hans put a hare into her apron; but when she had gone about a hundred steps with it he whistled, and the hare jumped out of the apron and was back with the flock again before she could turn round.

When evening came the hare-herd whistled once more and looked to see whether they were all there, and then drove them to the palace.

The King wondered how Hans had been able to graze a hundred hares without losing any of them. All the same he still would not give him his daughter, and said he must now bring him a feather from the Griffin's tail.

Hans set out at once and walked straight on. In the evening he came to a castle, and there he asked for a night's lodging, for in those days there were no inns. The lord of the castle promised it with much pleasure, and asked where he was going.

Hans answered, "To the Griffin."

"Oh — to the Griffin! They tell me he knows everything. I've lost the key of an iron money chest; perhaps you'd be so good as to ask him where it is."

"Yes, indeed," said Hans, "I'll do that."

Early next morning he went on; and on his way he came to another castle, where he stayed the night again. When the people who lived there learned that he was going to the Griffin, they said they had a daughter in the house who was ill, and that they had already tried every means to cure her but none had done her any good; would he be so kind as to ask the Griffin what would make their daughter well again?

Hans said he would gladly do that, and went on.

Then he came to a lake; and instead of a ferry boat there was a tall, tall man there who had to carry everybody across. The man asked Hans where he was journeying.

"To the Griffin," said Hans.

"Then when you get to him," said the man, "just ask him why I'm forced to carry everybody over the lake."

"Yes, indeed, I'll certainly do that," said Hans.

Then the man took him up on his shoulders and carried him across.

At length Hans arrived at the Griffin's house; but only the wife was at home, and not the Griffin himself. The woman asked him what he wanted, and he told her everything: that he had to get a feather out of the Griffin's tail; that there was a castle where they had lost the key of their money chest, and he was to ask the Griffin where it was; that in another castle the daughter was ill, and he was to find out what would cure her; and that not far from there was a lake with a man beside it who was forced to carry people across, and he was very anxious to learn why the man had to do it.

Then the woman said, "But look here, my good friend, no Christian can talk to the Griffin; he devours them all. But if you like, you can lie down under his bed; and in the night, when he's fast asleep, you can reach out and pull a feather out of his tail. And as for the things you want to know, I'll ask about them myself."

Hans was quite satisfied with this and got under the bed.

In the evening the Griffin came home; and as soon as he came into the room he said, "Wife, I smell a Christian."

"Yes," said the woman, "one was here today, but he went away again." And at that the Griffin said no more.

In the middle of the night, when the Griffin was snoring loudly, Hans reached out and plucked a feather from his tail. The Griffin woke up instantly and said, "Wife, I smell a Christian, and it seems to me that somebody was pulling at my tail."

His wife said, "You've certainly been dreaming. And I told you before that a Christian was here today, but that he went away again. He told me all kinds of things — that in one castle they'd lost the key of their money chest and could find it nowhere."

"Oh, the fools!" said the Griffin. "The key is in the woodshed, under a log of wood behind the door."

"And then he said that in another castle the daughter was ill, and they knew no remedy to cure her."

"Oh, the fools!" said the Griffin. "Under the cellar steps a toad has made its nest out of her hair; and if she got her hair back, she'd be well."

"And then he also said that there was a place with a lake, and a man beside it who was forced to carry everybody across."

"Oh, the fool!" said the Griffin. "If he only set one man down in the middle, he'd never have to carry another across."

Early next morning the Griffin got up and went out. Then Hans came out from under the bed; and he had a beautiful feather, and had heard what the Griffin had said about the key and the daughter and the ferryman. The Griffin's wife repeated it all over to him once more so that he should not forget it, and then he went home again.

First he came to the man by the lake, who asked him what the Griffin had said; but Hans replied that he must carry him across first, and then he would tell him. So the man carried him across; and when he was over, Hans told him that all he had to do was set one person down in the middle of the lake, and then he would never have to carry anybody over again.

The man was hugely delighted, and told Hans that out of gratitude he would take him across once more and back again. But Hans said no, he would save him the trouble; he was quite satisfied already — and went on his way.

Then he came to the castle where the daughter was ill. He took her on his shoulders, for she could not walk, and carried her down the cellar steps and pulled out the toad's nest from under the lowest step and put it into her hand; and she sprang off his shoulder and up the steps ahead of him, and was quite cured. Then her father and mother were overjoyed beyond measure, and they gave Hans gifts of gold and silver, and whatever else he wished for they gave him.

And when he got to the other castle he went straight into the woodshed and found the key under the log of wood behind the door, and took it to the lord of the castle. He too was not a little pleased, and gave Hans as a reward a great deal of the gold that was in the chest, and all kinds of things besides — cows and sheep and goats.

When Hans arrived before the King with all these things — with the money and the gold and the silver, and the cows and sheep and goats — the King asked him how he had come by them. Then Hans told him that the Griffin gave everybody whatever he wanted.

So the King thought he could make use of such things himself, and set out on his way to the Griffin. But when he got to the lake, it happened that he was the very first to arrive there after Hans; and the man set him down in the middle of it and went away, and the King was drowned.

But Hans married the daughter and became King.
