Strong Hans

There were once a man and a woman who had an only child, and lived quite alone in a lonely valley.

It happened that the mother went into the wood one day to gather fir branches, and took little Hans with her, who was just two years old. As it was springtime, and the child took pleasure in the many-coloured flowers, she went further and further on with him into the forest.

Suddenly two robbers sprang out of the thicket, seized the mother and child, and carried them far away into the black forest, where nobody ever came from one year's end to another. The poor woman begged the robbers urgently to set her and her child free; but their hearts were made of stone, and they would not listen to her prayers and entreaties, but drove her on further by force.

After they had worked their way through bushes and briars for about two miles, they came to a rock with a door in it, at which the robbers knocked, and it opened at once. They had to go through a long dark passage, and at last came into a great cavern lit by a fire burning on the hearth. On the wall hung swords and sabres and other deadly weapons, which gleamed in the light; and in the middle stood a black table at which four more robbers were sitting gambling, with the captain at the head of it.

As soon as he saw the woman he came and spoke to her, and told her to set her mind at rest and have no fear; they would do nothing to hurt her, but she must look after the housekeeping, and if she kept everything in order she would not fare badly with them. And with that they gave her something to eat, and showed her a bed where she could sleep with her child.

The woman stayed many years with the robbers, and Hans grew tall and strong. His mother told him stories, and taught him to read out of an old book of tales about knights that she found in the cave.

When Hans was nine years old he made himself a strong club out of a fir branch and hid it behind the bed, and then went to his mother and said, "Dear mother, please tell me who my father is. I must and will know."

His mother was silent and would not tell him, so that he should not grow homesick; besides, she knew that the godless robbers would not let him go away. But it all but broke her heart that Hans should not go to his father.

In the night, when the robbers came home from their robbing expedition, Hans brought out his club, stood in front of the captain and said, "I want to know now who my father is; and if you don't tell me at once, I'll strike you down."

Then the captain laughed, and gave Hans such a box on the ear that he rolled under the table. Hans got up again, held his tongue, and thought, "I'll wait another year and then try again; perhaps I'll do better then."

When the year was up he brought out his club again, rubbed the dust off it, looked it over well and said, "It's a stout, strong club."

At night the robbers came home and drank one jug of wine after another, and their heads began to grow heavy. Then Hans brought out his club, placed himself in front of the captain and asked him who his father was.

But the captain again gave him such a vigorous box on the ear that Hans rolled under the table. It was not long, though, before he was up again; and he beat the captain and the robbers so with his club that they could no longer move either their arms or their legs. His mother stood in a corner full of admiration for his bravery and his strength.

When Hans had finished his work he went to his mother and said, "Now I've shown that I'm in earnest; but now I must know as well who my father is."

"Dear Hans," answered his mother, "come, we'll go and look for him until we find him."

She took the key of the entrance door from the captain, and Hans fetched a great meal sack and packed into it gold and silver and whatever else he could find that was beautiful, until it was full, and then he took it on his back.

They left the cave — and how Hans opened his eyes when he came out of the darkness into daylight and saw the green forest and the flowers and the birds and the morning sun in the sky! He stood there and marvelled at everything just as if he had no sense at all.

His mother looked for the way home; and when they had walked for a couple of hours they got safely into their lonely valley and to their little house. His father was sitting in the doorway. He wept for joy when he recognised his wife and heard that Hans was his son, for he had long thought them both dead. But Hans, although he was not twelve years old yet, was a head taller than his father.

They went into the little room together; but Hans had hardly put his sack down on the bench by the stove before the whole house began to crack. The bench broke down, and then the floor, and the heavy sack fell through into the cellar.

"God save us!" cried his father. "What's that? Now you've broken our little house to pieces!"

"Don't get any grey hairs over that, dear father," answered Hans. "There's more in that sack than is needed for a new house."

His father and Hans set about building a new house at once, and buying cattle and land and setting up a farm. Hans ploughed the fields; and when he walked behind the plough and pushed it into the ground, the oxen had hardly any need to pull.

The next spring Hans said, "Keep all the money, and have a walking stick made for me that weighs a hundredweight, so that I can go travelling."

When the stick he had asked for was ready, he left his father's house and went out, and came to a deep, dark forest. There he heard something crunching and cracking; he looked round and saw a fir tree that was twisted round like a rope from the bottom to the top; and when he looked upwards he saw a great fellow who had hold of the tree and was twisting it like a willow wand.

"Hey!" cried Hans. "What are you doing up there?"

The fellow replied, "I got some faggots together yesterday, and I'm twisting a rope for them."

"That's what I like," thought Hans; "he has some strength in him." And he called to him, "Leave that alone and come with me."

The fellow came down, and he was a whole head taller than Hans — and Hans was not small.

"Your name is Fir-Twister from now on," said Hans to him.

And with that they went on further, and heard something knocking and hammering with such force that the ground shook at every stroke. Shortly afterwards they came to a mighty rock, in front of which a giant was standing and striking great pieces off it with his fist.

When Hans asked what he was doing, he answered, "At night, when I want to sleep, bears and wolves and vermin of that kind come and sniff and snuffle about me and won't let me rest. So I want to build myself a house and lay myself inside it, so that I can have some peace."

"Oh, indeed," thought Hans, "I can make use of this one too" — and said to him, "Leave your house-building alone and come with me. You shall be called Rock-Splitter."

The man agreed; and all three of them roamed through the forest, and wherever they went the wild beasts were terrified and ran away from them.

In the evening they came to an old deserted castle, and went up into it and lay down in the hall to sleep.

Next morning Hans went into the garden. It had run quite wild and was full of thorns and bushes. And as he was walking about in it, a wild boar rushed at him; but he gave it such a blow with his club that it fell down on the spot. He took it on his shoulders and carried it in, and they put it on a spit and roasted it and enjoyed themselves.

Then they arranged that each day two of them should go out hunting in turn and one should stay at home and cook nine pounds of meat for each of them.

Fir-Twister stayed at home first, and Hans and Rock-Splitter went out hunting. And when Fir-Twister was busy cooking, a little shrivelled-up old man came to him in the castle and asked for some meat.

"Be off, you sly hypocrite," he answered. "You need no meat."

But how astonished Fir-Twister was when the insignificant little dwarf sprang at him and belaboured him so with his fists that he could not defend himself, but fell on the ground and gasped for breath. The dwarf did not go away until he had thoroughly vented his anger on him.

When the other two came home from hunting, Fir-Twister said nothing to them about the old man or the blows he had taken, and thought, "When they stay at home, they can try their luck with the little scrubbing-brush" — and the mere thought of it gave him pleasure already.

Next day Rock-Splitter stayed at home, and he fared just as Fir-Twister had; he was badly beaten by the dwarf because he would not give him any meat. When the others came home in the evening, Fir-Twister could easily see what he had suffered; but both of them kept quiet, and thought, "Hans must taste some of that soup too."

Hans, who had to stay at home the next day, did his work in the kitchen as it had to be done; and as he was standing skimming the pan, the dwarf came and demanded a piece of meat without any ceremony.

Then Hans thought, "He's a poor wretch; I'll give him some of my own share, so that the others don't go short" — and handed him a piece.

When the dwarf had devoured it he asked for more meat, and good-natured Hans gave it to him, and told him it was a handsome piece and he must be content with it. But the dwarf begged for it a third time.

"You're shameless," said Hans, and gave him none.

Then the malicious dwarf tried to spring on him and treat him as he had treated Fir-Twister and Rock-Splitter; but he had come to the wrong man. Hans, without exerting himself much, gave him a couple of blows that sent him jumping down the castle steps.

Hans was going to run after him, but fell right over him, he was so tall. When he got up again the dwarf had a start on him. Hans hurried after him as far as the forest, and saw him slip into a hole in the rock. Then Hans went home — but he had marked the spot.

When the other two came back they were surprised that Hans was so well. He told them what had happened, and then they no longer concealed how it had gone with them.

Hans laughed and said, "It served you right. Why were you so greedy with your meat? It's a disgrace that two big men like you should have let yourselves be beaten by a dwarf."

At that they took a basket and a rope, and all three went to the hole in the rock the dwarf had slipped into, and let Hans and his club down in the basket.

When Hans reached the bottom he found a door; and when he opened it, a girl was sitting there who was as lovely as a picture — no, so beautiful that no words can express it. And beside her sat the dwarf, grinning at Hans like an ape. But she was bound with chains, and looked at him so mournfully that Hans felt great pity for her, and thought to himself, "You must deliver her out of the power of that wicked dwarf" — and gave him such a blow with his club that he fell down dead.

Immediately the chains fell away from the girl, and Hans was enraptured with her beauty. She told him she was a King's daughter whom a savage count had stolen away from her home and imprisoned there among the rocks, because she would have nothing to do with him. The count had set the dwarf there as a watchman, and he had made her suffer misery and vexation enough.

And now Hans put the girl in the basket and had her drawn up. The basket came down again; but Hans did not trust his two companions, and thought, "They've already shown themselves false and told me nothing about the dwarf. Who knows what they may be planning against me?"

So he put his club in the basket — and it was lucky he did; for when the basket was halfway up they let it fall again, and if Hans had really been sitting in it he would have been killed.

But now he did not know how he was to work his way out of the depths; and turn it over and over in his mind as he might, he could think of nothing. "It's a sad thing," said he to himself, "that I have to waste away down here."

And as he was walking backwards and forwards, he came once more to the little chamber where the girl had been sitting, and saw that the dwarf had a ring on his finger that shone and sparkled. So he drew it off and put it on; and when he turned it round on his finger, he suddenly heard something rustling over his head. He looked up and saw spirits of the air hovering above him, who told him he was their master and asked what he desired.

Hans was struck dumb at first; but afterwards he said that they were to carry him up again. They obeyed instantly, and it was just as if he had flown up himself.

When he was above ground, though, he could see nobody. Fir-Twister and Rock-Splitter had hurried away and taken the beautiful girl with them. But Hans turned the ring, and the spirits of the air came and told him that the two of them were at sea.

Hans ran and ran without stopping until he came to the shore; and there, far, far out on the water, he could make out a little boat with his faithless comrades sitting in it. And in fierce anger, without thinking what he was doing, he leapt into the water club in hand and began to swim; but the club, which weighed a hundredweight, dragged him deep down until he was all but drowned.

Then, in the very nick of time, he turned his ring; and immediately the spirits of the air came and carried him as swift as lightning into the boat. He swung his club and gave his wicked comrades the reward they deserved, and threw them into the water; and then he sailed home with the beautiful girl, who had been in the greatest alarm and whom he had now delivered for the second time, to her father and mother, and married her; and everybody rejoiced exceedingly.

The Peasant in Heaven

Once upon a time a poor, pious peasant died and arrived before the gate of heaven. At the same time a very rich, rich lord came there who also wanted to get into heaven.

Then Saint Peter came with the key and opened the door and let the great man in — but apparently did not see the peasant, and shut the door again.

And now the peasant outside heard how the great man was received in heaven with every kind of rejoicing, and how they were making music and singing inside. At length everything grew quiet again, and Saint Peter came and opened the gate of heaven and let the peasant in.

The peasant expected that they would make music and sing when he went in too; but everything stayed quite quiet. He was received with great affection, it's true, and the angels came to meet him — but nobody sang.

So the peasant asked Saint Peter how it was that they did not sing for him as they had done when the rich man went in, and said that it seemed to him that up there in heaven things were done with just as much partiality as on earth.

Then Saint Peter said, "By no means. You are just as dear to us as anybody else, and you'll enjoy every heavenly delight the rich man enjoys. But poor fellows like you come to heaven every day, and a rich man like that doesn't come more than once in a hundred years."

Lean Lisa

Lean Lisa was of a very different way of thinking from lazy Harry and fat Trina, who never let anything disturb their peace. She scoured everything with ashes from morning till evening, and loaded her husband, Long Laurence, with so much work that he had heavier weights to carry than a donkey with three sacks. It was all no use, though: they had nothing and came to nothing.

One night, as she lay in bed and could hardly move a limb for weariness, she still would not let her thoughts go to sleep. She dug her elbows into her husband's side and said, "Listen, Lenz, to what I've been thinking. If I were to find one florin, and another was given to me, I'd borrow another to add to them, and you'd give me another too; and then, as soon as I had the four florins together, I'd buy a young cow."

This pleased her husband well enough. "It's true," said he, "that I don't know where I'm to get the florin you want as a gift from me; but if you can get the money together and buy a cow with it, you'll do well to carry out your plan. I'll be glad," he added, "if the cow has a calf, and then I'll often get a drink of milk to refresh me."

"The milk isn't for you," said his wife. "We must let the calf suck, so that it grows big and fat and we can sell it well."

"Certainly," replied her husband, "but all the same we'll take a little milk; that will do no harm."

"Who taught you how to manage cows?" said his wife. "Whether it does harm or not, I won't allow it; and even if you stood on your head for it, you shouldn't have a drop of the milk. Do you think, because there's no satisfying you, Long Laurence, that you're to eat up what I earn with so much difficulty?"

"Wife," said the man, "be quiet, or I'll give you a blow on the mouth."

"What!" cried she. "You threaten me, you glutton, you rascal, you lazy Harry!"

She was just taking hold of his hair, but Long Laurence got up, seized both of Lean Lisa's withered arms in one hand and pressed her head down into the pillow with the other, and let her scold, and held her there until she fell asleep out of sheer weariness.

Whether she went on quarrelling when she woke next morning, or whether she went out to look for the florin she wanted to find, that I do not know.
