The Hut in the Forest

A poor woodcutter lived with his wife and three daughters in a little hut on the edge of a lonely forest.

One morning, as he was about to go off to his work, he said to his wife, "Let my dinner be brought out to me in the forest by my eldest daughter, or I shall never get my work done. And so that she doesn't lose her way," he added, "I'll take a bag of millet with me and scatter the seeds along the path."

So when the sun was just above the middle of the forest, the girl set out on her way with a bowl of soup. But the field sparrows and wood sparrows, the larks and finches, the blackbirds and siskins had picked up the millet long before, and the girl could not find the trail.

Then, trusting to chance, she went on and on, until the sun sank and night began to fall. The trees rustled in the darkness, the owls hooted, and she began to be afraid.

Then in the distance she saw a light glimmering between the trees. "There must be people living there who can take me in for the night," she thought — and went towards the light.

It was not long before she came to a house with all its windows lit up. She knocked, and a rough voice from inside cried, "Come in."

The girl stepped into the dark entry and knocked at the door of the room.

"Just come in," cried the voice; and when she opened the door, an old grey-haired man was sitting at the table with his face propped in both hands, and his white beard fell down over the table almost to the ground. By the stove lay three animals: a hen, a cock and a brindled cow.

The girl told the old man her story and begged for shelter for the night. The man said:

	"Pretty little hen,
	pretty little cock,
	and pretty brindled cow,
	what do you say to that?"

"Duks," answered the animals — and that must have meant, "We're willing," for the old man said, "Here you shall have shelter and food. Go to the fire and cook us our supper."

The girl found plenty of everything in the kitchen and cooked a good supper, but she gave no thought to the animals. She carried the full dishes to the table, sat down beside the grey-haired man, and ate and satisfied her hunger.

When she had had enough she said, "But now I'm tired. Where is there a bed I can lie down and sleep in?"

The animals replied:

	"You have eaten with him,
	you have drunk with him,
	you have had no thought for us —
	so find out for yourself where you can pass the night."

Then the old man said, "Just go upstairs, and you'll find a room with two beds. Shake them up and put white linen on them, and then I'll come and lie down to sleep too."

The girl went up; and when she had shaken the beds and put clean sheets on them, she lay down in one of them without waiting any longer for the old man.

After some time, though, the grey-haired man came up and took his candle and looked at the girl and shook his head. And when he saw that she had fallen into a sound sleep, he opened a trapdoor and let her down into the cellar.

Late that night the woodcutter came home and reproached his wife for leaving him to go hungry all day.

"It isn't my fault," she replied. "The girl went out with your dinner and must have lost herself; but she's sure to come back tomorrow."

The woodcutter, though, got up before dawn to go into the forest, and asked that the second daughter should take him his dinner that day. "I'll take a bag of lentils," said he. "The seeds are larger than millet; the girl will see them better and can't lose her way."

So at dinner time the girl took out the food — but the lentils had disappeared. The birds of the forest had picked them up as they had the day before, and had left none.

The girl wandered about the forest until nightfall, and then she too came to the old man's house, and was told to come in, and begged for food and a bed. The man with the white beard asked the animals again:

	"Pretty little hen,
	pretty little cock,
	and pretty brindled cow,
	what do you say to that?"

The animals answered "Duks" again, and everything happened just as it had the day before. The girl cooked a good meal and ate and drank with the old man, and did not concern herself about the animals; and when she asked about her bed they answered:

	"You have eaten with him,
	you have drunk with him,
	you have had no thought for us —
	so find out for yourself where you can pass the night."

When she was asleep the old man came and looked at her and shook his head, and let her down into the cellar.

On the third morning the woodcutter said to his wife, "Send our youngest child out with my dinner today. She's always been good and obedient, and she'll stay on the right path and not run about after every wild bumblebee the way her sisters did."

The mother did not want to do it, and said, "Am I to lose my dearest child as well?"

"Have no fear," he replied. "The girl won't go astray; she's too careful and sensible. Besides, I'll take some peas with me and scatter them about. They're bigger still than lentils, and they'll show her the way."

But when the girl went out with her basket on her arm, the wood pigeons had already got all the peas in their crops, and she did not know which way to turn. She was full of sorrow, and never stopped thinking how hungry her father would be, and how her good mother would grieve, if she did not get home.

At length, when it grew dark, she saw the light and came to the house in the forest. She begged very prettily to be allowed to spend the night there, and the man with the white beard once more asked his animals:

	"Pretty little hen,
	pretty little cock,
	and beautiful brindled cow,
	what do you say to that?"

"Duks," said they.

Then the girl went over to the stove where the animals were lying, and petted the cock and the hen and stroked their smooth feathers with her hand, and caressed the brindled cow between her horns. And when, following the old man's orders, she had made ready some good soup and the bowl was set on the table, she said, "Am I to eat as much as I want, and the good animals to have nothing? Outside there's food in plenty; I'll see to them first."

So she went and brought some barley and put it to soak for the cock and the hen, and a whole armful of sweet-smelling hay for the cow. "I hope you'll like it, dear animals," said she, "and you shall have a refreshing drink too, in case you're thirsty."

Then she fetched in a bucketful of water; and the cock and the hen jumped up onto the edge of it and dipped their beaks in and then held up their heads the way birds do when they drink, and the brindled cow took a hearty draught as well.

When the animals had been fed, the girl sat down at the table beside the old man and ate what he had left. It was not long before the cock and the hen began to tuck their heads under their wings, and the cow's eyes began to blink too.

Then the girl said, "Oughtn't we to go to bed?"

	"Pretty little hen,
	pretty little cock,
	and pretty brindled cow,
	what do you say to that?"

The animals answered "Duks":

	"You have eaten with us,
	you have drunk with us,
	you have had a kind thought for all of us —
	we wish you good night."

So the girl went upstairs and shook up the feather beds and laid clean sheets on them; and when she had done it the old man came and lay down on one of the beds, and his white beard reached down to his feet. The girl lay down on the other, said her prayers, and fell asleep.

She slept quietly till midnight, and then there was such a noise in the house that she woke. There was a sound of cracking and splitting in every corner, and the doors sprang open and banged against the walls. The beams groaned as if they were being torn out of their joints; it seemed as if the staircase were falling down; and at length there was a crash as if the whole roof had fallen in. But as everything grew quiet again and the girl was not hurt, she stayed quietly lying where she was and fell asleep again.

But when she woke in the morning in the brilliance of the sunshine — what did her eyes behold? She was lying in a vast hall, and everything around her shone with royal splendour. On the walls golden flowers grew up a ground of green silk; the bed was of ivory and the canopy of red velvet; and on a chair close by was a pair of shoes embroidered with pearls.

The girl believed that she was dreaming; but three richly dressed attendants came in and asked what orders she wished to give.

"If you'll go," she replied, "I'll get up at once and make some soup ready for the old man, and then I'll feed the pretty little hen and the cock and the beautiful brindled cow."

She thought the old man was up already, and looked round at his bed; but he was not lying in it — a stranger was. And while she was looking at him, and realising that he was young and handsome, he woke and sat up in bed and said, "I'm a King's son, and I was bewitched by a wicked witch and made to live in this forest as an old grey-haired man. Nobody was allowed to be with me but my three attendants, in the shapes of a cock, a hen and a brindled cow. The spell was not to be broken until a girl came to us whose heart was so good that she showed herself full of love not only to human beings but to animals — and that you have done. And by you, at midnight, we were set free, and the old hut in the forest was changed back into my royal palace."

And when they had got up, the King's son ordered the three attendants to set out and fetch the girl's father and mother to the wedding feast.

"But where are my two sisters?" asked the girl.

"I've locked them in the cellar; and tomorrow they shall be taken into the forest and live as servants to a charcoal burner, until they've grown kinder and don't leave poor animals to go hungry."

Sharing Joy and Sorrow

There was once a tailor who was a quarrelsome fellow; and his wife, who was good and hard-working and pious, could never please him. Whatever she did, he was not satisfied, but grumbled and scolded and knocked her about and beat her.

As the authorities heard of it at last, they had him summoned and put in prison to improve him. He was kept for a while on bread and water and then set free again. He was made to promise, though, that he would not beat his wife any more, but would live with her in peace and share joy and sorrow with her, as married people should.

All went well for a time; but then he fell into his old ways and was surly and quarrelsome. And because he dared not beat her, he would seize her by the hair and tear it out. His wife got away from him and ran out into the yard; but he ran after her with his yardstick and his scissors, and chased her about, and threw the yardstick and the scissors at her, and whatever else came to hand. When he hit her he laughed, and when he missed her he stormed and swore.

This went on so long that the neighbours came to the wife's help. The tailor was summoned before the magistrates again and reminded of his promise.

"Dear gentlemen," said he, "I've kept my word. I haven't beaten her, but have shared joy and sorrow with her."

"How can that be," said the judge, "when she keeps bringing such heavy complaints against you?"

"I haven't beaten her. Just because she looked so strange, I wanted to comb her hair with my hand; but she got away from me and left me quite spitefully. So I hurried after her, and to bring her back to her duty I threw at her — as a well-meant reminder — whatever came readily to hand. And I've shared joy and sorrow with her too: for whenever I hit her I was full of joy and she of sorrow, and if I missed her, then she was joyful and I was sorry."

The judges were not satisfied with this answer, but gave him the reward he deserved.

The Willow-Wren

In the old days every sound still had its meaning and its application. When the smith's hammer rang out, it cried, "Strike away! Strike away!" When the carpenter's plane grated, it said, "Here goes! Here goes!" If the mill wheel began to clack, it said, "Help, Lord God! Help, Lord God!" And if the miller was a cheat and happened to leave the mill, it spoke proper High German, and first asked slowly, "Who is there? Who is there?" and then answered quickly, "The miller! The miller!" and at last, quite in a hurry, "He steals bravely! He steals bravely! Three pecks in a bushel."

In those days the birds had their own language too, which everybody understood; now it only sounds like chirping and screeching and whistling, and to some people like music without words.

It came into the birds' minds, though, that they would be without a ruler no longer, and would choose one of themselves to be their King. Only one among them, the green plover, was against it. He had lived free and would die free; and flying anxiously here and there he cried, "Where shall I go? Where shall I go?" He withdrew into a lonely, unfrequented marsh, and showed himself among his fellows no more.

The birds now wanted to discuss the matter; and on a fine May morning they all gathered together from the woods and fields: eagles and chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows — how can I name them all? Even the cuckoo came, and the hoopoe, his clerk, who is so called because he is always heard a few days before him; and a very small bird that had no name yet mingled with the crowd.

The hen, who by some accident had heard nothing of the whole business, was astonished at the great gathering. "What, what, what's going to be done?" she cackled. But the cock calmed his beloved hen and said, "Only rich folk showing off" — and told her what they were about.

It was decided, though, that whichever of them could fly the highest should be King. A tree frog sitting among the bushes cried a warning when he heard that — "No, no, no! No!" — because he thought many tears would be shed over it; but the crow said, "Caw, caw," and that it would all pass off peaceably.

It was now settled that they should begin the ascent at once, on that fine morning, so that nobody could say afterwards, "I could easily have flown much higher, but evening came on and I could do no more."

So at a given signal the whole company rose up into the air. The dust rose from the ground, and there was tremendous fluttering and whirring and beating of wings, and it looked as if a black cloud were rising up.

The little birds were soon left behind, though. They could go no further, and fell back to the ground. The larger birds held out longer; but none could match the eagle, who mounted so high that he could have picked the eyes out of the sun. And when he saw that the others could not get up to him, he thought, "Why should you fly still higher? You are the King" — and began to let himself down again.

The birds below at once called to him, "You must be our King; nobody has flown as high as you."

"Except me," screamed the little fellow without a name, who had crept into the eagle's breast feathers. And as he was not at all tired, he rose up and mounted so high that he reached heaven itself. And when he had gone as far as that, he folded his wings together and called down in a clear, penetrating voice, "I am King! I am King!"

"You, our King?" cried the birds angrily. "You've managed it by trickery and cunning!"

So they set another condition. He should be King who could get furthest down into the ground.

How the goose did flap about with her broad breast when she was on land again! How quickly the cock scratched a hole! The duck came off worst of all, for she leapt into a ditch and sprained her legs, and waddled away to a nearby pond crying, "Cheating! Cheating!"

The little bird without a name, though, sought out a mouse hole and slipped down into it, and cried out of it in his small voice, "I am King! I am King!"

"You, our King?" cried the birds, angrier still. "Do you think your cunning will win?"

They decided to keep him prisoner in the hole and starve him out. The owl was posted as sentry in front of it, and was not to let the rascal out if she valued her life.

When evening came all the birds were feeling very tired after exerting their wings so much, and went to bed with their wives and children. The owl alone stayed standing by the mouse hole, gazing steadily into it with her great eyes.

Meanwhile she too had grown tired, and thought to herself, "You could certainly shut one eye; you'll still be watching with the other, and the little wretch shan't come out of his hole." So she shut one eye, and with the other looked straight at the mouse hole.

The little fellow put his head out and peeped, and meant to slip away; but the owl came forward immediately, and he drew his head back again. Then the owl opened the one eye again and shut the other, meaning to shut them in turn all through the night.

But when she next shut the one eye, she forgot to open the other; and as soon as both her eyes were shut, she fell asleep. The little fellow soon noticed that, and slipped away.

From that day on, the owl has never dared show herself by daylight; for if she does, the other birds chase her and pluck her feathers out. She only flies out at night; but she hates and hunts mice, because they make such ugly holes.

The little bird, too, is very unwilling to let himself be seen, because he's afraid it will cost him his life if he's caught. He steals about in the hedges; and when he's quite safe he sometimes cries, "I am King!" — and for this reason the other birds call him in mockery the King of the Hedges, the Zaunkönig.

But nobody was as happy as the lark at not having to obey the little King. As soon as the sun appears she rises high in the air and cries, "Ah, how beautiful that is! Beautiful that is! Beautiful, beautiful! Ah, how beautiful that is!"

The Sole

The fishes had been discontented for a long time because no order was kept in their kingdom. None of them would turn aside for the others, but they all swam to the right or the left as the fancy took them, or darted between those who wanted to stay together, or got in their way; and a strong one would give a weak one a blow with its tail that drove it away, or else swallowed it without any more ado.

"How delightful it would be," said they, "if we had a king who enforced law and justice among us." And they met together to choose as their ruler the one who could cut through the water fastest and give help to the weak.

They lined up in rank and file by the shore, and the pike gave the signal with his tail, at which they all started. The pike darted away like an arrow, and with him the herring, the gudgeon, the perch, the carp and all the rest of them. Even the sole swam with them, and hoped to reach the winning place.

All at once the cry was heard, "The herring is first!"

"Who's first?" screamed the flat, envious sole angrily, who had been left far behind. "Who's first?"

"The herring! The herring!" was the answer.

"The naked herring?" cried the jealous creature. "The naked herring?"

Since that time the sole's mouth has been on one side, as a punishment.

The Bittern and the Hoopoe

"Where do you like best to graze your flocks?" said a man to an old cowherd.

"Here, sir, where the grass is neither too rich nor too poor; otherwise it's no use."

"Why not?" asked the man.

"Do you hear that melancholy cry from the meadow over there?" answered the herdsman. "That's the bittern; he was once a herdsman, and so was the hoopoe. I'll tell you the story.

"The bittern pastured his cattle on rich green meadows where flowers grew in abundance, and so his cows became wild and unmanageable. The hoopoe drove his cattle up onto high barren hills where the wind plays with the sand, and his cows grew thin and got no strength.

"When it was evening and the herdsmen wanted to drive their cows home, the bittern could not get his together again; they were too high-spirited and ran away from him. He called, 'Come, cows, come' — but it was no use; they took no notice of his calling.

"The hoopoe, though, could not even get his cows up on their legs, they had grown so faint and weak. 'Up, up, up!' he screamed — but it was in vain; they stayed lying on the sand.

"That's what happens when a man has no moderation. And to this day, though they have no herds now to watch, the bittern cries, 'Come, cows, come' — and the hoopoe, 'Up, up, up.'"
