The Owl

Two or three hundred years ago, when people were far from being as crafty and cunning as they are nowadays, an extraordinary thing happened in a little town.

By some mischance one of the great owls, the kind called horned owls, had come from the neighbouring woods into a townsman's barn during the night; and when day broke it did not dare venture out of its hiding place again, for fear of the other birds, which raised a terrible outcry whenever it appeared.

In the morning, when the manservant went into the barn to fetch some straw, he was so mightily alarmed at the sight of the owl sitting there in a corner that he ran away and announced to his master that a monster was sitting in the barn rolling its eyes about in its head — the like of which he had never set eyes on in his life, and which could devour a man without the slightest difficulty.

"I know you already," said his master. "You've courage enough to chase a blackbird about the fields; but when you see a dead hen lying, you have to fetch a stick before you go near it. I must go and see for myself what sort of monster it is."

And he went quite boldly into the granary and looked around him. But when he saw the strange grim creature with his own eyes, he was no less terrified than his servant had been. With two bounds he sprang out, ran to his neighbours, and begged them imploringly to lend him help against an unknown and dangerous beast, or the whole town might be in danger if it broke loose out of the barn where it was shut up.

A great noise and clamour arose in all the streets. The townsmen came armed with spears, hayforks, scythes and axes, as if they were going out against an enemy; and finally the senators appeared with the burgomaster at their head. When they had drawn up in the marketplace they marched to the barn and surrounded it on all sides.

Then one of the most courageous of them stepped forward and went in with his spear lowered — but came running out immediately afterwards with a shriek, as pale as death, and could not utter a single word. Two others ventured in, but they fared no better.

At last one man stepped forward — a great strong man who was famous for his warlike deeds — and said, "You won't drive the monster away by merely looking at him. We must be in earnest here; but I see you've all turned into women, and not one of you dares face the animal."

He ordered them to give him some armour, had a sword and spear brought and armed himself. Everybody praised his courage, though many feared for his life.

The two barn doors were opened, and they saw the owl, which had meanwhile perched herself in the middle of a great crossbeam. He had a ladder brought; and when he raised it and made ready to climb up, they all cried out to him to bear himself bravely, and commended him to St. George, who slew the dragon.

When he had just got to the top, and the owl saw that he had designs on her — and was bewildered too by the crowd and the shouting, and did not know how to escape — she rolled her eyes, ruffled her feathers, flapped her wings, snapped her beak, and cried "Tu-whit, tu-whoo" in a harsh voice.

"Strike home! Strike home!" screamed the crowd outside to the valiant hero.

"Anybody standing where I'm standing," answered he, "wouldn't cry 'Strike home!'"

He did indeed plant his foot one rung higher on the ladder — but then he began to tremble, and went back down again half fainting.

And now there was nobody left who dared put himself in such danger. "The monster," said they, "has poisoned and mortally wounded the very strongest man among us, just by snapping at him and breathing on him. Are we to risk our lives too?"

They took counsel about what they ought to do to keep the whole town from being destroyed. For a long time nothing seemed any use; but at length the burgomaster found a way out.

"My opinion," said he, "is that we ought to pay for this barn out of the common purse, and for whatever corn or straw or hay it contains, and so make good the owner's loss — and then burn the whole building down, and the terrible beast with it. That way nobody will have to endanger his life. This is no time to be thinking of expense, and stinginess would be out of place."

Everybody agreed with him. So they set fire to the barn at all four corners, and the owl was miserably burnt with it.

Let anybody who won't believe it go there and ask for himself.

The Moon

In days gone by there was a land where the nights were always dark and the sky spread over it like a black cloth; for there the moon never rose, and no star shone in the darkness. At the creation of the world the light at night had been enough.

Three young fellows once went out of this country on a travelling expedition, and came into another kingdom where, in the evening when the sun had disappeared behind the mountains, a shining globe was set on an oak tree, which shed a soft light far and wide. By its help everything could be seen and made out quite well, even though it was not as brilliant as the sun.

The travellers stopped and asked a countryman who was driving past with his cart what kind of a light that was.

"That's the moon," answered he. "Our mayor bought it for three thalers and fastened it to the oak tree. He has to pour oil into it every day and keep it clean, so that it always burns brightly. He gets a thaler a week from us for doing it."

When the countryman had driven off, one of them said, "We could make some use of this lamp. We've an oak tree at home just as big as this, and we could hang it on that. What a pleasure it would be not to have to feel our way about in the dark at night!"

"I'll tell you what we'll do," said the second. "We'll fetch a cart and horses and carry the moon away. The people here can buy themselves another."

"I'm a good climber," said the third. "I'll bring it down."

The fourth brought a cart and horses, and the third climbed the tree and bored a hole in the moon and passed a rope through it and let it down. When the shining ball was lying in the cart they covered it over with a cloth, so that nobody should notice the theft.

They carried it safely into their own country and set it up on a high oak. Old and young rejoiced when the new lamp let its light shine over the whole land, and bedrooms and sitting rooms were filled with it. The dwarfs came out of their caves in the rocks, and the tiny elves in their little red coats danced in rings on the meadows.

The four took care that the moon was kept supplied with oil, and cleaned the wick, and received their weekly thaler. But they grew to be old men; and when one of them fell ill and saw that he was about to die, he directed that one quarter of the moon should be laid in the grave with him as his property.

When he died, the mayor climbed the tree and cut off a quarter with the hedge shears, and it was put in his coffin. The moon's light grew less, but not yet visibly.

When the second died, the second quarter was buried with him, and the light grew dimmer. It grew weaker still after the death of the third, who likewise took his share away with him; and when the fourth was carried to his grave, the old state of darkness began again, and whenever people went out at night without their lanterns they knocked their heads together.

But when the pieces of the moon had joined themselves together again in the world below, where darkness had always reigned, it came about that the dead grew restless and woke from their sleep. They were astonished to find that they could see again; the moonlight was quite enough for them, for their eyes had grown so weak that they could not have borne the brilliance of the sun.

They got up and were merry, and fell back into their old ways of living. Some of them went to the play and to dance, others hurried to the taverns, where they called for wine and got drunk and brawled and quarrelled, and at last took up cudgels and belaboured one another. The noise grew greater and greater, and at last reached even to heaven.

Saint Peter, who guards the gate of heaven, thought the lower world had broken out in revolt, and gathered together the heavenly troops that are to drive back the Evil One when he and his companions storm the abode of the blessed. But as they did not come, he got on his horse and rode out through the gate of heaven and down into the world below. There he brought the dead to order and told them to lie down in their graves again, and took the moon away with him and hung it up in heaven.

The Duration of Life

When God had created the world and was about to fix the length of each creature's life, the donkey came and asked, "Lord, how long shall I live?"

"Thirty years," replied God. "Does that content you?"

"Ah, Lord," answered the donkey, "that's a long time. Think of my painful existence! To carry heavy burdens from morning till night, to drag sacks of corn to the mill so that others can eat bread, to be cheered and refreshed with nothing but blows and kicks. Relieve me of a part of this long time."

Then God had pity on him and relieved him of eighteen years. The donkey went away comforted, and the dog appeared.

"How long would you like to live?" said God to him. "Thirty years is too many for the donkey, but you'll be satisfied with it."

"Lord," answered the dog, "is that your will? Consider how much running I shall have to do; my feet will never hold out so long. And when I've once lost my voice for barking and my teeth for biting, what will be left for me to do but run from one corner to another and growl?"

God saw that he was right, and released him from twelve years of life.

Then came the monkey. "You'll certainly be willing to live thirty years?" said the Lord to him. "You've no need to work as the donkey and the dog do, and you'll always enjoy yourself."

"Ah, Lord," he answered, "it may look as if that were so, but it's quite different. When it rains porridge, I have no spoon. I'm always expected to play merry pranks and pull faces that make people laugh; and if they give me an apple and I bite into it — why, it's sour. How often sadness hides itself behind mirth! I shall never be able to hold out for thirty years."

God was gracious and took off ten.

At last man appeared, joyful, healthy and vigorous, and begged God to appoint his time for him.

"Thirty years you shall live," said the Lord. "Is that enough for you?"

"What a short time!" cried man. "When I've built my house and my own fire burns on my own hearth; when I've planted trees that blossom and bear fruit, and am just meaning to enjoy my life — then I'm to die! O Lord, lengthen my time."

"I'll add the donkey's eighteen years to it," said God.

"That's not enough," replied the man.

"You shall have the dog's twelve years as well."

"Still too little."

"Well then," said God, "I'll give you the monkey's ten years too; but more you shall not have."

The man went away, but was not satisfied.

So man lives seventy years. The first thirty are his human years, and they're soon gone; then he's healthy and merry, works with pleasure and is glad of his life. Then follow the donkey's eighteen years, when one burden after another is laid on him, and he has to carry the corn that feeds others, and blows and kicks are the reward of his faithful service. Then come the dog's twelve years, when he lies in the corner and growls and has no teeth left to bite with. And when this time is over, the monkey's ten years make the end. Then a man is weak in the head and foolish, does silly things, and becomes the joke of the children.

Death’s Messengers

In ancient times a giant was once travelling along a great highway, when suddenly an unknown man sprang up in front of him and said, "Halt! Not one step further."

"What!" cried the giant. "A creature I could crush between my fingers wants to block my way? Who are you, that you dare to speak so boldly?"

"I am Death," answered the other. "Nobody resists me, and you too must obey my commands."

But the giant refused, and began to wrestle with Death. It was a long, violent battle; but at last the giant got the upper hand and struck Death down with his fist, so that he dropped beside a stone. The giant went his way, and Death lay there beaten, and so weak that he could not get up again.

"What's to be done now," said he, "if I stay lying here in a corner? Nobody will die in the world, and it will get so full of people that they won't have room to stand next to each other."

Meanwhile a young man came along the road, strong and healthy, singing a song and glancing about him on every side. When he saw the half-fainting figure he went to him with compassion, raised him up, poured a strengthening draught out of his flask for him, and waited until he came round.

"Do you know," said the stranger as he was getting up, "who I am, and whom you've helped back onto his legs?"

"No," answered the young man, "I don't know you."

"I am Death," said he. "I spare nobody, and I can make no exception for you; but so that you can see that I'm grateful, I promise you that I won't fall on you unexpectedly, but will send my messengers to you before I come and take you away."

"Well," said the young man, "it's something gained that I shall know when you're coming, and be safe from you at least until then."

Then he went on his way, and was light-hearted and enjoyed himself and lived without a thought.

But youth and health did not last long. Soon came sicknesses and sorrows, which tormented him by day and took away his rest at night.

"Die I shan't," said he to himself, "for Death will send his messengers before that; but I do wish these wretched days of sickness were over."

As soon as he felt well again he began to live merrily once more.

Then one day somebody tapped him on the shoulder. He looked round, and Death was standing behind him, and said, "Follow me. The hour of your departure from this world has come."

"What!" replied the man. "Will you break your word? Didn't you promise me that you'd send your messengers to me before you came yourself? I've seen none."

"Silence!" answered Death. "Have I not sent you one messenger after another? Didn't fever come and strike you and shake you and cast you down? Hasn't dizziness bewildered your head? Hasn't gout twitched you in every limb? Didn't your ears ring? Didn't toothache bite into your cheeks? Wasn't it dark before your eyes? And besides all that, hasn't my own brother Sleep reminded you of me every night? Didn't you lie at night as if you were already dead?"

The man could make no answer. He yielded to his fate and went away with Death.

Master Pfriem (Master Cobbler’s Awl)

Master Pfriem was a short, thin but lively man who never rested a moment. His face, of which his turned-up nose was the only prominent feature, was marked with smallpox and pale as death; his hair was grey and shaggy, and his eyes were small, but they glanced about perpetually on every side. He saw everything, criticised everything, knew everything best, and was always in the right.

When he went into the streets he moved his arms about as though he were rowing; and once he knocked the pail of a girl who was carrying water so high in the air that he was drenched all over by it himself. "Stupid thing," cried he to her, while he shook himself, "couldn't you see that I was coming up behind you?"

By trade he was a shoemaker; and when he worked he pulled his thread out with such force that he drove his fist into anybody who did not keep far enough away. No apprentice stayed more than a month with him, for he always found some fault with even the very best work. At one time it was that the stitches were not even, at another that one shoe was too long, or one heel higher than the other, or the leather not cut large enough. "Wait," said he to his apprentice, "I'll soon show you how we make skins soft" — and fetched a strap and gave him a couple of strokes across the back.

He called them all sluggards. He himself did not turn out much work, though, for he never sat still for a quarter of an hour.

If his wife got up very early in the morning and lit the fire, he jumped out of bed and ran barefoot into the kitchen, crying, "Are you going to burn my house down? That's a fire you could roast an ox by. Does wood cost nothing?"

If the servants were standing by their washtubs laughing and telling each other everything they knew, he scolded them and said, "There stand the geese, cackling and forgetting their work to gossip. And why fresh soap? Disgraceful extravagance, and shameful idleness into the bargain! They want to save their hands, and not rub the things properly." And out he would run and knock over a pail full of soap and water, so that the whole kitchen was flooded.

Somebody was building a new house, so he hurried to the window to watch. "There, they're using that red sandstone again that never dries!" cried he. "Nobody will ever be healthy in that house. And just look how badly the fellows are laying the stones! Besides, the mortar is good for nothing; it ought to have gravel in it, not sand. I shall live to see that house come down on the people inside it."

He sat down and put a couple of stitches in, and then jumped up again and unfastened his leather apron and cried, "I'll just go out and appeal to those men's consciences."

He came upon the carpenters. "What's this?" cried he. "You're not working to the line! Do you expect the beams to be straight? One thing wrong will put everything wrong." He snatched an axe out of a carpenter's hand and was going to show him how he ought to cut; but as a cart loaded with clay came by, he threw the axe away and hurried over to the peasant walking beside it.

"You're not in your right mind," said he. "Who harnesses young horses to a heavily loaded cart? The poor beasts will die on the spot."

The peasant gave him no answer, and Pfriem ran back into his workshop in a rage.

When he was settling to his work again, his apprentice handed him a shoe.

"Well, what's this now?" he screamed. "Haven't I told you you shouldn't cut shoes so broad? Who would buy a shoe like this, which is hardly anything but a sole? I insist that my orders are followed exactly."

"Master," answered the apprentice, "you may well be quite right that the shoe is a bad one; but it's the very one that you cut out yourself, and set to work on yourself. When you jumped up a while ago you knocked it off the table, and I've only just picked it up. But an angel from heaven would never make you believe it."

One night Master Pfriem dreamed that he was dead and on his way to heaven. When he got there he knocked loudly at the door. "I'm surprised," said he to himself, "that they have no knocker on the door; a man knocks his knuckles sore."

The apostle Peter opened the door and wanted to see who was demanding admission so noisily. "Ah, it's you, Master Pfriem," said he. "Well, I'll let you in; but I warn you that you must give up that habit of yours and find fault with nothing you see in heaven, or you may fare badly."

"You might have spared your warning," answered Pfriem. "I know already what's proper; and here, God be thanked, everything is perfect, and there's nothing to blame as there is on earth."

So he went in and walked up and down the wide spaces of heaven. He looked around him to the left and to the right, but now and then he shook his head or muttered something to himself.

Then he saw two angels carrying away a beam. It was the beam that a man had had in his own eye while he was looking for the splinter in somebody else's. They were not carrying the beam lengthways, though, but at an angle. "Did anybody ever see such a piece of stupidity?" thought Master Pfriem — but he said nothing and seemed satisfied with it. "It comes to the same thing after all, whichever way they carry the beam, straight or crooked, so long as they get along with it; and truly I don't see them knocking against anything."

Soon after this he saw two angels drawing water out of a well into a bucket; but at the same time he noticed that the bucket was full of holes and that the water was running out of it on every side. They were watering the earth with rain.

"Hang it!" he exclaimed — but luckily caught himself, and thought, "Perhaps it's only a pastime. If it's an amusement, then it seems they can do useless things of this kind even here in heaven, where people, as I've already noticed, do nothing but idle about."

He went further and saw a cart that had stuck fast in a deep hole. "It's no wonder," said he to the man standing beside it. "Who would load a cart so unreasonably? What have you got there?"

"Good wishes," replied the man. "I couldn't go along the right way with it; but still I've pushed it safely up here, and they won't leave me stuck here."

And in fact an angel did come and harness two horses to it. "That's quite right," thought Pfriem, "but two horses won't get that cart out; it must have at least four."

Another angel came and brought two more horses; she did not harness them in front of it, though, but behind.

That was too much for Master Pfriem. "Clumsy creature," he burst out, "what are you doing there? Has anybody, since the world began, ever seen a cart drawn like that? But you, in your conceited arrogance, think you know everything best."

He was going to say more, but one of the inhabitants of heaven seized him by the throat and pushed him out with irresistible strength. Under the gateway Master Pfriem turned his head round to take one more look at the cart, and saw that it was being lifted into the air by four winged horses.

At this moment Master Pfriem woke. "Things are certainly arranged differently in heaven from on earth," said he to himself, "and that excuses a good deal. But who can watch horses harnessed both behind and in front with any patience? To be sure they had wings — but who was to know that? Besides, it's great folly to fix a pair of wings on a horse that has four legs to run with already. But I must get up, or they'll do nothing but make mistakes for me in my house. It's a lucky thing for me, though, that I'm not really dead."
