Eve’s Various Children

When Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradise, they had to build themselves a house on unfruitful ground and eat their bread in the sweat of their brows. Adam dug the land and Eve spun.

Every year Eve brought a child into the world; but the children were unlike each other, some pretty and some ugly. After a considerable time had gone by, God sent an angel to them to announce that he was coming to inspect their household.

Eve, delighted that the Lord should be so gracious, cleaned her house thoroughly, decked it with flowers and strewed reeds on the floor. Then she brought in her children — but only the beautiful ones. She washed and bathed them, combed their hair, put clean clothes on them, and told them to conduct themselves properly and modestly in the Lord's presence. They were to bow to him civilly, hold out their hands, and answer his questions modestly and sensibly.

The ugly children, though, were not to let themselves be seen. One hid under the hay, another under the roof, a third in the straw, the fourth in the stove, the fifth in the cellar, the sixth under a tub, the seventh under the wine cask, the eighth under an old fur cloak, the ninth and tenth under the cloth she always made their clothes out of, and the eleventh and twelfth under the leather she cut their shoes from.

She had hardly got ready before there was a knock at the door. Adam looked through a chink and saw that it was the Lord. Adam opened the door respectfully, and the Heavenly Father came in.

There, in a row, stood the pretty children, and they bowed to him and held out their hands and knelt down. And the Lord began to bless them. He laid his hands on the first and said, "You shall be a powerful king"; and to the second, "You a prince"; to the third, "You a count"; to the fourth, "You a knight"; to the fifth, "You a nobleman"; to the sixth, "You a citizen"; to the seventh, "You a merchant"; to the eighth, "You a scholar." And he bestowed on them all his richest blessings besides.

When Eve saw that the Lord was so mild and gracious, she thought, "I'll bring my ill-favoured children here too; it may be that he'll give them his blessing as well." So she ran and brought them out of the hay and the straw and the stove and wherever else she had hidden them; and along came the whole coarse, dirty, shabby, sooty band.

The Lord smiled and looked at them all and said, "I'll bless these too." He laid his hands on the first and said to him, "You shall be a peasant"; to the second, "You a fisherman"; to the third, "You a smith"; to the fourth, "You a tanner"; to the fifth, "You a weaver"; to the sixth, "You a shoemaker"; to the seventh, "You a tailor"; to the eighth, "You a potter"; to the ninth, "You a carter"; to the tenth, "You a sailor"; to the eleventh, "You an errand boy"; and to the twelfth, "You a kitchen boy, all the days of your life."

When Eve had heard all this she said, "Lord, how unequally you divide your gifts! They are all of them my children after all, whom I brought into the world; your favours ought to be given to all of them alike."

But God answered, "Eve, you don't understand. It's right and necessary that the whole world should be supplied out of your children. If they were all princes and lords, who would grow the corn and thresh it and grind it and bake it? Who would be blacksmiths, weavers, carpenters, masons, labourers, tailors and seamstresses? Each shall have his own place, so that one supports another, and all are fed like the limbs of one body."

Then Eve answered, "Ah, Lord, forgive me; I spoke to you too quickly. Do your divine will with my children."

The Nix of the Mill-Pond

There was once a miller who lived with his wife in great contentment. They had money and land, and their prosperity grew year by year, more and more.

But bad luck comes like a thief in the night. As their wealth had increased, so it decreased again, year by year; and at last the miller could hardly call the mill he lived in his own. He was in great distress; and when he lay down after his day's work he found no rest, but tossed about in his bed full of care.

One morning he got up before daybreak and went out into the open air, thinking that perhaps his heart might grow lighter there. As he was stepping over the mill dam the first sunbeam was just breaking out, and he heard a rippling sound in the pond. He turned round and saw a beautiful woman rising slowly out of the water. Her long hair, which she was holding off her shoulders with her soft hands, fell down on both sides and covered her white body.

He soon saw that she was the nix of the mill-pond; and in his fright he did not know whether to run away or stay where he was. But the nix let her sweet voice be heard, and called him by his name and asked why he was so sad.

The miller was struck dumb at first; but when he heard her speak so kindly he took heart, and told her how he had once lived in wealth and happiness, but was now so poor that he did not know what to do.

"Be easy," answered the nix. "I'll make you richer and happier than you've ever been before — only you must promise to give me the young thing that has just been born in your house."

"What can that be," thought the miller, "but a puppy or a kitten?" — and he promised her what she wanted.

The nix went down into the water again, and he hurried back to his mill, comforted and in good spirits. He had not reached it yet when the maidservant came out of the house and called to him to rejoice, for his wife had given birth to a little boy.

The miller stood as if struck by lightning. He saw very well that the cunning nix had known about it and had cheated him. Hanging his head, he went up to his wife's bedside; and when she said, "Why don't you rejoice over the fine boy?" he told her what had happened to him and what he had promised the nix.

"What use are riches and prosperity to me," he added, "if I'm to lose my child? But what can I do?"

Even the relations, who had come to wish them joy, did not know what to say.

Meanwhile prosperity came back to the miller's house. Everything he undertook succeeded; it was as if presses and coffers filled themselves of their own accord, and as if money multiplied in the cupboards overnight. It was not long before his wealth was greater than it had ever been.

But he could not rejoice in it untroubled, for the bargain he had made with the nix tormented his soul. Whenever he passed the mill-pond, he was afraid she might rise up and remind him of his debt. He never let the boy himself go near the water. "Beware," he said to him. "If you so much as touch the water, a hand will rise up and seize you and drag you down."

But as year after year went by and the nix did not show herself again, the miller began to feel easy. The boy grew up into a young man and was apprenticed to a huntsman. When he had learned everything and had become an excellent huntsman, the lord of the village took him into his service.

In the village lived a beautiful and true-hearted girl who pleased the huntsman; and when his master saw it, he gave him a little house. The two were married, and lived peacefully and happily and loved each other with all their hearts.

One day the huntsman was chasing a roe; and when the animal turned aside out of the forest into the open country, he pursued it and at last shot it. He did not notice that he was now near the dangerous mill-pond; and after he had dressed the deer he went to the water to wash his bloodstained hands.

But hardly had he dipped them in before the nix rose up, wound her dripping arms round him with a smile, and drew him swiftly down under the waves, which closed over him.

When it was evening and the huntsman did not come home, his wife grew alarmed. She went out to look for him; and as he had often told her that he had to be on his guard against the nix's snares and dared not go near the mill-pond, she suspected already what had happened. She hurried to the water; and when she found his hunting pouch lying on the shore, she could have no more doubt about the misfortune.

Lamenting in her sorrow and wringing her hands, she called her beloved by name, but in vain. She hurried across to the other side of the pond and called him again; she reviled the nix with harsh words, but no answer came. The surface of the water stayed calm; only the crescent moon stared steadily back at her.

The poor woman did not leave the pond. She paced round and round it with hasty steps, never resting a moment, sometimes in silence, sometimes uttering a loud cry, sometimes softly sobbing. At last her strength gave out; she sank down to the ground and fell into a heavy sleep.

Presently a dream took hold of her. She was anxiously climbing up between great masses of rock; thorns and briars caught her feet, the rain beat in her face, and the wind tossed her long hair about. When she reached the summit, quite a different sight met her: the sky was blue, the air soft, the ground sloped gently downwards, and on a green meadow gay with flowers of every colour stood a pretty cottage. She went up to it and opened the door; and there sat an old woman with white hair, who beckoned to her kindly.

At that very moment the poor woman woke. Day had already dawned, and she resolved at once to act on her dream. She laboriously climbed the mountain, and everything was exactly as she had seen it in the night. The old woman received her kindly and pointed out a chair for her to sit on.

"You must have met with some misfortune," she said, "since you've sought out my lonely cottage."

In tears, the woman told her what had happened.

"Be comforted," said the old woman. "I'll help you. Here is a golden comb for you. Wait until the full moon has risen, then go to the mill-pond, sit down on the shore and comb your long black hair with this comb. When you've done, lay it down on the bank, and you'll see what happens."

The woman went home, but the time until the full moon came passed slowly. At last the shining disc appeared in the sky; and then she went out to the mill-pond and sat down and combed her long black hair with the golden comb, and when she had finished she laid it down at the water's edge.

It was not long before there was a movement in the depths; a wave rose and rolled to the shore and carried the comb away with it. In no more time than the comb needed to sink to the bottom, the surface of the water parted, and the huntsman's head rose up. He did not speak, but looked at his wife with sorrowful eyes. At the same instant a second wave came rushing up and covered the man's head. It was all gone; the mill-pond lay as peaceful as before, and nothing but the face of the full moon shone on it.

Full of sorrow, the woman went back; but again the dream showed her the old woman's cottage. Next morning she set out again and told her troubles to the wise woman.

The old woman gave her a golden flute and said, "Wait until the full moon comes again, then take this flute; play a beautiful air on it, and when you've finished, lay it on the sand. Then you'll see what happens."

The wife did as the old woman told her. No sooner was the flute lying on the sand than there was a stirring in the depths, and a wave rushed up and carried the flute away with it. Immediately afterwards the water parted, and not only her husband's head but half his body rose up. He stretched his arms out longingly towards her — but a second wave came up and covered him and drew him down again.

"Alas, what good does it do me," said the unhappy woman, "to see my beloved only to lose him again?"

Despair filled her heart afresh; but the dream led her a third time to the old woman's house. She set out, and the wise woman gave her a golden spinning wheel and comforted her and said, "It isn't all fulfilled yet. Wait until the time of the full moon, then take the spinning wheel and sit down on the shore and spin the spool full; and when you've done that, set the spinning wheel down near the water, and you'll see what happens."

The woman obeyed everything she said exactly. As soon as the full moon showed itself she carried the golden spinning wheel to the shore and spun industriously until the flax came to an end and the spool was quite filled with thread. No sooner was the wheel standing on the shore than there was a more violent movement than before in the depths of the pond, and a mighty wave rushed up and carried the wheel away with it.

Immediately the head and then the whole body of her husband rose into the air on a spout of water. He sprang quickly to the shore, caught his wife by the hand and fled with her.

But they had gone only a very little way when the whole pond rose with a frightful roar and streamed out over the open country. The fugitives already saw death before their eyes, when the woman in her terror called on the old woman for help; and in an instant they were transformed, she into a toad and he into a frog.

The flood that had overtaken them could not destroy them; but it tore them apart and carried them far away. When the water had drained off and they both touched dry land again, they got their human shapes back — but neither knew where the other was. They found themselves among strangers who had never heard of their native country. High mountains and deep valleys lay between them.

To keep themselves alive, they both had to mind sheep. For many long years they drove their flocks through field and forest and were full of sorrow and longing.

When spring had broken out over the earth once more, they both went out one day with their flocks; and as chance would have it, they came near each other. They met in a valley, but did not recognise each other; yet they were glad not to be so lonely any more. From then on they drove their flocks to the same place every day. They did not speak much, but they felt comforted.

One evening, when the full moon was shining in the sky and the sheep were already at rest, the shepherd pulled the flute out of his pocket and played a beautiful but sorrowful air on it. When he had finished, he saw that the shepherdess was weeping bitterly.

"Why are you weeping?" he asked.

"Alas," answered she, "the full moon shone like this when I played this air on the flute for the last time, and the head of my beloved rose out of the water."

He looked at her, and it seemed as if a veil fell from his eyes, and he recognised his dear wife; and when she looked at him, and the moon shone on his face, she knew him too. They embraced and kissed each other — and nobody need ask whether they were happy.

The Little Folks’ Presents

A tailor and a goldsmith were travelling together; and one evening, when the sun had sunk behind the mountains, they heard the sound of distant music, which grew more and more distinct. It sounded strange, but so pleasant that they forgot all their weariness and stepped out quickly.

The moon had already risen when they reached a hill, where they saw a crowd of little men and women who had taken each other by the hands and were whirling round in a dance with the greatest pleasure and delight. They sang to it most charmingly, and that was the music the travellers had heard.

In the middle of them sat an old man who was rather taller than the rest. He wore a many-coloured coat, and his iron-grey beard hung down over his chest. The two of them stood still, full of astonishment, and watched the dance.

The old man made a sign that they should come in, and the little folks willingly opened their circle. The goldsmith, who had a hump and, like all hunchbacks, was brave enough, stepped in. The tailor felt a little afraid at first and held back; but when he saw how merrily it was all going, he plucked up his courage and followed.

The circle closed again at once, and the little folks went on singing and dancing with the wildest leaps. But the old man took a large knife that hung at his belt and whetted it; and when it was sharp enough he looked round at the strangers.

They were terrified; but they had not much time for reflection, for the old man seized the goldsmith and with the greatest speed shaved the hair of his head clean off, and then the same thing happened to the tailor.

But their fear left them when, after he had finished his work, the old man clapped them both on the shoulder in a friendly way, as much as to say that they had done well to let it all be done to them willingly and without any struggle. He pointed with his finger to a heap of coals lying at one side, and made signs to the travellers that they should fill their pockets with them.

Both of them obeyed, although they did not know what use the coals could be to them, and then they went on their way to find a shelter for the night. When they had got down into the valley, the clock of the nearby monastery struck twelve, and the singing stopped. In a moment everything had vanished, and the hill lay lonely in the moonlight.

The two travellers found an inn and covered themselves up on their straw beds with their coats; but in their weariness they forgot to take the coals out of them first. A heavy weight on their limbs woke them earlier than usual. They felt in their pockets, and could not believe their eyes when they saw that the pockets were not filled with coals but with pure gold. And happily, too, the hair of their heads and beards had come back as thick as ever.

They had now become rich men; but the goldsmith, who in keeping with his greedy nature had filled his pockets better, was twice as rich as the tailor. And a greedy man, even if he has much, still wants more; so the goldsmith proposed to the tailor that they should stay another day and go out again in the evening, to bring back still greater treasures from the old man on the hill.

The tailor refused, and said, "I have enough and I'm content. Now I'll be a master and marry my dear one" — for so he called his sweetheart — "and I'm a happy man." But he stayed another day to please him.

In the evening the goldsmith hung a couple of bags over his shoulders so as to be able to stow away a great deal, and took the road to the hill. He found the little folks at their singing and dancing as on the night before, and the old man shaved him clean again and made signs to him to take some coal away with him. He was not slow about stuffing as much into his bags as would go, and went back quite delighted and covered himself over with his coat.

"Even if the gold does weigh heavily," said he, "I'll gladly bear it" — and at last he fell asleep with the sweet expectation of waking in the morning an enormously rich man.

When he opened his eyes he got up in haste to look in his pockets; but how amazed he was when he drew nothing out of them but black coals, however often he put his hands in.

"The gold I got the night before is still there for me," thought he — and went and fetched it out; but how appalled he was to see that it too had turned back into coal.

He struck his forehead with his dusty black hand, and then he felt that his whole head was bald and smooth, and so was the place where his beard should have been. But his misfortunes were not over yet: he now noticed for the first time that, besides the hump on his back, a second one just as large had grown in front on his chest.

Then he recognised the punishment for his greed, and began to weep aloud.

The good tailor, who was woken by this, comforted the unhappy fellow as well as he could, and said, "You've been my comrade in my travelling days; you shall stay with me and share in my wealth."

He kept his word — but the poor goldsmith had to carry his two humps as long as he lived, and to cover his bald head with a cap.
