The Giant and the Tailor

A certain tailor, who was great at boasting but poor at doing, took it into his head to go abroad for a while and look about the world. As soon as he could manage it he left his workshop and wandered on his way, over hill and dale, sometimes this way and sometimes that, but always on and on.

Once, while he was out, he saw in the blue distance a steep hill, and behind it a tower reaching to the clouds, which rose up out of a wild dark forest.

"Thunder and lightning," cried the tailor, "what's that?" And as curiosity strongly goaded him, he went boldly towards it.

But what made the tailor open his eyes and his mouth, when he came near, was to see that the tower had legs, and leapt over the steep hill in a single bound, and was now standing in front of him as an all-powerful giant.

"What do you want here, you tiny fly's leg?" cried the giant, in a voice like thunder on every side.

The tailor whimpered, "I only want to look about and see whether I can earn myself a bit of bread in this forest."

"If that's what you're after," said the giant, "you can have a place with me."

"If it must be, why not? What wages shall I get?"

"You shall hear what wages you'll get. Every year three hundred and sixty-five days — and when it's leap year, one more into the bargain. Does that suit you?"

"All right," replied the tailor, and thought to himself, "A man must cut his coat according to his cloth. I'll try to get away as fast as I can."

At this the giant said to him, "Go, little ragamuffin, and fetch me a jug of water."

"Hadn't I better bring the well itself at once, and the spring too?" asked the boaster, and went off with the pitcher to the water.

"What — the well and the spring too?" growled the giant into his beard; for he was rather clownish and stupid, and began to be afraid. "That rascal is no fool; he has a wizard inside him. Be on your guard, old Hans; this is no serving man for you."

When the tailor had brought the water, the giant told him to go into the forest and cut a couple of blocks of wood and bring them back.

"Why not the whole forest at once, with one stroke? The whole forest, young and old, with everything in it, both rough and smooth?" asked the little tailor, and went off to cut the wood.

"What — the whole forest, young and old, with everything in it, both rough and smooth? And the well and its spring too?" growled the credulous giant into his beard, and was more terrified still. "That rascal can do a great deal more than bake apples; he has a wizard inside him. Be on your guard, old Hans; this is no serving man for you."

When the tailor had brought the wood, the giant ordered him to shoot two or three wild boars for supper.

"Why not a thousand at one shot, and bring them all here?" asked the boastful tailor.

"What!" cried the timid giant in great terror. "Let well alone for tonight, and lie down and rest."

The giant was so terribly alarmed that he could not close an eye all night long for thinking of the best way to get rid of this accursed sorcerer of a servant. Time brings counsel.

Next morning the giant and the tailor went to a marsh with a number of willow trees standing round it. Then the giant said, "Listen, tailor, sit yourself down on one of these willow branches. I'd like more than anything to see whether you're heavy enough to bend it down."

In a moment the tailor was sitting on it, holding his breath and making himself so heavy that the bough bent down. But when he had to draw breath, it flung him — for unluckily he had not put his pressing iron in his pocket — so high into the air that he was never seen again; and this to the giant's great delight.

If the tailor has not fallen down again, he must still be hovering about up there in the air.

The Nail

A merchant had done good business at the fair; he had sold his wares and lined his money bags with gold and silver. Then he wanted to travel home and be in his own house before nightfall. So he packed his trunk of money on his horse and rode away.

At noon he rested in a town; and when he wanted to go on, the stable boy brought out his horse and said, "There's a nail missing, sir, from the shoe on its left hind foot."

"Let it be missing," answered the merchant. "The shoe will certainly stay on for the six miles I still have to go. I'm in a hurry."

In the afternoon, when he dismounted once more and had his horse fed, the stable boy came into the room to him and said, "Sir, there's a shoe missing from your horse's left hind foot. Shall I take him to the blacksmith?"

"Let it still be missing," answered the man. "The horse can hold out well enough for the couple of miles that are left. I'm in haste."

He rode off; but before long the horse began to limp. It had not limped long before it began to stumble, and it had not stumbled long before it fell down and broke its leg. The merchant had to leave the horse where it lay, and unbuckle the trunk and take it on his back and go home on foot. And he did not get there until quite late at night.

"And that unlucky nail," said he to himself, "has caused the whole disaster."

Hurry slowly.

The Poor Boy in the Grave

There was once a poor shepherd boy whose father and mother were dead, and he was placed by the authorities in the house of a rich man, who was to feed him and bring him up.

But the man and his wife had bad hearts, and were greedy and anxious about their riches, and vexed whenever anybody put a morsel of their bread in his mouth. The poor young fellow might do what he liked, he got little to eat — only so many the more blows.

One day he had to watch a hen and her chicks; but she ran through a hedge with them, and a hawk darted down instantly and carried her off through the air. The boy shouted "Thief! Thief! Rascal!" with all the strength in his body — but what good did that do? The hawk did not bring its prey back.

The man heard the noise and ran to the spot; and as soon as he saw that his hen was gone, he flew into a rage and gave the boy such a beating that he could not stir for two days.

Then he had to look after the chicks without the hen; but now his difficulty was greater, for one ran here and another there. He thought he was doing a very clever thing when he tied them all together with a string, because then the hawk would not be able to steal any of them away from him. But he was very much mistaken.

After two days, worn out with running about and with hunger, he fell asleep. The bird of prey came and seized one of the chicks; and as the others were tied fast to it, it carried them all off together, perched itself on a tree and devoured them.

The farmer was just coming home; and when he saw the disaster he grew angry and beat the boy so unmercifully that he had to lie in bed for several days.

When he was on his legs again the farmer said to him, "You're too stupid for me; I can't make a herdsman of you. You must go as errand boy."

Then he sent him to the judge, to whom he was to carry a basketful of grapes, and gave him a letter as well.

On the way, hunger and thirst tormented the unhappy boy so violently that he ate two of the bunches of grapes. He took the basket to the judge; but when the judge had read the letter and counted the bunches he said, "Two clusters are missing."

The boy confessed quite honestly that, driven by hunger and thirst, he had eaten the two that were missing.

The judge wrote a letter to the farmer and asked for the same number of grapes again. These too the boy had to carry to him, with a letter. And as he was again so extremely hungry and thirsty, he could not help himself, and again ate two bunches. But first he took the letter out of the basket and put it under a stone and sat down on top of it, so that the letter could not see him and betray him.

The judge, though, again made him explain about the missing bunches.

"Ah," said the boy, "how did you find out? The letter couldn't have known about it, because I put it under a stone before I did it."

The judge could not help laughing at the boy's simplicity, and sent the man a letter warning him to look after the poor boy better and not let him go short of food and drink, and also to teach him what was right and what was wrong.

"I'll soon show you the difference," said the hard man. "If you want to eat, you must work; and if you do anything wrong, you'll be taught quite well enough by blows."

The next day he set him a hard task. He was to chop up two bundles of straw for the horses' food; and then the man threatened him. "In five hours," said he, "I'll be back; and if the straw isn't cut into chaff by then, I'll beat you until you can't move a limb."

The farmer went off with his wife and the manservant and the girl to the yearly fair, and left nothing behind for the boy but a small bit of bread.

The boy sat down on the bench and began to work with all his might. As he grew warm over it he took his little coat off and threw it down on the straw. In his terror that he would not get done in time, he kept on cutting without stopping; and in his haste, without noticing it, he chopped up his little coat along with the straw.

He realised the disaster too late; there was no repairing it. "Ah," cried he, "now it's all over with me. That wicked man didn't threaten me for nothing; if he comes back and sees what I've done, he'll kill me. Rather than that, I'll take my own life."

The boy had once heard the farmer's wife say, "I've got a pot of poison under my bed." She had only said it to keep greedy people away, though, for there was honey in it.

The boy crept under the bed and brought out the pot and ate everything in it. "I don't know," said he. "People say death is bitter, but it tastes very sweet to me. It's no wonder the farmer's wife has so often longed for death."

He sat himself down in a little chair and made ready to die. But instead of growing weaker, he felt strengthened by the nourishing food.

"It can't have been poison," thought he. "But the farmer once said there was a small bottle of fly poison in the box where he keeps his clothes. That, no doubt, will be the true poison, and will bring death to me."

It was no fly poison, though, but Hungarian wine. The boy got the bottle out and emptied it.

"This death tastes sweet too," said he. But shortly afterwards, when the wine began to rise into his head and stupefy him, he thought his end was drawing near. "I feel that I must die," said he. "I'll go away to the churchyard and find a grave."

He staggered out, reached the churchyard and laid himself down in a newly dug grave. He lost his senses more and more. Nearby was an inn where a wedding was being held; and when he heard the music he thought he was already in Paradise, until at length he lost all consciousness.

The poor boy never woke again; the heat of the strong wine and the cold night dew took his life from him, and he stayed in the grave he had laid himself down in.

When the farmer heard the news of the boy's death he was terrified and afraid of being brought to justice; indeed, his distress took such a powerful hold on him that he fell fainting to the ground. His wife, who was standing at the hearth with a pan of hot fat, ran to help him. But the flames leapt against the pan, and the whole house caught fire; and in a few hours it lay in ashes. And the rest of the years they had to live they passed in poverty and misery, tormented by the pangs of conscience.
