The Spindle, The Shuttle, and the Needle

There was once a girl whose father and mother died while she was still a little child. All alone, in a small house at the end of the village, lived her godmother, who supported herself by spinning and weaving and sewing. The old woman took the forlorn child in to live with her, kept her to her work, and brought her up in everything that is good.

When the girl was fifteen years old the old woman fell ill, called the child to her bedside and said, "Dear daughter, I feel my end drawing near. I leave you the little house, which will protect you from wind and weather, and my spindle and shuttle and needle, which you can earn your bread with."

Then she laid her hands on the girl's head and blessed her and said, "Only keep the love of God in your heart, and all will go well with you."

With that she closed her eyes; and when she was laid in the earth, the girl followed the coffin weeping bitterly, and paid her the last mark of respect.

And now the girl lived quite alone in the little house, and was hard-working, and spun and wove and sewed; and the good old woman's blessing was on everything she did. It seemed as if the flax in the room increased of its own accord; and whenever she wove a piece of cloth or carpet or made a shirt, she at once found a buyer who paid her amply for it, so that she wanted for nothing and even had something to share with others.

About this time the King's son was travelling about the country looking for a bride. He was not to choose a poor one, and he did not want a rich one. So he said, "She shall be my wife who is the poorest and at the same time the richest."

When he came to the village where the girl lived he asked, as he did wherever he went, who was the richest and also the poorest girl in the place. They named the richest first; and the poorest, they said, was the girl who lived in the small house right at the end of the village.

The rich girl was sitting in all her splendour in front of her door; and when the prince came up to her she got up and went to meet him and made him a low curtsey. He looked at her, said nothing, and rode on.

When he came to the poor girl's house she was not standing at the door but sitting in her little room. He stopped his horse and saw through the window, on which the bright sun was shining, the girl sitting at her spinning wheel, busily spinning. She looked up; and when she saw that the prince was looking in she blushed all over her face, let her eyes fall, and went on spinning. I don't know whether the thread was quite even just at that moment; but she went on spinning until the King's son had ridden away again.

Then she went to the window and opened it and said, "It's so warm in this room" — but she still looked after him as long as she could make out the white feathers in his hat.

Then she sat down to work again in her own room and went on with her spinning; and a saying the old woman had often repeated when she was sitting at her work came into her mind, and she sang the words to herself:

	"Spindle, my spindle, haste, haste you away,
	and here to my house bring the wooer, I pray."

And what do you think happened? The spindle sprang out of her hand in an instant and out of the door; and when, in her astonishment, she got up and looked after it, she saw it dancing merrily out into the open country, drawing a shining golden thread behind it. Before long it had vanished entirely from her sight.

As she now had no spindle, the girl took the weaver's shuttle in her hand and sat down at her loom and began to weave.

The spindle, meanwhile, danced on and on; and just as the thread came to an end it reached the prince.

"What's this I see?" he cried. "The spindle must want to show me the way." And he turned his horse about and rode back alongside the golden thread.

The girl, though, was sitting at her work, singing:

	"Shuttle, my shuttle, weave well this day,
	and guide the wooer to me, I pray."

Immediately the shuttle sprang out of her hand and out of the door. In front of the threshold, though, it began to weave a carpet more beautiful than the eyes of man had ever seen. Lilies and roses bloomed on both sides of it; and on a golden ground in the middle green branches climbed up, with hares and rabbits bounding beneath them, and stags and deer stretching their heads in between; and brightly coloured birds sat in the branches above — they lacked nothing but the gift of song. The shuttle leapt this way and that, and everything seemed to grow of its own accord.

As the shuttle had run away, the girl sat down to sew. She held the needle in her hand and sang:

	"Needle, my needle, sharp-pointed and fine,
	prepare for a wooer this house of mine."

Then the needle leapt out of her fingers and flew about the room everywhere, as quick as lightning. It was just as if invisible spirits were at work: they covered tables and benches with green cloth in an instant, and the chairs with velvet, and hung silk curtains at the windows.

Hardly had the needle put in the last stitch before the girl saw through the window the white feathers of the prince, whom the spindle had brought there by the golden thread. He dismounted, stepped over the carpet into the house; and when he came into the room, there stood the girl in her poor clothes, but shining out from them like a rose surrounded by leaves.

"You are the poorest, and also the richest," said he to her. "Come with me; you shall be my bride."

She did not speak, but she gave him her hand. Then he gave her a kiss and led her out and lifted her onto his horse, and took her to the royal castle, where the wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing. And the spindle and the shuttle and the needle were kept in the treasure chamber and held in great honour.

The Peasant and the Devil

There was once a far-sighted, crafty peasant whose tricks were much talked about. The best story, though, is how he once got hold of the Devil and made a fool of him.

The peasant had been working in his field one day; and as twilight had set in he was making ready for the journey home, when he saw a heap of burning coals in the middle of his field. And when he went up to it, full of astonishment, a little black devil was sitting on the live coals.

"You're sitting on a treasure, I do believe," said the peasant.

"Yes, truly," replied the Devil, "on a treasure that holds more gold and silver than you've ever seen in your life."

"The treasure is in my field and belongs to me," said the peasant.

"It's yours," answered the Devil, "if for two years you'll give me half of everything your field produces. I have money enough, but I've a longing for the fruits of the earth."

The peasant agreed to the bargain. "But so that no dispute can arise about the division," said he, "everything above the ground shall belong to you, and what's under the earth to me."

The Devil was quite satisfied with that — but the cunning peasant had sown turnips.

Now when harvest time came, the Devil appeared and wanted to take away his crop; but he found nothing but the yellow withered leaves, while the peasant, full of delight, was digging up his turnips.

"You've had the best of it for once," said the Devil, "but next time that won't do. What grows above ground shall be yours, and what's under it, mine."

"I'm willing," replied the peasant. But when the time came to sow, he did not sow turnips again, but wheat. The grain ripened, and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalks down to the ground. When the Devil came he found nothing but the stubble, and went off in a fury down into a cleft in the rocks.

"That's the way to cheat the Devil," said the peasant — and went and fetched the treasure away.

The Crumbs on the Table

A countryman said to his little puppies one day, "Come into the parlour and enjoy yourselves, and pick up the breadcrumbs on the table. Your mistress has gone out to pay some visits."

Then the little dogs said, "No, no, we won't go. If the mistress finds out, she'll beat us."

The countryman said, "She'll know nothing about it. Do come; after all, she never gives you anything good."

Then the little dogs said again, "No, no, we must let it alone; we mustn't go."

But the countryman gave them no peace until at last they went, and got up on the table and ate up the breadcrumbs with all their might.

But at that very moment the mistress came in, and seized the stick in great haste and beat them and treated them very hard indeed.

And when they were outside the house, the little dogs said to the countryman, "D'you, d'you, d'you, d'you, d'you see?"

Then the countryman laughed and said, "Didn't, didn't, didn't you expect it?"

So they just had to run away.

The Sea-Hare

There was once a princess who had a room high up under the battlements of her castle, with twelve windows in it that looked out in every possible direction; and when she climbed up to it and looked around her, she could survey her whole kingdom.

When she looked out of the first, her sight was keener than any other human being's; from the second she could see better still; from the third more distinctly still; and so it went on, up to the twelfth, from which she saw everything above the earth and under it, and nothing at all could be kept secret from her.

And as she was haughty, and would be subject to nobody but wanted to keep the rule for herself alone, she had it proclaimed that nobody should ever be her husband who could not hide himself from her so well that it would be quite impossible for her to find him. But whoever tried it and was discovered by her was to have his head struck off and stuck on a post.

Ninety-seven posts with the heads of dead men on them were already standing in front of the castle, and nobody had come forward for a long time. The princess was delighted, and thought to herself, "Now I shall be free as long as I live."

Then three brothers appeared before her and announced that they wished to try their luck.

The eldest thought he would be quite safe if he crept into a lime pit; but she saw him from the first window and made him come out, and had his head cut off.

The second crept into the cellar of the palace, but she saw him too from the first window, and his fate was sealed. His head was set on the ninety-ninth post.

Then the youngest came to her and begged her to give him a day to think about it, and also to be so gracious as to overlook it if she happened to discover him twice; but if he failed the third time, he would consider his life over.

As he was so handsome and begged so earnestly, she said, "Yes, I'll grant you that — but you won't succeed."

Next day he thought for a long time how he should hide himself, but all in vain. So he took his gun and went out hunting. He saw a raven, took good aim at him and was just about to fire, when the bird cried, "Don't shoot; I'll make it worth your while not to."

He put his gun down and went on, and came to a lake, where he surprised a large fish that had come up from the depths below to the surface of the water. When he had aimed at it, the fish cried, "Don't shoot, and I'll make it worth your while."

He let it dive down again, and went on, and met a fox that was lame. He fired and missed it, and the fox cried, "You'd do much better to come here and draw the thorn out of my foot for me."

He did it; but then he wanted to kill the fox and skin it, and the fox said, "Stop, and I'll make it worth your while."

The young man let him go; and then, as it was evening, he went home.

Next day he was to hide himself; but however much he racked his brains over it, he did not know where. He went into the forest to the raven and said, "I let you live; so now tell me where I'm to hide myself, so that the King's daughter won't see me."

The raven hung his head and thought it over for a long time. At length he croaked, "I have it."

He fetched an egg out of his nest and cut it into two parts and shut the young man inside it, and then made it whole again and sat down on it.

When the King's daughter went to the first window she could not find him, nor from the others either, and she began to grow uneasy; but from the eleventh she saw him. She ordered the raven to be shot and the egg to be brought and broken, and the young man was forced to come out.

She said, "For once you're excused; but if you don't do better than this, you're lost."

Next day he went to the lake and called the fish to him and said, "I let you live; now tell me where to hide myself, so that the King's daughter won't see me."

The fish thought for a while, and at last cried, "I have it! I'll shut you up in my stomach." He swallowed him and went down to the bottom of the lake.

The King's daughter looked out through her windows, and even from the eleventh she did not see him, and was alarmed; but at length from the twelfth she saw him. She ordered the fish to be caught and killed, and then the young man appeared. Anybody can imagine what state of mind he was in.

She said, "Twice you're forgiven; but be sure your head will be set on the hundredth post."

On the last day he went out into the country with a heavy heart and met the fox. "You know how to find all kinds of hiding places," said he. "I let you live; now advise me where to hide myself, so that the King's daughter doesn't discover me."

"That's a hard task," answered the fox, looking very thoughtful. At length he cried, "I have it!" — and went with him to a spring and dipped himself in it, and came out as a stallholder in the market, a dealer in animals. The young man had to dip himself in the water too, and was changed into a small sea-hare.

The dealer went into the town and showed the pretty little animal, and a great many people gathered to see it. At length the King's daughter came too; and as she liked it very much, she bought it and gave the dealer a good deal of money for it. Before he handed it over to her, he said to it, "When the King's daughter goes to the window, creep quickly under the braids of her hair."

And now the time came for her to look for him. She went to one window after another in turn, from the first to the eleventh, and did not see him. And when she did not see him from the twelfth either, she was full of anxiety and anger, and slammed it shut with such violence that the glass in every window shivered into a thousand pieces and the whole castle shook.

She went back and felt the sea-hare under the braids of her hair. Then she seized it and threw it on the ground, exclaiming, "Away with you! Get out of my sight!"

It ran to the dealer, and the two of them hurried to the spring and plunged into it and got their true shapes back.

The young man thanked the fox and said, "The raven and the fish are idiots compared with you. You know the right tune to play, there's no denying it."

The young man went straight to the palace. The princess was already expecting him, and reconciled herself to her fate. The wedding was celebrated, and now he was king and lord of the whole kingdom.

He never told her where he had hidden himself the third time, or who had helped him; so she believed that he had done it all by his own skill, and she had great respect for him, for she thought to herself, "He can do more than I can."
