The Master-Thief

One day an old man and his wife were sitting in front of a miserable house, resting a while from their work. Suddenly a splendid carriage with four black horses came driving up, and a richly dressed man got down out of it.

The peasant stood up and went to the great man and asked what he wanted, and how he could be of use to him.

The stranger held out his hand to the old man and said, "I want nothing but to enjoy a country dish for once. Cook me some potatoes the way you always have them, and then I'll sit down at your table and eat them with pleasure."

The peasant smiled and said, "You're a count, or a prince, or perhaps even a duke; noble gentlemen often have fancies like that. But you shall have your wish."

His wife went into the kitchen and began to wash and scrub the potatoes and make them into balls, the way country folk eat them.

While she was busy with this work, the peasant said to the stranger, "Come into my garden with me for a while; I still have something to do there." He had dug some holes in the garden and now wanted to plant some trees in them.

"Have you no children," asked the stranger, "who could help you with your work?"

"No," answered the peasant. "I had a son, it's true, but it's long since he went out into the world. He was a ne'er-do-well — sharp and knowing, but he'd learn nothing and was full of bad tricks. At last he ran away from me, and since then I've heard nothing of him."

The old man took a young tree and put it in a hole and drove a post in beside it; and when he had shovelled some earth in and trampled it firmly down, he tied the stem of the tree to the post with a rope of straw, above, below and in the middle.

"But tell me," said the stranger, "why don't you tie that crooked, knotted tree lying over there in the corner, bent down almost to the ground, to a post as well, so that it grows straight like these?"

The old man smiled and said, "Sir, you speak according to your knowledge; it's easy to see that you know nothing about gardening. That tree there is old and misshapen; nobody can make it straight now. Trees must be trained while they're young."

"That's how it was with your son," said the stranger. "If you'd trained him while he was still young, he wouldn't have run away; now he too must have grown hard and misshapen."

"It's a long time indeed since he went away," replied the old man. "He must have changed."

"Would you know him again if he came to you?" asked the stranger.

"Hardly by his face," replied the peasant, "but he has a mark about him — a birthmark on his shoulder that looks like a bean."

When he had said that, the stranger pulled off his coat and bared his shoulder and showed the peasant the bean.

"Good God!" cried the old man. "You really are my son!" And love for his child stirred in his heart. "But," he added, "how can you be my son, when you've become a great lord and live in wealth and luxury? How have you managed that?"

"Ah, father," answered his son, "the young tree was tied to no post and has grown crooked; now it's too old, and it will never be straight again. How did I get all this? I've become a thief. But don't be alarmed — I'm a master-thief. For me there are neither locks nor bolts; whatever I want is mine. Don't imagine that I steal like a common thief; I only take a little of the surplus of the rich. Poor people are safe from me — I'd rather give to them than take anything from them. And it's the same with anything I can have without trouble and cunning and skill: I never touch it."

"Alas, my son," said his father, "it still doesn't please me. A thief is a thief; I tell you it will end badly."

He took him to his mother; and when she heard that this was her son she wept for joy — but when he told her that he had become a master-thief, two streams flowed down her face. At length she said, "Even if he's become a thief, he's still my son, and my eyes have seen him once more."

They sat down at the table, and once again he ate with his parents the poor food he had not eaten for so long.

His father said, "If our lord the count, up there in the castle, learns who you are and what trade you follow, he won't take you in his arms and cradle you the way he did when he held you at the font — he'll have you swing from a rope."

"Be easy, father, he'll do me no harm, for I understand my trade. I'll go to him myself this very day."

When evening drew near, the master-thief got into his carriage and drove to the castle. The count received him civilly, taking him for a distinguished man. But when the stranger made himself known, the count went pale and was quite silent for some time.

At length he said, "You're my godson, and on that account mercy shall take the place of justice, and I'll deal leniently with you. Since you pride yourself on being a master-thief, I'll put your art to the test; but if you don't stand the test, you must marry the ropemaker's daughter, and the croaking of the raven shall be your music on the occasion."

"My lord count," answered the master-thief, "think of three things, as difficult as you like; and if I don't perform your tasks, do with me what you will."

The count thought for a few minutes, and then said, "Well then: first, you shall steal the horse I keep for my own riding out of the stable. Second, you shall steal the sheet from under my wife and me while we're asleep, without our noticing it, and my wife's wedding ring as well. And third and last, you shall steal the parson and the clerk out of the church. Mark what I'm saying, for your life depends on it."

The master-thief went to the nearest town, where he bought the clothes of an old peasant woman and put them on. Then he stained his face brown and painted wrinkles on it too, so that nobody could have recognised him. Then he filled a small cask with old Hungarian wine, into which he mixed a powerful sleeping draught. He put the cask in a basket and took it on his back, and walked with slow and tottering steps to the count's castle.

It was already dark when he arrived. He sat down on a stone in the courtyard and began to cough like an asthmatic old woman, and to rub his hands as if he were cold.

In front of the stable door some soldiers were lying round a fire. One of them noticed the woman and called out to her, "Come nearer, old mother, and warm yourself beside us. After all, you've no bed for the night, and must take one where you can find it."

The old woman tottered up to them, begged them to lift the basket off her back, and sat down beside them at the fire.

"What have you got in your little cask, old lady?" one of them asked.

"A good mouthful of wine," she answered. "I live by trade; for money and fair words I'm quite ready to let you have a glass."

"Let's have it here, then," said the soldier; and when he had tasted one glass he said, "When wine is good, I like another glass" — and had another poured out for himself; and the rest followed his example.

"Hey, comrades," cried one of them to the men in the stable, "here's an old body with wine as old as herself. Take a draught; it'll warm your stomachs far better than our fire."

The old woman carried her cask into the stable. One of the soldiers had seated himself on the saddled riding horse, another held its bridle in his hand, a third had hold of its tail. She poured out as much as they wanted, until the cask ran dry.

It was not long before the bridle fell out of the first one's hand, and he dropped down and began to snore. The second let go of the tail and lay down and snored still louder. The one sitting in the saddle did stay sitting, but bent his head almost down to the horse's neck, and slept and blew with his mouth like the bellows of a forge. The soldiers outside had been asleep a long while already, and lay motionless on the ground as if dead.

When the master-thief saw that he had succeeded, he put a rope in the first one's hand instead of the bridle, and gave the one who had been holding the tail a wisp of straw. But what was he to do with the one sitting on the horse's back? He did not want to throw him down, for he might have woken and cried out.

He had a good idea. He unbuckled the girths of the saddle, tied a couple of ropes that were hanging from a ring on the wall fast to the saddle, and hauled the sleeping rider up into the air on it; then he twisted the rope round the posts and made it fast.

He soon unfastened the horse from its chain; but if he had ridden over the stone pavement of the yard they would have heard the noise in the castle. So he wrapped the horse's hoofs in old rags and led him carefully out, and leapt on him and galloped off.

When day broke, the master galloped up to the castle on the stolen horse. The count had just got up and was looking out of the window.

"Good morning, my lord count," he called to him. "Here's the horse, which I've got safely out of the stable. And just look how beautifully your soldiers are lying there asleep; and if you'll only go into the stable, you'll see how comfortable your watchmen have made themselves."

The count could not help laughing. Then he said, "For once you've succeeded; but things won't go so well the second time. And I warn you that if you come before me as a thief, I'll handle you as I would a thief."

When the countess went to bed that night she closed her hand tightly over her wedding ring; and the count said, "All the doors are locked and bolted. I'll stay awake and wait for the thief; and if he gets in by the window I'll shoot him."

The master-thief, though, went in the dark to the gallows, cut down a poor sinner who was hanging there, and carried him on his back to the castle. Then he set a ladder up to the bedroom, put the dead body on his shoulders and began to climb.

When he had got so high that the dead man's head showed at the window, the count, who was watching from his bed, fired a pistol at him; and immediately the master let the poor sinner drop and hid himself in a corner.

The night was light enough with the moon for the master to see distinctly how the count climbed out of the window onto the ladder and came down, and carried the dead body into the garden and began to dig a hole to lay it in.

"Now," thought the thief, "the moment has come." He stole nimbly out of his corner and climbed up the ladder straight into the countess's bedroom.

"Dear wife," he began, in the count's voice, "the thief is dead; but after all he's my godson, and has been more of a scapegrace than a villain. I won't put him to open shame; besides, I'm sorry for his parents. I'll bury him myself before daybreak in the garden, so that the thing isn't known. So give me the sheet — I'll wrap the body in it and bury him the way a dog buries things, by scratching."

The countess gave him the sheet.

"I'll tell you what," the thief went on, "I have a fit of generosity on me. Give me the ring too — the unhappy man risked his life for it, so he may as well take it with him into his grave."

She would not gainsay the count; and although she did it unwillingly, she drew the ring off her finger and gave it to him.

The thief made off with both these things, and got home safely before the count in the garden had finished his work of burying.

What a long face the count pulled when the master came next morning and brought him the sheet and the ring!

"Are you a wizard?" said he. "Who fetched you out of the grave I laid you in myself, and brought you back to life?"

"You didn't bury me," said the thief, "but the poor sinner from the gallows" — and he told him exactly how it had all happened; and the count had to admit to him that he was a clever, crafty thief.

"But you haven't reached the end yet," he added. "You still have the third task to perform; and if you don't succeed at that, all the rest is no use."

The master smiled and gave no answer.

When night had fallen he went to the village church with a long sack on his back, a bundle under his arm and a lantern in his hand. In the sack he had some crabs, and in the bundle short wax candles. He sat down in the churchyard, took out a crab and stuck a wax candle on its back. Then he lit the little light and put the crab on the ground and let it creep about. He took a second out of the sack and treated it the same way, and so on until the last one was out of the sack.

After this he put on a long black garment that looked like a monk's habit, and stuck a grey beard on his chin. When at last he was quite unrecognisable, he took the sack the crabs had been in, went into the church and climbed up into the pulpit.

The clock in the tower was just striking twelve; and when the last stroke had sounded, he cried out in a loud, piercing voice, "Hearken, sinful men! The end of all things has come! The last day is at hand! Hearken! Hearken! Whoever wants to go to heaven with me must creep into this sack. I am Peter, who opens and shuts the gate of heaven. Behold how the dead out there in the churchyard are wandering about gathering up their bones. Come, come, and creep into the sack; the world is about to be destroyed!"

The cry echoed through the whole village. The parson and the clerk, who lived nearest the church, heard it first; and when they saw the lights moving about the churchyard, they realised that something unusual was going on, and went into the church.

They listened to the sermon for a while, and then the clerk nudged the parson and said, "It wouldn't be amiss if we used this opportunity together, and found an easy way of getting to heaven before the last day dawns."

"To tell the truth," answered the parson, "that's what I've been thinking myself. So if you're willing, we'll set out on our way."

"Yes," answered the clerk, "but you, as pastor, have precedence. I'll follow."

So the parson went first and climbed up into the pulpit, where the master opened his sack. The parson crept in first and then the clerk.

The master immediately tied the sack up tightly, seized it by the middle and dragged it down the pulpit steps; and whenever the heads of the two fools bumped against the steps he cried, "We're going over the mountains."

Then he drew them through the village the same way; and when they were passing through puddles he cried, "Now we're going through the wet clouds." And when at last he was dragging them up the castle steps, he cried, "Now we're on the steps of heaven, and we'll soon be in the outer court."

When he had got to the top he pushed the sack into the dovecote; and when the pigeons fluttered about he said, "Hear how glad the angels are, and how they're flapping their wings." Then he bolted the door on them and went away.

Next morning he went to the count and told him that he had performed the third task as well, and had carried the parson and the clerk out of the church.

"Where have you left them?" asked the lord.

"They're lying upstairs in a sack in the dovecote, and imagine they're in heaven."

The count went up himself and satisfied himself that the master had told the truth. When he had delivered the parson and the clerk from their captivity, he said, "You're an arch-thief and you've won your wager. For once you escape with a whole skin; but see that you leave my land, for if you ever set foot on it again you may count on your elevation to the gallows."

The arch-thief took leave of his parents, went out once more into the wide world, and nobody has ever heard of him since.
