The Drummer

A young drummer went out quite alone into the country one evening, and came to a lake, on the shore of which he saw three pieces of white linen lying. "What fine linen," said he, and put one piece in his pocket.

He went home, thought no more about what he had found, and went to bed. But just as he was falling asleep, it seemed to him that somebody was saying his name. He listened, and made out a soft voice calling to him, "Drummer, drummer, wake up!"

As it was a dark night he could see nobody; but it seemed to him that a figure was hovering about his bed.

"What do you want?" he asked.

"Give me back my dress," answered the voice, "that you took away from me last evening by the lake."

"You shall have it back," said the drummer, "if you'll tell me who you are."

"Ah," replied the voice, "I'm the daughter of a mighty King; but I've fallen into a witch's power and am shut up on the glass mountain. Every day I have to bathe in the lake with my two sisters; but I can't fly back again without my dress. My sisters have gone away, but I've been left behind. I beg you to give me my dress back."

"Be easy, poor child," said the drummer. "I'll gladly give it back to you." He took it out of his pocket and held it out to her in the dark. She snatched it in haste and wanted to go off with it.

"Stop a moment — perhaps I can help you."

"You can only help me by climbing the glass mountain and freeing me from the witch's power. But you can't get to the glass mountain; and indeed, if you were right beside it, you couldn't climb it."

"When I want to do a thing, I always can do it," said the drummer. "I'm sorry for you, and I'm not afraid of anything. But I don't know the road that leads to the glass mountain."

"The road goes through the great forest where the man-eaters live," she answered; "and more than that I dare not tell you."

And then he heard her wings quiver as she flew away.

At daybreak the drummer got up, buckled on his drum, and went fearlessly straight into the forest. After he had walked a while without seeing any giants, he thought to himself, "I must wake the sluggards up" — and hung his drum in front of him and beat such a reveille that the birds flew out of the trees with loud cries.

It was not long before a giant who had been lying asleep among the grass got up, and he was as tall as a fir tree.

"Wretch," cried he, "what are you drumming here for, and waking me out of my best sleep?"

"I'm drumming," he replied, "because I want to show the way to the many thousands who are following me."

"What do they want in my forest?" demanded the giant.

"They want to make an end of you, and clear the forest of a monster like you."

"Oho," said the giant, "I'll trample the lot of you to death like so many ants."

"Do you think you can do anything against us?" said the drummer. "If you stoop to take hold of one, he'll jump away and hide himself; but when you're lying down asleep, they'll come out of every thicket and creep up on you. Every one of them has a steel hammer in his belt, and with those they'll beat your skull in."

The giant grew angry, and thought, "If I meddle with this crafty crew it might turn out badly for me. I can strangle wolves and bears, but I can't protect myself from these earthworms."

"Listen, little fellow," said he, "go back again, and I'll promise you that in future I'll leave you and your comrades in peace; and if there's anything else you want, tell me, for I'm quite willing to do something to please you."

"You have long legs," said the drummer, "and can run faster than I can. Carry me to the glass mountain, and I'll give my followers the signal to go back, and they'll leave you in peace this time."

"Come here, worm," said the giant. "Sit yourself on my shoulder and I'll carry you where you want to be."

The giant lifted him up, and the drummer began to beat his drum up there to his heart's delight. The giant thought, "That's the signal for the others to turn back."

After a while a second giant was standing in the road, who took the drummer from the first and stuck him in his buttonhole. The drummer took hold of the button, which was as large as a dish, and held on by it and looked merrily about him.

Then they came to a third giant, who took him out of the buttonhole and set him on the brim of his hat. Then the drummer walked backwards and forwards up there and looked out over the trees; and when he saw a mountain in the blue distance he thought, "That must be the glass mountain" — and so it was.

The giant only took two steps more, and they reached the foot of the mountain, where the giant put him down. The drummer demanded to be put on the summit of the glass mountain; but the giant shook his head, growled something into his beard, and went back into the forest.

And now the poor drummer was standing in front of the mountain, which was as high as if three mountains had been piled one on another, and at the same time as smooth as a looking glass; and he did not know how to get up it. He began to climb, but it was useless, for he always slipped back down again. "If a man were a bird now," thought he; but what was the use of wishing? No wings grew for him.

While he was standing there, not knowing what to do, he saw two men not far off who were struggling fiercely together. He went over to them and saw that they were arguing about a saddle that lay on the ground in front of them, which both of them wanted.

"What fools you are," said he, "to quarrel about a saddle when you have no horse for it."

"The saddle is worth fighting about," answered one of the men. "Whoever sits on it and wishes himself in any place, even if it's the very end of the earth, gets there the instant he's spoken the wish. The saddle belongs to both of us. It's my turn to ride on it, but this other man won't let me."

"I'll soon settle the quarrel," said the drummer; and he went a short distance off and stuck a white rod in the ground. Then he came back and said, "Now run to the goal, and whoever gets there first shall ride first."

Both of them set off at a trot; but hardly had they gone a couple of steps before the drummer swung himself onto the saddle, wished himself on the glass mountain — and before anybody could turn round, he was there.

On top of the mountain was a plain; and on it stood an old stone house, with a great fishpond in front of it and a dark forest behind. He saw neither people nor animals; everything was quiet, and only the wind rustled among the trees, and the clouds moved past quite close above his head.

He went to the door and knocked. When he had knocked for the third time, an old woman with a brown face and red eyes opened the door. She had spectacles on her long nose and looked at him sharply, and then asked what he wanted.

"To come in, and food, and a bed for the night," replied the drummer.

"That you shall have," said the old woman, "if you'll perform three services in return."

"Why not?" he answered. "I'm not afraid of any kind of work, however hard it may be."

The old woman let him in and gave him some food and a good bed for the night.

Next morning, when he had had his sleep out, she took a thimble off her wrinkled finger and held it out to the drummer and said, "Get to work now, and empty out that pond with this thimble. But you must have it done before night; and you must have sorted out all the fish in the water and laid them side by side according to their kind and size."

"That's strange work," said the drummer; but he went to the pond and began to empty it. He baled all morning; but what can anybody do to a great lake with a thimble, even if he baled for a thousand years?

At noon he thought, "It's all useless; whether I work or not, it will come to the same thing." So he gave up and sat down.

Then a girl came out of the house who set a little basket of food in front of him and said, "What ails you, that you sit here so sadly?"

He looked at her and saw that she was wonderfully beautiful. "Ah," said he, "I can't finish the first piece of work; how will it be with the others? I came out to look for a King's daughter who is said to live here, but I haven't found her, and I'll go on further."

"Stay here," said the girl. "I'll help you out of your difficulty. You're tired; lay your head in my lap and sleep. When you wake again, your work will be done."

The drummer did not need to be told that twice. As soon as his eyes were shut she turned a wishing ring and said, "Rise, water. Fishes, come out."

Instantly the water rose up on high like a white mist and moved away with the other clouds, and the fish sprang out onto the shore and laid themselves side by side, each according to his size and kind.

When the drummer woke he saw with amazement that it was all done. But the girl said, "One of the fish isn't lying with its own kind, but quite alone. When the old woman comes tonight and sees that everything she demanded has been done, she'll ask you, 'What is this fish lying alone for?' Then throw the fish in her face and say, 'This one is for you, old witch.'"

In the evening the witch came; and when she had asked this question, he threw the fish in her face. She behaved as though she had not noticed it and said nothing, but looked at him with malicious eyes.

Next morning she said, "Yesterday was too easy for you; I must give you harder work. Today you must chop down the whole of the forest, split the wood into logs and pile them up; and everything must be finished by the evening."

She gave him an axe, a mallet and two wedges. But the axe was made of lead, and the mallet and the wedges of tin. When he began to cut, the edge of the axe turned back, and the mallet and wedges were beaten out of shape. He did not know how to manage; but at midday the girl came once more with his dinner and comforted him.

"Lay your head in my lap," said she, "and sleep; when you wake, your work will be done."

She turned her wishing ring, and in an instant the whole forest fell down with a crash, the wood split, and it arranged itself in heaps; and it seemed just as if unseen giants were doing the work.

When he woke, the girl said, "You see that the wood is piled up and arranged; only one bough is left. But when the old woman comes this evening and asks you about that bough, hit her with it and say, 'That's for you, witch.'"

The old woman came. "There, you see how easy the work was," said she. "But who have you left that bough lying there for?"

"For you, witch," he replied, and hit her with it. But she pretended not to feel it, and laughed scornfully and said, "Early tomorrow morning you shall arrange all the wood in one heap, set fire to it and burn it."

He got up at daybreak and began to gather the wood; but how can one man get a whole forest together? The work made no progress.

The girl, though, did not desert him in his need. She brought him his food at noon; and when he had eaten he laid his head in her lap and went to sleep. When he woke, the whole pile of wood was burning in one enormous flame that stretched its tongues out into the sky.

"Listen to me," said the girl. "When the witch comes, she'll give you all kinds of orders. Do whatever she asks without fear, and then she won't be able to get the better of you; but if you're afraid, the fire will take hold of you and consume you. And at the end, when you've done everything, seize her with both hands and throw her into the middle of the fire."

The girl went away, and the old woman came sneaking up to him. "Oh, I'm cold," said she, "but that's a fire that burns; it warms my old bones for me and does me good. But there's a log lying there that won't burn — bring it out for me. When you've done that you're free and can go where you like. Come — go in with a good will."

The drummer did not stop to think; he sprang into the middle of the flames, but they did not hurt him and could not even singe a hair of his head. He carried the log out and laid it down.

But hardly had the wood touched the earth before it was transformed, and the beautiful girl who had helped him in his need stood before him; and by the shining silk and gold clothes she wore, he knew very well that she was the King's daughter.

But the old woman laughed venomously and said, "You think you have her safe, but you haven't got her yet."

And just as she was about to fall on the girl and take her away, the young man seized the old woman with both hands and lifted her up high and threw her into the jaws of the fire, which closed over her as if it were delighted to have an old witch to burn.

Then the King's daughter looked at the drummer; and when she saw that he was a handsome young man, and remembered how he had risked his life to deliver her, she gave him her hand and said, "You've ventured everything for my sake; and I too will do everything for yours. Promise to be true to me, and you shall be my husband. We shan't want for riches; we'll have enough with what the witch has gathered together here."

She led him into the house, where there were chests and coffers crammed with the old woman's treasures. The girl left the gold and silver where it was and took only the precious stones.

She would not stay any longer on the glass mountain, so the drummer said to her, "Sit beside me on my saddle, and then we'll fly down like birds."

"I don't like the old saddle," said she. "I need only turn my wishing ring and we shall be at home."

"Very well, then," answered the drummer. "Then wish us in front of the town gate."

In the twinkling of an eye they were there; but the drummer said, "I'll just go to my parents and tell them the news. Wait for me out here; I'll soon be back."

"Ah," said the King's daughter, "I beg you to be careful. When you arrive, don't kiss your parents on the right cheek, or you'll forget everything, and I shall be left out here alone and deserted."

"How could I forget you?" said he — and promised to come back very soon, and gave her his hand on it.

When he went into his father's house he had changed so much that nobody knew who he was; for the three days he had spent on the glass mountain had been three years. Then he made himself known, and his parents fell on his neck with joy; and his heart was so moved that he forgot what the girl had said, and kissed them on both cheeks. And when he had given them the kiss on the right cheek, every thought of the King's daughter vanished from him.

He emptied out his pockets and laid handfuls of the largest jewels on the table. His parents had not the least idea what to do with such riches. Then his father built a magnificent castle, all surrounded by gardens and woods and meadows, as if a prince were going to live in it. And when it was ready his mother said, "I've found a girl for you, and the wedding shall be in three days." And her son was content to do as his parents wished.

The poor King's daughter had stood a long while outside the town waiting for the young man to come back. When evening came she said, "He must have kissed his parents on the right cheek, and has forgotten me."

Her heart was full of sorrow. She wished herself into a lonely little hut in a forest, and would not go back to her father's court. Every evening she went into the town and passed the young man's house; he often saw her, but he no longer knew her.

At length she heard people saying, "The wedding will be tomorrow." Then she said, "I'll try whether I can win his heart back."

On the first day of the wedding celebrations she turned her wishing ring and said, "A dress as bright as the sun." Instantly the dress lay in front of her, and it was as bright as if it had been woven out of real sunbeams.

When all the guests had gathered, she came into the hall. Everybody was amazed at the beautiful dress, and the bride most of all; and as pretty dresses were what she took most delight in, she went to the stranger and asked whether she would sell it to her.

"Not for money," she answered. "But if I may spend the first night outside the door of the room where your betrothed sleeps, I'll give it up to you."

The bride could not overcome her desire, and consented; but she mixed a sleeping draught with the wine her betrothed drank that night, which made him fall into a deep sleep.

When everything had grown quiet, the King's daughter crouched down by the bedroom door, opened it just a little, and called:

	"Drummer, drummer, I pray you hear!
	Have you forgotten you held me dear?
	That on the glass mountain we sat hour by hour?
	That I rescued your life from the witch's power?
	Did you not plight your troth to me?
	Drummer, drummer, hearken to me!"

But it was all in vain; the drummer did not wake; and when morning dawned the King's daughter had to go back again as she had come.

On the second evening she turned her wishing ring and said, "A dress as silvery as the moon." When she appeared at the feast in the dress, which was as soft as moonbeams, it roused the bride's desire again; and the King's daughter gave it to her for permission to spend the second night outside the bedroom door too.

Then in the stillness of the night she called:

	"Drummer, drummer, I pray you hear!
	Have you forgotten you held me dear?
	That on the glass mountain we sat hour by hour?
	That I rescued your life from the witch's power?
	Did you not plight your troth to me?
	Drummer, drummer, hearken to me!"

But the drummer, stupefied by the sleeping draught, could not be roused. Sadly, next morning, she went back to her hut in the forest.

But the people in the house had heard the stranger girl's lament and told the bridegroom about it. They told him too that it was impossible for him to have heard any of it, because the girl he was going to marry had poured a sleeping draught into his wine.

On the third evening the King's daughter turned her wishing ring and said, "A dress glittering like the stars." When she showed herself in it at the feast, the bride was quite beside herself at the splendour of the dress, which far surpassed the others, and said, "I must and will have it."

The girl gave it as she had given the others — for permission to spend the night outside the bridegroom's door.

The bridegroom, though, did not drink the wine that was handed to him before he went to bed, but poured it out behind the bed. And when everything was quiet he heard a sweet voice calling to him:

	"Drummer, drummer, I pray you hear!
	Have you forgotten you held me dear?
	That on the glass mountain we sat hour by hour?
	That I rescued your life from the witch's power?
	Did you not plight your troth to me?
	Drummer, drummer, hearken to me!"

Suddenly his memory came back to him. "Ah," cried he, "how could I have acted so unfaithfully? But the kiss I gave my parents on the right cheek in the joy of my heart — that's to blame for it all; that's what stupefied me."

He sprang up and took the King's daughter by the hand and led her to his parents' bed. "This is my true bride," said he. "If I marry the other, I'll be doing a great wrong."

His parents, when they heard how it had all happened, gave their consent. Then the lights in the hall were lit again, drums and trumpets were brought, friends and relations were invited to come, and the real wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing. The first bride was given the beautiful dresses as compensation, and declared herself satisfied.

The Ear of Corn

In former times, when God himself still walked the earth, the soil was much more fruitful than it is now; then the ears of corn bore not fifty or sixty grains but four or five hundred. In those days the corn grew from the bottom to the very top of the stalk, and the ear was as long as the stalk was.

But men are so made that when they are too well off they no longer value the blessings that come from God, but grow indifferent and careless.

One day a woman was passing a cornfield when her little child, who was running beside her, fell into a puddle and dirtied her frock. At this the mother tore up a handful of the beautiful ears of corn and cleaned the frock with them.

When the Lord, who came by just then, saw it, he was angry, and said, "From now on the stalks of corn shall bear no more ears. Men are no longer worthy of heavenly gifts."

The bystanders who heard this were terrified, and fell on their knees and prayed that he would still leave something on the stalks, even if the people did not deserve it — for the sake of the innocent birds, which would otherwise have to starve.

The Lord, who foresaw their suffering, had pity on them and granted the request. And so the ears were left as they grow now.
