The Grave-Mound

A rich farmer was standing in his yard one day, looking over his fields and gardens. The corn was growing up vigorously and the fruit trees were heavily laden. Last year's grain still lay in such immense heaps on the floors that the rafters could hardly bear it. Then he went into the stable, where there were well-fed oxen and fat cows and horses shining like looking glass. And at length he went back into his sitting room and cast a glance at the iron chest his money lay in.

While he was standing there surveying his riches, all at once there came a loud knock close by him. The knock was not at the door of his room but at the door of his heart. It opened, and he heard a voice that said to him, "Have you done good to your family with it? Have you thought about the needs of the poor? Have you shared your bread with the hungry? Have you been contented with what you have, or have you always wanted more?"

His heart was not slow in answering. "I have been hard and pitiless, and have never shown any kindness even to my own family. If a beggar came, I turned my eyes away from him. I haven't troubled myself about God, but have thought only of increasing my wealth. If everything the sky covers had been mine, I still shouldn't have had enough."

When he heard this answer he was greatly alarmed; his knees began to tremble and he had to sit down.

Then there was another knock — but this knock was at the door of his room. It was his neighbour, a poor man with a number of children whom he could no longer feed enough.

"I know," the poor man had thought, "that my neighbour is rich; but he's as hard as he is rich. I don't believe he'll help me — but my children are crying for bread, so I'll risk it."

He said to the rich man, "You don't readily give away anything of yours; but I stand here like a man who feels the water rising over his head. My children are starving. Lend me four measures of corn."

The rich man looked at him a long while; and then the first sunbeam of mercy began to melt away a drop of the ice of greed. "I won't lend you four measures," he answered, "but I'll make you a present of eight — only you must fulfil one condition."

"What am I to do?" said the poor man.

"When I'm dead, you shall keep watch for three nights by my grave."

The peasant was uneasy in his mind at this request; but in the need he was in he would have agreed to anything. So he accepted, and carried the corn home with him.

It seemed as if the rich man had foreseen what was going to happen; for when three days had gone by he suddenly dropped down dead. Nobody knew exactly how it came about, but nobody grieved for him.

When he was buried, the poor man remembered his promise. He would gladly have been released from it; but he thought, "After all, he acted kindly towards me. I've fed my hungry children with his corn; and even if that weren't so, where I've once given my promise I must keep it."

At nightfall he went into the churchyard and sat down on the grave mound. Everything was quiet; only the moon showed above the grave, and now and then an owl flew past and uttered her melancholy cry. When the sun rose, the poor man took himself safely home; and in the same way the second night passed quietly by.

On the evening of the third day he felt a strange uneasiness; it seemed to him that something was going to happen. When he went out he saw a man by the churchyard wall whom he had never seen before. He was no longer young, had scars on his face, and his eyes looked about him sharply and eagerly. He was covered all over with an old cloak, and nothing could be seen of him but his great riding boots.

"What are you looking for here?" the peasant asked. "Aren't you afraid of a lonely churchyard?"

"I'm looking for nothing," he answered, "and I'm afraid of nothing. I'm like the youngster who went out to learn how to shiver and got nothing for his labour — except that he got a King's daughter for a wife, and great wealth with her; only I've stayed poor. I'm nothing but a discharged soldier, and I mean to spend the night here, because I have no other shelter."

"If you're without fear," said the peasant, "stay with me and help me watch over that grave there."

"Keeping watch is a soldier's business," he replied. "Whatever we meet with here, whether it's good or bad, we'll share it between us."

The peasant agreed to that, and they sat down on the grave together.

All was quiet until midnight, when suddenly a shrill whistling was heard in the air, and the two watchers saw the Evil One standing bodily before them.

"Be off, you ragamuffins!" cried he to them. "The man lying in that grave belongs to me; I've come to take him, and if you don't go away I'll wring your necks."

"Sir with the red feather," said the soldier, "you're not my captain; I've no need to obey you, and I haven't yet learned how to be afraid. Go away — we shall stay sitting here."

The Devil thought to himself, "Money is the best thing to get hold of these two vagabonds with." So he began to play a softer tune, and asked quite kindly whether they would not accept a bag of money and go home with it.

"That's worth listening to," answered the soldier, "but one bag of gold won't do for us. If you'll give as much as will go into one of my boots, we'll quit the field for you and go away."

"I haven't as much as that on me," said the Devil, "but I'll fetch it. In the next town lives a money-changer who's a good friend of mine and will readily advance it to me."

When the Devil had vanished, the soldier took his left boot off and said, "We'll soon pull the charcoal-burner's nose for him. Just give me your knife, comrade." He cut the sole off the boot and set it in the long grass near the grave, on the edge of a half-overgrown hole. "That will do," said he. "Now the chimney-sweep may come."

They both sat down and waited; and it was not long before the Devil came back with a small bag of gold in his hand.

"Just pour it in," said the soldier, raising the boot up a little. "But that won't be enough."

The Black One shook out everything in the bag; the gold fell through, and the boot stayed empty.

"Stupid Devil," cried the soldier, "it won't do! Didn't I say so at once? Go back and bring more."

The Devil shook his head, went, and in an hour's time came back with a much larger bag under his arm.

"Now pour it in," cried the soldier, "but I doubt the boot will be full."

The gold clinked as it fell, but the boot stayed empty. The Devil looked into it himself with his burning eyes and satisfied himself that it was true.

"You have shamefully big calves to your legs," cried he, and pulled a sour face.

"Did you think," replied the soldier, "that I had a cloven hoof like yours? Since when have you got so stingy? See that you get more gold together, or our bargain comes to nothing."

The Wicked One went off again. This time he stayed away longer; and when at length he appeared he was panting under the weight of a sack on his shoulders. He emptied it into the boot, which was just as far from being full as before.

He grew furious and was just about to tear the boot out of the soldier's hands, when at that moment the first ray of the rising sun broke out from the sky, and the Evil Spirit fled away with loud shrieks. The poor soul was saved.

The peasant wanted to divide the gold; but the soldier said, "Give what falls to my share to the poor. I'll come with you to your cottage, and together we'll live in rest and peace on what's left, as long as God is pleased to allow it."

Old Rinkrank

There was once a King who had a daughter; and he had a glass mountain made, and said that whoever could cross to the other side of it without falling should have his daughter for a wife.

Now there was a man who loved the King's daughter, and he asked the King whether he might have her.

"Yes," said the King. "If you can cross the mountain without falling, you shall have her."

And the princess said she would go over it with him and would hold him if he was about to fall. So they set out together to go over it; but when they were halfway up the princess slipped and fell, and the glass mountain opened and shut her up inside it, and her betrothed could not see where she had gone, for the mountain closed immediately.

Then he wept and lamented bitterly, and the King was miserable too, and had the mountain broken open where she had been lost, thinking he would be able to get her out again; but they could not find the place she had fallen into.

Meanwhile the King's daughter had fallen a long way down into the earth, into a great cave. An old fellow with a very long grey beard came to meet her, and told her that if she would be his servant and do everything he told her, she might live; and if not, he would kill her.

So she did everything he told her. In the mornings he took his ladder out of his pocket and set it up against the mountain and climbed to the top by it, and then he drew the ladder up after him. The princess had to cook his dinner and make his bed and do all his work; and when he came home again he always brought a heap of gold and silver with him.

When she had lived with him many years and had grown quite old, he called her Mother Mansrot, and she had to call him Old Rinkrank.

Then once, when he was out and she had made his bed and washed his dishes, she shut all the doors and windows fast — all but one little window that the light shone in at, which she left open.

When Old Rinkrank came home he knocked at his door and cried, "Mother Mansrot, open the door for me."

"No," said she, "Old Rinkrank, I won't open the door for you."

Then he said:

	"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
	on my seventeen long shanks,
	on my weary, worn-out foot —
	wash my dishes, Mother Mansrot."

"I've washed your dishes already," said she.

Then again he said:

	"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
	on my seventeen long shanks,
	on my weary, worn-out foot —
	make me my bed, Mother Mansrot."

"I've made your bed already," said she.

Then again he said:

	"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
	on my seventeen long shanks,
	on my weary, worn-out foot —
	open the door, Mother Mansrot."

Then he ran all round his house and saw that the little window was open, and thought, "I'll look in and see what she can be up to, and why she won't open the door for me."

He tried to peep in, but could not get his head through because of his long beard. So he put his beard through the open window first; but just as he had got it through, Mother Mansrot came by and pulled the window down with a cord she had tied to it, and his beard was shut fast in it.

Then he began to cry most piteously, for it hurt him very much, and to beg her to let him go again. But she said not until he gave her the ladder he climbed the mountain with. Then, whether he wanted to or not, he had to tell her where the ladder was.

And she fastened a very long ribbon to the window, and then set up the ladder and climbed the mountain; and when she was at the top of it she opened the window.

She went to her father and told him everything that had happened to her. The King rejoiced greatly; and her betrothed was still there, and they went and dug up the mountain and found Old Rinkrank inside it with all his gold and silver. Then the King had Old Rinkrank put to death, and took all his gold and silver; and the princess married her betrothed, and lived right happily in great magnificence and joy.

The Crystal Ball

There was once an enchantress who had three sons who loved each other like brothers; but the old woman did not trust them, and thought they wanted to steal her power from her.

So she changed the eldest into an eagle, which had to live in the rocky mountains, and was often seen sweeping in great circles in the sky. The second she changed into a whale, which lived in the deep sea, and all that was seen of it was that it sometimes spouted a great jet of water up into the air. Each of them wore his human shape only for two hours a day.

The third son, who was afraid she might change him into a raging wild beast — a bear, perhaps, or a wolf — went away secretly. He had heard that a King's daughter who was under a spell was imprisoned in the Castle of the Golden Sun, and was waiting for deliverance. But those who tried to free her risked their lives; three-and-twenty young men had already died a miserable death, and now only one more might make the attempt, after which no others must come.

And as his heart was without fear, he seized on the idea of seeking out the Castle of the Golden Sun. He had already travelled about a long time without being able to find it, when he came by chance into a great forest and did not know the way out of it.

All at once he saw two giants in the distance, who signalled to him with their hands; and when he came up to them they said, "We're quarrelling about a cap and which of us it's to belong to; and as we're equally strong, neither of us can get the better of the other. Small men are cleverer than we are, so we'll leave the decision to you."

"How can you argue about an old cap?" said the young man.

"You don't know what properties it has. It's a wishing cap; whoever puts it on can wish himself away wherever he likes, and in an instant he's there."

"Give me the cap," said the young man. "I'll go a short distance off, and when I call you, you must run a race, and the cap shall belong to whichever of you gets to me first."

He put it on and went away — and thought of the King's daughter, and forgot the giants, and walked on and on. At length he sighed from the very bottom of his heart and cried, "Ah, if only I were at the Castle of the Golden Sun!" And hardly had the words passed his lips before he was standing on a high mountain in front of the castle gate.

He went in and walked through all the rooms, until in the last one he found the King's daughter. But how shocked he was when he saw her! She had an ash-grey face full of wrinkles, dim eyes and red hair.

"Are you the King's daughter, whose beauty the whole world praises?" cried he.

"Ah," she answered, "this isn't my true shape. Human eyes can only see me in this state of ugliness; but so that you may know what I'm like, look in this mirror — it doesn't let itself be misled; it will show you my image as it truly is."

She put the mirror into his hand, and he saw in it the likeness of the most beautiful girl on earth — and saw too how the tears were rolling down her cheeks with grief.

Then he said, "How can you be set free? I fear no danger."

She said, "Whoever gets the crystal ball and holds it in front of the enchanter will destroy his power with it, and I shall get my true shape back again. Ah," she added, "so many have already gone to their deaths for this, and you are so young; it grieves me that you should meet with such great danger."

"Nothing can keep me from doing it," said he. "But tell me what I must do."

"You shall know everything," said the King's daughter. "When you go down the mountain the castle stands on, a wild bull will be standing below by a spring, and you must fight it. And if you have the luck to kill it, a fiery bird will spring out of it, which carries a burning egg in its body, and in the egg the crystal ball lies like a yolk. The bird won't let the egg fall, though, unless it's forced to; and if it falls to the ground it will flame up and burn everything near it, and melt even ice itself, and the crystal ball with it — and then all your trouble will have been for nothing."

The young man went down to the spring, where the bull snorted and bellowed at him. After a long struggle he plunged his sword into the animal's body, and it fell down.

Instantly a fiery bird rose out of it and was about to fly away; but the young man's brother, the eagle, who was passing between the clouds, swooped down and chased it away to the sea and struck it with his beak until, in its extremity, it let the egg fall.

The egg did not fall into the sea, though, but onto a fisherman's hut standing on the shore; and the hut at once began to smoke and was about to break out in flames. Then waves as high as a house rose in the sea and streamed over the hut and put out the fire. The other brother, the whale, had come swimming to them and had driven the water up on high.

When the fire was out, the young man looked for the egg and happily found it. It had not melted yet; but the shell was broken by being so suddenly cooled with the water, and he could take out the crystal ball unhurt.

When the young man went to the enchanter and held it in front of him, the enchanter said, "My power is destroyed, and from this time on you are King of the Castle of the Golden Sun. And with this you can give your brothers their human shapes back too."

Then the young man hurried to the King's daughter; and when he came into the room she was standing there in the full splendour of her beauty, and joyfully they exchanged rings with each other.
