Maid Maleen

There was once a King who had a son who asked for the hand of the daughter of a mighty King. She was called Maid Maleen, and was very beautiful. But as her father wanted to give her to another, the prince was refused; and as the two of them loved each other with all their hearts, they would not give each other up, and Maid Maleen said to her father, "I can and will take no other man for my husband."

Then the King flew into a passion and ordered a dark tower to be built into which no ray of sunlight or moonlight could enter. When it was finished, he said, "In there you shall be shut up for seven years, and then I'll come and see whether your stubborn spirit is broken."

Food and drink for the seven years were carried into the tower, and then she and her waiting-woman were led into it and walled up, and so cut off from the sky and from the earth. There they sat in the darkness and did not know when day or night began. The King's son often went round and round the tower and called their names, but no sound from outside pierced the thick walls. What else could they do but lament and complain?

Meanwhile the time passed; and by the dwindling of the food and drink they knew that the seven years were coming to an end. They thought the moment of their deliverance had come; but no stroke of a hammer was heard, no stone fell out of the wall, and it seemed to Maid Maleen that her father had forgotten her.

As they had food for only a short while longer, and saw a miserable death waiting for them, Maid Maleen said, "We must try our last chance, and see whether we can break through the wall."

She took the bread knife and picked and bored at the mortar round a stone; and when she was tired the waiting-maid took her turn. With great labour they succeeded in getting out one stone, and then a second and a third; and when three days were over, the first ray of light fell into their darkness, and at last the opening was so large that they could look out.

The sky was blue and a fresh breeze played on their faces — but how melancholy everything looked all around! Her father's castle lay in ruins; the town and the villages were burned down, as far as they could see; the fields far and wide were laid waste, and there was not a human being in sight.

When the opening in the wall was large enough for them to slip through, the waiting-maid sprang down first, and then Maid Maleen followed. But where were they to go? The enemy had ravaged the whole kingdom, driven the King out and killed all the people.

They wandered off to look for another country; but nowhere did they find shelter, or a human being to give them a mouthful of bread, and their need was so great that they had to satisfy their hunger with nettles.

When at last, after long journeying, they came into another country, they tried to get work everywhere; but wherever they knocked they were turned away, and nobody would take pity on them. At last they reached a large city and went to the royal palace. There too they were told to go away; but at last the cook said they might stay in the kitchen and be scullions.

Now the son of the King in whose kingdom they were was the very man who had been betrothed to Maid Maleen. His father had chosen another bride for him, whose face was as ugly as her heart was wicked. The wedding was fixed and the bride had already arrived; but because of her great ugliness she shut herself in her room and let nobody see her, and Maid Maleen had to bring her her meals from the kitchen.

When the day came for the bride and the bridegroom to go to church, she was ashamed of her ugliness and afraid that if she showed herself in the streets the people would mock and laugh at her.

So she said to Maid Maleen, "A great piece of luck has come your way. I've sprained my foot and can't walk through the streets properly. You shall put on my wedding clothes and take my place — a greater honour than that you couldn't have."

Maid Maleen, though, refused, and said, "I want no honour that isn't suitable for me."

It was in vain, too, that the bride offered her gold. At last she said angrily, "If you don't obey me, it will cost you your life. I have only to say the word and your head will be lying at your feet."

Then she was forced to obey, and put on the bride's magnificent clothes and all her jewels.

When she came into the royal hall, everybody was amazed at her great beauty, and the King said to his son, "This is the bride I've chosen for you, and whom you must lead to church."

The bridegroom was astonished, and thought, "She's like my Maid Maleen, and I'd believe it was she herself — but she's been shut up in the tower a long while now, or is dead." He took her by the hand and led her to church.

On the way there was a nettle plant, and she said:

	"Oh, nettle plant,
	little nettle plant,
	what are you doing here alone?
	I have known the time
	when I ate you unboiled,
	when I ate you unroasted."

"What are you saying?" asked the King's son.

"Nothing," she replied. "I was only thinking of Maid Maleen."

He was surprised that she knew about her, but said nothing.

When they came to the footbridge into the churchyard, she said:

	"Footbridge, do not break —
	I am not the true bride."

"What are you saying there?" asked the King's son.

"Nothing," she replied. "I was only thinking of Maid Maleen."

"Do you know Maid Maleen?"

"No," she answered, "how should I know her? I've only heard of her."

When they came to the church door, she said once more:

	"Church door, do not break —
	I am not the true bride."

"What are you saying there?" asked he.

"Ah," she answered, "I was only thinking of Maid Maleen."

Then he took out a precious chain and put it round her neck and fastened the clasp. And with that they went into the church, and the priest joined their hands together before the altar and married them.

He led her home; but she did not speak a single word the whole way. When they got back to the royal palace she hurried into the bride's room, took off the magnificent clothes and the jewels, dressed herself in her grey gown and kept nothing but the jewel at her neck that she had been given by the bridegroom.

When night came and the bride was to be led into the prince's room, she let her veil fall over her face so that he should not notice the deception. As soon as everybody had gone away, he said to her, "What did you say to the nettle plant growing by the wayside?"

"Which nettle plant?" said she. "I don't talk to nettle plants."

"If you didn't do it, then you're not the true bride," said he.

So she thought a moment, and said:

	"I must go out unto my maid,
	who keeps my thoughts for me."

She went out and looked for Maid Maleen. "Girl, what did you say to the nettle?"

"I said nothing but this:

	Oh, nettle plant,
	little nettle plant,
	what are you doing here alone?
	I have known the time
	when I ate you unboiled,
	when I ate you unroasted."

The bride ran back into the room and said, "I know now what I said to the nettle" — and repeated the words she had just heard.

"But what did you say to the footbridge when we went over it?" asked the King's son.

"To the footbridge?" she answered. "I don't talk to footbridges."

"Then you're not the true bride."

She said again:

	"I must go out unto my maid,
	who keeps my thoughts for me" —

and ran out and found Maid Maleen. "Girl, what did you say to the footbridge?"

"I said nothing but this:

	Footbridge, do not break —
	I am not the true bride."

"That costs you your life!" cried the bride — but she hurried into the room and said, "I know now what I said to the footbridge" — and repeated the words.

"But what did you say to the church door?"

"To the church door?" she replied. "I don't talk to church doors."

"Then you're not the true bride."

She went out and found Maid Maleen and said, "Girl, what did you say to the church door?"

"I said nothing but this:

	Church door, do not break —
	I am not the true bride."

"That will break your neck for you!" cried the bride, and flew into a terrible passion; but she hurried back into the room and said, "I know now what I said to the church door" — and repeated the words.

"But where is the jewel I gave you at the church door?"

"What jewel?" she answered. "You didn't give me any jewel."

"I put it round your neck myself, and I fastened it myself. If you don't know that, you're not the true bride."

He drew the veil away from her face; and when he saw her immeasurable ugliness he sprang back in terror and said, "How did you come here? Who are you?"

"I'm your betrothed bride; but because I was afraid the people would mock me if they saw me out of doors, I ordered the scullery maid to dress herself in my clothes and go to church instead of me."

"Where is the girl?" said he. "I want to see her. Go and bring her here."

She went out and told the servants that the scullery maid was an impostor, and that they must take her out into the courtyard and strike off her head. The servants seized Maid Maleen and were going to drag her out; but she screamed so loudly for help that the King's son heard her voice and hurried out of his room and ordered them to set the girl free at once.

Lights were brought, and then he saw at her neck the gold chain he had given her at the church door. "You are the true bride," said he, "who went with me to the church. Come with me now to my room."

When they were alone together he said, "On the way to church you named Maid Maleen, who was my betrothed bride. If I could believe it possible, I'd think she was standing in front of me — you're like her in every way."

She answered, "I am Maid Maleen, who for your sake was shut up seven years in the darkness, who suffered hunger and thirst and has lived so long in want and poverty. But today the sun is shining on me once more. I was married to you in the church, and I am your lawful wife."

Then they kissed each other and were happy all the days of their lives. And the false bride was rewarded for what she had done by having her head cut off.

The tower Maid Maleen had been imprisoned in stood for a long time afterwards; and when the children went past it they sang:

	"Kling, klang, gloria,
	who sits within this tower?
	A King's daughter, she sits within;
	a sight of her I cannot win.
	The wall it will not break,
	the stone cannot be pierced.
	Little Hans, with your coat so gay,
	follow me, follow me, fast as you may."

The Boots of Buffalo-Leather

A soldier who is afraid of nothing troubles himself about nothing. One of this kind had been given his discharge; and as he had learned no trade and could earn nothing, he travelled about and begged alms from kind people. He had an old waterproof on his back, and a pair of riding boots of buffalo leather that were still left to him.

One day he was walking he did not know where, straight out into open country, and at length came to a forest. He did not know where he was, but saw a man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree who was well dressed and wore a green shooting coat. The soldier shook hands with him, sat down on the grass beside him and stretched out his legs.

"I see you've got good boots on, and well polished," said he to the huntsman; "but if you had to travel about the way I do, they wouldn't last long. Look at mine — they're buffalo leather, and they've been worn a long time, but in them I can go through thick and thin."

After a while the soldier got up and said, "I can't stay any longer; hunger drives me on. But, Brother Bright-Boots, where does this road lead to?"

"I don't know that myself," answered the huntsman. "I've lost my way in the forest."

"Then you're in the same plight as I am," said the soldier. "Birds of a feather flock together; let's stay together and look for our way."

The huntsman smiled a little, and they walked on further and further, until night fell.

"We're not getting out of this forest," said the soldier, "but over there in the distance I can see a light shining, which will help us to something to eat."

They found a stone house and knocked at the door, and an old woman opened it.

"We're looking for lodging for the night," said the soldier, "and some lining for our stomachs, for mine is as empty as an old knapsack."

"You can't stay here," answered the old woman. "This is a robbers' house, and you'd do wisely to get away before they come home, or you're lost."

"It won't be as bad as that," answered the soldier. "I haven't had a mouthful for two days, and whether I'm murdered here or die of hunger in the forest is all the same to me. I'm going in."

The huntsman would not follow, but the soldier drew him in with him by the sleeve. "Come, my dear brother, we shan't come to our end as quickly as that."

The old woman took pity on them and said, "Creep in here behind the stove, and if they leave anything I'll give it to you on the sly when they're asleep."

Hardly were they in the corner before twelve robbers came bursting in, sat down at the table, which was already laid, and vehemently demanded food. The old woman brought in some great dishes of roast meat, and the robbers thoroughly enjoyed it.

When the smell of the food reached the soldier's nostrils he said to the huntsman, "I can't hold out any longer. I'm going to sit down at the table and eat with them."

"You'll bring us to destruction," said the huntsman, and held him back by the arm. But the soldier began to cough loudly.

When the robbers heard that, they threw down their knives and forks and leapt up and found the two of them behind the stove.

"Aha, gentlemen, so you're in the corner?" cried they. "What are you doing here? Have you been sent as spies? Wait a while, and you'll learn how to fly on a dry bough."

"But do be civil," said the soldier. "I'm hungry. Give me something to eat, and then you can do what you like with me."

The robbers were astonished, and the captain said, "I see you have no fear. Well, you shall have some food; but after that you must die."

"We'll see," said the soldier — and sat down at the table and began to cut away valiantly at the roast meat. "Brother Bright-Boots, come and eat," he called to the huntsman. "You must be as hungry as I am, and you can't have better roast meat at home." But the huntsman would not eat.

The robbers looked at the soldier in astonishment and said, "The rascal stands on no ceremony."

After a while he said, "I've had enough food; now get me something good to drink."

The captain was in the mood to humour him in this too, and called to the old woman, "Bring a bottle out of the cellar, and mind it's the best."

The soldier drew the cork out with a loud pop, and then went with the bottle to the huntsman and said, "Pay attention, brother, and you'll see something that will surprise you. I'm going to drink the health of the whole clan."

Then he brandished the bottle over the robbers' heads and cried, "Long life to you all — but with your mouths open and your right hands lifted up." And then he drank a hearty draught.

Hardly were the words said before they all sat motionless as if they had been made of stone, with their mouths open and their right hands stretched up in the air.

The huntsman said to the soldier, "I see you know tricks of another kind. But come now, let's go home."

"Oho, my dear brother, that would be marching away far too soon. We've beaten the enemy, and we must take the booty first. Those men are sitting fast and opening their mouths in astonishment, but they won't be allowed to move until I let them. Come, eat and drink."

The old woman had to bring another bottle of the best wine, and the soldier would not stir until he had eaten enough to last three days.

At last, when day came, he said, "Now it's time to strike our tents; and so that our march may be a short one, the old woman shall show us the nearest way to the town."

When they had got there, he went to his old comrades and said, "Out in the forest I've found a nest full of gallows birds; come with me and we'll take it." The soldier led them; and he said to the huntsman, "You must come back with me too, to see how they shake when we seize them by the feet."

He placed the men round the robbers, and then took the bottle and drank a mouthful and brandished it over them and cried, "Live again!" Instantly they all got the power of movement back — but were thrown down and bound hand and foot with cords.

Then the soldier ordered them to be thrown into a cart as if they had been so many sacks, and said, "Now drive them straight to prison."

The huntsman, though, took one of the men aside and gave him another errand besides.

"Brother Bright-Boots," said the soldier, "we've safely routed the enemy and been well fed; now we'll walk quietly along behind them, like stragglers."

When they got near the town, the soldier saw a crowd of people pouring out through the town gate, raising loud cries of joy and waving green boughs in the air. Then he saw that the whole bodyguard was coming up.

"What can this mean?" said he to the huntsman.

"Don't you know," he replied, "that the King has been absent from his kingdom a long time, and that today he's coming back, and everybody is going out to meet him?"

"But where's the King?" said the soldier. "I don't see him."

"Here he is," answered the huntsman. "I am the King, and I sent word of my arrival." Then he opened his hunting coat and his royal clothes could be seen.

The soldier was alarmed and fell on his knees and begged him to forgive him for having, in his ignorance, treated him as an equal and spoken to him by such a name.

But the King shook hands with him and said, "You're a brave soldier and you've saved my life. You shall never be in want again; I'll take care of you. And if you ever want to eat a piece of roast meat as good as the one in the robbers' house, come to the royal kitchen. But if you want to drink a health, you must ask my permission first."

The Golden Key

In the winter, when deep snow lay on the ground, a poor boy had to go out on a sledge to fetch wood. When he had gathered it together and packed it, he was so frozen with cold that he did not want to go home at once, but to light a fire and warm himself a little.

So he scraped the snow away; and as he was clearing the ground like this, he found a tiny golden key. Then he thought that where the key was, the lock must be too; and he dug in the ground and found an iron chest.

"If only the key fits it!" thought he. "No doubt there are precious things in that little box."

He looked, but there was no keyhole. At last he found one, but so small that it was hardly visible. He tried the key, and it fitted exactly. Then he turned it once round — and now we must wait until he has quite unlocked it and opened the lid, and then we shall learn what wonderful things were lying in that box.
