St. Joseph in the Forest

There was once a mother who had three daughters. The eldest was rude and wicked, the second much better, though she had her faults; but the youngest was a pious, good child. Their mother, though, was so strange that it was the eldest daughter she loved most, and she could not bear the youngest.

For this reason she often sent the poor girl out into the great forest, to be rid of her, thinking she would lose herself and never come back. But the guardian angel that every good child has did not desert her, and always brought her back onto the right path again.

Once, though, the guardian angel behaved as if he were not there, and the child could not find her way out of the forest again. She walked on and on until evening came, and then she saw a tiny light burning in the distance. She ran up to it at once and came to a little hut.

She knocked; the door opened, and she came to a second door and knocked again. An old man with a snow-white beard, who looked venerable, opened it for her — and he was none other than St. Joseph.

He said quite kindly, "Come in, dear child, and sit yourself on my little chair by the fire and warm yourself. I'll fetch you clear water if you're thirsty; but here in the forest I have nothing for you to eat but a couple of little roots, which you must scrape and boil first."

St. Joseph gave her the roots. The girl scraped them clean, and then brought out a piece of pancake and the bread her mother had given her to take with her, and mixed it all together in a pan and cooked herself a thick soup.

When it was ready, St. Joseph said, "I'm so hungry; give me some of your food."

The child was quite willing, and gave him more than she kept for herself; but God's blessing was with her, so that she had enough.

When they had eaten, St. Joseph said, "Now we'll go to bed. I have only one bed, though; lie down in it. I'll lie on the ground, on the straw."

"No," answered she, "stay in your own bed; the straw is soft enough for me."

But St. Joseph took the child in his arms and carried her to the little bed; and there she said her prayers and fell asleep.

Next morning when she woke she wanted to say good morning to St. Joseph, but she did not see him. So she got up and looked for him, but could not find him anywhere. And at last she noticed behind the door a bag of money, so heavy that she could only just carry it; and on it was written that it was for the child who had slept there that night.

So she took the bag and bounded away with it and got safely home to her mother; and as she gave her mother all the money, her mother could not help being satisfied with her.

The next day the second child took a fancy to go into the forest too. Her mother gave her a much larger piece of pancake and bread. It went with her just as it had with the first child. In the evening she came to St. Joseph's little hut, and he gave her roots for a thick soup.

When it was ready he said to her too, "I'm so hungry; give me some of your food."

Then the child said, "You may have your share."

Afterwards, when St. Joseph offered her his bed and wanted to lie on the straw, she replied, "No, lie down in the bed; there's plenty of room for both of us." St. Joseph took her in his arms and put her in the bed, and laid himself down on the straw.

In the morning, when the child woke and looked for St. Joseph, he had vanished; but behind the door she found a little sack of money about as long as a hand, and on it was written that it was for the child who had slept there the night before. So she took the little bag and ran home with it and took it to her mother — but she secretly kept two pieces for herself.

By this time the eldest daughter had grown curious, and the next morning she insisted on going out into the forest too. Her mother gave her pancakes to take — as many as she wanted — and bread and cheese as well.

In the evening she found St. Joseph in his little hut, just as the other two had. When the soup was ready and St. Joseph said, "I'm so hungry; give me some of your food," the girl answered, "Wait until I've had enough; then if there's anything left you shall have it."

She ate nearly all of it, though, and St. Joseph had to scrape the dish.

Afterwards the good old man offered her his bed and wanted to lie on the straw. She took it without any objection, lay down in the little bed, and left the hard straw to the white-haired man.

Next morning when she woke, St. Joseph was nowhere to be found; but she did not trouble herself about that. She looked behind the door for a money bag. She thought something was lying on the ground; but as she could not quite make out what it was, she stooped down and examined it closely — and it stayed hanging to her nose; and when she straightened up she saw to her horror that it was a second nose, hanging fast to her own.

Then she began to scream and howl; but that did no good. She had to see it always in front of her, for it stuck out so far. So she ran out and screamed without stopping, until she met St. Joseph; and she fell at his feet and begged until, out of pity, he took the nose off her again, and even gave her two farthings.

When she got home her mother was standing in front of the door, and asked, "What were you given?"

Then she lied and said, "A great bag of money — but I lost it on the way."

"Lost it!" cried her mother. "Oh, but we'll soon find it again" — and took her by the hand and wanted to go and look for it with her.

At first she began to cry and did not want to go; but at last she went. On the way, though, so many lizards and snakes came at the two of them that they did not know how to save themselves. At last they stung the wicked child to death; and they stung the mother in the foot, because she had not brought her up better.

The Twelve Apostles

Three hundred years before the birth of the Lord Christ, there lived a mother who had twelve sons, but was so poor and needy that she no longer knew how she was to keep them alive at all. She prayed to God daily that he would grant that all her sons might be on the earth together with the Redeemer who was promised.

When her need grew still greater, she sent them out one after another into the world to look for bread for her.

The eldest was called Peter; and he went out and had already walked a long way, a whole day's journey, when he came into a great forest. He looked for a way out but could find none, and went further and further astray; and at the same time he felt such great hunger that he could hardly stand. At length he grew so weak that he had to lie down, and he believed death was at hand.

Suddenly there stood beside him a small boy who shone with brightness, and was as beautiful and kind as an angel. The child clapped his little hands together until Peter had to look up and saw him.

Then the child said, "Why are you sitting there in such trouble?"

"Alas," answered Peter, "I'm going about the world looking for bread, so that I may yet see the dear Saviour who is promised. That's my greatest desire."

The child said, "Come with me, and your wish shall be fulfilled."

He took poor Peter by the hand and led him between some cliffs to a great cavern. When they went in, everything was shining with gold and silver and crystal; and in the middle of it twelve cradles were standing side by side.

Then the little angel said, "Lie down in the first and sleep a while; I'll rock you."

Peter did so, and the angel sang to him and rocked him until he was asleep. And when he was asleep the second brother came too, guided there by his guardian angel, and was rocked to sleep like the first; and so came the others one after another, until all twelve lay there sleeping in the golden cradles.

They slept, though, for three hundred years, until the night when the Saviour of the world was born. Then they woke, and were with him on earth, and were called the twelve apostles.

The Rose

There was once a poor woman who had two children. The youngest had to go into the forest every day to fetch wood.

Once, when she had gone a long way to look for it, a little child who was quite strong came and helped her industriously to pick up the wood and carry it home — and then, before a moment had passed, the strange child disappeared.

The child told her mother about this, but at first she would not believe it. At length she brought a rose home, and told her mother that the beautiful child had given her this rose, and had told her that when it was in full bloom he would come back. Her mother put the rose in water.

One morning her child could not get out of bed. Her mother went to the bed and found her dead — but she lay looking very happy. And on that same morning the rose was in full bloom.

Poverty and Humility Lead to Heaven

There was once a King's son who went out into the world, and he was full of thought and sad. He looked at the sky, which was so beautifully pure and blue, and then he sighed and said, "How well everything must be with a man up there in heaven."

Then he saw a poor grey-haired man coming along the road towards him; and he spoke to him and asked, "How can I get to heaven?"

The man answered, "By poverty and humility. Put on my ragged clothes, wander about the world for seven years and get to know what misery is. Take no money; but if you're hungry, ask compassionate hearts for a bit of bread. That way you'll reach heaven."

So the King's son took off his magnificent coat and wore the beggar's clothes in its place, and went out into the wide world and suffered great misery. He took nothing but a little food, and said nothing, but prayed to the Lord to take him into his heaven.

When the seven years were over he came back to his father's palace, but nobody recognised him. He said to the servants, "Go and tell my parents that I've come back." But the servants did not believe it, and laughed and left him standing there.

Then he said, "Go and tell my brothers, so that they'll come down; I should so much like to see them again." The servants would not do that either; but at last one of them went and told the King's children — and they did not believe it, and did not trouble themselves about it.

Then he wrote a letter to his mother describing all his misery — but he did not say that he was her son. So the Queen, out of pity, had a place under the stairs assigned to him, and food taken to him every day by two servants.

But one of them was ill-natured and said, "Why should the beggar have the good food?" — and kept it for himself, or gave it to the dogs, and took the weak, wasted beggar nothing but water. The other, though, was honest, and took the beggar what was sent to him. It was little, but he could live on it for a while; and all the time he was quite patient, though he grew steadily weaker.

But as his illness grew worse he asked to receive the last sacrament. And when the host was raised down below, all the bells in the town and the country round began to ring.

After mass the priest went to the poor man under the stairs — and there he lay dead. In one hand he had a rose, in the other a lily, and beside him lay a paper with his history written in it.

When he was buried, a rose grew on one side of his grave and a lily on the other.

God’s Food

There were once two sisters, one of whom had no children and was rich, and the other had five and was a widow, and was so poor that she no longer had enough food to feed herself and her children.

In her need she went to her sister and said, "My children and I are suffering the greatest hunger. You're rich; give me a mouthful of bread."

The very rich sister was as hard as a stone, and said, "I have nothing in the house myself" — and drove the poor creature away with harsh words.

Some time later the rich sister's husband came home and was just going to cut himself a piece of bread; but when he made the first cut into the loaf, red blood flowed out.

When his wife saw that she was terrified and told him what had happened. He hurried away to help the widow and her children; but when he came into her room he found her praying. She had her two youngest children in her arms, and the three eldest were lying dead.

He offered her food, but she answered, "For earthly food we have no more desire. God has already satisfied the hunger of three of us, and he will hear our prayers too."

Hardly had she spoken these words before the two little ones drew their last breath; whereupon her heart broke and she sank down dead.

The Three Green Twigs

There was once a hermit who lived in a forest at the foot of a mountain, and passed his time in prayer and good works; and every evening he carried two pails of water up the mountain, to the glory of God. Many an animal drank of it, and many a plant was refreshed by it; for up on the heights a strong wind blew continually, which dried the air and the ground, and the wild birds that dread mankind wheel about there and search with their sharp eyes for a drink.

And because the hermit was so pious, an angel of God, visible to his eyes, went up with him and counted his steps; and when the work was finished, brought him his food, just as the prophet of old was fed by the raven at God's command.

When in his piety the hermit had already reached a great age, it happened that he once saw from a distance a poor sinner being taken to the gallows. He said carelessly to himself, "There — that one is getting what he deserves."

In the evening, when he was carrying the water up the mountain, the angel who usually went with him did not appear, and brought him no food either. Then he was terrified, and searched his heart and tried to think how he could have sinned, that God should be so angry; but he could not find it out. So he neither ate nor drank, but threw himself down on the ground and prayed day and night.

And as he was weeping bitterly in the forest one day, he heard a little bird singing beautifully and delightfully; and then he was more troubled still, and said, "How joyfully you sing! The Lord isn't angry with you. Ah, if only you could tell me how I've offended him, so that I could do penance, and then my heart would be glad again too."

Then the bird began to speak and said, "You have done an injustice, in that you condemned a poor sinner who was being led to the gallows; and for that the Lord is angry with you. He alone sits in judgement. But if you'll do penance and repent your sins, he'll forgive you."

Then the angel stood beside him with a dry branch in his hand and said, "You shall carry this dry branch until three green twigs sprout out of it; and at night, when you sleep, you shall lay it under your head. You shall beg your bread from door to door, and not stay more than one night in the same house. That is the penance the Lord lays on you."

Then the hermit took the piece of wood and went back into the world, which he had not seen for so long. He ate and drank nothing but what he was given at the doors; but many of his requests were not listened to, and many doors stayed shut to him, so that he often did not get a crumb of bread.

Once, when he had gone from door to door from morning till night and nobody had given him anything and nobody would shelter him for the night, he went out into a forest and at last found a cave that somebody had made, with an old woman sitting in it.

Then he said, "Good woman, keep me in your house for this one night."

But she said, "No, I daren't, even if I wanted to. I have three sons who are wicked and wild; if they come home from their robbing and find you, they'd kill us both."

The hermit said, "Let me stay; they'll do no harm to you or to me." And the woman was compassionate and let herself be persuaded.

So the man lay down under the stairs and put the piece of wood under his head. When the old woman saw him do that she asked the reason for it; and he told her that he carried the piece of wood about with him for a penance and used it at night for a pillow, and that he had offended the Lord because, when he saw a poor sinner on the way to the gallows, he had said that he was getting what he deserved.

Then the woman began to weep and cried, "If the Lord punishes one single word like that, how will it go with my sons when they come before him in judgement?"

At midnight the robbers came home and blustered and stormed. They made a fire; and when it lit up the cave and they saw a man lying under the stairs, they flew into a rage and cried to their mother, "Who is this man? Haven't we forbidden anybody at all to be taken in?"

Then their mother said, "Let him alone; he's a poor sinner expiating his crime."

The robbers asked, "What has he done? Old man," they cried, "tell us your sins."

The old man raised himself and told them how by one single word he had sinned so that God was angry with him, and how he was now expiating that crime.

The robbers were so powerfully touched in their hearts by this story that they were appalled at the life they had lived up to then, and reflected, and began with hearty repentance to do penance for it.

The hermit, having converted the three sinners, lay down to sleep again under the stairs. In the morning, though, they found him dead — and out of the dry wood his head lay on, three green twigs had grown up high. So the Lord had received him into his favour once more.

Our Lady’s Little Glass

Once upon a time a carter's cart, which was heavily loaded with wine, had stuck so fast that whatever he did, he could not get it to move again.

Then it happened that Our Lady came by that way; and when she saw the poor man's distress, she said to him, "I'm tired and thirsty. Give me a glass of wine and I'll set your cart free for you."

"Willingly," answered the carter, "but I have no glass to give you the wine in."

Then Our Lady picked a little white flower with red stripes, called field bindweed, which looks very like a glass, and gave it to the carter. He filled it with wine, and Our Lady drank it; and in that same instant the cart was set free and the carter could drive on.

And the little flower is still called Our Lady's Little Glass to this day.

The Aged Mother

In a large town there was an old woman who sat alone in her room one evening, thinking how she had lost first her husband, then both her children, then one by one all her relations, and at length, that very day, her last friend; and now she was quite alone and desolate.

She was very sad at heart; and heaviest of all her losses to her was the loss of her sons; and in her pain she blamed God for it.

She was still sitting lost in thought when all at once she heard the bells ringing for early prayers. She was surprised that in her sorrow she had watched through the whole night like this; and she lit her lantern and went to church.

It was already lit up when she arrived — but not as it usually was with wax candles; the light was dim. And it was crowded with people already, and all the seats were filled; and when the old woman got to her usual place, that was not empty either, but the whole bench was quite full.

And when she looked at the people, they were none other than her dead relations, sitting there in their old-fashioned clothes, but with pale faces. They neither spoke nor sang; but a soft humming and whispering was heard all over the church.

Then an aunt of hers stood up and stepped forward and said to the poor old woman, "Look there beside the altar, and you'll see your sons."

The old woman looked, and saw her two children, one hanging on the gallows, the other bound to the wheel.

Then her aunt said, "Look — that is how it would have been with them if they had lived, and if the good God had not taken them to himself while they were innocent children."

The old woman went home trembling, and on her knees thanked God for having dealt with her more kindly than she had been able to understand; and on the third day she lay down and died.
