The Heavenly Wedding

A poor peasant boy heard the priest say in church one day that whoever wanted to enter the kingdom of heaven must always go straight onwards. So he set out, and walked straight onwards over hill and valley without ever turning aside.

At length his way led him into a great town and into the middle of a church, where God's service was being held just at that time. And when he saw all the magnificence of it, he thought he had reached heaven, and sat down and rejoiced with his whole heart.

When the service was over and the clerk told him to go out, he replied, "No, I won't go out again. I'm glad to be in heaven at last."

So the clerk went to the priest and told him that there was a child in the church who would not go out again, because he believed he was in heaven.

The priest said, "If he believes that, we'll leave him inside." So he went to him and asked whether he had any inclination to work.

"Yes," the little fellow replied, "I'm used to working — but I won't go out of heaven again."

So he stayed in the church; and when he saw how people came and knelt and prayed to Our Lady with the blessed child Jesus, carved in wood, he thought, "That's the good God" — and said, "Dear God, how thin you are! The people must certainly be letting you starve. But every day I'll give you half my dinner."

From that time on he took half his dinner to the image every day; and the image began to enjoy the food. When a few weeks had gone by, people noticed that the image was growing larger and stout and strong, and they wondered greatly at it. The priest could not understand it either; but he stayed in the church and followed the little boy about, and then he saw how he shared his food with the Virgin Mary, and how she accepted it.

After some time the boy fell ill and could not leave his bed for eight days; but as soon as he could get up again, the first thing he did was to take his food to Our Lady.

The priest followed him and heard him say, "Dear God, don't take it amiss that I haven't brought you anything for such a long time; I've been ill and couldn't get up."

Then the image answered him and said, "I've seen your good will, and that is enough for me. Next Sunday you shall come with me to the wedding."

The boy rejoiced at this and repeated it to the priest, who begged him to go and ask the image whether he too might be allowed to come.

"No," answered the image, "you alone."

The priest wanted to prepare him first and give him holy communion, and the child was willing; and next Sunday, when the host came to him, he fell down and died, and was at the eternal wedding.

The Hazel-Branch

One afternoon the Christ child had laid himself down in his cradle bed and fallen asleep. Then his mother came to him and looked at him full of gladness and said, "Have you laid yourself down to sleep, my child? Sleep sweetly; and meanwhile I'll go into the wood and fetch you a handful of strawberries, for I know you'll be pleased with them when you wake."

Out in the wood she found a spot with the most beautiful strawberries; but as she was stooping down to pick one, an adder sprang up out of the grass. She was alarmed, and left the strawberries where they were and hurried away. The adder darted after her; but Our Lady, as you can easily understand, knew what was best to do. She hid herself behind a hazel bush and stood there until the adder had crept away again.

Then she gathered the strawberries; and as she set out on her way home she said, "As the hazel bush has been my protection this time, it shall protect others too in future."

And so, from the most distant times, a green hazel branch has been the safest protection against adders and snakes and everything else that creeps on the earth.
