TEXT ANALYSIS — C. V. Boys, Soap Bubbles and the Forces Which Mould Them (1890)
Source: Project Gutenberg #33370 (1896 printing of the 1890 first edition)

WHAT THIS IS

Three lectures delivered in the theatre of the London Institution on the
afternoons of December 30, 1889 and January 1 and 3, 1890, "before a
juvenile audience." Charles Vernon Boys was Assistant Professor of Physics
at the Royal College of Science, South Kensington — a superb experimentalist
(he invented the quartz-fibre torsion balance and measured G with it) who
was also, on this evidence, one of the great popular science lecturers.

The subject is surface tension, though Boys almost never uses the phrase.
His entire pedagogy rests on one metaphor introduced in the first ten
minutes and never abandoned: the surface of a liquid behaves as if it were
a perfectly elastic skin, stretched with a definite force, always trying to
make itself as small as possible. Everything else — capillarity, the shape
of drops, the instability of liquid cylinders, spider webs, singing
fountains, bubbles nested inside bubbles — is derived from that one idea.

This is the project's first ILLUSTRATED volume and its first work of
popular science lecturing. Both facts shape the translation.

STYLE AND TONE

Boys is standing in front of a room of children with a bench full of
apparatus, and the prose is a transcript of a performance:

  - Continuous present tense of live demonstration: "I am now dipping it
    in the water, as you can see, and on taking it out, the hairs, as we
    expected, cling together." This is the book's heartbeat. KEEP IT. Do
    not convert demonstrations into the timeless present of a textbook
    ("when a brush is dipped in water, the hairs cling"). The reader must
    stay in the lecture theatre watching a man do things.
  - Direct address, constantly: "I want you to notice", "you may well ask",
    "which you can try at home just as well as I can here", "I hope to make
    this clear when we meet again."
  - Socratic setup: he poses the question, invites a wrong guess, then
    performs the experiment that settles it. Preserve the order — never
    front-load the answer he is building to.
  - Dry, affectionate humour, deadpan and never arch: the Etruscan vase
    ("there is however, no means of telling now whose soap they used"); the
    tilted candlestick ("you will know when this is the case, because then
    the falling grease will just fall on the edge of the candlestick and
    splash on to the carpet"); the paper water-bomb "called a cat-box,
    because of its power of dispelling cats." Land these jokes; do not
    explain them, amplify them, or add jokes of your own.
  - Intellectual generosity: he credits Plateau, Rayleigh, Kelvin, Savart,
    Maxwell, Chichester Bell, Rücker by name, and says plainly when
    something is beyond the lecture ("why I cannot now explain", "it would
    take too long to explain"). Keep every one of these admissions — the
    honesty about the limits of a children's lecture is part of the voice.

The register to aim for: a brilliant teacher talking to a smart
fourteen-year-old, in short clear modern sentences, with nothing talked
down to and nothing dumbed out.

THE CENTRAL TRANSLATION PROBLEM: LONG PERIODIC SENTENCES

Boys' sentences are Victorian-long, with the argument carried in stacked
subordinate clauses. His logic is exact and the clauses are load-bearing, so
they cannot be dropped — they must be unstacked into sequenced short
sentences without losing a single step. Example (Lecture I, capillarity):

  ORIGINAL: "It will not even pull it up as high as it did in the case of
  the smaller tube, because if it were pulled up as high the weight of the
  water raised would in that case be four times as great, and not only
  twice as great, as you might at first think."

  MODERN: "It will not even lift the water as high as the narrow tube did.
  Suppose it were lifted that high: the weight of raised water would then
  be four times as great, not merely twice as great, which is what you
  might guess at first."

That is the whole job, three hundred times over. Watch especially for:
  - "the more so as the spaces were narrower" — comparative constructions
    that need rebuilding as explicit statements
  - chains of "which ... which ... and so" — split at every "and so"
  - "It is for this reason that..." — usually better as "That is why..."

DO NOT SIMPLIFY THE PHYSICS TO SHORTEN A SENTENCE. Boys' reasoning about
pressure and curvature (Lecture II) is genuinely subtle and completely
correct; every "half", "twice", "four and a half diameters" and "three and
one-seventh" must survive exactly as written.

FIGURES

69 numbered figures plus a frontispiece, carried as markers:

  source:  [Figure 22]
  modern:  [Figure 22: one line of caption, written by the translation]

Rules:
  - Every marker in the source file must appear in the modern file, in the
    same order and the same position relative to the surrounding prose.
    verify.py enforces this.
  - The ORIGINAL has no captions at all — just "Fig. 22." under each plate.
    Write a fresh one-sentence caption for each, drawn from what the
    adjacent prose says the plate shows. This is the single biggest
    improvement the modern edition makes: a reader can now understand a
    plate without hunting the paragraph that explains it.
  - Captions are descriptive, not interpretive: say what is in the picture
    and what it demonstrates. No exclamation, no editorial.
  - [Figure 39b] is NOT a figure — it is the scale bar ("thousandths of an
    inch") belonging to Fig. 39's photomicrograph of spider-web beads.
    Leave it caption-less; assemble.py renders a caption-less figure as a
    bare image, which is correct for a scale.
  - [Figure front] is the frontispiece: the stroboscopic photograph of a
    fountain's drops apparently frozen in mid-air. Boys' own caption
    survives in the marker; rewrite it as modern English and drop his
    "(See page 109.)" — replace with a pointer to Lecture Three.
  - Boys refers to plates INSIDE his sentences ("as the photograph taken
    with a microscope beautifully shows (Fig. 39)"). Keep those references,
    modernized to "(Figure 39)". They are how the lecture and the plate are
    stitched together.
  - Fig. 35 (the thaumatrope: 43 successive photographs of a falling drop)
    was a fold-out at the END of the 1890 book, reached via a marginal note.
    prep.py has moved it inline to the point where it is discussed. Boys'
    cross-references to it ("For the use to which this figure is to be put,
    see page 149") become pointers to the Practical Hints section, where he
    explains how to cut it out and spin it.

VOCABULARY — LOCKED MAPPINGS

Keep (they are the content, and Boys defines each one himself):
  elastic skin, surface tension, capillarity, catenoid, nodoid, cylinder,
  sphere, hyperbola, parabola, ellipse, conic section, focus, figure of
  revolution, surface of no curvature, screw surface, thaumatrope

  - "elastic skin" is Boys' governing metaphor and must never be replaced
    by "surface tension" as a matter of routine. Introduce "surface
    tension" ONCE, in Lecture I, as the modern name for what he is
    describing, then let him go on saying "elastic skin" exactly as he does.
  - capillus / catena: Boys gives the Latin etymologies himself. Keep both.

Modernize, once, then use the modern word throughout:
  india-rubber            -> rubber
  quicksilver             -> mercury
  bisulphide of carbon    -> carbon disulfide (Boys' own "bad-smelling and
                             dangerous" stays — it is both)
  fluorescine / uranine   -> fluorescein
  benzine                 -> benzine (a petroleum solvent — gloss on first
                             use; it is not modern benzene, do not "correct")
  lycopodium              -> lycopodium powder (club-moss spores)
  ox-gall                 -> ox gall
  water-butt              -> rain barrel
  tooth-wheel             -> toothed wheel
  nob (of a watch)        -> button
  gutta-percha            -> gutta-percha (gloss: a hard natural latex)
  the lantern             -> the projector, glossed ONCE on first use as
                             "the lantern — the projector at the front of
                             the room"; thereafter "the projector" or "the
                             lantern" as reads best. "The screen" stays.
  juveniles               -> young people (in the Preface)
  philosophers (Newton's) -> scientists

Keep as written, with a brief gloss on first use:
  coal-gas — the piped town gas of 1890, lighter than air. Boys uses it to
    make bubbles that rise. Gloss once; a modern reader would use helium,
    and the Practical Hints annotation may say so, but the lecture text
    keeps coal gas.
  ether — diethyl ether. Keep. Boys already flags it as inflammable.
  grains to the inch — his measurement of surface tension, "three and a
    quarter grains to the inch." Keep the figure; gloss "grain" once as an
    old unit of weight, about 65 milligrams.
  a drop as large as a shilling — keep the shilling; add "about the size of
    a modern coin" only if the sentence needs it. Do not convert to
    millimetres.

PEOPLE — gloss briefly on first mention, never more:
  Plateau — Joseph Plateau, the Belgian physicist, who went blind and went
    on experimenting (Boys calls him "the blind experimentalist" — keep it;
    it is said with admiration)
  Sir W. Thomson / Sir William Thomson — add "(Lord Kelvin)" once
  Lord Rayleigh, Savart, Clerk Maxwell, Prof. Rücker (Boys prints "Rucker"
    — restore the umlaut), Mr. Bidwell — name only, no biography
  Mr. Chichester Bell, "cousin of Mr. Graham Bell, the inventor of the
    telephone" — Boys' own gloss, keep it
  Millais — the painter of "Bubbles" (1886), the picture "thanks to modern
    advertising enterprise" that everyone had seen because Pears used it on
    soap advertisements. Boys assumes his audience knows it; a modern reader
    does not, so name the painting and say in a clause that it was famous
    from soap advertising. This is exactly the "brief contextual
    explanation" the project's philosophy calls for.

QUOTATIONS THAT MUST SURVIVE VERBATIM

  - The two stanzas of Edward Lear's "The Jumblies" ("They went to sea in a
    sieve, they did..."). Quoted poetry is NEVER modernized. Boys does not
    name Lear; naming him in a half-clause is a legitimate courtesy.
  - Proverbs 23:31, King James: "Look not thou upon the wine when it is
    red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself
    aright." Verbatim, KJV, including "his colour". Boys' argument depends
    on the exact wording of "moveth itself aright" — he is claiming the
    verse describes the tears-of-wine effect, which is a genuinely good
    reading. Keep his reasoning intact, including the wider point he draws
    from it about passages whose meaning is lost because the everyday
    knowledge behind them is lost.

FAMOUS PASSAGES (also listed in must_contain.txt)

  1. The manifesto on experiment, Lecture I — the best-known thing in the
     book and one of the great statements of the scientific method for
     children: "An experiment is a question which we ask of Nature, who is
     always ready to give a correct answer, provided we ask properly, that
     is, provided we arrange a proper experiment." Keep near-verbatim. The
     surrounding sentences ("An experiment is not a conjuring trick...")
     may be modernized, but that sentence stands.
  2. The opening: everyone in the room has blown a soap bubble and wondered
     how such a magnificent thing is so easily made.
  3. "capillus, a hair" and "catena is the Latin for a chain."
  4. The frozen fountain: the drops "strung like pearls or beads of silver
     upon an invisible wire."
  5. The closing paragraph, Lecture III: has wonder been destroyed by
     explanation, or increased? — ending on actions "not so trivial as to
     be unworthy of the attention of ordinary people like ourselves."
     Boys' last words. Keep the shape and the modesty exactly.

SCIENCE: WHAT TO LEAVE ALONE

Boys is right about essentially everything, which is remarkable for 1890.
Follow the Verne rule — keep the science as written, make no silent
corrections:
  - Rayleigh's numbers on jet instability, drop vibration rates, and the
    3.14-diameter (length = circumference) stability limit of a liquid
    cylinder are all correct. Reproduce them exactly.
  - The claim that thunderstorm raindrops are large because atmospheric
    electricity makes colliding drops coalesce is Rayleigh's, and Boys
    attributes it. It is not the modern account of raindrop size. Keep it
    as his claim, unhedged — a footnote-style correction would break the
    lecture. The reader is reading 1890.
  - "There can never be more than three films meeting in an edge, or more
    than four edges, or six films, meeting in a point" — Plateau's laws,
    still exactly right (proved by Taylor in 1976).
  - Where Boys says he cannot explain something in a children's lecture
    ("why I cannot now explain"), do not supply the explanation.

SENSITIVE / DATED CONTENT

There is very little, and none of it is grave. Handle as follows:
  - The "cat-box" is a folded-newspaper water bomb, and Boys' joke is that
    it is good for driving cats off. Render the joke as he tells it, in one
    clause, without embroidery and without a disclaimer. It is a Victorian
    child throwing water.
  - "Juvenile audience" / "juveniles": Boys is warm, never condescending;
    "young people" carries it.
  - The Practical Hints have children handling ether, carbon disulfide,
    benzine, molten paraffin wax, and blown glass over a flame. See below.
  - Boys says "he or she should skip the next pages" in a footnote, in
    1890, unprompted. Keep that as written.

PRACTICAL HINTS — THE ANNOTATION POLICY

The appendix is a third of the book and the reason the lectures existed: he
wants the reader to go and do it. Translate all of it, in full, keeping
every dimension, material and quantity as given. Then, sparingly, add a
bracketed modern note where a reader who actually tries the experiment
needs one. Format, always exactly this, as its own sentence inside the
paragraph or as a short paragraph after it:

  [Modern note: ...]

Use one only for these three reasons, and keep each to one or two sentences:
  1. A material no longer obtainable or now called something else, where a
     substitute is obvious: coal gas (helium), india-rubber sheet (a
     balloon or dental dam), a "silvered ball used to ornament a
     Christmas-tree" (a glass bulb of any kind).
  2. A genuine hazard a reader might not recognise as one, because in 1890
     nobody flagged it: carbon disulfide (highly flammable, seriously
     toxic — this one gets a note), ether (extremely flammable, and its
     vapour travels), melting paraffin wax over any flame, and Boys' own
     glass-blowing instructions.
  3. Boys' soap recipe. His mixture (oleate of soda, glycerine, distilled
     water, left to stand for a week and decanted) is a real recipe worth
     keeping verbatim, plus a note that modern dish detergent and glycerine
     in water works and is what a reader will actually use.

Do NOT annotate to explain physics he has already explained, to convert
units, or to admire the experiment. Fewer than a dozen notes in the whole
appendix. Where Boys is simply describing a workshop skill (soldering,
sealing-wax, wire bending), leave him to it.

RATIO

English-to-English modernization: unstacking long sentences costs a few
words, cutting Victorian throat-clearing ("I think then I have now done
enough to show that...") saves them, and the two roughly cancel.
Expect 0.95–1.15. Run:

  python3 verify.py soap-bubbles --min-ratio 0.85 --max-ratio 1.3

Figure markers are excluded from the word counts, so the captions written
by the translation do not inflate the ratio.
