Chapter 11 -- Telang's 1898 prose (Sacred Books of the East 8), OCR, crib only.
No verse numbers; footnotes and page heads removed by prep.py. Names are
OCR-mangled (Arguna = Arjuna, Pazdu = Pandu, Ganardana = Janardana): take
every name from running_notes.txt, never from here. Use it for 11.15-49,
where Besant's crib is her own blank verse.

CHAPTER XI.

Arguna said:

In consequence of the excellent and mysterious
words concerning the relation of the supreme and
individual soul, which you have spoken for my
welfare, this delusion of mine is gone away. O you
whose eyes are like lotus leaves! I have heard from
you at large about the production and dissolution of
things, and also about your inexhaustible greatness.
O highest lord! what you have said about yourself
is so. I wish, O best of beings! to see your divine
form. If, O lord! you think that it is possible for
me to look upon it, then, O lord of the possessors
of mystic power!! show your inexhaustible form
to me.

The Deity said:

In hundreds and in thousands see my forms, O
son of Pzztha! various, divine, and of various colours
and shapes. See the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, the
two Asvins, and Maruts likewise. And O descendant of Bharata! see wonders, in numbers, unseen
before. Within my body, O Gudakesa! see to-day
the whole universe, including (everything) movable
and immovable, (all) in one, and whatever else you
wish to see. But you will not be able to see me
with merely this eye of yours. I give you an eye
divine. (Now) see my divine power.

Sazigaya said:

Having spoken thus, O king! Hari, the great

lord of the possessors of mystic power, then showed
to the son of Prztha his supreme divine form, having
many mouths and eyes, having (within it) many
wonderful sights, having many celestial ornaments,
having many celestial weapons held erect, wearing
celestial flowers and vestments, having an anointment of celestial perfumes, full of every wonder, the
infinite deity with faces in all directions’. If in
the heavens, the lustre of a thousand suns burst
forth all at once, that would be like the lustre of
that mighty one. There the son of Pazdu then
observed in the body of the god of gods the whole
universe (all) in one, and divided into numerous *
(divisions). Then Dhanazgaya filled with amazement, and with hair standing on end, bowed his
head before the god, and spoke with joined hands.

Arguna said :

O god! I see within your body the gods, as also
all the groups of various beings; and the lord
Brahman seated on (his) lotus seat, and all the
sages and celestial snakes. I see you, who are of
countless forms, possessed of many arms, stomachs,
mouths, and eyes on all sides. And, O lord of the
universe! O you of all forms! I do not see your
end or middle or beginning. I see you bearing a
coronet and a mace and a discus—a. mass of glory,
brilliant on all sides, difficult to look at, having on

resembling the fire of destruction, I cannot recognise the (various) directions, I feel no comfort. Be
gracious, O lord of gods! who pervadest the
universe. And all these sons of Dhvztardsh/ra,
together with all the bands of kings, and Bhishma
and Droza, and this charioteer's son! likewise,
together with our principal warriors also, are rapidly
entering your mouths, fearful and horrific? by (reason
of your) jaws. And some with their heads smashed
are seen (to be) stuck in the spaces between the
teeth. As the many rapid currents of a river's
waters run towards the sea alone, so do these heroes
of the human world enter your mouths blazing all
round. As butterflies, with increased velocity, enter
a blazing fire to their destruction, so too do these
people enter your mouths with increased velocity
(only) to their destruction. Swallowing all these
people, you are licking them over and over again
from all sides, with your blazing mouths. Your
fierce splendours, O Vishzu! filling the whole
universe with (their) effulgence, are heating it. Tell
me who you are in this fierce form. Salutations be
to thee, O chief of the gods! Be gracious. I wish
to know you, the primeval one, for I do not understand your actions.
The Deity said :

I am death, the destroyer of the worlds, fully

developed, and I am now active about the over-

throw of the worlds. Even without you, the warriors standing in the adverse hosts, shall all cease to
be. Therefore, be up, obtain glory, and vanquishing
(your) foes, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. All these
have been already killed by me. Be only the instrument, O Savyasaéin!! Droza, and Bhishma, and
Gayadratha, and Karma, and likewise other valiant
warriors also, whom I have killed, do you kill. Be
not alarmed. Do fight. And in the battle you will
conquer (your) foes.

Safigaya said :

Hearing these words of Kesava, the wearer of
the coronet *, trembling, and with joined hands,
bowed down; and sorely afraid, and with throat
choked up, he again spoke to Kvzshva after saluting
him.

Arguna said :

It is quite proper, O Hvzshikesa! that the universe is delighted and charmed by your renown,
that the demons run away affrighted in all directions,
and that all the assemblages of Siddhas bow down
(to you). And why, O high-souled one! should
they not bow down to you (who are) greater than
Brahman, and first cause? O infinite lord of
gods! O you pervading the universe! you are
the indestructible, that which is, that which is not,
and what is beyond them*®. You are the primal

? Arguna, as he could shoot with his left hand as well as the
right.— Sridhara.

god, the ancient being, you are the highest support
of this universe’. You are that which has knowledge, that which is the object of knowledge, you
are the highest goal. By you is this universe
pervaded, O you of infinite forms! You are the
wind, Yama, fire, Varuza, the moon, you Pragdpati,
and the great grandsire*. Obeisance be to thee
a thousand times, and again and again obeisance to
thee! In front and from behind obeisance to thee!
Obeisance be to thee from all sides, O you who are
all! You are of infinite power, of unmeasured glory;
you pervade all, and therefore you are all! Whatever I have said contemptuously,—for instance, ‘O
Krzshva!’ ‘O Yadava!’ ‘O friend !’—thinking you
to be (my) friend, and not knowing your greatness
(as shown in) this (universal form), or through
friendliness, or incautiously ; and whatever disrespect
I have shown you for purposes of merriment, on
(occasions of) play, sleep, dinner, or sitting (together),
whether alone or in the presence (of friends),—for
all that, O undegraded one! I ask pardon of you
who are indefinable*. You are the father of the
world — movable and immovable — you its great
and venerable master; there is none equal to you,
whence can there be one greater, O you whose
power is unparalleled in all the three worlds?
Therefore I bow and prostrate myself, and would
propitiate you, the praiseworthy lord. Be pleased,

O god! to pardon (my guilt) as a father (that of
his) son, a friend (that of his) friend, or a husband
(that of his) beloved. I am delighted at seeing
what I had never seen before, and my heart is also
alarmed by fear. Show me that same form, O god!
Be gracious, O lord of gods! O you pervading the
universe! I wish to see you bearing the coronet
and the mace, with the discus in hand, just the same
(as before)?. O you of thousand arms! O you of
all forms ! assume that same four-handed form.

The Deity said:

O Arguna! being pleased (with you), I have by
my own mystic power shown you this supreme form,
full of glory, universal, infinite, primeval, and which
has not been seen before by any one else but you,
O you hero among the Kauravas! I cannot be seen
in this form by any one but you, (even) by (the help
of) the study of the Vedas, or of? sacrifices, nor by
gifts, nor by actions, nor by fierce penances. Be not
alarmed, be not perplexed, at seeing this form of
mine, fearful like this. Free from fear and with
delighted heart, see now again that same form of
mine.

Safigaya said:

Having thus spoken to Arguna, Vasudeva again

showed his own form, and the high-souled one

becoming again of a mild form, comforted him who
had been affrighted.

Arguna said:
O Ganardana! seeing this mild, human form of

yours, I am now in my right mind, and have come
to my normal state.

The Deity said:

Even the gods are always desiring to see this
form of mine, which it is difficult to get a sight
of, and which you have seen. I cannot be seen, as
you have seen me, by (means of) the Vedas, not by
penance, not by gift, nor yet by sacrifice. But, O
Arguna! by devotion to me exclusively, I can in
this form be truly known, seen, and assimilated ?
with, O terror of your foes! He who performs acts
for (propitiating) me, to whom I am the highest
(object), who is my devotee, who is free from attachment, and who has no enmity towards any being, he,
O son of Pazdu! comes to me.
