Lecture Two: Brightness of the Flame — the Air a Candle Needs, and the Water It Makes

(Part 1 of 2)

Last time we met we were occupied with the general character and arrangement of the liquid part of a candle, and with the way that liquid gets to the place of burning. You see that when we have a candle burning fairly in a steady, regular atmosphere, it takes a shape something like the one in the diagram, and looks quite uniform, though very curious in its character.

And now I must ask your attention to the means by which we can find out what happens in any particular part of the flame — why it happens, what it does in happening, and where, after all, the whole candle goes to. Because, as you know very well, a candle brought before us and burned disappears, if it burns properly, without leaving the least trace of dirt in the candlestick; and that is a very curious circumstance.

In order to examine this candle carefully, then, I have set up certain apparatus, and you will see the use of it as I go on. Here is a candle. I am about to put the end of this glass tube into the middle of the flame — into the part which old Hooke drew as being rather dark, and which you can see at any time if you look at a candle carefully without blowing it about. We will examine that dark part first.

[Figure 7: A bent glass tube with one end in the dark middle of a candle flame. What is drawn off is not burnt but is the wax itself in vapour, which runs along the tube and falls to the bottom of the flask like a heavy substance.]

Now, I take this bent glass tube and put one end into that part of the flame; and you see at once that something is coming out of the flame at the other end of the tube. If I put a flask there and leave it a little while, you will see that something from the middle of the flame is gradually drawn off, goes through the tube into the flask, and there behaves very differently from the way it behaves in the open air. It not only escapes from the end of the tube but falls to the bottom of the flask like a heavy substance — which indeed it is. We find that this is the wax of the candle turned into a vaporous fluid — not a gas.

(You must learn the difference between a gas and a vapour: a gas stays permanent, a vapour is something that will condense.) If you blow out a candle you notice a very nasty smell, and it comes from the condensing of this vapour.

That is very different from what you have outside the flame; and to make it clearer to you I am going to produce, and set fire to, a larger quantity of this vapour. What we have on a small scale in a candle, we must, as scientists, produce on a larger scale if need be, so that we can examine the different parts. Mr. Anderson will give me a source of heat, and I will show you what that vapour is. Here is some wax in a glass flask, and I am going to make it hot — as the inside of that candle flame is hot, and the matter round the wick is hot. [The lecturer placed some wax in a glass flask and heated it over a lamp.]

Now I dare say that is hot enough. You see the wax I put in has become liquid, and there is a little smoke coming off it. We shall very soon have the vapour rising. I will make it hotter still — and now we get more of it, so much that I can actually pour the vapour out of the flask into that basin and set fire to it there.

This, then, is exactly the same kind of vapour as we have in the middle of the candle. And to make sure of it, let us test whether we have not got a real combustible vapour here in this flask, taken out of the middle of the candle. [Taking the flask into which the tube from the candle led, and putting in a lighted taper.] See how it burns. This is the vapour from the middle of the candle, produced by the candle's own heat; and that is one of the first things you have to think about in following the progress of the wax through its burning, and the changes it goes through.

I will set another tube carefully in the flame, and I should not wonder if, with a little care, we can get that vapour to travel along the tube to the far end, where we will light it and get the actual flame of the candle at a place some distance away from it. Now look at that. Is that not a very pretty experiment? People talk about laying on gas — why, we can lay on a candle! And you see from this that there are plainly two different actions going on: one the making of the vapour, the other the burning of it — and each takes place in its own particular part of the candle.

[Figure 8: The vapour led out of the middle of the flame along a tube and lit at the far end, so that the candle's flame burns at a distance from the candle.]

I shall get no vapour at all from the part that has already burnt. If I raise the tube (Figure 7) to the upper part of the flame, then as soon as the vapour has been swept out, what comes away is no longer combustible: it is already burned. Burned how? Burned like this. In the middle of the flame, where the wick is, there is this combustible vapour. On the outside of the flame is the air, which we shall find is necessary for the burning of the candle. Between the two an intense chemical action takes place, in which the air and the fuel act on one another; and at the very moment we get light, the vapour inside is destroyed.

If you examine where the heat of a candle is, you will find it very curiously arranged. Suppose I take this candle and hold a piece of paper close down on the flame — where is the heat of that flame? Do you not see that it is not on the inside? It is in a ring, exactly where I told you the chemical action was. Even with my rough way of doing the experiment, if there is not too much disturbance there will always be a ring. This is a good experiment for you to make at home. Take a strip of paper, have the air in the room quiet, and lay the paper right across the middle of the flame (I must not talk while I do the experiment) — and you will find it is burnt in two places, and hardly at all in the middle. Once you have tried it a couple of times and got it neat, you will be very interested to see where the heat is, and to find that it is where the air and the fuel come together.

This is most important to us as we go on with our subject. Air is absolutely necessary for burning; and, what is more, I must have you understand that *fresh* air is necessary, or else our reasoning and our experiments will be faulty. Here is a jar of air. I put it over a candle, and at first the candle burns very nicely in it, showing that what I have said is true. But there will soon be a change. See how the flame draws upwards, then fades, and at last goes out.

And why does it go out? Not simply because it wants air, for the jar is as full now as it was before; but because it wants pure, fresh air. The jar is full of air, partly changed and partly unchanged; but it does not hold enough of the fresh air that a candle needs for burning.

These are all points that we, as young chemists, have to gather up; and if we look a little more closely into this kind of action we shall find some steps of reasoning that are extremely interesting. For instance, here is the oil lamp I showed you, an excellent lamp for our experiments — the old Argand lamp. I now make it behave like a candle [obstructing the passage of air into the centre of the flame]. There is the cotton; there is the oil rising up it; and there is the conical flame. It burns poorly, because the air is partly held back. I have let no air get to it except round the outside of the flame, and it does not burn well. I cannot let in more air from the outside, because the wick is large. But if, as Argand did so cleverly, I open a passage into the middle of the flame and let air come in there, you will see how much more beautifully it burns. And if I shut the air off, look how it smokes.

Why? We now have some very interesting points to study. We have the case of a candle burning; we have the case of a candle put out for want of air; and we now have the case of imperfect burning. This last is so interesting to us that I want you to understand it as thoroughly as you understand a candle burning in the best possible way.

I will make a great flame now, because we want the largest illustrations we can get. Here is a larger wick [burning turpentine on a ball of cotton]. All these things are the same as candles, after all. If we have larger wicks we must have a larger supply of air, or our burning will be less complete. Look at this black substance going up into the air — there is a steady stream of it. I have arranged means to carry off the imperfectly burned part, so that it shall not annoy you. Look at the soot flying off the flame. See what imperfect burning it is, because it cannot get enough air.

What is happening, then? Certain things necessary to the burning of a candle are absent, and very bad results follow. But we can see what happens to a candle when it burns in a pure and proper state of air. When I showed you that charring by the ring of flame on one side of the paper, I might also have shown you, by turning to the other side, that the burning of a candle produces the same kind of soot — charcoal, or carbon.

But before I show you that, let me explain something that is quite necessary for our purpose. Though I take a candle and give you its burning, as a general result, in the form of a flame, we must ask whether burning is always in this condition, or whether there are other conditions of flame. We shall soon discover that there are, and that they matter a great deal to us.

Perhaps the best way to illustrate this point, for us young people, is by showing a strong contrast. Here is a little gunpowder. You know gunpowder burns with a flame — we may fairly call it flame. It contains carbon and other materials which together make it burn with a flame. And here is some powdered iron, or iron filings. I intend to burn these two things together, and I have a little mortar in which I shall mix them.

(Before I go into these experiments, let me hope that none of you will do any harm by trying to repeat them for fun's sake. All these things may be used quite properly if you take care; but without care, a great deal of mischief will be done.)

Well then: here is a little gunpowder, which I put at the bottom of this little wooden vessel, and I mix the iron filings in with it. My object is to have the gunpowder set fire to the filings and burn them in the air, and so show the difference between substances that burn with a flame and substances that do not. Here is the mixture; and when I set fire to it, watch the burning, and you will see that it is of two kinds. You will see the gunpowder burning with a flame, and the filings thrown up. You will see them burning too, but without producing any flame. Each will burn in its own way. [The lecturer then ignited the mixture.]

There is the gunpowder, which burns with a flame; and there are the filings — they burn with a different kind of combustion. You see, then, these two great distinctions. And on these differences depend all the usefulness and all the beauty of the flame we use for the purpose of giving light. When we use oil, or gas, or a candle for lighting, their fitness depends entirely on these different kinds of burning.

There are such curious conditions of flame that it takes some cleverness and some nicety of judgement to tell one kind of burning from another. Here, for instance, is a powder which is very combustible, consisting, as you see, of separate little particles. It is called lycopodium, and every one of these particles can produce a vapour and produce its own flame; but to watch them burning you would imagine it was all one flame. I will set fire to a quantity now, and you will see the effect.

We saw a cloud of flame, apparently all in one body; but that rushing noise [referring to the sound made by the burning] was proof that the burning was not continuous or regular. This is the lightning of the pantomimes, and a very good imitation of it. [The experiment was repeated twice, by blowing lycopodium from a glass tube through a spirit flame.] This is not an example of burning like that of the iron filings I have been speaking of — and to those we must now return.

Editor's note: Lycopodium is a yellowish powder found in the fruit of the club moss (Lycopodium clavatum). It is used in fireworks.
