Lecture Two: Brightness of the Flame — the Air a Candle Needs, and the Water It Makes

(Part 2 of 2)

Suppose I take a candle and examine the part of it that looks brightest to our eyes. There I get these black particles, which you have already seen given off from the flame many times, and which I am now going to draw off in a different way. I will take this candle and clear away the guttering caused by the currents of air; and if I now set a glass tube so that it just dips into this luminous part — as in our first experiment, only higher up — you see the result. Instead of the white vapour you had before, you now get a black vapour. There it goes, as black as ink. It is certainly very different from the white vapour; and when we put a light to it, we find it does not burn but puts the light out.

These particles, as I said before, are simply the smoke of the candle; and that brings to mind the old occupation Dean Swift recommended to servants for their amusement — writing on the ceiling of a room with a candle. But what is that black substance? Why, it is the same carbon that exists in the candle. How does it get out of the candle? It plainly existed in the candle, or else we should not have it here.

Now I want you to follow me in this. You would hardly think that all those substances flying about London in the form of soot and blacks are the very beauty and life of the flame, and are burned in it just as those iron filings were burned here. Here is a piece of wire gauze, which will not let the flame through it; and I think you will see almost at once that when I bring it low enough to touch the part of the flame that is otherwise so bright, it quells and quenches it immediately, and lets a volume of smoke rise up.

I want you to follow me on this point: that whenever a substance burns without taking the vaporous state — as the iron filings burnt in the flame of the gunpowder — then whether it becomes liquid or stays solid, it becomes exceedingly luminous. I have taken three or four examples apart from the candle on purpose to illustrate this, because what I have to say applies to all substances, whether they burn or not: they are exceedingly bright if they keep their solid state, and it is to the presence of solid particles in the candle flame that the flame owes its brilliance.

Here is a platinum wire, a body which is not changed by heat. If I heat it in this flame, see how exceedingly luminous it becomes. I will make the flame dim, so that it gives only a little light, and yet you will see that the heat it can give that platinum wire — though far less than the heat it has itself — is able to raise the wire to a far higher state of brilliance.

This flame has carbon in it; but I will take one that has none. In that vessel there is a material, a kind of fuel — a vapour, or a gas, whichever you like to call it — with no solid particles in it. I take it because it is an example of flame burning without any solid matter whatever. And if I now put this solid substance into it, you see what an intense heat it has, and how brightly it makes the solid body glow. This is the pipe through which we bring that particular gas, which we call hydrogen, and which you shall know all about next time we meet. And here is a substance called oxygen, by means of which the hydrogen can burn. Although their mixture produces far greater heat than you can get from a candle, there is very little light.

If, however, I take a solid substance and put it in, we get an intense light. If I take a piece of lime — a substance which will not burn and will not turn to vapour with the heat, and which therefore stays solid and stays hot — you will soon see what happens about its glowing. I have here a most intense heat, produced by hydrogen burning in contact with oxygen; but as yet there is very little light. That is not for want of heat but for want of particles that can keep their solid state. Now watch when I hold this piece of lime in the flame of the hydrogen as it burns in the oxygen — see how it glows! This is the glorious limelight, which rivals the voltaic light and is almost equal to sunlight.

Here is a piece of carbon, or charcoal, which will burn and give us light in exactly the same way as if it were burnt as part of a candle. The heat in the flame of a candle breaks up the vapour of the wax and sets the carbon particles free; they rise up heated and glowing, as this is glowing now, and then pass into the air. But the particles, once burnt, never leave a candle in the form of carbon. They go off into the air as a perfectly invisible substance, which we shall learn about later on.

Editor's note: Bunsen has calculated that the temperature of the oxyhydrogen blowpipe is 8061° Centigrade. Hydrogen burning in air has a temperature of 3259° C., and coal gas in air, 2350° C.

Is it not beautiful to think that such a process is going on, and that so dirty a thing as charcoal can become so incandescent? You see it comes to this: all bright flames contain these solid particles. Everything that burns and produces solid particles — either while it is burning, as in the candle, or immediately after being burnt, as with the gunpowder and iron filings — all of these give us this glorious and beautiful light.

I will give you a few illustrations. Here is a piece of phosphorus, which burns with a bright flame. Very well; we may conclude that phosphorus produces these solid particles, either at the moment of burning or afterwards. Here is the phosphorus lit, and I cover it with this glass to keep in what is produced. What is all that smoke? That smoke consists of the very particles produced by the burning of the phosphorus.

Here again are two substances. This is chlorate of potash, and this other is sulphuret of antimony. I shall mix them a little, and then they can be set burning in a number of ways. I shall touch them with a drop of sulphuric acid, to give you an illustration of chemical action, and they will burn instantly. [The lecturer then ignited the mixture by means of sulphuric acid.] Now, from the look of things, you can judge for yourselves whether they produce solid matter in burning. I have given you the train of reasoning that lets you say whether they do or not — for what is this bright flame but the solid particles passing off?

Editor's note: The following is the action of the sulphuric acid in inflaming the mixture of sulphuret of antimony and chlorate of potassa. A portion of the latter is decomposed by the sulphuric acid into oxide of chlorine, bisulphate of potassa and perchlorate of potassa. The oxide of chlorine inflames the sulphuret of antimony, which is a combustible body, and the whole mass instantly bursts into flame.

[Figure 9: A mixture of chlorate of potash and sulphuret of antimony, touched with a drop of sulphuric acid. It bursts into flame at once, throwing off bright solid particles.]

Mr. Anderson has a very hot crucible in the furnace. I am about to throw some zinc filings into it, and they will burn with a flame like gunpowder. I make this experiment because you can make it well at home. Now, I want you to see the result of the burning of this zinc. Here it is burning — burning beautifully, I may say, like a candle. But what is all that smoke, and what are those little clouds of wool which will come to you if you cannot come to them, and make themselves felt in the form of what used to be called philosophic wool? We shall also have a quantity of that woolly matter left in the crucible.

But I will take another piece of this same zinc and make the experiment a little closer to home, so to speak. The same thing will happen here. Here is the piece of zinc; there [pointing to a jet of hydrogen] is the furnace; and we will set to work and try to burn the metal. It glows, you see: there is the burning, and there is the white substance it burns into. So if I take that flame of hydrogen as the representative of a candle, and show you a substance like zinc burning in it, you will see that this substance glowed only while the burning was going on — while it was kept hot. And if I take a flame of hydrogen and put this white substance from the zinc into it, look how beautifully it glows, and just because it is a solid substance.

Now I will take a flame like the one I had a moment ago and set the carbon particles free from it. Here is some camphine, which burns with a smoke; but if I send these particles of smoke through this pipe into the hydrogen flame, you will see them burn and become luminous, because we heat them a second time. There they are. Those are the particles of carbon lit up a second time. They are the particles you can easily see by holding a piece of paper behind them, and which, while they are in the flame, are set glowing by the heat, and, being so lit, produce this brightness. When the particles are not separated out, you get no brightness.

The flame of coal gas owes its brightness to the separating out, during burning, of these particles of carbon, which are in it just as they are in a candle. I can alter that arrangement very quickly. Here, for instance, is a bright flame of gas. Suppose I add enough air to the flame to make it all burn before those particles are set free — then I shall not have this brightness. And I can do it in this way. If I place this wire-gauze cap over the jet, as you see, and light the gas above it, it burns with a non-luminous flame, because it has plenty of air mixed with it before it burns. And if I raise the gauze, you see it does not burn below. There is plenty of carbon in the gas; but because the air can get to it and mix with it before it burns, you see how pale and blue the flame is. And if I blow on a bright gas flame, so as to consume all this carbon before it is heated to the glowing point, it will burn blue as well. [The lecturer illustrated his remarks by blowing on the gas light.] The only reason I do not get the same bright light when I blow on the flame is that the carbon meets enough air to burn it before it gets separated out in the flame in a free state. The difference is due entirely to the solid particles not being set free before the gas is burnt.

Editor's note: The "air-burner," which is of such value in the laboratory, owes its advantage to this principle. It consists of a cylindrical metal chimney covered at the top with a piece of rather coarse iron wire gauze. This is supported over an argand burner in such a way that the gas may mix in the chimney with enough air to burn the carbon and hydrogen simultaneously, so that there is no separation of carbon in the flame and no consequent deposit of soot. The flame, being unable to pass through the wire gauze, burns in a steady, nearly invisible manner above.

You will have noticed that there are certain products resulting from the burning of a candle, and that one part of these products may be considered charcoal, or soot; and that this charcoal, when burnt afterwards, produces some other product. It concerns us very much now to find out what that other product is. We have shown that something is going away; and I want you to understand how much is going up into the air. For that purpose we will have burning on a slightly larger scale.

Heated air rises from that candle, and two or three experiments will show you the ascending current. But to give you a notion of the quantity of matter that goes up this way, I will try an experiment in which I shall attempt to imprison some of the products of this burning. For this purpose I have here what boys call a fire balloon. I use it simply as a sort of measure of the result of the burning we are considering; and I am going to make a flame in the easiest and simplest way that suits my present purpose. This plate shall be the "cup" of the candle, let us say; this spirit shall be our fuel; and I am about to put this chimney over it, because that is better than letting things go at random.

[Figure 10: A fire balloon held over the chimney of a spirit flame. The hot products of the burning fill it, and it rises — a rough measure of how much matter goes up from a flame.]

Mr. Anderson will now light the fuel, and here at the top we shall get the results of the burning. What we get at the top of that tube is, generally speaking, exactly the same as what you get from the burning of a candle; but we do not get a luminous flame here, because we are using a substance that is poor in carbon.

I am going to put this balloon — not into action, because that is not my object — but to show you the effect produced by those products which rise from the candle, as they rise here from the furnace. [The balloon was held over the chimney, and immediately began to fill.] You see how ready it is to go up; but we must not let it, because it might come against those upper gas lights, and that would be very inconvenient. [The upper gas lights were turned out, at the lecturer's request, and the balloon was allowed to ascend.]

Does that not show you what a large bulk of matter is being given off? Now, all the products of that candle are going through this tube [placing a large glass tube over a candle], and you will see presently that the tube becomes quite opaque. Suppose I take another candle, put it under a jar, and set a light on the other side, just to show you what is going on. You see the sides of the jar go cloudy and the light begins to burn feebly. It is the products, you see, that make the light so dim, and the same thing makes the sides of the jar so opaque.

If you go home and take a spoon that has been out in the cold air and hold it over a candle — not so as to soot it — you will find it becomes dim, just as that jar is dim. If you can get a silver dish, or something of that sort, you will make the experiment better still. And now, just to carry your thoughts forward to the time when we next meet, let me tell you that it is water which causes the dimness; and when we meet again I will show you that we can make it take the form of a liquid without any difficulty.
