Lecture Four: Hydrogen in the Candle Burns into Water — and Oxygen, the Other Half of Water

(Part 1 of 2)

I see you are not tired of the candle yet, or I am sure you would not be interested in the subject the way you are.

When our candle was burning we found that it produced water exactly like the water we have around us; and on examining that water further we found in it that curious body hydrogen — the light substance, some of which is in this jar. We afterwards saw the burning powers of that hydrogen, and that it produced water. And I think I introduced to your notice an apparatus which I said very briefly was an arrangement of chemical force, or power, or energy, so adjusted as to bring its power to us along these wires. I said I would use that force to pull water to pieces and see what else there is in water besides hydrogen; because, you remember, when we passed the water through the iron tube we by no means got back the weight of water we put in as steam, although a very large quantity of gas came off. We have now to see what the other substance is.

So that you may understand the character and use of this instrument, let us make an experiment or two. Let us first put together some substances which we know, and then see what the instrument does to them. Here is some copper (notice the various changes it can go through), and here is some nitric acid; and you will find that this, being a strong chemical agent, acts very powerfully when I add it to the copper. It is sending off a beautiful red vapour now; but as we do not want that vapour, Mr. Anderson will hold it near the chimney for a while, so that we may have the use and the beauty of the experiment without the annoyance.

The copper I have put into the flask will dissolve. It will change the acid and the water into a blue fluid containing copper and other things, and I mean then to show you how this voltaic battery deals with it. In the meantime we will set up another kind of experiment for you to see what power the battery has. Here is a substance which is to us like water — that is to say, it contains bodies we do not yet know about, as water contains a body we do not yet know about.

I will put this solution of a salt on paper, spread it about, apply the power of the battery to it, and see what happens. Three or four important things will happen which we shall take advantage of. I lay this wetted paper on a sheet of tinfoil, which is convenient for keeping everything clean and for applying the power to advantage. And the solution, you see, is not affected at all by being put on the paper or the tinfoil, nor by anything else I have brought into contact with it so far — so it is free for us to use as regards that instrument.

But first let us make sure our instrument is in order. Here are our wires. Let us see whether it is in the state it was in last time. We can soon tell. So far, when I bring them together we have no power, because the conveyers — what we call the electrodes, the passages or ways for the electricity — are blocked. But now Mr. Anderson, by that [referring to a sudden flash at the ends of the wires], has sent me a telegram to say it is ready.

Before I begin our experiment I will get Mr. Anderson to break contact again at the battery behind me, and we will lay a platinum wire across to connect the poles; and if I find I can make a fair length of this wire glow, we shall be safe in our experiment. Now you will see the power. [The connection was established, and the wire between became red hot.] There is the power running beautifully through the wire, which I have made thin on purpose to show you that we have these powerful forces at command. And now, having that power, we will go on with it to the examination of water.

Editor's note: A solution of acetate of lead submitted to the action of the voltaic current yields lead at the negative pole and brown peroxide of lead at the positive pole. A solution of nitrate of silver, under the same circumstances, yields silver at the negative pole and peroxide of silver at the positive pole.

I have two pieces of platinum here; and if I lay them down on this piece of paper [the moistened paper on the tinfoil], you will see no action. If I take them up, there is no change you can see; the arrangement remains just as it was before. But now see what happens. If I take these two poles and put one or the other of them down separately on the platinum plates, they do nothing for me — both are perfectly without action. But if I let them both be in contact at the same moment, see what happens [a brown spot appeared under each pole of the battery]. Look at the effect: see how I have pulled something apart from the white — something brown. And I have no doubt that if I arranged it thus, and put one of the poles to the tinfoil on the other side of the paper — why, I get such a beautiful action on the paper that I am going to see whether I cannot write with it. A telegram, if you please. [The lecturer here traced the word "juvenile" on the paper with one of the terminal wires.] See there how beautifully we can get our results!

You see we have drawn something out of this solution which we did not know about before. Let us now take that flask from Mr. Anderson's hands and see what we can draw out of it. This, you know, is a liquid we have just made up from copper and nitric acid while our other experiments were going on; and though I am making this experiment in great haste and may bungle it a little, I would rather let you see me do it than prepare it beforehand.

Now, see what happens. These two platinum plates are the two ends of this apparatus — or I will make them so in a moment — and I am about to put them into that solution just as we did on the paper a moment ago. It makes no difference to us whether the solution is on paper or in a jar, so long as we bring the ends of the apparatus to it. If I put the two platinums in by themselves, they come out as clean and white as they went in [inserting them into the fluid without connecting them to the battery]. But when we bring the power to bear [the platinums were connected with the battery and dipped into the solution again], this one, you see [exhibiting one of the platinums], is turned into copper, as it were: it has become like a plate of copper; and that one [exhibiting the other] has come out quite clean. If I take the coppered piece and change sides, the copper leaves the right-hand side and comes over to the left: the plate that was coppered comes out clean, and the plate that was clean comes out coated with copper. So you see that the same copper we put into this solution we can also take out of it again by means of this instrument.

Putting that solution aside, let us now see what effect this instrument has upon water. Here are two little platinum plates which I intend to make the ends of the battery; and this (C) is a little vessel shaped so that I can take it to pieces and show you how it is built. Into these two cups (A and B) I pour mercury, which touches the ends of the wires connected to the platinum plates. Into the vessel (C) I pour some water containing a little acid — put in only to help the action along; it undergoes no change in the process. Connected to the top of the vessel is a bent glass tube (D), which may remind you of the pipe that was joined to the gun barrel in our furnace experiment, and which now passes up under the jar (F).

I have now adjusted this apparatus, and we will go on to affect the water in one way or another. In the other case I sent the water through a tube that was made red hot; now I am going to pass electricity through the contents of this vessel. Perhaps I shall boil the water; and if I do boil it I shall get steam, and you know that steam condenses when it gets cold, so you will be able to tell by that whether I am boiling the water or not. Perhaps, though, I shall not boil the water but produce some other effect. You shall have the experiment and see.

There is one wire, which I put to this side (A), and here is the other, which I put to the other side (B); and you will soon see whether any disturbance takes place. Here it is, seeming to boil up famously — but does it boil? Let us see whether what goes off is steam or not. I think you will soon see the jar (F) fill with vapour, if what rises from the water is steam. But can it be steam? Certainly not; because there it stays, you see, unchanged. There it is, standing over the water; it cannot be steam, then, but must be a permanent gas of some sort. What is it? Is it hydrogen? Is it something else? Well, we will examine it. If it is hydrogen it will burn. [The lecturer then ignited a portion of the collected gas, which burnt with an explosion.]

[Figure 19: The apparatus for pulling water apart with the battery: the vessel C holding water with a little acid, the cups A and B of mercury touching the wires, and the bent tube D carrying the gas up under the jar F.]

It is certainly something combustible, but not combustible in the way hydrogen is. Hydrogen would not have given you that noise; though the colour of the light, when the thing did burn, was like hydrogen's. This, however, will burn without any contact with the air.

That is why I have chosen this other form of apparatus, in order to point out to you the particular circumstances of this experiment. Instead of an open vessel I have taken a closed one (our battery is so beautifully active that we are even boiling the mercury, and getting everything right — not wrong, but vigorously right); and I am going to show you that this gas, whatever it may be, can burn without air, and in that respect differs from a candle, which cannot burn without air.

Our way of doing it is this. Here is a glass vessel (G) fitted with two platinum wires (I and K) through which I can apply electricity. We can put the vessel on the air pump and exhaust the air; and when the air is out we can bring it here, fasten it onto this jar (F), and let into it the gas that was formed by the action of the voltaic battery on the water — the gas we have produced by changing the water into it. For I may go as far as this and say that we have really, by that experiment, changed the water into that gas. We have not merely altered its condition; we have changed it really and truly into that gaseous substance, and all the water that was decomposed in the experiment is there.

As I screw this vessel (GH) on here (H) and get the tubes well connected, and then open the stopcocks (HHH), watch the level of the water in F and you will see the gas rise. Now I close the stopcocks, having drawn up as much as the vessel will hold; and with the gas safely carried into that chamber, I will pass an electric spark into it from this Leyden jar (L). The vessel, which is now quite clear and bright, will go dim. There will be no sound, because the vessel is strong enough to contain the explosion. [A spark was then passed through the jar, and the explosive mixture was ignited.]

Did you see that brilliant light? If I screw the vessel onto the jar again and open these stopcocks, you will see the gas rise a second time. [The stopcocks were then opened.] Those gases [referring to the gases first collected in the jar, which had just been ignited by the electric spark] have disappeared, as you see: their place is empty, and fresh gas has gone in. Water has been formed out of them. And if we repeat our operation [repeating the last experiment], I shall have another empty space, as you will see by the water rising. I always have an empty vessel after the explosion, because the gas into which the water was resolved by the battery explodes under the influence of the spark and changes back into water; and presently you will see some drops of water trickling down the sides of this upper vessel and collecting at the bottom.

Here we are dealing with water entirely, without any reference to the atmosphere. The water of the candle had the atmosphere helping to produce it; but in this way water can be produced independently of the air. Water, therefore, ought to contain that other substance which the candle takes from the air and which, combining with hydrogen, produces water.

Just now you saw that one end of this battery took hold of the copper and drew it out of the vessel holding the blue solution. It was done by this wire; and surely we may say that if the battery has such power over a metallic solution which we made and unmade, may we not find it possible to split apart the component parts of water too, and put them in this place and that place? Suppose I take the poles — the metallic ends of this battery — and see what happens with the water in this apparatus (Figure 20), where we have set the two ends far apart.

[Figure 20: The two poles of the battery set well apart in the vessel of water, each with a perforated shelf above it and a cylinder standing over that, so that the gas from each pole is collected by itself. One cylinder fills about twice as fast as the other.]

I place one here (at A) and the other there (at B); and I have little shelves with holes in them which I can set over each pole, arranged so that whatever escapes from the two ends of the battery will appear as separate gases — for you saw that the water did not become vaporous but gaseous.

The wires are now in proper connection with the vessel containing the water, and you see the bubbles rising. Let us collect these bubbles and see what they are. Here is a glass cylinder (O): I fill it with water and put it over one end (A) of the pile; and I take another (H) and put it over the other end (B). So now we have a double apparatus, with both places delivering gas. Both these jars will fill with gas. There they go — the one on the right (H) filling very rapidly, the one on the left (O) not so fast. Although I have let some bubbles escape, the action is still going on pretty regularly; and if one jar were not rather smaller than the other you would see that I have twice as much in this one (H) as in that one (O).

Both these gases are colourless; they stand over the water without condensing; they are alike in all things — in all apparent things, I mean. And here we have a chance of examining these bodies and finding out what they are. Their bulk is large and we can easily apply tests to them. I will take this jar (H) first, and I will ask you to be ready to recognise hydrogen.
