Lecture Four: Hydrogen in the Candle Burns into Water — and Oxygen, the Other Half of Water

(Part 2 of 2)

Think of all its qualities — the light gas which stood well in inverted vessels, burning with a pale flame at the mouth of the jar — and see whether this gas does not answer to all of them. If it is hydrogen it will stay here while I hold this jar upside down. [A light was then applied, and the hydrogen burnt.]

What is there now in the other jar? You know that the two together made an explosive mixture. But what can this be that we find as the other constituent in water, and which must therefore be the substance that made the hydrogen burn? We know the water we put into the vessel consisted of the two things together. We find one of them is hydrogen; what must the other be, which was in the water before the experiment and which we now have by itself?

I am going to put this lighted splinter of wood into the gas. The gas itself will not burn, but it will make the splinter burn. [The lecturer lit the end of the wood and introduced it into the jar of gas.] See how it invigorates the burning of the wood, and makes it burn far better than air would. And now you see by itself that other substance which is contained in water, and which, when the water was formed by the burning of the candle, must have been taken out of the atmosphere. What shall we call it — A, B, or C? Let us call it O — call it "oxygen": it is a very good, distinct-sounding name. This, then, is the oxygen which was present in the water, and which forms so large a part of it.

We shall now begin to understand our experiments and researches more clearly; because once we have examined these things a couple of times we shall soon see why a candle burns in air. When we have analysed water in this way — that is, separated, or electrolysed, its parts out of it — we get two volumes of hydrogen and one volume of the body that burns it. These two are represented for us in the following diagram, with their weights stated as well; and you will find that oxygen is a very heavy body compared with hydrogen. It is the other element in water.

    By weight, 1 part of hydrogen to 8 parts of oxygen makes 9 of water

        Oxygen . . . . . .  88.9
        Hydrogen . . . . .  11.1
                           ------
        Water  . . . . . . 100.0

Perhaps I had better tell you now how we get this oxygen in quantity, having shown you how we can separate it from water. Oxygen, as you will immediately imagine, exists in the atmosphere; for how else should the candle burn and produce water? Such a thing would be absolutely impossible — chemically impossible — without oxygen.

[Figure 21: The iron retort charged with black oxide of manganese, with its delivery tube, ready to be set in the fire. Made red hot, the mineral gives off oxygen.]

Can we get it out of the air? Well, there are some very complicated and difficult processes by which we can get it from the air; but we have better ones. There is a substance called the black oxide of manganese: a very black-looking mineral, but very useful, and when made red hot it gives out oxygen. Here is an iron bottle which has had some of this substance put into it, with a tube fixed to it, and a fire ready made; and Mr. Anderson will put that retort into the fire, since it is made of iron and can stand the heat.

Here is a salt called chlorate of potash, which is now made in large quantities for bleaching, for chemical and medical uses, and for fireworks and other purposes. I will take some and mix it with some of the oxide of manganese (oxide of copper or oxide of iron would do as well); and if I put these together in a retort, far less than a red heat is enough to drive the oxygen out of the mixture. I am not preparing to make much, because we only want enough for our experiments — though, as you will see in a moment, if I use too small a charge the first portion of gas will be mixed with the air already in the retort, and I shall have to sacrifice it because it will be so diluted with air. The first portion must therefore be thrown away.

You will find in this case that an ordinary spirit lamp is quite enough for me to get the oxygen, so we shall have two processes going at once for preparing it. See how freely the gas is coming over from that small portion of the mixture. We will examine it and see what its properties are.

In this way we are producing, as you will notice, a gas just like the one we had in the experiment with the battery: transparent, not dissolved by water, and showing the ordinary visible properties of the atmosphere. (As this first jar contains the air along with the first portions of oxygen set free during the preparation, we will carry it out of the way and be ready to make our experiments in a regular, dignified manner.)

And since that power of making wood or wax or anything else burn was so marked in the oxygen we got from water by means of the voltaic battery, we may expect to find the same property here. We will try it. You see the burning of a lighted taper in air — and here is its burning in this gas [lowering the taper into the jar]. See how brightly and how beautifully it burns! And you can see something more than that: you will notice that it is a heavy gas, whereas hydrogen would go up like a balloon, or even faster than a balloon when not burdened with the weight of the envelope.

[Figure 22: A lighted taper lowered into a jar of oxygen. It burns far more brightly and beautifully than it does in air.]

You may easily see that although we got twice as much hydrogen from water by volume as oxygen, it does not follow that we have twice as much by weight — because one is heavy and the other a very light gas. We have means of weighing gases and air; but without stopping to explain that, let me simply tell you what their respective weights are. The weight of a pint of hydrogen is three-quarters of a grain; the weight of the same quantity of oxygen is nearly twelve grains. That is a very great difference. The weight of a cubic foot of hydrogen is one-twelfth of an ounce; the weight of a cubic foot of oxygen is one ounce and a third. And so we might go on to masses of matter that can be weighed in a balance, and reckoned in hundredweights and tons, as you will see almost immediately.

Now, as regards this property of oxygen supporting combustion, which we can compare with air's, I will take a piece of candle to show it to you in a rough way — and the result will be rough. There is our candle burning in air: how will it burn in oxygen? I have a jar of the gas here, and I am going to put it over the candle so that you can compare the action of this gas with that of air. Why, look at it! It looks something like the light you saw at the poles of the voltaic battery. Think how vigorous that action must be! And yet, in all that action, nothing more is produced than what is produced by the burning of the candle in air. We have the same production of water, and exactly the same phenomena, when we use this gas instead of air.

But now that we have some knowledge of this new substance, we can look at it a little more closely, and satisfy ourselves that we have a good general understanding of this part of the candle's product. It is wonderful how great the supporting powers of this substance are as regards burning. Here, for instance, is a lamp which, simple though it is, is the original, I may say, of a great variety of lamps built for all sorts of purposes — for lighthouses, for microscope illumination and other uses. And if it were proposed to make it burn very brightly, you would say, "If a candle burns better in oxygen, will not a lamp do the same?" Why, so it will. Mr. Anderson will give me a tube coming from our oxygen reservoir, and I am going to apply it to this flame, which I will make burn badly on purpose beforehand. There comes the oxygen — what a combustion that makes! But if I shut it off, what becomes of the lamp? [The flow of oxygen was stopped, and the lamp fell back to its former dimness.]

It is wonderful how, by means of oxygen, we get burning accelerated. But it does not only affect the burning of hydrogen, or carbon, or the candle; it exalts all combustions of the ordinary kind. Let us take one that has to do with iron, since you have already seen iron burn a little in the air. Here is a jar of oxygen, and here is a piece of iron wire; but if it were a bar as thick as my wrist, it would burn just the same.

[Figure 23: A spiral of iron wire, lit by a piece of burning wood tied to the end, burning brilliantly in a jar of oxygen — and continuing so long as the oxygen lasts.]

I first fasten a little piece of wood to the iron; then I set the wood on fire and let them both down together into the jar. The wood is alight now, and it burns as wood should burn in oxygen; but it will soon pass its burning on to the iron. The iron is now burning brilliantly, and will go on doing so for a long time. As long as we supply oxygen, so long can we carry on the burning of the iron, until the iron is consumed.

We will put that aside now and take another substance; but we must limit our experiments, since we have not time to spare for all the illustrations you would have a right to if we had more. We will take a piece of sulphur. You know how sulphur burns in air; well, we put it into the oxygen, and you will see that whatever can burn in air can burn far more intensely in oxygen — which may lead you to think that perhaps the atmosphere owes all its power of supporting combustion to this gas. The sulphur is now burning very quietly in the oxygen; but you cannot for a moment mistake the very high and increased action that takes place when it is burnt so, instead of merely in common air.

[Figure 24: Sulphur lowered into a jar of oxygen on a wire. It burns far more intensely than it does in common air.]

I am now going to show you the burning of another substance — phosphorus. I can do it better for you here than you could do it at home. This is a very combustible substance; and if it is so combustible in air, what would you expect it to be in oxygen? I am going to show it to you not at its fullest intensity, because if I did we should almost blow the apparatus up — even now I may crack the jar, though I do not want to break things carelessly. You see how it burns in air. But what a glorious light it gives when I put it into oxygen! [Introducing the lighted phosphorus into the jar of oxygen.] There you see the solid particles going off which make that burning so brilliantly luminous.

So far we have tested this power of oxygen, and the intense burning it produces, by means of other substances. Now, for a little while longer, we must look at it in relation to hydrogen. You remember that when we let the oxygen and the hydrogen obtained from water mix and burn together, we had a little explosion. You remember, too, that when I burnt oxygen and hydrogen together in a jet, we got very little light but a great deal of heat.

I am now going to set fire to oxygen and hydrogen mixed in the proportions in which they occur in water. Here is a vessel containing one volume of oxygen and two volumes of hydrogen. This mixture is exactly the same in nature as the gas we obtained just now from the voltaic battery. It would be far too much to burn all at once, so I have arranged to blow soap bubbles with it and burn the bubbles, so that we may see by a general experiment or two how this oxygen supports the burning of the hydrogen.

First of all, let us see whether we can blow a bubble. Well, there goes the gas [causing it to issue through a tobacco pipe into some soapsuds]. Here I have a bubble. I am catching them on my hand; and you may perhaps think I am behaving oddly in this experiment, but it is to show you that we must not always trust to noise and sound, but rather to real facts. [Exploding a bubble on the palm of his hand.] I am afraid to fire a bubble at the end of the pipe, because the explosion would run back up into the jar and blow it to pieces.

This oxygen, then, will unite with the hydrogen — as you see by what happens and hear by the sound — with the utmost readiness of action; and all its powers are then taken up in neutralising the qualities of the hydrogen.

So now I think you will see the whole history of water with reference to oxygen and the air, from what has been said. Why does a piece of potassium decompose water? Because it finds oxygen in the water. What is set free when I put it in the water, as I am about to do again? It sets hydrogen free, and the hydrogen burns; but the potassium itself combines with the oxygen. This piece of potassium, in taking the water apart — water, you may say, derived from the burning of the candle — takes away the oxygen which the candle took from the air, and so sets the hydrogen free.

And if I take a piece of ice and put a piece of potassium on it, the beautiful affinities relating oxygen and hydrogen are such that the ice will absolutely set fire to the potassium. I show you this today to enlarge your ideas of these things, and so that you may see how greatly results are modified by circumstances. There is the potassium on the ice, producing a sort of volcanic action.

It will be my business when we next meet, having pointed out these anomalous actions, to show you that we meet with none of these extra and strange effects — none of these strange and injurious actions — when we are burning not merely a candle but gas in our streets, or fuel in our fireplaces, so long as we keep within the laws that Nature has laid down for our guidance.
