Lecture Five: Oxygen in the Air — What the Atmosphere Is, and Carbonic Acid

(Part 1 of 2)

We have now seen that we can produce hydrogen and oxygen from the water we obtained from the candle. The hydrogen, you know, comes from the candle; the oxygen, you believe, comes from the air. But then you have a right to ask me: "How is it that the air and the oxygen do not burn the candle equally well?" If you remember what happened when I put a jar of oxygen over a piece of candle, you will recall that the burning was of a very different kind from the burning that goes on in air. Now, why is that? It is a very important question, and one I shall try to make you understand: it bears very closely on the nature of the atmosphere, and matters a great deal to us.

We have several tests for oxygen besides the mere burning of bodies. You have seen a candle burnt in oxygen and in air; you have seen phosphorus burnt in air and in oxygen; and you have seen iron filings burnt in oxygen. But we have other tests besides these, and I am going to mention one or two in order to carry your conviction and your experience further.

Here we have a vessel of oxygen. I will show its presence to you: if I take a little spark and put it into that oxygen, you know from the experience you gained last time what will happen. If I put that spark into the jar, it will tell you whether we have oxygen here or not. Yes! We have proved it by burning.

And now here is another test for oxygen, a very curious and useful one. I have two jars full of gas, with a plate between them to stop them mixing. I take the plate away, and the gases creep one into the other. "What happens?" you say. "Together they produce no such burning as we saw with the candle." But see how the presence of oxygen is told by its association with this other substance. What a beautifully coloured gas I have obtained this way, showing me that oxygen is present!

Editor's note: The gas which is thus employed as a test for the presence of oxygen is the binoxide of nitrogen, or nitrous oxide. It is a colourless gas which, when brought into contact with oxygen, unites with it, forming hyponitric acid — the red gas referred to.

We can try this experiment in the same way by mixing common air with the test gas. Here is a jar containing air — such air as the candle would burn in — and here is a bottle containing the test gas. I let them come together over water, and you see the result: the contents of the test bottle flow into the jar of air, and I get exactly the same kind of action as before. That shows me there is oxygen in the air — the very same substance we have already obtained from the water produced by the candle.

But beyond that, how is it that the candle does not burn in air as well as it does in oxygen? We will come to that point at once. Here are two jars filled to the same height with gas; they look alike to the eye, and I really do not know at present which of them holds oxygen and which holds air, although I know they were filled with these gases beforehand. But here is our test gas, and I am going to work with the two jars in order to see whether there is any difference between them in the way they redden it.

I now turn the test gas into one of the jars, and watch what happens. There is reddening, you see; so oxygen is present. Now we will test the other jar — and you see this is not so distinctly red as the first. And, further, this curious thing happens. If I take these two gases and shake them well with water, we absorb the red gas; then, if I put in more of the test gas and shake again, we absorb more; and I can go on as long as there is any oxygen present to produce that effect. Letting in air makes no difference; but the moment I introduce water the red gas disappears. And I can go on this way, putting in more and more of the test gas, until I come to something left behind which will no longer redden with the substance that reddened both the air and the oxygen.

Why is that? You can see in a moment that it is because there is, besides oxygen, something else present, which is left behind. I will let a little more air into the jar; and if it turns red you will know that some of the reddening gas is still there, and that consequently the air left behind was not left for want of the reddening body.

Now you will begin to understand what I am about to say. You saw that when I burnt phosphorus in a jar, and the smoke produced by the phosphorus and the oxygen of the air condensed, it left a good deal of gas unburnt — just as the red gas left something untouched. There was, in fact, this gas left behind, which the phosphorus cannot touch and the reddening gas cannot touch; and this something is not oxygen, and yet is part of the atmosphere.

So that is one way of opening out air into the two things it is composed of: oxygen, which burns our candles, our phosphorus, and anything else; and this other substance, nitrogen, which will not burn them. This other part of the air is much the larger proportion, and it is a very curious body when we come to examine it. It is remarkably curious, and yet you may say it is very uninteresting. It is uninteresting in one respect: it shows no brilliant effects of burning. If I test it with a taper as I do oxygen and hydrogen, it does not burn as hydrogen does, nor does it make the taper burn as oxygen does. Try it as I will, it does neither the one thing nor the other: it will not catch fire; it will not let the taper burn; it puts out the burning of everything. In ordinary circumstances there is nothing that will burn in it. It has no smell; it is not sour; it does not dissolve in water; it is neither an acid nor an alkali; it is as indifferent to all our organs as it is possible for a thing to be.

And you might say, "It is nothing; it is not worth chemical attention; what does it do in the air?" Ah! Then come the beautiful and fine results that an observant science shows us. Suppose that instead of having nitrogen, or nitrogen and oxygen, we had pure oxygen as our atmosphere: what would become of us? You know very well that a piece of iron lit in a jar of oxygen goes on burning to the end. When you see a fire in an iron grate, imagine where the grate would go if the whole atmosphere were oxygen. The grate would burn up more powerfully than the coals — for the iron of the grate is even more combustible than the coal we burn in it. A fire put into the middle of a locomotive would be a fire in a magazine of fuel, if the atmosphere were oxygen.

The nitrogen lowers it down and makes it moderate and useful to us. And then, with all that, it carries away the fumes you have seen produced from the candle, disperses them through the whole of the atmosphere, and takes them off to places where they are wanted to perform a great and glorious purpose of good to man, for the sustenance of plants. So it does a most wonderful work — although on examining it you say, "Why, it is a perfectly indifferent thing."

This nitrogen in its ordinary state is an inactive element. No action short of the most intense electric force, and then only in the most infinitely small degree, can make the nitrogen combine directly with the other element of the atmosphere, or with the things around it. It is perfectly indifferent, and therefore, one may say, a safe substance.

But before I take you on to that result, I must tell you about the atmosphere itself. I have written on this diagram the composition of one hundred parts of atmospheric air:

                        Bulk    Weight
        Oxygen . . . .    20      22.3
        Nitrogen . . .    80      77.7
                        -----    ------
                         100     100.0

That is a true analysis of the atmosphere, so far as the quantities of oxygen and nitrogen present are concerned. By our analysis we find that 5 pints of the atmosphere contain only 1 pint of oxygen and 4 pints of nitrogen by bulk. That is our analysis of the atmosphere. It takes all that quantity of nitrogen to bring the oxygen down, so as to be able to supply the candle properly with fuel, and to give us an atmosphere our lungs can breathe healthily and safely. It is just as important to get the oxygen right for us to breathe as it is to get the atmosphere right for the burning of a fire or a candle.

But now for this atmosphere. First of all let me tell you the weight of these gases. A pint of nitrogen weighs 10 2/5 grains, and a cubic foot weighs 1 1/6 ounce. That is the weight of the nitrogen. The oxygen is heavier: a pint of it weighs 11 9/10 grains, and a cubic foot 1 1/3 ounce. A pint of air weighs about 10 7/10 grains, and a cubic foot 1 1/5 ounce.

[Figure 25: The balance, with the light copper bottle on one pan, and the pump by which measured volumes of air are forced into it. The bottle sinks as soon as the extra air is pumped in.]

You have asked me several times — and I am very glad you have — "How do you weigh gases?" I will show you; it is very simple and easily done. Here is a balance, and here is a copper bottle, made as light as we can consistent with proper strength, turned very nicely in the lathe and made perfectly airtight, with a stopcock which we can open and shut. At present it is open, so the bottle is full of air. Here is a nicely adjusted balance, in which I think the bottle in its present condition will be balanced by the weight on the other side. And here is a pump by which we can force air into the bottle; with it we will force in a certain number of volumes of air, as measured by the pump. [Twenty measures were pumped in.]

We will shut that in and put it in the balance. See how it sinks: it is much heavier than it was. By what? By the air we have forced into it with the pump. There is not a greater bulk of air, but there is the same bulk of heavier air, because we have forced more air in on top of it.

And so that you may have a fair notion in your minds of how much this air measures, here is a jar full of water. We will open the copper vessel into this jar and let the air return to its former state. All I have to do is screw them tightly together and turn the taps — and there, you see, is the bulk of the twenty pumpfuls of air I forced into the bottle. And to be sure that we have been quite correct in what we have done, we will take the bottle back to the balance; and if it is now counterpoised by the original weight, we shall be quite sure our experiment was made correctly.

[Figure 26: The copper bottle opened into a jar of water, so that the twenty pumpfuls of forced-in air can return to their ordinary state and show their true bulk.]

It is balanced. So you see we can find out the weight of the extra volumes of air forced in, and by that means we are able to establish that a cubic foot of air weighs 1 1/5 ounce.

But that small experiment will by no means convey to your mind the whole literal truth of this matter. It is wonderful how it accumulates when you come to larger volumes. This bulk of air [a cubic foot] weighs 1 1/5 ounce. What do you think of the contents of that box up there, which I have had made for the purpose? The air inside that box weighs one pound — a full pound. And I have calculated the weight of the air in this room: you would hardly imagine it, but it is above a ton. So rapidly do the weights mount up; and so important is the presence of the atmosphere, and of the oxygen and nitrogen in it, and the work it does in carrying things to and fro from place to place, and taking bad vapours off to where they will do good instead of harm.

Having given you that little illustration about the weight of air, let me show you some consequences of it. You have a right to them, because you would not understand this much without them.

Do you remember this kind of experiment? Have you ever seen it? Suppose I take a pump rather like the one I had a little while ago for forcing air into the bottle, and set it up so that I can put my hand to it. My hand moves about in the air so easily that it seems to feel nothing, and I can hardly get up enough speed by any movement of my own to be sure that the air resists it much.

[Figure 27: A hand laid on the receiver of the air pump. Once the air beneath is exhausted, the weight of the atmosphere above holds the hand fast — so fast that the pump can be pulled about by it.]

But when I put my hand here [on the air-pump receiver, which was afterwards exhausted], you see what happens. Why is my hand fastened to this place, and why am I able to pull the pump about? And see — how is it that I can hardly get my hand away? Why is this? It is the weight of the air, the weight of the air that is above.

I have another experiment here which I think will explain more about it. When the air is pumped out from underneath the bladder stretched over this glass, you will see the effect in another shape. The top is quite flat at present; but I will make a very little motion with the pump — and now look at it. See how it has gone down; see how it is bent in. You will see the bladder go in more and more, until at last I expect it will be driven in and broken by the force of the atmosphere pressing on it.

[Figure 28: A bladder stretched over the mouth of a glass. As the air beneath is pumped away, the atmosphere presses the bladder deeper and deeper in, until at last it bursts.]

[The bladder at last broke with a loud report.] Now, that was done entirely by the weight of the air pressing on it, and you can easily understand how. The particles piled up in the atmosphere stand on each other, as these five cubes do. You can easily see that four of these five cubes rest on the bottom one, and if I take that away the others will all sink down. So it is with the atmosphere: the air above is held up by the air beneath; and when the air is pumped away from underneath, the change occurs that you saw when I put my hand on the air pump, and that you saw with the bladder — and that you shall see better here.

I have tied a piece of sheet rubber over this jar, and I am now going to take the air out of the inside. If you watch the rubber — which acts as a partition between the air below and the air above — you will see, as I pump, how the pressure shows itself. See where it is going. I can actually put my hand into the jar; and yet this result is caused only by the great and powerful action of the air above. How beautifully it shows this curious circumstance!

Here is something you can have a pull at when I have finished today. It is a little apparatus of two hollow brass hemispheres, closely fitted together, with a pipe and a cock connected to it through which we can exhaust the air inside. Easily as the two halves come apart while the air is left in them, you will see, when we exhaust it presently, that no two of you will have the power to pull them apart. Every square inch of surface in the area of that vessel sustains fifteen pounds by weight, or nearly so, when the air is taken out; and you may try your strength presently and see whether you can overcome that pressure of the atmosphere.

Here is another very pretty thing — the boys' sucker, only refined by the scientist. We young ones have a perfect right to take toys and make them into science, seeing that nowadays we are turning science into toys. Here is a sucker, only made of rubber. If I clap it on the table, you see at once that it holds. Why does it hold? I can slide it about; and yet if I try to pull it up, it seems as if it would pull the table with it. I can move it easily from place to place, but only when I bring it to the edge of the table can I get it off. It is held down by nothing but the pressure of the atmosphere above.

We have a couple of them; and if you take these two and press them together, you will see how firmly they stick. Indeed, we may use them as they are meant to be used — stuck against windows or walls, where they will stay for an evening and serve to hang anything on that you want.

I think, however, that you boys ought to be shown experiments you can make at home; so here is a very pretty one illustrating the pressure of the atmosphere. Here is a tumbler of water. Suppose I asked you to turn that tumbler upside down so that the water should not fall out — and not to hold it in with your hand, but simply by using the pressure of the atmosphere. Could you do it? Take a wine glass, either quite full or half full of water, put a flat card on the top, turn it upside down, and see what becomes of the card and of the water. The air cannot get in, because the water, by its capillary attraction round the edge, keeps it out.
