Lecture Five: Oxygen in the Air — What the Atmosphere Is, and Carbonic Acid

(Part 2 of 2)

I think this will give you a correct notion of what you might call the materiality of the air; and when I tell you that the box holds a pound of it and this room more than a ton, you will begin to think that air is something very serious.

I will make another experiment to convince you of this positive resistance. There is that beautiful experiment of the popgun, made so well and so easily out of a quill or a tube or anything of that kind. We take a slice of potato, say, or an apple, and take the tube and cut out a pellet, as I have done now, and push it to one end. I have made that end tight; and now I take another piece and put it in. That will confine the air inside the tube perfectly and completely for our purpose; and I shall now find it absolutely impossible, by any force of mine, to drive that little pellet right up to the other. It cannot be done. I may compress the air to a certain extent, but if I go on pressing, then long before it reaches the second pellet the confined air will drive the front one out with a force something like that of gunpowder — for gunpowder depends partly on the same action you see illustrated here.

The other day I saw an experiment which pleased me very much, and which I thought would serve our purpose here. (I ought to have held my tongue for four or five minutes before beginning it, because it depends on my lungs for its success.) By the proper application of air, I expect to be able to drive this egg out of one cup into the other by the force of my breath. But if I fail, it is in a good cause; and I do not promise success, because I have been talking more than I should have to make the experiment succeed.

[The lecturer here tried the experiment, and succeeded in blowing the egg from one egg cup to the other.]

You see that the air I blow goes downwards between the egg and the cup and makes a blast under the egg, and is thus able to lift a heavy thing — for a whole egg is a very heavy thing for air to lift. If you want to make the experiment, you had better boil the egg quite hard first, and then with a little care you may very safely try to blow it from one cup to the other.

I have kept you long enough on this property of the weight of air, but there is another thing I should like to mention. You saw the way in which, in the popgun, I was able to drive the second piece of potato half or two-thirds of an inch before the first piece started, by virtue of the elasticity of the air — just as I pressed the particles of air into the copper bottle with the pump. Now, this depends on a wonderful property in air, namely its elasticity, and I should like to give you a good illustration of it.

Take anything that confines air properly, such as this membrane, which can also contract and expand and so give us a measure of the air's elasticity; and confine a certain portion of air in this bladder. Then, if we take the atmosphere off from the outside of it — just as in those other cases we put pressure on — if we take the pressure off, you will see how it goes on expanding and expanding, larger and larger, until it fills the whole of this bell jar. That shows you the wonderful property of air: its elasticity, its compressibility and its expansibility, to an exceedingly large extent — which is very essential for the purposes and services it performs in the economy of creation.

We will now turn to another very important part of our subject, remembering that we have examined the candle in its burning and found that it gives rise to various products. We have the products of soot, of water, and of something else you have not yet examined. We have collected the water but have let the other things go into the air. Let us now examine some of those other products.

Here is an experiment which I think will help you partly in this. We will put our candle there and place a chimney over it, so. I think my candle will go on burning, because the air passage is open at the bottom and at the top. In the first place you see the moisture appearing — you know about that. It is water produced from the candle by the action of the air on its hydrogen. But besides that, something is going out at the top. It is not moisture; it is not water; it is not condensable; and yet, after all, it has very singular properties. You will find that the air coming out of the top of our chimney is nearly enough to blow out the light I am holding to it; and if I set the light fairly against the current, it will blow it right out. You will say that is just as it should be — and I suppose you think it ought to happen, because nitrogen does not support burning and ought to put the candle out, since a candle will not burn in nitrogen.

[Figure 29: A candle burning under a chimney open at top and bottom. The current issuing from the top will blow out a light held against it.]

But is there nothing there besides nitrogen? I must anticipate here — that is to say, I must use my own knowledge to give you the means we adopt for finding these things out and examining gases like these. I will take an empty bottle — here is one — and if I hold it over this chimney I shall get the burning of the candle below sending its results up into the bottle. We shall soon find that this bottle contains not merely an air that is bad as regards the burning of a taper put into it, but an air with other properties too.

Let me take a little quicklime and pour some common water onto it — the commonest water will do. I stir it a moment, then pour it onto a piece of filter paper in a funnel, and we shall very quickly have clear water running into the bottle below, as I have here. I have plenty of this water in another bottle; but I should like to use the limewater that was prepared in front of you, so that you may see what its uses are.

If I take some of this beautiful clear limewater and pour it into the jar that has collected the air from the candle, you will see a change come about. Do you see that the water has become quite milky? Notice that this will not happen with air alone. Here is a bottle filled with air; and if I put a little limewater into it, neither the oxygen nor the nitrogen nor anything else in that quantity of air will make any change in the limewater. It stays perfectly clear, and no amount of shaking that quantity of limewater with that quantity of ordinary air will cause any change. But if I take this bottle of limewater and hold it so as to bring the general products of the candle into contact with it, in a very short time we shall have it milky.

There is the chalk — the lime we used in making the limewater, combined with something that came from the candle: that other product which we are in search of, and which I want to tell you about today. It is a substance made visible to us by its action, and that action is not the action of the limewater on the oxygen, nor on the nitrogen, nor on the water itself: it is something new to us from the candle. And this white powder, produced by the limewater and the vapour from the candle, looks very much like whitening or chalk; and when it is examined, it does prove to be exactly the same substance as whitening or chalk.

So we are led to observe the various circumstances of this experiment, and to trace this production of chalk to its several causes, so as to give us true knowledge of the nature of the candle's burning — and to find that the substance issuing from the candle is exactly the same substance that would issue from a retort if I put some chalk into it with a little moisture and made it red hot. You would find exactly the same substance coming from it as from the candle.

But we have a better way of getting this substance, and in greater quantity, so that we can establish what its general characters are. We find this substance in very great abundance in a multitude of cases where you would least expect it. All limestones contain a great deal of this gas which issues from the candle, and which we call carbonic acid — the gas we should now call carbon dioxide. All chalks, all shells, all corals contain a great quantity of this curious air. We find it fixed in these stones; and for that reason Dr. Black called it "fixed air," finding it in fixed things like marble and chalk. He called it fixed air because it lost its quality of air and took on the condition of a solid body.

We can easily get this air out of marble. Here is a jar containing a little muriatic acid, and here is a taper which, if I put it into that jar, will show only the presence of common air. There is pure air right down to the bottom, you see; the jar is full of it. Here is a substance — marble, a very beautiful and superior marble — and if I put these pieces of marble into the jar, a great boiling apparently goes on. That, however, is not steam: it is a gas rising up. And if I now search the jar with a candle, I shall get exactly the same effect on the taper as I got from the air issuing from the end of the chimney over the burning candle. It is exactly the same action, caused by the very same substance that came from the candle; and in this way we can get carbonic acid in great abundance — we have nearly filled the jar already.

We also find that this gas is not only contained in marble. Here is a vessel in which I have put some common whitening — chalk which has been washed in water and freed of its coarser particles, and so supplied to the plasterer as whitening. Here is a large jar containing this whitening and water; and I have here some strong sulphuric acid, which is the acid you might have to use if you made these experiments. (Only, in using this acid with limestone, the body produced is an insoluble substance, whereas muriatic acid produces a soluble one that does not thicken the water so much.)

You may wonder why I take this kind of apparatus to show the experiment. I do it because you may repeat in a small way what I am about to do in a large one. You will get just the same kind of action; and I am evolving in this large jar carbonic acid, exactly the same in its nature and properties as the gas we obtained from the burning of the candle in the atmosphere. And no matter how different the two methods by which we prepare this carbonic acid, you will see, when we get to the end of our subject, that it is all exactly the same, whether prepared in the one way or the other.

Editor's note: Marble is a compound of carbonic acid and lime. The muriatic acid, being the stronger of the two, takes the place of the carbonic acid, which escapes as a gas, the residue forming muriate of lime, or chloride of calcium.

We will now go on to the next experiment about this gas. What is its nature? Here is one of the vessels full, and we will try it by combustion, as we have tried so many other gases. You see it is not combustible, nor does it support combustion. Neither, as we know, does it dissolve much in water, because we collect it over water very easily. Then you know it has an effect on limewater and turns it white; and when it does turn white in that way, it becomes one of the constituents that make carbonate of lime, or limestone.

The next thing I must show you is that it really does dissolve a little in water, and is therefore unlike oxygen and hydrogen in that respect. Here is an apparatus by which we can produce the solution. In the lower part is marble and acid, and in the upper part cold water. The valves are arranged so that the gas can get from one to the other. I will set it going now, and you can see the gas bubbling up through the water as it has been doing all night long; and by this time we shall find we have this substance dissolved in the water. If I take a glass and draw off some of the water, I find it tastes a little acid in the mouth: it is impregnated with carbonic acid. And if I now apply a little limewater to it, that will give us a test of its presence. This water will make the limewater turbid and white, which is proof that carbonic acid is there.

Then it is a very weighty gas — heavier than the atmosphere. I have put their respective weights at the lower part of this table, along with the weights of the other gases we have been examining, for comparison:

                          Pint            Cubic foot
        Hydrogen . . .    3/4 grain       1/12 ounce
        Oxygen . . . .   11 9/10  "       1 1/2   "
        Nitrogen . . .   10 1/10  "       1 1/4   "
        Air  . . . . .   10 7/16  "       1 3/8   "
        Carbonic acid    16 1/3   "       1 9/10  "

A pint of it weighs 16 1/3 grains, and a cubic foot weighs 1 9/10 ounce — almost two ounces. You can see by many experiments that this is a heavy gas. Suppose I take a glass containing nothing but air, and from this vessel of carbonic acid I try to pour a little of the gas into that glass. I wonder whether any has gone in or not. I cannot tell by the look of it, but I can this way [introducing the taper]. Yes, there it is, you see; and if I examined it with limewater I should find it by that test too.

I will take this little bucket and let it down into the well of carbonic acid — and indeed we too often have real wells of carbonic acid. Now, if there is any carbonic acid there, I must have reached it by this time, and it will be in this bucket, which we will examine with a taper. There it is, you see: it is full of carbonic acid.

[Figure 30: A little bucket let down into the jar — the "well" of carbonic acid — and drawn up again. A taper held in it is at once put out, showing what the bucket has brought up.]

There is another experiment by which I will show you its weight. Here is a jar hung at one end of a balance, and it is now in equipoise; but when I pour this carbonic acid into the jar on the side that now contains air, you will see it sink at once, because of the carbonic acid I have poured in. And now, if I examine this jar with a lighted taper, I shall find that the carbonic acid has fallen into it and that it no longer has any power of supporting combustion. If I blow a soap bubble, which of course will be filled with air, and let it fall into this jar of carbonic acid, it will float.

[Figure 31: A soap bubble, and a little balloon of air, floating midway down a jar of carbonic acid — held up by nothing but the greater weight of the gas beneath them.]

But first of all I will take one of these little balloons filled with air. I am not quite sure where the carbonic acid is; we will just sound the depth and see whereabouts its level lies. There, you see, we have the bladder floating on the carbonic acid; and if I evolve some more of the gas, the bladder will be lifted higher. There it goes — the jar is nearly full. And now I will see whether I can blow a soap bubble and float it the same way. [The lecturer here blew a soap bubble and let it fall into the jar of carbonic acid, where it floated midway.] It is floating, just as the balloon floated, by virtue of the greater weight of the carbonic acid compared with air.

And now, having given you so far the history of carbonic acid — its sources in the candle, and its physical properties and weight — when we next meet I shall show you what it is composed of, and where it gets its elements from.
