Lecture Six: Carbon and Coal Gas — Breathing, and How Like a Candle It Is

(Part 1 of 2)

A lady who honours me by her presence at these lectures has put me under a further obligation by sending me these two candles from Japan, which I presume are made of that substance I mentioned in an earlier lecture. You see they are even more highly ornamented than the French candles, and I suppose, judging by their appearance, that they are candles of luxury. They have a remarkable peculiarity about them, namely a hollow wick — that beautiful feature which Argand introduced into the lamp and made so valuable.

To those who receive such presents from the East I may just say that this and similar materials gradually undergo a change which gives their surface a dull, dead look; but they can easily be restored to their original beauty if the surface is rubbed with a clean cloth or a silk handkerchief, so as to polish away the little roughness. That brings the colours back. I have rubbed one of these candles, and you can see the difference between it and the other, which has not been polished but could be restored by the same process. Notice too that these moulded candles from Japan are made more conical than the moulded candles of this part of the world.

When we last met I told you a good deal about carbonic acid. We found by the limewater test that when the vapour from the top of the candle or lamp was received into bottles and tested with that solution of limewater — whose composition I explained to you, and which you can make for yourselves — we got that white opacity which was in fact calcareous matter, like shells and corals and many of the rocks and minerals of the earth. But I have not yet told you fully and clearly the chemical history of this substance, carbonic acid, as we get it from the candle, and I must now take that subject up again.

We have seen the products and the nature of them as they issue from the candle. We have traced the water to its elements, and now we have to see where the elements of the carbonic acid supplied by the candle come from. A few experiments will show this.

You remember that when a candle burns badly it produces smoke, but that when it is burning well there is no smoke. And you know that the brightness of the candle is due to this smoke becoming ignited. Here is an experiment to prove it: so long as the smoke stays in the flame of the candle and is set glowing, it gives a beautiful light and never appears to us as black particles.

I will light some fuel that is extravagant in its burning — a little turpentine on a sponge will serve our purpose. You see the smoke rising from it and floating off into the air in large quantities; and remember, the carbonic acid we get from the candle comes from smoke like that. To make it plain to you, I will put this turpentine burning on the sponge into a flask where I have plenty of oxygen, the rich part of the atmosphere — and you see now that the smoke is all consumed.

That is the first part of our experiment; and now, what follows? The carbon which you saw flying off from the turpentine flame into the air is now entirely burnt in this oxygen; and we shall find that by this rough and temporary experiment we get exactly the same conclusion and the same result as we had from the burning of the candle. The reason I make the experiment in this way is solely that I may keep the steps of our demonstration so simple that you can never for a moment lose the train of reasoning, if only you pay attention. All the carbon that is burned in oxygen, or in air, comes out as carbonic acid; while the particles that are not so burned show you the second substance in the carbonic acid — namely the carbon: the body that made the flame so bright while there was plenty of air, but which was thrown off in excess when there was not oxygen enough to burn it.

I have also to show you a little more distinctly the history of carbon and oxygen in their union to make carbonic acid. You are better able to understand this now than before, and I have prepared three or four experiments by way of illustration.

This jar is filled with oxygen, and here is some carbon which has been put into a crucible to be made red hot. I keep my jar dry, and I venture to give you a result which is imperfect in some degree, so that I can make the experiment brighter. I am about to put the oxygen and the carbon together. That this is carbon — common charcoal, powdered — you will see from the way it burns in the air [letting some of the red-hot charcoal fall out of the crucible]. Now I am going to burn it in oxygen gas: look at the difference. From a distance it may look to you as though it were burning with a flame, but it is not. Every little piece of charcoal is burning as a spark; and while it burns so it is producing carbonic acid. I particularly want these two or three experiments to point out something I shall dwell on more distinctly by and by: that carbon burns in this way, and not as a flame.

Instead of taking many small particles of carbon to burn, I will take a rather large piece, which will let you see the shape and size and trace the effects very clearly. Here is the jar of oxygen, and here is the piece of charcoal, to which I have fastened a little piece of wood that I can set alight, so as to start the burning — which I could not conveniently do otherwise. You see the charcoal burning now, but not with a flame. (Or if there is a flame, it is the smallest possible one, and I know its cause: the formation of a little carbonic oxide — what is now called carbon monoxide — close on the surface of the carbon.) It goes on burning, you see, slowly producing carbonic acid by the union of this carbon, or charcoal — the terms are equivalent — with the oxygen.

Here is another piece of charcoal, a piece of bark, which has the quality of being blown to pieces, exploding as it burns. By the effect of the heat we shall reduce the lump of carbon to particles that fly off; and still every particle, just like the whole mass, burns in this peculiar way: it burns as a coal, and not as a flame. You see a multitude of little burnings going on, but no flame. I do not know a finer experiment than this for showing that carbon burns with a spark.

Here, then, is carbonic acid formed from its elements. It is produced at once; and if we examined it with limewater you would see that we have the same substance I described to you before. By putting together 6 parts of carbon by weight (whether it comes from the flame of a candle or from powdered charcoal) and 16 parts of oxygen by weight, we get 22 parts of carbonic acid; and, as we saw last time, 22 parts of carbonic acid combined with 28 parts of lime produce common carbonate of lime. If you were to examine an oyster shell and weigh its component parts, you would find that every 50 parts gave 6 of carbon and 16 of oxygen, combined with 28 of lime. However, I do not want to trouble you with these minutiae; it is only the general science of the matter that we can go into now.

See how finely the carbon is dissolving away [pointing to the lump of charcoal burning quietly in the jar of oxygen]. You might say the charcoal is actually dissolving in the air round about it; and if it were perfectly pure charcoal, which we can easily prepare, there would be no residue at all. When we have a perfectly cleansed and purified piece of carbon, no ash is left. The carbon burns as a solid dense body which heat alone cannot change as to its solidity — and yet it passes away into a vapour that never condenses into a solid or a liquid under ordinary circumstances. And what is more curious still is the fact that the oxygen does not change in its bulk by the dissolving of the carbon in it. The bulk is just the same at the end as at the beginning; only it has become carbonic acid.

There is another experiment I must give you before you are fully acquainted with the general nature of carbonic acid. Being a compound body, consisting of carbon and oxygen, carbonic acid is a body we ought to be able to take apart. And so we can. As we did with water, so we can with carbonic acid: take the two parts asunder.

The simplest and quickest way is to act on the carbonic acid with a substance that can draw the oxygen out of it and leave the carbon behind. You remember that I took potassium and put it on water, or on ice, and you saw that it could take the oxygen away from the hydrogen. Now suppose we do something of the same kind here with the carbonic acid.

You know carbonic acid is a heavy gas. I will not test it with limewater, as that would interfere with our later experiments; but I think its heaviness and its power of putting flame out will be enough for our purpose. I introduce a flame into the gas, and you will see whether it goes out. You see the light is extinguished. Indeed, the gas may even put out phosphorus, which, as you know, burns pretty strongly. Here is a piece of phosphorus heated to a high degree. I put it into the gas, and you see the light is put out — though it will take fire again in the air, because there it re-enters into combustion.

Now let me take a piece of potassium, a substance which even at ordinary temperatures can act on carbonic acid — though not enough for our present purpose, because it soon gets covered with a protective coat. But if we warm it up to the burning point in air, as we have a fair right to do, and as we did with the phosphorus, you will see that it can burn in carbonic acid; and if it burns, it will burn by taking oxygen, so that you will see what is left behind. I am going to burn this potassium in the carbonic acid as a proof that oxygen exists in the carbonic acid. [In the preliminary process of heating, the potassium exploded.]

Sometimes we get an awkward piece of potassium that explodes, or something like it, when it burns. I will take another piece; and now that it is heated I put it into the jar, and you see that it burns in the carbonic acid — not as well as it does in air, because in carbonic acid the oxygen is combined; but it does burn, and it takes the oxygen away. If I now put this potassium into water, I find that besides the potash formed (which you need not trouble about) there is a quantity of carbon produced.

I have made the experiment here in a very rough way; but I assure you that if I made it carefully, giving a day to it instead of five minutes, we should get the full proper amount of charcoal left in the spoon, or wherever the potassium had been burnt, so that there could be no doubt about the result. Here, then, is the carbon obtained from the carbonic acid, as a common black substance; so you have the entire proof of the nature of carbonic acid as consisting of carbon and oxygen. And now I may tell you that whenever carbon burns under ordinary circumstances, it produces carbonic acid.

Suppose I take this piece of wood and put it into a bottle with limewater. I might shake that limewater up with the wood and the air as long as I pleased, and it would still stay clear, as you see. But suppose I burn the piece of wood in the air of that bottle. Of course you know I get water. Do I get carbonic acid? [The experiment was performed.] There it is, you see — that is to say, the carbonate of lime which results from carbonic acid; and that carbonic acid must have been formed from the carbon that comes from the wood, or from the candle, or from anything else.

Indeed, you have often tried a very pretty experiment yourselves by which you can see the carbon in wood. If you take a piece of wood, half burn it, and then blow it out, you have carbon left. There are things that do not show carbon in this way. A candle does not show it, but it contains carbon.

Here also is a jar of coal gas, which produces carbonic acid abundantly. You do not see the carbon, but we can soon show it to you. I will light it, and as long as there is any gas in this cylinder it will go on burning. You see no carbon, but you see a flame; and because the flame is bright, it will lead you to guess that there is carbon in it. But I will show it to you by another process. I have some of the same gas in another vessel, mixed with a body that will burn the hydrogen of the gas but will not burn the carbon. I light them with a burning taper, and you see that the hydrogen is consumed but the carbon is not: it is left behind as a dense black smoke. I hope that from these three or four experiments you will learn to see when carbon is present, and to understand what the products of combustion are when gas or any other body is thoroughly burned in the air.

Before we leave the subject of carbon, let us make a few experiments and remarks about its wonderful condition as regards ordinary burning. I have shown you that carbon in burning burns only as a solid body — and yet you see that after it is burnt it ceases to be a solid. There are very few fuels that behave like this. In fact it is only that great source of fuel, the carbonaceous series — the coals, charcoals and woods — that can do it. I do not know that there is any elementary substance besides carbon that burns under these conditions; and if it had not been so, what would have become of us?

Suppose all fuel had been like iron, which when it burns burns into a solid substance. We could not then have such a fire as you have in this fireplace. Here also is another kind of fuel which burns very well — as well as carbon, if not better; so well, indeed, that it takes fire of itself when it is in the air, as you see [breaking a tube full of lead pyrophorus]. This substance is lead, and you see how wonderfully combustible it is. It is very finely divided, and it is like a heap of coals in a fireplace: the air can get to its surface and inside it, and so it burns.

But why does it not burn in that way now, when it is lying in a mass? [emptying the contents of the tube in a heap onto a plate of iron.] Simply because the air cannot get to it. Though it can produce a great heat — the great heat we want in our furnaces and under our boilers — still, what is produced cannot get away from the portion that remains unburnt underneath; and so that portion is kept from coming into contact with the atmosphere and cannot be consumed.

How different that is from carbon. Carbon burns in just the same way as this lead does, and so gives an intense fire in the furnace, or wherever you choose to burn it; but then the body produced by its burning passes away, and the carbon that remains is left clear. I showed you how the carbon went on dissolving in the oxygen, leaving no ash; whereas here [pointing to the heap of pyrophorus] we actually have more ash than fuel, for it is heavier by the amount of oxygen that has united with it.

So you see the difference between carbon and lead, or iron; and it is carbon that gives us so wonderful a result in our use of fuel, whether for light or for heat. If the product of burning carbon went off as a solid body, the room would have been filled with an opaque substance, as it was in the case of the phosphorus; but when carbon burns, everything passes up into the atmosphere. Before the burning it is in a fixed, almost unchangeable condition; afterwards it is in the form of a gas which it is very difficult — though we have succeeded — to produce in a solid or liquid state.

Now I must take you to a very interesting part of our subject: the relation between the burning of a candle and that living kind of burning which goes on inside us. In every one of us there is a living process of combustion going on very like that of a candle, and I must try to make that plain to you. It is not merely true in a poetical sense, the relation of the life of man to a taper; and if you will follow me, I think I can make it clear.

To make the relation very plain I have devised a little apparatus which we can soon build up in front of you. Here is a board with a groove cut in it, and I can close the groove at the top with a little cover. I can then continue the groove as a channel with a glass tube at each end, so that there is a free passage all the way through. Suppose I take a taper or candle — and we can be liberal now in our use of the word "candle," since we understand what it means — and place it in one of the tubes. It will go on burning very well, as you see. You will notice that the air which feeds the flame passes down the tube at one end, goes along the horizontal tube, and rises up the tube at the other end where the taper is placed.
