Lecture Six: Carbon and Coal Gas — Breathing, and How Like a Candle It Is

(Part 2 of 2)

[Figure 32: The board with a groove cut in it, closed by a cover and continued by a glass tube at each end. A taper burns in one tube; the air feeding it comes down the other tube and along the channel between.]

If I stop the opening through which the air enters, I stop the burning, as you see. I cut off the supply of air, and the candle goes out.

But now, what will you think of this? In an earlier experiment I showed you the air going from one burning candle to a second candle. If I took the air coming from another candle and sent it down by some elaborate arrangement into this tube, I should put this burning candle out. But what will you say when I tell you that my breath will put that candle out? I do not mean by blowing at all, but simply that the nature of my breath is such that a candle cannot burn in it.

I will now hold my mouth over the opening, and without blowing the flame in any way I will let no air into the tube except what comes from my mouth. You see the result. I did not blow the candle out; I merely let the air I breathed out pass into the opening, and the light went out for want of oxygen and for no other reason. Something or other — namely my lungs — had taken the oxygen out of the air, and there was none left to supply the candle's burning. I think it is very pretty to see the time it takes before the bad air I breathe into this end of the apparatus reaches the candle. The candle goes on burning at first; but as soon as the air has had time to get there, out it goes.

And now I will show you another experiment, because this is an important part of our science. Here is a jar containing fresh air, as you can tell from the fact that a candle or a gas light burns in it. I close it up for a little while, and by means of a pipe I get my mouth over it so that I can breathe the air in. By holding it over water, in the way you see, I am able to draw this air up (supposing the cork to be quite tight), take it into my lungs, and send it back into the jar.

[Figure 33: The jar of fresh air standing over water, with a pipe by which the lecturer can draw the air up into his lungs and breathe it back again into the jar, to be tested afterwards.]

We can then examine it and see the result. You will notice that I first take the air up and then send it back, as you can tell from the rise and fall of the water; and now, by putting a taper into the air, you will see what state it is in from the light going out. Even one breath, you see, has completely spoiled this air, so that it is no use my trying to breathe it a second time.

Now you understand the grounds for objecting to many of the arrangements in the houses of the poorer classes, where the air is breathed over and over again for want of a supply — for want of proper ventilation enough to produce a good result. You see how bad the air becomes from a single breathing, so you can easily understand how essential fresh air is to us.

To carry this a little further, let us see what happens with limewater. Here is a globe holding a little limewater, with its pipes so arranged as to give access to the air inside, so that we can find out the effect of breathed and unbreathed air upon it. I can either draw air in through A, so that the air feeding my lungs goes through the limewater; or I can force the air out of my lungs through the tube B, which goes to the bottom, and so show its effect on the limewater.

[Figure 34: The globe of limewater with two tubes, A and B. Through A the lecturer draws outside air in through the water to his lungs; through B he blows his breath down through the water.]

You will notice that however long I draw the outside air through the limewater and into my lungs, I shall produce no effect on the water — it will not make the limewater turbid. But if I send the air from my lungs through the limewater several times in succession, you see how white and milky it becomes, showing the effect that breathed-out air has had on it. And now you begin to know that the atmosphere which we have spoiled by breathing is spoiled by carbonic acid, for here you see it in contact with the limewater.

I have here two bottles, one containing limewater and the other common water, with tubes passing into them and connecting them. The apparatus is very rough, but useful all the same.

[Figure 35: Two bottles joined by tubes, one holding limewater and the other common water, arranged so that the breath drawn in passes through one and the breath sent out passes through the other.]

If I take these two bottles, breathing in here and out there, the arrangement of the tubes will stop the air going backwards. The air coming in goes to my mouth and lungs, and on going out passes through the limewater; so I can go on breathing and making an experiment which is very refined in its nature and very good in its results. You will notice that the good air has done nothing to the limewater; in the other case nothing has come to the limewater but my breath — and you see the difference between the two.

Let us now go a little further. What is all this process going on inside us, which we cannot do without either day or night, and which is so provided for by the Author of all things that He has arranged for it to be independent of our will? If we hold back our breathing, as we can to a certain extent, we should destroy ourselves. When we are asleep, the organs of breathing and the parts associated with them still go on with their work — so necessary to us is this process of respiration, this contact of air with the lungs.

I must tell you in the briefest possible way what this process is. We consume food; the food goes through that strange set of vessels and organs inside us and is brought to various parts of the system, particularly the digestive parts. The portion so changed is carried through our lungs by one set of vessels, while the air we breathe in and out is drawn into and thrown out of the lungs by another set; so that the air and the food come close together, separated only by an exceedingly thin surface. The air can thus act upon the blood, producing precisely the same kind of results as we have seen in the case of the candle.

The candle combines with parts of the air, forming carbonic acid and giving off heat. So in the lungs this curious, wonderful change is taking place: the air entering combines with the carbon — not carbon in a free state, but carbon placed ready for action at that moment — makes carbonic acid, and is thrown out into the atmosphere. And so this singular result follows: we may look upon our food as fuel.

Let me take that piece of sugar, which will serve my purpose. It is a compound of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, like a candle in containing the same elements, though not in the same proportions. The proportions are these:

        Sugar
            Carbon . . . . . 72
            Hydrogen . . . . 11  }  together 99 — exactly
            Oxygen . . . . . 88  }  the proportions of water

This is indeed a very curious thing, and worth remembering: the oxygen and hydrogen are in exactly the proportions that form water, so that sugar may be said to be compounded of 72 parts of carbon and 99 parts of water. And it is the carbon in the sugar that combines with the oxygen brought in by the air in the process of respiration — so making us like candles, producing these actions, this warmth, and far more wonderful results besides, for the sustenance of the system, by a most beautiful and simple process.

To make this more striking still, I will take a little sugar; or, to hasten the experiment, I will use some syrup, which is about three-quarters sugar and a little water. If I put a little oil of vitriol on it, it takes the water away and leaves the carbon as a black mass. [The lecturer mixed the two together.] You see how the carbon is coming out; and before long we shall have a solid mass of charcoal, all of which has come out of sugar. Sugar, as you know, is food; and here we have an absolutely solid lump of carbon where you would never have expected it.

And if I arrange things so as to oxidise the carbon of the sugar, we shall get a much more striking result. Here is sugar, and here I have an oxidiser — a quicker one than the atmosphere; so we shall oxidise this fuel by a process different in form from respiration, though not different in kind. It is the burning of the carbon by contact with the oxygen which the body has supplied to it. If I set this going at once, you will see combustion produced. Just what happens in my lungs — taking in oxygen from another source, namely the atmosphere — takes place here by a more rapid process.

You will be astonished when I tell you what this curious play of carbon comes to. A candle will burn some four, five, six or seven hours. What, then, must be the daily amount of carbon going up into the air as carbonic acid! What a quantity of carbon must go from each of us in breathing! What a wonderful change of carbon must take place under these circumstances of burning, or of breathing!

A man in twenty-four hours converts as much as seven ounces of carbon into carbonic acid; a milk cow will convert seventy ounces, and a horse seventy-nine ounces, solely by the act of breathing. That is, the horse in twenty-four hours burns seventy-nine ounces of charcoal, or carbon, in his organs of respiration, to supply his natural warmth in that time. All warm-blooded animals get their warmth this way, by the conversion of carbon — not carbon in a free state, but in a state of combination.

And what an extraordinary notion this gives us of the alterations going on in our atmosphere. As much as 5,000,000 pounds, or 548 tons, of carbonic acid is formed by respiration in London alone in twenty-four hours. And where does it all go? Up into the air. If the carbon had been like the lead I showed you, or like iron, which in burning produces a solid substance, what would happen? Burning could not go on. As charcoal burns it becomes a vapour and passes off into the atmosphere, which is the great vehicle, the great carrier, for taking it away to other places.

Then what becomes of it? It is wonderful to find that the change produced by breathing, which seems so injurious to us — for we cannot breathe the same air twice over — is the very life and support of the plants and vegetables growing on the surface of the earth. And the same holds below the surface, in the great bodies of water; for fishes and other animals breathe on the same principle, though not exactly by contact with open air.

Fish such as I have here [pointing to a globe of goldfish] breathe by means of the oxygen dissolved out of the air by the water, and they form carbonic acid; and all of them are working away at the one great business of making the animal and vegetable kingdoms serve one another. And all the plants growing on the surface of the earth, like the one I have brought here as an illustration, absorb carbon. These leaves are taking up their carbon from the atmosphere, to which we have given it in the form of carbonic acid, and they are growing and prospering on it. Give them a pure air like ours, and they could not live in it; give them carbon along with other matters, and they live and rejoice.

This piece of wood gets all its carbon, as the trees and plants get theirs, from the atmosphere — which, as we have seen, carries away what is bad for us and at the same time good for them: what is disease to the one being health to the other. So we are made dependent, not merely on our fellow creatures, but on our fellow existers, all Nature being tied together by laws which make one part serve the good of another.

There is another small point I must mention before we draw to a close, one that concerns the whole of these operations, and it is most curious and beautiful to see it clustering about the bodies that concern us — oxygen, hydrogen and carbon in their different states of existence.

I showed you just now some powdered lead which I set burning; and you saw that the moment the fuel was brought to the air it acted, even before it got out of the bottle — the moment the air crept in, it acted. Now, there is a case of chemical affinity, and it is by chemical affinity that all our operations proceed. When we breathe, the same operation goes on within us. When we burn a candle, the attraction of the different parts to one another is going on. Here it is going on in the case of the lead; and it is a beautiful instance of chemical affinity. If the products of the burning rose off from the surface, the lead would take fire and go on burning to the end.

But you remember we have this difference between charcoal and lead: while the lead can start into action at once if air can reach it, the carbon will remain days, weeks, months or years. The manuscripts of Herculaneum were written with a carbon ink, and there they have been for 1,800 years or more, not changed at all by the atmosphere, though they have been in contact with it under all sorts of circumstances.

Now, what is it that makes lead and carbon differ in this respect? It is a striking thing to see that the matter appointed to serve the purpose of fuel waits before it acts. It does not start off burning like the lead and many other things I could show you, but have not cluttered the table with: it waits for action. This waiting is a curious and wonderful thing. Candles — those Japanese candles, for instance — do not start into action at once like the lead or the iron (for iron finely divided does the same thing as lead), but wait there for years, perhaps for ages, without undergoing any change at all.

I have here a supply of coal gas. The jet is giving out the gas, but you see it does not take fire: it comes out into the air, but it waits until it is hot enough before it burns. If I make it hot enough, it takes fire. If I blow it out, the gas that is still issuing waits until the light is put to it again.

It is curious to see how differently substances wait — how some will wait until the temperature is raised a little, and others until it is raised a good deal. I have here a little gunpowder and some guncotton; even these differ in the conditions under which they will burn. The gunpowder is composed of carbon and other substances, which make it highly combustible; the guncotton is another combustible preparation. They are both waiting, but they will start into activity at different degrees of heat, or under different conditions. By applying a heated wire to them we shall see which starts first [touching the guncotton with the hot iron]. You see the guncotton has gone off, but not even the hottest part of the wire is now hot enough to fire the gunpowder.

How beautifully that shows you the difference in the degree to which bodies act in this way! In the one case the substance will wait any length of time until the bodies associated with it are made active by heat; in the other, as in the process of respiration, it waits no time at all. In the lungs, as soon as the air enters, it unites with the carbon; even at the lowest temperature the body can bear short of being frozen, the action begins at once, producing the carbonic acid of respiration. And so all things go on fitly and properly. Thus you see the analogy between respiration and burning is made still more beautiful and striking.

Indeed, all I can say to you at the end of these lectures — for we must come to an end at one time or another — is to express a wish that you may, in your generation, be fit to compare to a candle; that you may, like it, shine as lights to those about you; that, in all your actions, you may justify the beauty of the taper by making your deeds honourable and effectual in the discharge of your duty to your fellow-men.

Editor's note: Lead pyrophorus is made by heating dry tartrate of lead in a glass tube (closed at one end and drawn out to a fine point at the other) until no more vapours are evolved. The open end of the tube is then to be sealed before the blowpipe. When the tube is broken and the contents shaken out into the air, they burn with a red flash.
