Lecture on Platinum

(Part 1 of 2)

Delivered before the Royal Institution on Friday, 22 February 1861.

Whether I was to have the honour of appearing before you this evening or not seemed doubtful on one or two points. One of them I will mention immediately; the other may or may not appear in the course of the hour that follows.

The first point is this. When I was tempted to promise this subject for your attention this evening, it was founded on a promise — and a full intention of keeping it — by my friend Deville of Paris, who was to come here and show you a phenomenon in metallurgical chemistry which is not at all common. In that I have been disappointed. His intention was to have fused some thirty or forty pounds of platinum here, and so to have made plain, through my mouth and my description, the principles of a new process in metallurgy for this beautiful, magnificent and valuable metal. But circumstances over which neither he nor I nor anyone else concerned had sufficient control have prevented it; and I learned of it so recently that I could hardly leave my place here to be filled by somebody else, or allow you, who have kindly come to hear what might be said, to go unreceived in the best manner I can manage under the circumstances. I therefore propose to state, as well as I can, the principles on which Monsieur Deville proceeds, by means of drawings and some subordinate or inferior experiments.

The metal platinum, of which you see some very fine specimens on the table, has been known to us for about a hundred years. It has been worked in a beautiful way in this country, in France and elsewhere, and supplied to the customer in ingots like these, or in plates such as we have here, or in masses which by their very fall on the table announce the great weight of the substance — for platinum stands nearly at the head of all substances in that respect. This substance has come to us so far mainly through the science of Dr. Wollaston, whom many of us knew, and it is obtained in great purity and beauty.

It is a very remarkable metal in many ways, besides its known special uses. It usually comes to us in grains. Here is a very fine specimen of native platinum in grains. Here also is a nugget, or ingot; and here are some small pieces gathered out of certain alluvial soils in Brazil, Mexico, California, and the Ural districts of Russia.

It is strange that this metal is almost always found in company with four or five other metals, most curious in their qualities and characteristics. They are called the platiniferous metals; and they are not only always found associated in this way but have other curious relations, which I shall point out by referring to one of the tables behind me.

This substance is always native — always in the metallic state; and the metals it is found with, which are rarely found anywhere else, are palladium, rhodium, iridium, osmium and ruthenium. We have the names in one of the tables, arranged in two columns representing two groups: platinum, iridium and osmium making up one group, and ruthenium, rhodium and palladium the other. Three of them have a chemical equivalent of 98½, and the others an equivalent of about half that number.

Then the metals of the first group have an extreme specific gravity — platinum being in fact the lightest of the three, or as light as the lightest. Osmium has a specific gravity of 21.4 and is the heaviest body in nature; platinum is 21.15, and iridium the same; while the specific gravity of the other three is only about half as much, namely 11.3, 12.1 and 11.8.

Then there is this curious relation, that palladium and iridium are so much alike that you would scarcely know one from the other, although one has only half the weight of the other and only half the equivalent power. It is the same with iridium and rhodium, and with osmium and ruthenium, which are so closely allied that they make pairs, each one separated from its own group.

Then these metals are the most infusible we possess. Osmium is the most difficult to fuse; indeed, I believe it never has been fused, whereas every other metal has. Ruthenium comes next, then iridium, then rhodium, then platinum — so that platinum ranks here as a rather fusible metal, and yet we have long been accustomed to speak of the infusibility of platinum. Then last comes palladium, the most fusible of the whole set. It is a curious thing to see this fine association of physical properties coming out in metals which are grouped together somehow in nature — no doubt by causes related to similar properties in their situation on the surface of the earth, for it is in alluvial soils that these things are found.

Now, as regards this substance, let me tell you briefly how we get it. The process used to be this. The ore I showed you just now was taken and digested in nitro-muriatic acid of a certain strength — aqua regia — and partly converted into a solution, leaving behind certain bodies which I have on the table. The platinum being carefully dissolved in the acids, muriate of ammonia was added to the solution, as I am about to add it here. A yellow precipitate was then thrown down, as you see happening now; and this, carefully washed and cleansed, gave us that body [pointing to a specimen of the chloride of platinum and ammonium], nearly all the other elements having been thrown out.

This substance, when heated, gave us what we call platinum sponge — platinum in the metallic state, so finely divided as to form a kind of heavy mass, or sponge. At the time Dr. Wollaston first sent it out, it was not fusible for the market or in the manufacturers' workshops, because the temperature required was so high and there were no furnaces that could bring the mass into a globule and make the parts cling together.

Most of the metals we get from nature and work in our shops are finally brought into a mass by fusion. I am not aware of any in the arts or sciences except iron for which this is not so. Soft iron we do not bring together by fusion but by a process very like the one that was used for platinum: namely, welding. These divided grains of spongy platinum, having been well washed and sunk in water to exclude the air, and pressed together, and heated, and hammered, and pressed again until they came into a fairly close, dense, compact mass, cohered so well that when the mass was put into a charcoal furnace and raised to a high temperature, the particles — at first infinitely divided, for they had been chemically divided — stuck to one another, each to all the rest, until they made the kind of substance you see here, which will bear rolling and every kind of expansion.

No process other than that has so far been adopted for obtaining this substance from the particles, by solution, precipitation, ignition and welding. It is certainly a very fine thing to see that we can rely so completely on the properties of the various substances we deal with; that by carrying our processes through we can obtain a material like this, which allows of division and extension under a rolling mill — a material of the finest possible kind, its parts held together with no gaps and no porosity, but so continuous that no fluid can pass between them. And, as Dr. Wollaston beautifully showed, a globule of platinum fused by the voltaic battery and the oxyhydrogen blowpipe, when drawn into a wire, was no sounder and no stronger than this wire made by the curious coalescence of the particles through the sticking power they have at high temperatures. This is the process used by Messrs. Johnson and Matthey, to whose great kindness I am indebted for these ingots and for the valuable assistance I have had with the illustrations.

The treatment I have to put before you, however, is of a different kind; and it is in the hope that before long we may have a manufacture of platinum of this sort that I am encouraged to come before you and tell you how far Deville has gone in the matter, and to illustrate the principles on which he proceeds.

I think it only fair that you should see an experiment showing the way we get platinum to adhere. Probably you all know about the welding of iron: you go into the blacksmith's shop and see him put the handle of a poker onto the stem, and by a little management and the application of heat he makes them one. No doubt you have seen him put the iron into the fire and sprinkle a little sand on it. He does not know the science he calls into play when he sprinkles sand over the oxide of iron, but there is fine science there, and he practises it when he gets his weld.

I can show you here this beautiful business of particles sticking together up to the fullest possible intensity of their combination. If you went into Mr. Matthey's workshops and saw them hammering and welding away, you would see the value of the experiment I am about to show you.

Here is some platinum wire. This is a metal which resists the action of acids, resists oxidation by heat, and resists change of any sort; so I can heat it in the open air without any flux. I bend the wire so that the ends cross; I make them hot with the blowpipe; and then, with a tap of a hammer, I shall make them into one piece. Now that the pieces are united I shall have great difficulty in pulling them apart, though they are joined only where the two cylindrical surfaces met. And now that I have succeeded in pulling the wire apart, the break is not at the weld but where the force of the pincers cut it — so the join we made is a complete one. This, then, is the principle of the manufacture and production of platinum in the old way.

The treatment Deville proposes to carry out, and which he has carried out on a rather large scale in connection with the Russian supply of platinum, is entirely by heat, with little or no reference to the use of acids. So that you may know what the problem is, look at this table, which gives the composition of a piece of platinum ore like the one I showed you just now. Wherever it comes from, the composition is just as complicated, though the proportions vary:

        Platinum . . . . . . .  76.4
        Iridium  . . . . . . .   4.3
        Rhodium  . . . . . . .   0.3
        Palladium  . . . . . .   1.4
        Gold . . . . . . . . .   0.4
        Copper . . . . . . . .   4.1
        Iron . . . . . . . . .  11.7
        Osmide of iridium  . .   0.5
        Sand . . . . . . . . .   1.4
                               ------
                                100.5

This refers to the Ural ore. In that state of combination, as the table shows, the iridium and osmium are found combined in crystals, sometimes to the amount of 0.5 per cent and sometimes 3 or 4 per cent. Now, this is what Deville proposes to deal with in the dry way, instead of dealing with it by any acid.

I have here another kind of platinum, and I show it to you for this reason. The Russian government, having large stores of platinum in their territories, obtained it in a metallic state and worked it into coin. The coin I have in my hand is a twelve-silver-rouble piece. The rouble is worth three shillings, so this coin is worth thirty-six shillings. The smaller coin is worth half that sum, and the other half of that again.

The metal, however, is unfit for coinage. When you have the two metals gold and silver used for coinage, there is a little confusion in the value of the two on the market; but when you have three precious metals — for you may call platinum a precious metal — worked into coin, they are certain to run counter to one another. Indeed, it did happen that the price of the platinum coin fixed by the government was such that it was worth while to buy platinum in other countries, coin it, take it into Russia and put it into circulation. The result was that the Russian government stopped the issue.

The composition of this coin is: platinum 97.0, iridium 1.2, rhodium 0.5, palladium 0.25, with a little copper and a little iron. It is, in fact, bad platinum. It scales, and it has an unfitness for commercial use and for the laboratory which properly purified platinum does not have. It wants working over again.

Now, Deville's process depends on three things: intense heat, blowpipe action, and the volatility of certain metals. We know that there are plenty of metals that are volatile; but I think this is the first time it has been proposed to use the volatility of certain metals — gold and palladium, for instance — for the purpose of driving them off and leaving something else behind. He counts a great deal on the volatility of metals which we have not been in the habit of thinking volatile at all, but have rather looked on as fixed. I must try to illustrate these three points with a few experiments.

Perhaps I can best show you what is wanted in the heating of platinum by using that source of heat we have here, which seems almost limitless: the voltaic battery. It is only because of the heat that the voltaic battery affects the platinum at all. By applying the two ends of the battery to this piece of platinum wire, you will see what result we get. You will notice that we can carry this heating agent about wherever we like and deal with it as we please, limiting it any way we choose. I am obliged to handle it carefully, but even that will have an interest for you as you watch the experiment.

Contact is now made. The electric current, when squeezed into thin conducting wires that offer resistance, gives off heat to a large extent; and this is the power we work with. You see the intense glow imparted to the wire at once; and if I applied the heat continuously, the current would melt the wire. As soon as contact is broken the wire goes back to its former appearance; and now that we make contact again, you see the glow as before. [The experiment was repeated several times in rapid succession.]

You can see a line of light, though you can scarcely make out the wire. And now that it has melted with the great heat, if you examine it you will find that it is indeed a set of irregularities from end to end — a string of little spheres, threaded on an axis of platinum running through them. That is the wire Mr. Grove described as being produced at the moment when fusion of the whole mass is beginning.

In the same way, if I take a reasonably thick piece of platinum and subject it to the heat this battery can produce, you will see how brilliant the effect is. I shall put on a pair of spectacles for the experiment, because the voltaic spark has an injurious effect on the eyes if the action is kept up; and it is neither good policy nor bravery to subject any organ to unnecessary danger. At all events, I want to keep the full use of my eyes to the end of the lecture.

You now see the action of the heat on the piece of platinum — heat so great that it breaks the plate on which the drops of metal fall. You can see, then, that we have sources of heat in nature powerful enough to deal with platinum.

Here is an apparatus by which the same thing can be shown. Here is a piece of platinum put into a crucible of carbon made at the end of one pole of the battery, and you will see the brilliant light produced. There is our furnace, and the platinum is rapidly getting hot; and now you can see that it is melted and throwing off little particles. What a magnificent scientific instrument this is. When you look at the result lying on the charcoal, you will see a beautifully fused piece of platinum. It is a fiery globule now, with a surface so bright and smooth and reflective that I cannot tell whether it is transparent or opaque or what. This will give you an idea of what has to be done by any process that claims to deal with thirty, or forty, or fifty pounds of platinum at once.

Let me now tell you briefly what Deville proposes to do. First of all he takes this ore, with its impurities, and mixes it — as he finds essential and best — with its own weight of sulphuret of lead, that is, lead combined with sulphur. Both the lead and the sulphur are wanted; for the iron that is present, as you saw in the table, is one of the most annoying substances in the treatment that you can imagine, because it is not volatile. While the iron remains sticking to the platinum, the platinum will not flow readily; and it cannot be sent away by a high temperature — sent off into the atmosphere so as to leave the platinum behind.

Well, then: a hundred parts of ore and a hundred parts of sulphuret of lead, with about fifty parts of metallic lead, are all mingled together in a crucible. The sulphur of the sulphuret takes the iron, the copper and some of the other metals and impurities and combines with them to form a slag; and as it goes on boiling and oxidising it carries off the iron, so that a great cleansing takes place.
