Lecture on Platinum

(Part 2 of 2)

Now, you ought to know that these metals — platinum, iridium and palladium — have a strong affinity for metals like lead and tin, and a great deal depends on that. Very much depends on the platinum throwing out its impurities of iron and so on, by being taken up with the lead that is present in it.

So that you may have some notion of the great power platinum has of combining with other metals, let me point you to a little of the chemist's experience — his bad experience. He knows very well that if he takes a piece of platinum foil and heats a piece of lead on it, or if he takes a piece of platinum foil like the one we have here and heats things on it that have lead in them, his platinum is destroyed.

Here is a piece of platinum; and if I apply the heat of the spirit lamp to it, then because of this little piece of lead which I am putting on it, I shall make a hole in the metal. The heat of the lamp by itself would do the platinum no harm, and neither would other chemical means; but because a little lead is present, and there is an affinity between the two substances, the bodies fuse together at once. You see the hole I have made. It is large enough to put your finger in, and yet the platinum itself, as you saw, was almost infusible except by the voltaic battery.

To show this more strikingly, I have taken pieces of platinum foil, tinfoil and lead foil and rolled them together; and if I apply the blowpipe to them you will have, in effect, a repetition on a larger scale of the experiment you saw just now, when the lead and platinum came together and the one spoiled the other. With the metals laid one on another and folded together, and heat applied, you will see not only that the platinum runs to waste, but that at the moment the platinum and lead combine there is ignition produced — there is a power of sustaining combustion. I have taken a large piece so that you may see the thing on a large scale. You saw the ignition and the explosion that followed, of which we have the results here: the consequence of the chemical affinity between platinum and the metals combined with it, and this is the thing on which Deville founds his first result.

When he has melted these substances and stirred them well up, and so obtained a complete mixture, he throws air onto the surface to burn off all the sulphur from the remaining sulphuret of lead; and at last he gets an ingot of lead with platinum in it — comparatively much lead and little platinum. He gets that in the crucible along with a quantity of slag and other things, which he treats afterwards. It is that platinum-bearing lead which we have to deal with in the rest of the process.

Now let me tell you what he does with it. His first object is to get rid of the lead. He has thrown out all the iron and a number of other things, and he has got the kind of compound shown in the table. He may get it as high as 78 per cent platinum and 22 lead; or 5, or 10, or 15 of platinum to 95, or 90, or 85 of lead, which he calls weak platinum. He then puts it into the kind of vessel you see before you. Suppose we had the mixture here: we should have to make it hot and then throw air onto the surface. The combustible metal — that is, the lead — and everything else that will oxidise are thoroughly oxidised; the litharge flows out in a fused state into a vessel placed to receive it, and the platinum stays behind.

[Figure 36: The vessel in which the platinum-bearing lead is heated and air thrown on its surface. The lead oxidises, the litharge runs out in a molten stream into the vessel set to catch it, and the platinum remains behind.]

Here is the process Deville adopts for casting off the lead, after he has got the platinum out of the ore. (Having made use of your friend, you get rid of him as quickly as you can.) He gets his heat by using the combination of oxygen and hydrogen, or of carburetted fuel, to make a fire. Here I have a source of coal gas; there I have a source of hydrogen; and here a source of oxygen. Here too is one of the blowpipes Deville uses in his process for working platinum in the way I have described. There are two pipes: one goes to the source of coal gas and the other to the supply of oxygen.

[Figure 37: One of Deville's blowpipes, with its two pipes — one leading to the coal gas, the other to the oxygen — which together give a flame hot enough to melt platinum.]

By uniting these we get a flame of such heat that it will melt platinum. Perhaps you can hardly imagine what that heat is without some proof of it; but you will soon see that I really have the power of melting platinum. Here is a piece of platinum foil running like wax under the flame I am bringing to bear on it.

The question, however, is whether we can get heat enough to melt not this small quantity but large masses — many pounds of the metal. And having got heat like this, the next consideration is what vessel he is to use that could hold the platinum when it is so heated, and could bear the effects of the flame. Such vessels are happily well supplied at Paris, and are made of a substance that surrounds Paris: a kind of chalk, called by geologists, I believe, calcaire grossier, which has the property of enduring an extreme degree of heat.

I am now going to get the highest heat we can obtain. First I show you the burning of hydrogen by itself. I have not a large supply, because coal gas is enough for most of our purposes. If I put a piece of lime obtained from this chalk into the gas, you see we get a pretty hot flame, which would burn one's fingers a good deal.

But now let me subject a piece of it to the joint action of oxygen and hydrogen. I do this to show you the value of lime as a material for the furnaces and chambers that have to hold the substances being worked on, and that consequently have to withstand this extreme heat. Here we have the hydrogen and the oxygen, which give the most intense heat obtainable by chemical action; and if I put a piece of lime into the flame we get what is called the limelight. Now, for all the beauty and intensity of the action you see, there is no appreciable wasting of the lime, except by the mechanical force of the current of gases rushing from the jet against it and sweeping away such particles as are not strongly held together. Some people call it "vapour of lime," and it may be so; but there is no other change in the lime than that, under a heat in this highly exalted chemical condition, when almost any other substance would melt at once.

Then, as to the way the heat is applied to the substance. It is all very well for me to take a piece of antimony and fuse it in the flame of a blowpipe. But if I tried this piece in an ordinary lamp flame I should do nothing; if I tried a smaller piece I should do little or nothing; and a smaller piece still, little or nothing. Yet I have here a condition which represents what Deville carries to the highest possible extent, and which we all carry to the highest extent, in the use of the blowpipe.

Suppose I take this piece of antimony. I shall not be able to melt it in the flame of the candle merely by holding it there. And yet, by taking pains, we can even melt a piece of platinum there. This is a preparation I made to prove the fusibility of platinum in a common candle. There is a piece of wire, drawn by Dr. Wollaston's ingenious process, no more than the three-thousandth part of an inch across. He put the wire in the middle of a cylinder of silver and drew both together until the whole compound was exceedingly thin, and then dissolved the silver away with nitric acid. What was left in the centre is a substance I can scarcely see with an eyeglass — but I know it is there, and I can make it visible, as you see, by putting it into the candle, where the heat makes it glow like a spark. I have tried this experiment again and again upstairs in my own room, and have easily fused this platinum wire with a common candle.

So you see we have heat enough in a candle, as in the voltaic battery or in the highly exalted burning of the blowpipe — but we do not supply a continuous source of heat. In the very act of becoming ignited, the heat radiates away so fast that you cannot accumulate enough to fuse the wire, except under the most careful arrangement. So I cannot melt that piece of antimony by simply putting it into the candle; but if I put it on charcoal and drive the fiery current against it, there will be heat enough to melt it.

The beauty of the blowpipe is that it sends hot air — making hot air by the burning of the flame — against the thing to be heated. I have only to hold the antimony in the path of that current, and particle after particle of the current strikes the antimony, and so we get it melted. Now you see it red hot; and I have no doubt it will go on burning if I withdraw it from the flame and keep forcing air onto it. There it is, burning with no heat but that of its own combustion, which I am keeping up by sending air against it. It would go out in a moment if I took the current of air away; but there it burns, and the more air I give it, by this or any other means, the better. So here we have not merely a mighty source of heat, but a means of driving the heat forcibly against substances.

Let me show you another experiment with a piece of iron. It will serve two purposes: showing you what the blowpipe does as a source of heat, and what it does by sending that heat where it is wanted. I have taken iron rather than silver or another metal so that you may see the difference in the action, and so be more interested in the experiment.

Here is our fuel, the coal gas, and here our oxygen. Having thus got my power of heat, I apply it to the iron, which, as you see, soon becomes red hot. It is flowing about now like a globule of melted mercury. But notice that I cannot raise any vapour: it is covered with a coat of melted oxide, and unless I have great power in my blowpipe it is hardly possible to break through it. Now, then, you see these beautiful sparks. You have not only a beautiful kind of burning, but you can see that the iron is being driven off — not producing smoke, but burning in a fixed condition. How different this is from the action of some other metals; that piece of antimony, for instance, which we saw just now throwing off abundant fumes.

We can of course burn this iron away by giving it plenty of air; but with the bodies Deville wants to expose to this intense heat he has no such means. The gas itself must have power enough to drive off the slag that forms on the surface of the metal, and power to strike the platinum so as to get the full contact he wants for the fusion to take place. So here we see the means he resorts to: oxygen, and either coal gas or water gas or pure hydrogen for producing the heat, and the blowpipe for driving the heated current onto the metals.

Editor's note: Water gas is formed by passing vapour of water over red-hot charcoal or coke. It is a mixture of hydrogen and carbonic oxide, each of which is an inflammable gas.

I have two or three rough drawings here of the kind of furnaces he uses. They are larger, though, than his actual furnaces. Even the furnace in which he carries out that most serious operation of fusing fifty pounds of platinum at once is not much more than half the size of the drawing. It is made of a piece of lime below and a piece of lime above. You see how beautifully lime withstands heat without changing shape; and you may have thought how beautifully it prevents the heat from being dissipated, by its very poor conducting power.

[Figure 38: Deville's furnace — a chamber built of a piece of lime below and a piece above, with openings for the blowpipes, a hole at the top for feeding in more metal, and an aperture for the products of combustion to escape.]

While the front of the lime you saw here was glowing so fiercely, I could at any moment touch the back of it without feeling any discomfort from the heat. So by having a chamber of lime of this sort, he can get a vessel to hold these metals with scarcely any loss of heat. He puts the blowpipes through these openings and sends the gases down onto the metals, which gradually melt. Then he puts in more metal through a hole at the top. The products of the burning issue from the opening you see drawn there. If there are strips of platinum, he pushes them in through the mouth from which the heated current is coming, and they get red hot and white hot before they reach the bath of platinum. So he is able to fuse a large body of platinum this way.

When the platinum is melted he takes the top off and pours out from the bottom piece, like a crucible, and makes his cast. This is the furnace by which he fuses his forty or fifty pounds of platinum at once. The metal is raised to a heat no eye can bear. There is no light and shadow, no chiaroscuro there; all is the same intensity of glow. You look in and you cannot see where the metal is or where the lime is; it is all as one.

We have therefore a platform with a handle, turning on an axis which coincides with the gutter formed for pouring the metal; and when everything is known to be ready — judged through dark glasses — the workmen take off the top piece and lift the handle, and the mould being then set in its proper position, he knows that the metal will issue exactly along the line of the axis. No injury has ever come from the use of this plan. You know how carefully one has to carry a vessel of mercury like the one we have here, for fear of turning it over on one side or the other. But if it is a vessel of melted platinum, the very greatest care must be used, because the substance is twice as heavy — and yet no injury has been done to any of the workmen in this operation.

I said that Deville depends on intense heat for carrying off vapour, and this brings me to the point of showing how vapours are carried off. Here is a basin of mercury, which boils easily, as you know, and gives us a chance of observing the facts and principles that are to guide us. Here are two poles of the battery; and if I bring them into contact with the mercury, see what a development of vapour we get. The mercury is flying off rapidly, and I might, if I chose, put the whole company around me in a bath of mercury vapour.

And so, if we take this piece of lead and treat it the same way, it too will give off vapour. Notice the fumes rising from it; and even if it were so far shut off from the air that you could not form any litharge, you would still have those abundant fumes flying off.

I may also take a piece of gold and show you the same thing. Here is a piece of gold, which I put on a clean surface of Paris limestone. Applying the heat of the blowpipe to it, you see how the heat drives the vapour off; and if you look at the stone at the end of the lecture, you will see a purple patch of condensed gold on it. So here is a proof of the volatilisation of gold. It is the same with silver.

You will not be startled if I sometimes use one agent and sometimes another to illustrate a particular point. The volatility of gold and silver is the same thing, whether it is brought about by the voltaic battery or by the blowpipe. [A lump of silver was placed in a charcoal crucible between the poles of a voltaic battery.] Now look at the fumes of silver, and notice the peculiar and beautiful green colour they give.

We shall now show you this same process of boiling the silver, thrown on a screen from the electric lamp in front of you. And while Dr. Tyndall is kindly getting the lamp ready for the purpose, let me tell you that Deville proposes to throw out in this way all the extraneous things I have spoken of, except two — namely iridium and rhodium. It so happens, he says, that iridium and rhodium make the metal more capable of resisting the attacks of acids than platinum is by itself. Alloys are compounded with up to 25 per cent of rhodium and iridium, which increases the chemical inertness of the platinum, and its malleability and other physical properties as well.

[The image of the voltaic discharge through vapour of silver was now thrown onto the screen.] What you have on the screen now is an inverted image of what you saw when we heated the silver before. The fine stream you see around the silver is the discharge of the electric force taking place, giving that glorious green light you see in the ray; and if Dr. Tyndall will open the top of the lamp, you will see the quantity of fumes that come out of the opening, showing you at once the volatility of silver.

I have now finished this imperfect account. It is only an apology for not having brought the process itself before you. I have done the best I could under the circumstances; and I know your kindness well, for if I were not sure that I could trust to it, I would not appear here as often as I have done. The gradual loss of my memory and of my other faculties is making itself painfully evident to me, and every time I appear before you it takes the continued remembrance of your kindness to enable me to get through my task. If I should happen to go on too long, or should fail to do what you might wish, remember that it is you who are to blame, for wishing me to remain. I have wanted to retire, as I think every man ought to do before his faculties become impaired; but I must confess that the affection I have for this place, and for those who come to this place, is such that I hardly know when the proper time has come.
