Chapter XII: Periodicity in Nature

The whole life of Nature is dominated by

the existence of periodic events, that is, by the existence of successive events so analogous to each other that, without any straining of language, they may be termed recurrences of the same event. The rotation of the earth produces the successive days. It is true that each day is different from the preceding days, however abstractly we define the meaning of a day, so as to exclude casual phenomena. But with a sufficiently abstract definition of a day, the distinction in properties between two days becomes faint and remote from practical interest; and each day may then be conceived as a recurrence of the phenomenon of one rotation of the earth. Again the path of the earth round the sun leads to the yearly recurrence of the seasons, and imposes another periodicity on all the operations of nature. Another less fundamental periodicity is provided by the phases of the moon. In modern civilized life, with its artificial light, these phases are of slight importance, but in

ancient times, in climates where the days are burning and the skies clear, human life was apparently largely influenced by the existence of moonlight. Accordingly our divisions into weeks and months, with their religious associations, have spread over the European races from Syria and Mesopotamia, though independent observances following the moon’s phases are found amongst most nations. It is, however, through the tides, and not through its phases of light and darkness, that the moon’s periodicity has chiefly influenced the history of the earth.

Our bodily life is essentially periodic. It is dominated by the beatings of the heart, and the recurrence of breathing. The presupposition of periodicity is indeed fundamental to our very conception of life. We cannot imagine a course of nature in which, as events progressed, we should be unable to say: “This has happened before.” The whole conception of experience as a guide to conduct would be absent. Men would always find themselves in new situations possessing no substratum of identity with anything in past history. The very means of measuring time as a quantity would be absent. Events might still be recognized as occurring in a series, so that some were earlier and others later. But we now go beyond this bare recognition. We can not only say that

three events, \(A\), \(B\), \(C\), occurred in this order, so that \(A\) came before \(B\), and \(B\) before \(C\); but also we can say that the length of time between the occurrences of \(A\) and \(B\) was twice as long as that between \(B\) and \(C\). Now, quantity of time is essentially dependent on observing the number of natural recurrences which have intervened. We may say that the length of time between \(A\) and \(B\) was so many days, or so many months, or so many years, according to the type of recurrence to which we wish to appeal. Indeed, at the beginning of civilization, these three modes of measuring time were really distinct. It has been one of the first tasks of science among civilized or semi-civilized nations, to fuse them into one coherent measure. The full extent of this task must be grasped. It is necessary to determine, not merely what number of days (*e.g.* \(365.25\)…) go to some one year, but also previously to determine that the same number of days do go to the successive years. We can imagine a world in which periodicities exist, but such that no two are coherent. In some years there might be \(200\) days and in others \(350\). The determination of the broad general consistency of the more important periodicities was the first step in natural science. This consistency arises from no abstract intuitive law of thought; it is merely an observed fact of nature

guaranteed by experience. Indeed, so far is it from being a necessary law, that it is not even exactly true There are divergencies in every case. For some instances these divergencies are easily observed and are therefore immediately apparent. In other cases it requires the most refined observations and astronomical accuracy to make them apparent. Broadly speaking, all recurrences depending on living beings, such as the beatings of the heart, are subject in comparison with other recurrences to rapid variations. The great stable obvious recurrences—stable in the sense of mutually agreeing with great accuracy—are those depending on the motion of the earth as a whole, and on similar motions of the heavenly bodies.

We therefore assume that these astronomical

recurrences mark out equal intervals of time. But how are we to deal with their discrepancies which the refined observations of astronomy detect? Apparently we are reduced to the arbitrary assumption that one or other of these sets of phenomena marks out equal times—*e.g.* that either all days are of equal length, or that all years are of equal length. This is not so: some assumptions must be made, but the assumption which underlies the whole procedure of the astronomers in determining the measure of time is that the laws of motion are exactly verified.

Before explaining how this is done, it is interesting to observe that this relegation of the determination of the measure of time to the astronomers arises (as has been said) from the stable consistency of the recurrences with which they deal. If such a superior consistency had been noted among the recurrences characteristic of the human body, we should naturally have looked to the doctors of medicine for the regulation of our clocks.

In considering how the laws of motion come into the matter, note that two inconsistent modes of measuring time will yield different variations of velocity to the same body. For example, suppose we define an hour as one twenty-fourth of a day, and take the case of a train running uniformly for two hours at the rate of twenty miles per hour. Now take a grossly inconsistent measure of time, and suppose that it makes the first hour to be twice as long as the second hour. Then, according to this other measure of duration, the time of the train’s run is divided into two parts, during each of which it has traversed the same distance, namely, twenty miles; but the duration of the first part is twice as long as that of the second part. Hence the velocity of the train has not been uniform, and on the average the velocity during the second period is twice that during the first period. Thus the question as to

whether the train has been running uniformly or not entirely depends on the standard of time which we adopt.

Now, for all ordinary purposes of life on the earth, the various astronomical recurrences may be looked on as absolutely consistent; and, furthermore assuming their consistency, and thereby assuming the velocities and changes of velocities possessed by bodies, we find that the laws of motion, which have been considered above, are almost exactly verified. But only *almost* exactly when we come to some of the astronomical phenomena. We find, however, that by assuming slightly different velocities for the rotations and motions of the planets and stars, the laws would be exactly verified. This assumption is then made; and we have, in fact thereby, adopted a measure of time, which is indeed defined by reference to the astronomical phenomena, but not so as to be consistent with the uniformity of any one of them. But the broad fact remains that the uniform flow of time on which so much is based, is itself dependent on the observation of periodic events.

Even phenomena, which on the surface seem casual and exceptional, or, on the other hand, maintain themselves with a uniform persistency, may be due to the remote influence of periodicity. Take for example, the

principle of resonance. Resonance arises

when two sets of connected circumstances have the same periodicities. It is a dynamical law that the small vibrations of all bodies when left to themselves take place in definite times characteristic of the body. Thus a pendulum with a small swing always vibrates in some definite time, characteristic of its shape and distribution of weight and length. A more complicated body may have many ways of vibrating; but each of its modes of vibration will have its own peculiar “period.” Those

periods of vibration of a body are called its “free” periods. Thus a pendulum has but one period of vibration, while a suspension bridge will have many. We get a musical instrument, like a violin string, when the periods of vibration are all simple submultiples of the longest; *i.e.* if \(t\) seconds be the longest period, the others are \(\frac{1}{2}t\), \(\frac{1}{3}t\), and so on, where any of these smaller periods may be absent. Now, suppose we excite the vibrations of a body by a cause which is itself periodic; then, if the period of the cause is very nearly that of one of the periods of the body, that mode of vibration of the body is very violently excited; even although the magnitude of the exciting cause is small. This phenomenon is called “resonance.” The general reason is easy to understand. Any one wanting to upset a rocking stone will push “in tune”

with the oscillations of the stone, so as always to secure a favourable moment for a push. If the pushes are out of tune, some increase the oscillations, but others check them. But when they are in tune, after a time all the pushes are favourable. The word “resonance”

comes from considerations of sound: but the phenomenon extends far beyond the region of sound. The laws of absorption and emission of light depend on it, the “tuning” of receivers for wireless telegraphy, the comparative importance of the influences of planets on each other’s motion, the danger to a suspension bridge as troops march over it in step, and the excessive vibration of some ships under the rhythmical beat of their machinery at certain speeds. This coincidence of periodicities may produce steady phenomena when there is a constant association of the two periodic events, or it may produce violent and sudden outbursts when the association is fortuitous and temporary.

Again, the characteristic and constant periods of vibration mentioned above are the underlying causes of what appear to us as steady excitements of our senses. We work for hours in a steady light, or we listen to a steady unvarying sound. But, if modern science be correct, this steadiness has no counterpart in nature. The steady light is due to the impact on the eye of a countless

number of periodic waves in a vibrating ether, and the steady sound to similar waves in a vibrating air. It is not our purpose here to explain the theory of light or the theory of sound. We have said enough to make it evident that one of the first steps necessary to make mathematics a fit instrument for the investigation of Nature is that it should be able to express the essential periodicity of things. If we have grasped this, we can understand the importance of the mathematical conceptions which we have next to consider, namely, periodic functions.
