Book One, Chapters 41 to 45 (Symonds)

[Book 1, chapter 41]

ON the entreaty of my brother and sister, I remained at Florence, though
my own inclination led me to return to Rome. The dear friend, also, who
had helped me in some of my earlier troubles, as I have narrated (I mean
Piero, son of Giovanni Landi)-he too advised me to make some stay in
Florence; for the Medici were in exile, that is to say, Signor Ippolito
and Signor Alessandro, who were afterwards respectively Cardinal and
Duke of Florence; and he judged it would be well for me to wait and see
what happened. [1]

At that time there arrived in Florence a Sienese, called Girolamo
Marretti, who had lived long in Turkey and was a man of lively
intellect. He came to my shop, and commissioned me to make a golden
medal to be worn in the hat. The subject was to be Hercules wrenching
the lion’s mouth. While I was working at this piece, Michel Agnolo
Buonarroti came oftentimes to see it. I had spent infinite pains upon
the design, so that the attitude of the figure and the fierce passion of
the beast were executed in quite a different style from that of any
craftsman who had hitherto attempted such groups. This, together with
the fact that the special branch of art was totally unknown to Michel
Agnolo, made the divine master give such praises to my work that I felt
incredibly inspired for further effort. However, I found little else to
do but jewel-setting; and though I gained more thus than in any other
way, yet I was dissatisfied, for I would fain have been employed upon
some higher task than that of setting precious stones.

Just then I met with Federigo Ginori, a young man of a very lofty
spirit. He had lived some years in Naples, and being endowed with great
charms of person and presence, had been the lover of a Neapolitan
princess. He wanted to have a medal made, with Atlas bearing the world
upon his shoulders, and applied to Michel Agnolo for a design. Michel
Agnolo made this answer: “Go and find out a young goldsmith named
Benvenuto; he will serve you admirably, and certainly he does not stand
in need of sketches by me. However, to prevent your thinking that I want
to save myself the trouble of so slight a matter, I will gladly sketch
you something; but meanwhile speak to Benvenuto, and let him also make a
model; he can then execute the better of the two designs.” Federigo
Ginori came to me, and told me what he wanted, adding thereto how Michel
Agnolo had praised me, and how he had suggested I should make a waxen
model while he undertook to supply a sketch. The words of that great man
so heartened me, that I set myself to work at once with eagerness upon
the model; and when I had finished it, a painter who was intimate with
Michel Agnolo, called Giuliano Bugiardini, brought me the drawing of
Atlas. [2] On the same occasion I showed Giuliano my little model in
wax, which was very different from Michel Agnolo’s drawing; and
Federigo, in concert with Bugiardini, agreed that I should work upon my
model. So I took it in hand, and when Michel Agnolo saw it, he praised
me to the skies. This was a figure, as I have said, chiselled on a plate
of gold; Atlas had the heaven upon his back, made out of a crystal ball,
engraved with the zodiac upon a field of lapis-lazuli. The whole
composition produced an indescribably fine effect; and under it ran the
legend 'Summa tulisse juvat!' [3] Federigo was so thoroughly well
pleased that he paid me very liberally. Aluigi Alamanni was at that time
in Florence. Federigo Ginori, who enjoyed his friendship, brought him
often to my workshop, and through this introduction we became very
intimate together. 4

Note 1. I may remind my readers that the three Medici of the ruling
house were now illegitimate. Clement VII was the bastard son of
Giuliano, brother of Lorenzo the Magnificent. Ippolito, the Cardinal,
was the bastard of Giuliano, Duke of Nemours, son of Lorenzo the
Magnificent. Alessandro was the reputed bastard of Lorenzo, Duke of
Urbino, grandson of Lorenzo the Magnificent. Alessandro became Duke of
Florence, and after poisoning his cousin, Cardinal Ippolito, was
murdered by a distant cousin, Lorenzino de’ Medici. In this way the male
line of Lorenzo the Magnificent was extinguished.

Note 2. This painter was the pupil of Bertoldo, a man of simple manners
and of some excellence in his art. The gallery at Bologna has a fine
specimen of his painting. Michel Agnolo delighted in his society.

Note 3. Cellini says 'Summam.'

Note 4. This was the agreeable didactic poet Luigi Alamanni, who had to
fly from Florence after a conspiracy against Cardinal Giulio de’ Medici
in 1522. He could never reconcile himself to the Medicean tyranny, and
finally took refuge in France, where he was honoured by François I. He
died at Amboise in 1556.

[Book 1, chapter 42]

POPE CLEMENT had now declared war upon the city of Florence, which
thereupon was put in a state of defence; and the militia being organised
in each quarter of the town, I too received orders to serve in my turn.
I provided myself with a rich outfit, and went about with the highest
nobility of Florence, who showed a unanimous desire to fight for the
defence of our liberties. Meanwhile the speeches which are usual upon
such occasions were made in every quarter; [1] the young men met
together more than was their wont, and everywhere we had but one topic
of conversation.

It happened one day, about noon, that a crowd of tall men and lusty
young fellows, the first in the city, were assembled in my workshop,
when a letter from Rome was put into my hands. It came from a man called
Maestro Giacopino della Barca. His real name was Giacopo della Sciorina,
but they called him della Barca in Rome, because he kept a ferry boat
upon the Tiber between Ponte Sisto and Ponte Santo Agnolo. He was a
person of considerable talent, distinguished by his pleasantries and
striking conversation, and he had formerly been a designer of patterns
for the cloth-weavers in Florence. This man was intimate with the Pope,
who took great pleasure in hearing him talk. Being one day engaged in
conversation, they touched upon the sack and the defence of the castle.
This brought me to the Pope’s mind, and he spoke of me in the very
highest terms, adding that if he knew where I was, he should be glad to
get me back. Maestro Giacopo said I was in Florence; whereupon the Pope
bade the man write and tell me to return to him. The letter I have
mentioned was to the effect that I should do well if I resumed the
service of Clement, and that this was sure to turn out to my advantage.

The young men who were present were curious to know what the letter
contained; wherefore I concealed it as well as I could. Afterwards I
wrote to Maestro Giacopo, begging him by no means, whether for good or
evil, to write to me again. He however grew more obstinate in his
officiousness, and wrote me another letter, so extravagantly worded,
that if it had been seen, I should have got into serious trouble. The
substance of it was that the Pope required me to come at once, wanting
to employ me on work of the greatest consequence; also that if I wished
to act aright, I ought to throw up everything, and not to stand against
a Pope in the party of those hare-brained Radicals. This letter, when I
read it, put me in such a fright, that I went to seek my dear friend
Piero Landi. Directly he set eyes on me, he asked what accident had
happened to upset me so. I told my friend that it was quite impossible
for me to explain what lay upon my mind, and what was causing me this
trouble; only I entreated him to take the keys I gave him, and to return
the gems and gold in my drawers to such and such persons, whose names he
would find inscribed upon my memorandum-book; next, I begged him to pack
up the furniture of my house, and keep account of it with his usual
loving-kindness; and in a few days he should hear where I was. The
prudent young man, guessing perhaps pretty nearly how the matter stood,
replied: “My brother, go your was quickly; then write to me, and have no
further care about your things.” I did as he advised. He was the most
loyal friend, the wisest, the most worthy, the most discreet, the most
affectionate that I have ever known. I left Florence and went to Rome,
and from there I wrote to him.

Note 1. 'Fecesi quelle orazioni.' It may mean “the prayers were offered
up.”

[Book 1, chapter 43]

UPON my arrival in Rome, [1] I found several of my former friends, by
whom I was very well received and kindly entertained. No time was lost
before I set myself to work at things which brought me profit, but were
not notable enough to be described. There was a fine old man, a
goldsmith, called Raffaello del Moro, who had considerable reputation in
the trade, and was to boot a very worthy fellow. He begged me to consent
to enter his workshop, saying he had some commissions of importance to
execute, on which high profits might be looked for; so I accepted his
proposal with goodwill.

More than ten days had elapsed, and I had not presented myself to
Maestro Giacopino della Barca. Meeting me one day by accident, he gave
me a hearty welcome, and asked me how long I had been in Rome. When I
told him I had been there about a fortnight, he took it very ill, and
said that I showed little esteem for a Pope who had urgently compelled
him to write three times for me. I, who had taken his persistence in the
matter still more ill, made no reply, but swallowed down my irritation.
The man, who suffered from a flux of words, began one of his long yarns,
and went on talking, till at the last, when I saw him tired out, I
merely said that he might bring me to the Pope when he saw fit. He
answered that any time would do for him, and I, that I was always ready.
So we took our way toward the palace. It was a Maundy Thursday; and when
we reached the apartments of the Pope, he being known there and I
expected, we were at once admitted.

The Pope was in bed, suffering from a slight indisposition, and he had
with him Messer Jacopo Salviati and the Archbishop of Capua. [2] When
the Pope set eyes on me, he was exceedingly glad. I kissed his feet, and
then, as humbly as I could, drew near to him, and let him understand
that I had things of consequence to utter. On this he waved his hand,
and the two prelates retired to a distance from us. I began at once to
speak: “Most blessed Father, from the time of the sack up to this hour,
I have never been able to confess or to communicate, because they refuse
me absolution. The case is this. When I melted down the gold and worked
at the unsetting of those jewels, your Holiness ordered the Cavalierino
to give me a modest reward for my labours, of which I received nothing,
but on the contrary he rather paid me with abuse. When then I ascended
to the chamber where I had melted down the gold, and washed the ashes, I
found about a pound and a half of gold in tiny grains like millet-seeds;
and inasmuch as I had not money enough to take me home respectably, I
thought I would avail myself of this, and give it back again when
opportunity should offer. Now I am here at the feet of your Holiness,
who is the only true confessor. I entreat you to do me the favour of
granting me indulgence, so that I may be able to confess and
communicate, and by the grace of your Holiness regain the grace of my
Lord God.” Upon this the Pope, with a scarcely perceptible sigh,
remembering perhaps his former trials, spoke as follows: “Benvenuto, I
thoroughly believe what you tell me; it is in my power to absolve you of
any unbecoming deed you may have done, and, what is more, I have the
will. So, then, speak out with frankness and perfect confidence; for if
you had taken the value of a whole tiara, I am quite ready to pardon
you.” Thereupon I answered: “I took nothing, most blessed Father, but
what I have confessed; and this did not amount to the value of 140
ducats, for that was the sum I received from the Mint in Perugia, and
with it I went home to comfort my poor old father.” The Pope said: “Your
father has been as virtuous, good, and worthy a man as was ever born,
and you have not degenerated from him. I am very sorry that the money
was so little; but such as you say it was, I make you a present of it,
and give you my full pardon. Assure your confessor of this, if there is
nothing else upon your conscience which concerns me. Afterwards, when
you have confessed and communicated, you shall present yourself to me
again, and it will be to your advantage.”

When I parted from the Pope, Messer Giacopo and the Archbishop
approached, and the Pope spoke to them in the highest terms imaginable
about me; he said that he had confessed and absolved me; then he
commissioned the Archbishop of Capua to send for me and ask if I had any
other need beyond this matter, giving him full leave to absolve me
amply, and bidding him, moreover, treat me with the utmost kindness.

While I was walking away with Maestro Giacopino, he asked me very
inquisitively what was the close and lengthy conversation I had had with
his Holiness. After he had repeated the question more than twice, I said
that I did not mean to tell him, because they were matters with which he
had nothing to do, and therefore he need not go on asking me. Then I
went to do what had been agreed on with the Pope; and after the two
festivals were over, I again presented myself before his Holiness. He
received me even better than before, and said: “If you had come a little
earlier to Rome, I should have commissioned you to restore my two
tiaras, which were pulled to pieces in the castle. These, however, with
the exception of the gems, are objects of little artistic interest; so I
will employ you on a piece of the very greatest consequence, where you
will be able to exhibit all your talents. It is a button for my priest’s
cope, which has to be made round like a trencher, and as big as a little
trencher, one-third of a cubit wide. Upon this I want you to represent a
God the Father in half-relief, and in the middle to set that magnificent
big diamond, which you remember, together with several other gems of the
greatest value. Caradosso began to make me one, but did not finish it; I
want yours to be finished quickly, so that I may enjoy the use of it a
little while. Go, then, and make me a fine model.” He had all the jewels
shown me, and then I went off like a shot [3] to set myself to work.

Note 1. Cellini has been severely taxed for leaving Florence at this
juncture and taking service under Pope Clement, the oppressor of her
liberties. His own narrative admits some sense of shame. Yet we should
remember that he never took any decided part in politics, and belonged
to a family of Medicean sympathies. His father served Lorenzo and Piero;
his brother was a soldier of Giovanni delle Bande Nere and Duke
Alessandro. Many most excellent Florentines were convinced that the
Medicean government was beneficial; and an artist had certainly more to
expect from it than from the Republic.

Note 2. Nicolas Schomberg, a learned Dominican and disciple of
Savonarola, made Archbishop of Capua in 1520. He was a faithful and able
minister of Clement. Paul III gave him the hat in 1535, and he died in
1537.

Note 3. 'Affusolato.' Lit., straight as a spindle.

[Book 1, chapter 44]

DURING the time when Florence was besieged, Federigo Ginori, for whom I
made that medal of Atlas, died of consumption, and the medal came into
the hands of Messer Luigi Alamanni, who, after a little while, took it
to present in person to Francis, king of France, accompanied by some of
his own finest compositions. The King was exceedingly delighted with the
gift; whereupon Messer Luigi told his Majesty so much about my personal
qualities, as well as my art, and spoke so favourably, that the King
expressed a wish to know me.

Meanwhile I pushed my model for the button forward with all the
diligence I could, constructing it exactly of the size which the jewel
itself was meant to have. In the trade of the goldsmiths it roused
considerable jealousy among those who thought that they were capable of
matching it. A certain Micheletto had just come to Rome; [1] he was very
clever at engraving cornelians, and was, moreover, a most intelligent
jeweller, an old man and of great celebrity. He had been employed upon
the Pope’s tiaras; and while I was working at my model, he wondered much
that I had not applied to him, being as he was a man of intelligence and
of large credit with the Pope. At last, when he saw that I was not
coming to him, he came to me, and asked me what I was about. “What the
Pope has ordered me,” I answered. Then he said: “The Pope has
commissioned me to superintend everything which is being made for his
Holiness.” I only replied that I would ask the Pope, and then should
know what answer I ought to give him. He told me that I should repent,
and departing in anger, had an interview with all the masters of the
art; they deliberated on the matter, and charged Michele with the
conduct of the whole affair. As was to be expected from a person of his
talents, he ordered more than thirty drawings to be made, all differing
in their details, for the piece the Pope had commissioned.

Having already access to his Holiness’ ear, he took into his counsel
another jeweller, named Pompeo, a Milanese, who was in favour with the
Pope, and related to Messer Traiano, the first chamberlain of the court;
[2] these two together, then, began to insinuate that they had seen my
model, and did not think me up to a work of such extraordinary import.
The Pope replied that he would also have to see it, and that if he then
found me unfit for the purpose, he should look around for one who was
fit. Both of them put in that they had several excellent designs ready;
to which the Pope made answer, that he was very pleased to hear it, but
that he did not care to look at them till I had completed my model;
afterwards, he would take them all into consideration at the same time.

After a few days I finished my model, and took it to the Pope one
morning, when Messer Traiano made me wait till he had sent for
Micheletto and Pompeo, bidding them make haste and bring their drawings.
On their arrival we were introduced, and Micheletto and Pompeo
immediately unrolled their papers, which the Pope inspected. The
draughtsmen who had been employed were not in the jeweller’s trade, and
therefore, knew nothing about giving their right place to precious
stones; and the jewellers, on their side, had not shown them how; for I
ought to say that a jeweller, when he has to work with figures, must of
necessity understand design, else he cannot produce anything worth
looking at: and so it turned out that all of them had stuck that famous
diamond in the middle of the breast of God the Father. The Pope, who was
an excellent connoisseur, observing this mistake, approved of none of
them; and when he had looked at about ten, he flung the rest down, and
said to me, who was standing at a distance: “Now show me your model,
Benvenuto, so that I may see if you have made the same mistake as those
fellows.” I came forward, and opened a little round box; whereupon one
would have thought that a light from heaven had struck the Pope’s eyes.
He cried aloud: “If you had been in my own body, you could not have done
it better, as this proves. Those men there have found the right way to
bring shame upon themselves!” A crowd of great lords pressing round, the
Pope pointed out the difference between my model and the drawings. When
he had sufficiently commended it, the others standing terrified and
stupid before him, he turned to me and said: “I am only afraid of one
thing, and that is of the utmost consequence. Friend Benvenuto, wax is
easy to work in; the real difficulty is to execute this in gold.” To
those words I answered without moment’s hesitation: “Most blessed
Father, if I do not work it ten times better than the model, let it be
agreed beforehand that you pay me nothing.” When they heard this, the
noblemen made a great stir, crying out that I was promising too much.
Among them was an eminent philosopher, who spoke out in my favour: “From
the fine physiognomy and bodily symmetry which I observed in this young
man, I predict that he will accomplish what he says, and think that he
will even go beyond it.” The Pope put in: “And this is my opinion also.”
Then he called his chamberlain, Messer Traiano, and bade him bring five
hundred golden ducats of the Camera.

While we were waiting for the money, the Pope turned once more to gaze
at leisure on the dexterous device I had employed for combining the
diamond with the figure of God the Father. I had put the diamond exactly
in the center of the piece; and above it God the Father was shown
seated, leaning nobly in a sideways attitude, [3] which made a perfect
composition, and did not interfere with the stone’s effect. Lifting his
right hand, he was in the act of giving the benediction. Below the
diamond I had place three children, who, with their arms upraised, were
supporting the jewel. One of them, in the middle, was in full relief,
the other two in half-relief. All around I set a crowd of cherubs, in
divers attitudes, adapted to the other gems. A mantle undulated to the
wind around the figure of the Father, from the folds of which cherubs
peeped out; and there were other ornaments besides which made a very
beautiful effect. The work was executed in white stucco on a black
stone. When the money came, the Pope gave it to me with his own hand,
and begged me in the most winning terms to let him have it finished in
his own days, adding that this should be to my advantage.

Note 1. Vasari calls this eminent engraver of gems Michelino.

Note 2. Messer Traiano Alicorno.

Note 3. 'In un certo bel modo svolto.' That means: turned aside, not
fronting the spectator.

[Book 1, chapter 45]

I TOOK the money and the model home, and was in the utmost impatience to
begin my work. After I had laboured diligently for eight days, the Pope
sent word by one of his chamberlains, a very great gentleman of Bologna,
that I was to come to him and bring what I had got in hand. On the way,
the chamberlain, who was the most gentle-mannered person in the Roman
court, told me that the Pope not only wanted to see what I was doing,
but also intended to intrust me with another task of the highest
consequence, which was, in fact, to furnish dies for the money of the
Mint; and bade me arm myself beforehand with the answer I should give;
in short, he wished me to be prepared, and therefore he had spoken. When
we came into the presence, I lost no time in exhibiting the golden
plate, upon which I had as yet carved nothing but my figure of God the
Father; but this, though only in the rough, displayed a grander style
than that of the waxen model. The Pope regarded it with stupefaction,
and exclaimed: “From this moment forward I will believe everything you
say.” Then loading me with marks of favour, he added: “It is my
intention to give you another commission, which, if you feel competent
to execute it, I shall have no less at heart than this, or more.” He
proceeded to tell me that he wished to make dies for the coinage of his
realm, and asked me if I had ever tried my hand at such things, and if I
had the courage to attempt them. I answered that of courage for the task
I had no lack, and that I had seen how dies were made, but that I had
not ever made any. There was in the presence a certain Messer Tommaso,
of Prato, his Holiness’ Datary; [1] and this man, being a friend of my
enemies, put in: “Most blessed Father, the favours you are showering
upon this young man (and he by nature so extremely overbold) are enough
to make him promise you a new world. You have already given him one
great task, and now, by adding a greater, you are like to make them
clash together.” The Pope, in a rage, turned round on him, and told him
to mind his own business. Then he commanded me to make the model for a
broad doubloon of gold, upon which he wanted a naked Christ with his
hands tied, and the inscription 'Ecce Homo;' the reverse was to have a
Pope and Emperor in the act together of propping up a cross which seemed
to fall, and this legend: 'Unus spiritus et una fides erat in eis.'

After the Pope had ordered this handsome coin, Bandinello the sculptor
came up; he had not yet been made a knight; and, with his wonted
presumption muffled up in ignorance, said: “For these goldsmiths one
must make drawings for such fine things as that.” I turned round upon
him in a moment, and cried out that I did not want his drawings for my
art, but that I hoped before very long to give his art some trouble by
my drawings. The Pope expressed high satisfaction at these words, and
turning to me said: “Go then, my Benvenuto, and devote yourself with
spirit to my service, and do not lend an ear to the chattering of these
silly fellows.”

So I went off, and very quickly made two dies of steel; then I stamped a
coin in gold, and one Sunday after dinner took the coin and the dies to
the Pope, who, when he saw the piece, was astonished and greatly
gratified, not only because my work pleased him excessively, but also
because of the rapidity with which I had performed it. For the further
satisfaction and amazement of his holiness, I had brought with me all
the old coins which in former times had been made by those able men who
served Popes Giulio and Leo; and when I noticed that mine pleased him
far better, I drew forth from my bosom a patient, [2] in which I prayed
for the post of stamp-master [3] in the Mint. This place was worth six
golden crowns a month, in addition to the dies, which were paid at the
rate of a ducat for three by the Master of the Mint. The Pope took my
patent and handed it to the Datary, telling him to lose no time in
dispatching the business. The Datary began to put it in his pocket,
saying: “Most blessed Father, your Holiness ought not to go so fast;
these are matters which deserve some reflection.” To this the Pope
replied; “I have heard what you have got to say; give me here that
patent.” He took it, and signed it at once with his own hand; then,
giving it back, added: “Now, you have no answer left; see that you
dispatch it at once, for this is my pleasure; and Benvenuto’s shoes are
worth more than the eyes of all those other blockheads.” So, having
thanked his Holiness, I went back, rejoicing above measure, to my work.

Note 1. His full name was Tommaso Cortese. The Papal Datario was the
chief secretary of the office for requests, petitions and patents. His
title was derived from its being his duty to affix the 'Datum Romæ' to
documents. The fees of this office, which was also called Datario,
brought in a large revenue to the Papacy.

Note 2. 'Moto propio.' Cellini confuses his petition with the
instrument, which he had probably drawn up ready for signature.

Note 3. 'Maestro delle stampe della zecca, i. e.,' the artist who made
the dies.
