Book One, Chapters 46 to 52 (Symonds)

[Book 1, chapter 46]

I WAS still working in the shop of Raffaello del Moro. This worthy man
had a very beautiful young daughter, with regard to whom he had designs
on me; and I, becoming partly aware of his intentions, was very willing;
but, while indulging such desires, I made no show of them: on the
contrary, I was so discreet in my behaviour that I made him wonder. It
so happened that the poor girl was attacked by a disorder in her right
hand, which ate into the two bones belonging to the little finger and
the next. [1] Owing to her father’s carelessness, she had been treated
by an ignorant quack-doctor, who predicted that the poor child would be
crippled in the whole of her right arm, if even nothing worse should
happen. When I noticed the dismay of her father, I begged him not to
believe all that this ignorant doctor had said. He replied that he had
no acquaintance with physicians or with surgeons, and entreated me, if I
knew of one, to bring him to the house. [2] I sent at once for a certain
Maestro Giacomo of Perugia, a man of great skill in surgery, who
examined the poor girl. [3] She was dreadfully frightened through having
gained some inkling of the quack’s predictions; whereas, my intelligent
doctor declared that she would suffer nothing of consequence, and would
be very well able to use her right hand; also that though the two last
fingers must remain somewhat weaker than the others, this would be of no
inconvenience at all to her. So he began his treatment; and after a few
days, when he was going to extract a portion of the diseased bones, her
father called for me, and begged me to be present at the operation.
Maestro Giacomo was using some coarse steel instruments; and when I
observed that he was making little way and at the same time was
inflicting severe pain on the patient, I begged him to stop and wait
half a quarter of an hour for me. I ran into the shop, and made a little
scalping-iron of steel, extremely thin and curved; it cut like a razor.
On my return, the surgeon used it, and began to work with so gentle a
hand that she felt no pain, and in a short while the operation was over.
In consequence of this service, and for other reasons, the worthy man
conceived for me as much love, or more, as he had for two male children;
and in the meanwhile he attended to the cure of his beautiful young
daughter.

I was on terms of the closest intimacy with one Messer Giovanni Gaddi,
who was a clerk of the Camera, and a great connoisseur of the arts,
although he had no practical acquaintance with any. [4] In his household
were a certain Messer Giovanni, a Greek of eminent learning, Messer
Lodovico of Fano, no less distinguished as a man of letters, Messer
Antonio Allegretti, and Messer Annibale Caro, [5] at that time in his
early manhood. Messer Bastiano of Venice, a most excellent painter, and
I were admitted to their society; and almost every day we met together
in Messer Giovanni’s company. [6]

Being aware of this intimacy, the worthy goldsmith Raffaello said to
Messer Giovanni: “Good sir, you know me; now I want to marry my daughter
to Benvenuto, and can think of no better intermediary than your worship.
So I am come to crave your assistance, and to beg you to name for her
such dowry from my estate as you may think suitable.” The light-headed
man hardly let my good friend finish what he had to say, before he put
in quite at random: “Talk no more about it, Raffaello; you are farther
from your object than January from mulberries.” The poor man, utterly
discouraged, looked about at once for another husband for his girl;
while she and the mother and all the family lived on in a bad humour
with me. Since I did not know the real cause of this-I imagined they
were paying me with bastard coin for the many kindnesses I had shown
them-I conceived the thought of opening a workshop of my own in their
neighbourhood. Messer Giovanni told me nothing till the girl was
married, which happened in a few months.

Meanwhile, I laboured assiduously at the work I was doing for the Pope,
and also in the service of the Mint; for his Holiness had ordered
another coin, of the value of two carlins, on which his own portrait was
stamped, while the reverse bore a figure of Christ upon the waters,
holding out his hand to S. Peter, with this inscription 'Quare
dubitasti?' My design won such applause that a certain secretary of the
Pope, a man of the greatest talent, called Il Sanga, [7] was moved to
this remark: “Your Holiness can boast of having a currency superior to
any of the ancients in all their glory.” The Pope replied: “Benvenuto,
for his part, can boast of serving an emperor like me, who is able to
discern his merit.” I went on at my great piece in gold, showing it
frequently to the Pope, who was very eager to see it, and each time
expressed greater admiration.

Note 1. 'Ossicina che seguitano il dito,' &c. Probably metacarpal bones.

Note 2. 'Che gnene avviasse.'

Note 3. Giacomo Rastelli was a native of Rimini, but was popularly known
as of Perugia, since he had resided long in that city. He was a famous
surgeon under several Popes until the year 1566, when he died at Rome,
age seventy-five.

Note 4. Giovanni Gaddi of the Florentine family was passionately
attached to men of art and letters. Yet he seems to have been somewhat
disagreeable in personal intercourse; for even Annibale Caro, who owed
much to his patronage, and lived for many years in his house, never
became attached to him. We shall see how he treated Cellini during a
fever.

Note 5. Some poems of Allegretti’s survive. He was a man of mark in the
literary society of the age. Giovanni Greco may have been a Giovanni
Vergezio, who presented Duke Cosimo with some Greek characters of
exquisite finish. Lodovico da Fano is mentioned as an excellent Latin
scholar. Annibale Caro was one of the most distinguished writers of
Italian prose and verse in the later Renaissance. He spent the latter
portion of his life in the service of the Farnesi.

Note 6. Messer Bastiano is the celebrated painter Sebastian del Piombo,
born 1485, died 1547.

Note 7. Battista Sanga, a Roman, secretary to Gianmatteo Giberti, the
good Archbishop of Verona, and afterwards to Clement VII. He was a great
Latinist, and one of those ecclesiastics who earnestly desired a reform
of the Church. He died, poisoned, at an early age.

[Book 1, chapter 47]

MY brother, at this period, was also in Rome, serving Duke Alessandro,
on whom the Pope had recently conferred the Duchy of Penna. This prince
kept in his service a multitude of soldiers, worthy fellows, brought up
to valour in the school of that famous general Giovanni de’ Medici; and
among these was my brother, whom the Duke esteemed as highly as the
bravest of them. One day my brother went after dinner to the shop of a
man called Baccino della Croce in the Banchi, which all those
men-at-arms frequented. He had flung himself upon a settee, and was
sleeping. Just then the guard of the Bargello passed by; [1] they were
taking to prison a certain Captain Cisti, a Lombard, who had also been a
member of Giovanni’s troop, but was not in the service of the Duke. The
captain, Cattivanza degli Strozzi, chanced to be in the same shop; [2]
and when Cisti caught sight of him, he whispered: “I was bringing you
those crowns I owed; if you want them, come for them before they go with
me to prison.” Now Cattivanza had a way of putting his neighbours to the
push, not caring to hazard his own person. So, finding there around him
several young fellows of the highest daring, more eager than apt for so
serious an enterprise, he bade them catch up Captain Cisti and get the
money from him, and if the guard resisted, overpower the men, provided
they had pluck enough to do so.

The young men were but four, and all four of them without a beard. The
first was called Bertino Aldobrandi, another Anguillotto of Lucca; I
cannot recall the names of the rest. Bertino had been trained like a
pupil by my brother; and my brother felt the most unbounded love for
him. So then, off dashed the four brave lads, and came up with the guard
of the Bargello-upwards of fifty constables, counting pikes, arquebuses,
and two-handed-swords. After a few words they drew their weapons, and
the four boys so harried the guard, that if Captain Cattivanza had but
shown his face, without so much as drawing, they would certainly have
put the whole pack to flight. But delay spoiled all; for Bertino
received some ugly wounds and fell; at the same time, Anguillotto was
also hit in the right arm, and being unable to use his sword, got out of
the fray as well as he was able. The others did the same. Bertino
Aldobrandi was lifted from the ground seriously injured.

Note 1. The Bargello was the chief constable or sheriff in Italian
towns. I shall call him Bargello always in my translation, since any
English equivalent would be misleading. He did the rough work of
policing the city, and was consequently a mark for all the men of spirit
who disliked being kept in order. Giovio, in his Life of Cardinal Pompeo
Colonna, quite gravely relates how it was the highest ambition of young
Romans of spirit to murder the Bargello. He mentions, in particular, a
certain Pietro Margano, who had acquired great fame and popularity by
killing the Bargello of his day, one Cencio, in the Campo di Fiore. This
man became an outlaw, and was favourably received by Cardinal Colonna,
then at war with Clement VII.

Note 2. His baptismal name was Bernardo. Cattivanza was a nickname. He
fought bravely for Florence in the siege.

[Book 1, chapter 48]

WHILE these things were happening, we were all at table; for that
morning we had dined more than an hour later than usual. On hearing the
commotion, one of the old man’s sons, the elder, rose from table to go
and look at the scuffle. He was called Giovanni; and I said to him: “For
Heaven’s sake, don’t go! In such matters one is always certain to lose,
while there is nothing to be gained.” His father spoke to like purpose:
“Pray, my son, don’t go!” But the lad, without heeding any one, ran down
the stairs. Reaching the Banchi, where the great scrimmage was, and
seeing Bertino lifted from the ground, he ran towards home, and met my
brother Cecchino on the way, who asked what was the matter. Though some
of the bystanders signed to Giovanni not to tell Cecchino, he cried out
like a madman how it was that Bertino Aldobrandi had been killed by the
guard. My poor brother gave vent to a bellow which might have been heard
ten miles away. Then he turned to Giovanni: “Ah me! but could you tell
me which of those men killed him for me?” [1] Giovanni said, yes, that
it was a man who had a big two-handed sword, with a blue feather in his
bonnet. My poor brother rushed ahead, and having recognised the homicide
by those signs, he threw himself with all his dash and spirit into the
middle of the band, and before his man could turn on guard, ran him
right through the guts, and with the sword’s hilt thrust him to the
ground. Then he turned upon the rest with such energy and daring, that
his one arm was on the point of putting the whole band to flight, had it
not been that, while wheeling round to strike an arquebusier, this man
fired in self-defence, and hit the brave unfortunate young fellow above
the knee of his right leg. While he lay stretched upon the ground, the
constables scrambled off in disorder as fast as they were able, lest a
pair to my brother should arrive upon the scene.

Noticing that the tumult was not subsiding, I too rose from the table,
and girding on my sword-for everybody wore one then-I went to the bridge
of Sant’ Agnolo, where I saw a group of several men assembled. On my
coming up and being recognised by some of them, they gave way before me,
and showed me what I least of all things wished to see, albeit I made
mighty haste to view the sight. On the instant I did not know Cecchino,
since he was wearing a different suit of clothes from that in which I
had lately seen him. Accordingly, he recognised me first, and said:
“Dearest brother, do not be upset by my grave accident; it is only what
might be expected in my profession: get me removed from here at once,
for I have but few hours to live.” They had acquainted me with the whole
event while he was speaking, in brief words befitting such occasion. So
I answered: “Brother, this is the greatest sorrow and the greatest trial
that could happen to me in the whole course of my life. But be of good
cheer; for before you lose sight of him who did the mischief, you shall
see yourself revenged by my hand.’ Our words on both sides were to the
purport, but of the shortest.

Note 1. 'Oimè, saprestimi tu dire che di quelli me I’ha morto?' The 'me'
is so emphatic, that, though it makes poor English, I have preserved it
in my version.

[Book 1, chapter 49]

THE GUARD was now about fifty paces from us; for Maffio, their officer,
had made some of them turn back to take up the corporal my brother
killed. Accordingly, I quickly traversed that short space, wrapped in my
cape, which I had tightened round me, and came up with Maffio, whom I
should most certainly have murdered, for there were plenty of people
round, and I had wound my way among them. With the rapidity of
lightning, I had half drawn my sword from the sheath, when Berlinghier
Berlinghieri, a young man of the greatest daring and my good friend,
threw himself from behind upon my arms; he had four other fellows of
like kidney with him, who cried out to Maffio: “Away with you, for this
man here alone was killing you!” He asked: “Who is he?” and they
answered: “Own brother to the man you see there.” Without waiting to
hear more, he made haste for Torre di Nona; [1] and they said:
“Benvenuto, we prevented you against your will, but did it for your
good; now let us go to succour him who must die shortly.” Accordingly,
we turned and went back to my brother, whom I had at once conveyed into
a house. The doctors who were called in consultation, treated him with
medicaments, but could not decide to amputate the leg, which might
perhaps have saved him.

As soon as his wound had been dressed, Duke Alessandro appeared and most
affectionately greeted him. My brother had not as yet lost
consciousness; so he said to the Duke: “My lord, this only grieves me,
that your Excellency is losing a servant than whom you may perchance
find men more valiant in the profession of arms, but none more lovingly
and loyally devoted to your service than I have been.” The Duke bade him
do all he could to keep alive; for the rest, he well knew him to be a
man of worth and courage, He then turned to his attendants, ordering
them to see that the brave young fellow wanted for nothing.

When he was gone, my brother lost blood so copiously, for nothing could
be done to stop it, that he went off his head, and kept raving all the
following night, with the exception that once, when they wanted to give
him the communion, he said: “You would have done well to confess me
before; now it is impossible that I should receive the divine sacrament
in this already ruined frame; it will be enough if I partake of it by
the divine virtue of the eyesight, whereby it shall be transmitted into
my immortal soul, which only prays to Him for mercy and forgiveness.”
Having spoken thus, the host was elevated; but he straightway relapsed
into the same delirious ravings as before, pouring forth a torrent of
the most terrible frenzies and horrible imprecations that the mind of
man could imagine; nor did he cease once all that night until the day
broke.

When the sun appeared above our horizon, he turned to me and said:
“Brother, I do not wish to stay here longer, for these fellows will end
by making me do something tremendous, which may cause them to repent of
the annoyance they have given me.” Then he kicked out both his legs-the
injured limb we had enclosed in a very heavy box-and made as though he
would fling it across a horse’s back. Turning his face round to me, he
called out thrice-”Farewell, farewell!” and with the last word that most
valiant spirit passed away.

At the proper hour, toward nightfall, I had him buried with due ceremony
in the church of the Florentines; and afterwards I erected to his memory
a very handsome monument of marble, upon which I caused trophies and
banners to be carved. I must not omit to mention that one of his friends
had asked him who the man was that had killed him, and if he could
recognise him; to which he answered that he could, and gave his
description. My brother, indeed, attempted to prevent this coming to my
ears; but I got it very well impressed upon my mind, as will appear in
the sequel. 2

Note 1. The Torre di Nona was one of the principal prisons in Rome, used
especially for criminals condemned to death.

Note 2. Varchi, in his 'Storia Florentina,' lib. xi., gives a short
account of Cecchino Cellini’s death in Rome, mentioning also Bertino
Aldobrandi, in the attempt to revenge whom he lost his life.

[Book 1, chapter 50]

RETURNING to the monument, I should relate that certain famous men of
letters, who knew my brother, composed for me an epitaph, telling me
that the noble young man deserved it. The inscription ran thus:-

'“Francisco Cellino Florentino, qui quod in teneris annis ad Ioannem
Medicem ducem plures victorias retulit et signifer fuit, facile
documentum dedit quantæ fortitudinis et consilii vir futurus erat, ni
crudelis fati archibuso transfossus, quinto ætatis lustro jaceret,
Benvenutus frater posuit. Obiit die' xxvii 'Maii' MD.XXIX.”

He was twenty-five years of age; and since the soldiers called him
Cecchino del Piffero, [1] his real name being Giovanfrancesco Cellini, I
wanted to engrave the former, by which he was commonly known, under the
armorial bearings of our family. This name then I had cut in fine
antique characters, all of which were broken save the first and last. I
was asked by the learned men who had composed that beautiful epitaph,
wherefore I used these broken letters; and my answer was, because the
marvellous framework of his body was spoiled and dead; and the reason
why the first and last remained entire was, that the first should
symbolise the great gift God had given him, namely, of a human soul,
inflamed with his divinity, the which hath never broken, while the
second represented the glorious renown of his brave actions. The thought
gave satisfaction, and several persons have since availed themselves of
my device. Close to the name I had the coat of us Cellini carved upon
the stone, altering it in some particulars. In Ravenna, which is a most
ancient city, there exist Cellini of our name in the quality of very
honourable gentry, who bear a lion rampant or upon a field of azure,
holding a lily gules in his dexter paw, with a label in chief and three
little lilies or. [2] These are the true arms of the Cellini. My father
showed me a shield as ours which had the paw only, together with the
other bearings; but I should prefer to follow those of the Cellini of
Ravenna, which I have described above. Now to return to what I caused to
be engraved upon my brother’s tomb: it was the lion’s paw, but instead
of a lily, I made the lion hold an axe, with the field of the scutcheon
quartered; and I put the axe in solely that I might not be unmindful to
revenge him.

Note 1. That is, Frank, the Fifer’s son.

Note 2. I believe Cellini meant here to write “on a chief argent a label
of four points, and three lilies gules.” He has tricked the arms thus in
a MS. of the Palatine Library. See Leclanchè, p. 103; see also Piatti,
vol. i. p. 233, and Plon, p. 2.

[Book 1, chapter 51]

I WENT on applying myself with the utmost diligence upon the gold-work
for Pope Clement’s button. He was very eager to have it, and used to
send for me two or three times a week, in order to inspect it; and his
delight in the work always increased. Often would he rebuke and scold
me, as it were, for the great grief in which my brother’s loss had
plunged me; and one day, observing me more downcast and out of trim than
was proper, he cried aloud: “Benvenuto, oh! I did not know that you were
mad. Have you only just learned that there is no remedy against death?
One would think that you were trying to run after him.” When I left the
presence, I continued working at the jewel and the dies [1] for the
Mint; but I also took to watching the arquebusier who shot my brother,
as though he had been a girl I was in love with. The man had formerly
been in the light cavalry, but afterwards had joined the arquebusiers as
one of the Bargello’s corporals; and what increased my rage was that he
had used these boastful words: “If it had not been for me, who killed
that brave young man, the least trifle of delay would have resulted in
his putting us all to flight with great disaster.” When I saw that the
fever caused by always seeing him about was depriving me of sleep and
appetite, and was bringing me by degrees to sorry plight, I overcame my
repugnance to so low and not quite praiseworthy an enterprise, and made
my mind up one evening to rid myself of the torment. The fellow lived in
a house near a place called Torre Sanguigua, next door to the lodging of
one of the most fashionable courtesans in Rome, named Signora Antea. It
had just struck twenty-four, and he was standing at the house-door, with
his sword in hand, having risen from supper. With great address I stole
up to him, holding a large Pistojan dagger, [2] and dealt him a
back-handed stroke, with which I meant to cut his head clean off; but as
he turned round very suddenly, the blow fell upon the point of his left
shoulder and broke the bone. He sprang up, dropped his sword,
half-stunned with the great pain, and took to flight. I followed after,
and in four steps caught him up, when I lifted my dagger above his head,
which he was holding very low, and hit him in the back exactly at the
juncture of the nape-bone and the neck. The poniard entered this point
so deep into the bone, that, though I used all my strength to pull it
out, I was not able. For just at that moment four soldiers with drawn
swords sprang out from Antea’s lodging, and obliged me to set hand to my
own sword to defend my life. Leaving the poniard then, I made off, and
fearing I might be recognised, took refuge in the palace of Duke
Alessandro, which was between Piazza Navona and the Rotunda. [3] On my
arrival, I asked to see the Duke; who told me that, if I was alone, I
need only keep quiet and have no further anxiety, but to go on working
at the jewel which the Pope had set his heart on, and stay eight days
indoors. He gave this advice the more securely, because the soldiers had
now arrived who interrupted the completion of my deed; they held the
dagger in their hand, and were relating how the matter happened, and the
great trouble they had to pull the weapon from the neck and head-bone of
the man, whose name they did not know. Just then Giovan Bandini came up,
and said to them. [4] “That poniard is mine, and I lent it to Benvenuto,
who was bent on revenging his brother.” The soldiers were profuse in
their expressions of regret at having interrupted me, although my
vengeance had been amply satisfied.

More than eight days elapsed, and the Pope did not send for me according
to his custom. Afterwards he summoned me through his chamberlain, the
Bolognese nobleman I have already mentioned, who let me, in his own
modest manner, understand that his Holiness knew all, but was very well
inclined toward me, and that I had only to mind my work and keep quiet.
When we reached the presence, the Pope cast so menacing a glance towards
me, that the mere look of his eyes made me tremble. Afterwards, upon
examining my work his countenance cleared, and he began to praise me
beyond measure, saying that I had done a vast amount in a short time.
Then, looking me straight in the face, he added: “Now that you are
cured, Benvenuto, take heed how you live.” [5] I, who understood his
meaning, promised that I would. Immediately upon this, I opened a very
fine shop in the Banchi, opposite Raffaello, and there I finished the
jewel after the lapse of a few months.

Note 1. 'Ferri.' I have translated this word 'dies;' but it seems to
mean all the coining instruments, 'stampe' or 'conii' being the dies
proper.

Note 2. 'Pugnal pistolese;' it came in time to mean a cutlass.

Note 3. That is, the Pantheon.

Note 4. Bandini bears a distinguished name in Florentine annals. He
served Duke Alessandro in affairs of much importance; but afterwards he
betrayed the interests of his master, Duke Cosimo, in an embassy to
Charles V in 1543. It seems that he had then been playing into the hands
of Filippo Strozzi, for which offence he passed fifteen years in a
dungeon. See Varchi and Segni; also Montazio’s 'Prigionieri del Mastio
di Volterra,' cap. vii.

Note 5. This was the Pope’s hint to Cellini that he was aware of the
murder he had just committed.

[Book 1, chapter 52]

THE POPE had sent me all those precious stones, except the diamond,
which was pawned to certain Genoese bankers for some pressing need he
had of money. The rest were in my custody, together with a model of the
diamond. I had five excellent journeymen, and in addition to the great
piece, I was engaged on several jobs; so that my shop contained property
of much value in jewels, gems, and gold and silver. I kept a shaggy dog,
very big and handsome, which Duke Alessandro gave me; the beast was
capital as a retriever, since he brought me every sort of birds and game
I shot, but he also served most admirably for a watchdog. It happened,
as was natural at the age of twenty-nine, that I had taken into my
service a girl of great beauty and grace, whom I used as a model in my
art, and who was also complaisant of her personal favours to me. Such
being the case, I occupied an apartment far away from my workmen’s
rooms, as well as from the shop; and this communicated by a little dark
passage with the maid’s bedroom. I used frequently to pass the night
with her; and though I sleep as lightly as ever yet did man upon this
earth, yet, after indulgence in sexual pleasure, my slumber is sometimes
very deep and heavy.

So it chanced one night: for I must say that a thief, under the pretext
of being a goldsmith, had spied on me, and cast his eyes upon the
precious stones, and made a plan to steal them. Well, then, this fellow
broke into the shop, where he found a quantity of little things in gold
and silver. He was engaged in bursting open certain boxes to get at the
jewels he had noticed, when my dog jumped upon him, and put him to much
trouble to defend himself with his sword. The dog, unable to grapple
with an armed man, ran several times through the house, and rushed into
the rooms of the journeymen, which had been left open because of the
great heat. When he found they paid no heed to his loud barking, he
dragged their bed-clothes off; and when they still heard nothing, he
pulled first one and then another by the arm till he roused them, and,
barking furiously, ran before to show them where he wanted them to go.
At last it became clear that they refused to follow; for the traitors,
cross at being disturbed, threw stones and sticks at him; and this they
could well do, for I had ordered them to keep all night a lamp alight
there; and in the end they shut their rooms tight; so the dog,
abandoning all hope of aid from such rascals, set out alone again on his
adventure. He ran down, and not finding the thief in the shop, flew
after him. When he got at him, he tore the cape off his back. It would
have gone hard with the fellow had he not called for help to certain
tailors, praying them for God’s sake to save him from a mad dog; and
they, believing what he said, jumped out and drove the dog off with much
trouble.

After sunrise my workmen went into the shop, and saw that it had been
broken open and all the boxes smashed. They began to scream at the top
of their voices: “Ah, woe is me! Ah, woe is me!” The clamour woke me,
and I rushed out in a panic. Appearing thus before them, they cried out:
“Alas to us! for we have been robbed by some one, who has broken and
borne everything away!” These words wrought so forcibly upon my mind
that I dared not go to my big chest and look if it still held the jewels
of the Pope. So intense was the anxiety, that I seemed to lose my
eyesight, and told them they themselves must unlock the chest, and see
how many of the Pope’s gems were missing. The fellow were all of them in
their shirts; and when, on opening the chest, they saw the precious
stones and my work with them, they took heart of joy and shouted: “There
is no harm done; your piece and all the stones are here; but the thief
has left us naked to the shirt, because last night, by reason of the
burning heat, we took our clothes off in the shop and left them here.”
Recovering my senses, I thanked God, and said: “Go and get yourselves
new suits of clothes; I will pay when I hear at leisure how the whole
thing happened.” What caused me the most pain, and made me lose my
senses, and take fright-so contrary to my real nature-was the dread lest
peradventure folk should fancy I had trumped a story of the robber up to
steal the jewels. It had already been paid to Pope Clement by one of his
most trusted servants, and by others, that is, by Francesco del Nero,
Zana de’ Biliotti his accountant, the Bishop of Vasona, and several such
men: [1] “Why, most blessed Father, do you confide gems of that vast
value to a young fellow, who is all fire, more passionate for arms than
for his art, and not yet thirty years of age?” The Pope asked in answer
if any one of them knew that I had done aught to justify such
suspicions. Whereto Francesco del Nero, his treasurer, replied: [2] “No,
most blessed Father, because he has not as yet had an opportunity.
“Whereto the Pope rejoined: “I regard him as a thoroughly honest man;
and if I saw with my own eyes some crime he had committed, I should not
believe it.” This was the man who [3] caused me the greatest torment,
and who suddenly came up before my mind.

After telling the young men to provide themselves with fresh clothes, I
took my piece, together with the gems, setting them as well as I could
in their proper places, and went off at once with them to the Pope.
Francesco del Nero had already told him something of the trouble in my
shop, and had put suspicions in his head. So then, taking the thing
rather ill than otherwise, he shot a furious glance upon me, and cried
haughtily: “What have you come to do here? What is up?” “Here are all
your precious stones, and not one of them is missing.” At this the
Pope’s face cleared, and he said: “So then, you’re welcome.” I showed
him the piece, and while he was inspecting it, I related to him the
whole story of the thief and of my agony, and what had been my greatest
trouble in the matter. During this speech, he oftentimes turned round to
look me sharply in the eyes; and Francesco del Nero being also in the
presence, this seemed to make him half sorry that he had not guessed the
truth. At last, breaking into laughter at the long tale I was telling,
he sent me off with these words: “Go, and take heed to be an honest man,
as indeed I know that you are.”

Note 1. Of these people, we can trace the Bishop of Vasona. He was
Girolamo Schio or Schedo, a native of Vicenza, the confidential agent
and confessor of Clement VII., who obtained the See of Vaison in the
county of Avignon in 1523, and died at Rome in 1533. His successor in
the bishopric was Tomaso Cortesi, the Datary, mentioned above.

Note 2. Varchi gives a very ugly account of this man, Francesco del
Nero, who was nicknamed the 'Crà del Piccadiglio,' in his History of
Florence, book iii. “In the whole city of Florence there never was born,
in my belief, a man of such irreligion or of such sordid avarice.”
Giovio confirms the statement.

Note 3. 'Questo fu quello che.' This may be neuter: 'This was the
circumstance which.'
