Book Two, Chapters 1 to 6 (Symonds)

[Book 2, chapter 1]

I REMAINED for some time in the Cardinal of Ferrara’s palace, very well
regarded in general by everybody, and much more visited even than I had
previously been. Everybody was astonished that I should have come out of
prison and have been able to live through such indescribable
afflictions; [1] and while I was recovering my breath and endeavouring
to resume the habit of my art, I had great pleasure in re-writing the
Capitolo. Afterwards, with a view to re-establishing my strength, I
determined to take a journey of a few days for change of air. My good
friend the Cardinal gave me permission and lent me horses; and I had two
young Romans for my companions, one of them a craftsman in my trade, the
other only a comrade in our journey. We left Rome, and took the road to
Tagliacozzo, intending to visit my pupil Ascanio, who lived there. On
our arrival, I found the lad, together with his father, brothers,
sisters, and stepmother. I was entertained by them two days with
indescribable kindness; then I turned my face towards Rome, taking
Ascanio with me. On the road we fell to conversing about our art, which
made me die of impatience to get back and recommence my labours.

Having reached Rome, I got myself at once in readiness to work, and was
fortunate enough to find again a silver basin which I had begun for the
Cardinal before I was imprisoned. Together with this basin I had begun a
very beautiful little jug; but this had been stolen, with a great
quantity of other valuable articles. I set Pagolo, whom I have
previously mentioned, to work upon the basin. At the same time I
recommenced the jug, which was designed with round figures and
bas-reliefs. The basin was executed in a similar style, with round
figures and fishes in bas-relief. The whole had such richness and good
keeping, that every one who beheld it expressed astonishment at the
force of the design and beauty of invention, and also at the delicacy
[2] with which these young men worked.

The Cardinal came at least twice a day to see me, bringing with him
Messer Luigi Alamanni and Messer Gabriel Cesano; [3] and here we used to
pass an hour or two pleasantly together. Notwithstanding I had very much
to do, he kept giving me fresh commissions. Among others, I had to make
his pontifical seal of the size of the hand of a boy of twelve. On it I
engraved in intaglio two little histories, the one of San Giovanni
preaching in the wilderness, the other of Sant’ Ambrogio expelling the
Arians [4] on horseback with a lash in his hand. The fire and
correctness of design of this piece, and its nicety of workmanship, made
every one say that I had surpassed the great Lautizio, who ranked alone
in this branch of the profession. The Cardinal was so proud of it that
he used to compare it complacently with the other seals of the Roman
cardinals, which were nearly all from the hand of Lautizio.

Note 1. This assertion is well supported by contemporary letters of Caro
and Alamanni.

Note 2. 'Pulitezza.' This indicates precision, neatness, cleanness of
execution.

Note 3. The name of Cesano is well known in the literary correspondence
of those times.

Note 4. It will be remembered that the Cardinal was Archbishop of Milan.

[Book 2, chapter 2]

IN addition to these things the Cardinal ordered me to make the model
for a salt-cellar; but he said he should like me to leave the beaten
track pursued by such as fabricated these things. Messer Luigi, apropos
of this salt-cellar, made an eloquent description of his own idea;
Messer Gabriello Cesano also spoke exceedingly well to the same purpose.
The Cardinal, who was a very kindly listener, showed extreme
satisfaction with the designs which these two able men of letters had
described in words. Then he turned to me and said: “My Benvenuto, the
design of Messer Luigi and that of Messer Gabriello please me both so
well that I know not how to choose between them; therefore I leave the
choice to you, who will have to execute the work.” I replied as follows:
“It is apparent, my lords, of what vast consequence are the sons of
kings and emperors, and what a marvellous brightness of divinity appears
in them; nevertheless, if you ask some poor humble shepherd which he
loves best, those royal children or his sons, he will certainly tell you
that he loves his own sons best. Now I too have a great affection for
the children which I bring forth from my art; consequently the first
which I will show you, most reverend monsignor my good master, shall be
of my own making and invention. There are many things beautiful enough
in words which do not match together well when executed by an artist.”
Then I turned to the two scholars and said: “You have spoken, I will
do.” Upon this Messer Luigi Alamanni smiled, and added a great many
witty things, with the greatest charm of manner, in my praise; they
became him well, for he was handsome of face and figure, and had a
gentle voice. Messer Gabriello Cesano was quite the opposite, as ugly
and displeasing as the other was agreeable; accordingly he spoke as he
looked.

Messer Luigi had suggested that I should fashion a Venus with Cupid,
surrounded by a crowd of pretty emblems, all in proper keeping with the
subject. Messer Gabriello proposed that I should model an Amphitrite,
the wife of Neptune, together with those Tritons of the sea, and many
such-like fancies, good enough to describe in words, but not to execute
in metal.

I first laid down an oval framework, considerably longer than half a
cubit--almost two-thirds, in fact; and upon this ground, wishing to
suggest the interminglement of land and ocean, I modelled two figures,
considerably taller than a palm in height, which were seated with their
legs interlaced, suggesting those lengthier branches of the sea which
run up into the continents. The sea was a man, and in his hand I placed
a ship, elaborately wrought in all its details, and well adapted to hold
a quantity of salt. Beneath him I grouped the four sea-horses, and in
his right hand he held his trident. The earth I fashioned like a woman,
with all the beauty of form, the grace, and charm of which my art was
capable. She had a richly decorated temple firmly based upon the ground
at one side; and here her hand rested. This I intended to receive the
pepper. In her other hand I put a cornucopia, overflowing with all the
natural treasures I could think of. Below this goddess, in the part
which represented earth, I collected the fairest animals that haunt our
globe. In the quarter presided over by the deity of ocean, I fashioned
such choice kinds of fishes and shells as could be properly displayed in
that small space. What remained of the oval I filled in with luxuriant
ornamentation.

Then I waited for the Cardinal; and when he came, attended by the two
accomplished gentlemen, I produced the model I had made in wax. On
beholding it, Messer Gabriel Cesano was the first to lift his voice up,
and to cry: “This is a piece which it will take the lives of ten men to
finish: do not expect, most reverend monsignor, if you order it, to get
it in your lifetime. Benvenuto, it seems, has chosen to display his
children in a vision, but not to give them to the touch, as we did when
we spoke of things that could be carried out, while he has shown a thing
beyond the bounds of possibility.” Messer Alamanni took my side; but the
Cardinal said he did not care to undertake so important an affair. Then
I turned to them and said: “Most reverend monsignor, and you, gentlemen,
fulfilled with learning; I tell you that I hope to complete this piece
for whosoever shall be destined to possess it; [1] and each one of you
shall live to I see it executed a hundred times more richly than the
model. Indeed, I hope that time will be left me to produce far greater
things than this.” The Cardinal replied in heat: “Unless you make if for
the King, to whom I mean to take you, I do not think that you will make
it for another man alive.” Then he showed me letters in which the King,
under one heading, bade him return as soon as possible, bringing
Benvenuto with him. At this I raised my hands to heaven, exclaiming:
“Oh, when will that moment come, and quickly?” The Cardinal bade me put
myself in readiness, and arrange the affairs I had in Rome. He gave me
ten days for these preparations.

Note 1. 'A chi l’ard avere.' For whomsoever it in going to belong to.

[Book 2, chapter 3]

WHEN the time came to travel, he gave me a fine and excellent horse. The
animal was called Tornon, because it was a gift from the Cardinal
Tornon. [1] My apprentices, Pagolo and Ascanio, were also furnished with
good mounts.

The Cardinal divided his household, which was very numerous, into two
sections. The first, and the more distinguished, he took with him,
following the route of Romagna, with the object of visiting Madonna del
Loreto, and then making for Ferrara, his own home. The other section he
sent upon the road to Florence. This was the larger train; it counted a
great multitude, including the flower of his horse. He told me that if I
wished to make the journey without peril, I had better go with him,
otherwise I ran some risk of my life. I expressed my inclination to his
most reverend lordship to travel in his suite. But, having done so,
since the will of Heaven must be accomplished, it pleased God to remind
me of my poor sister, who had suffered greatly from the news of my
misfortunes. I also remembered my cousins, who were nuns in Viterbo, the
one abbess and the other camerlinga, [2] and who had therefore that rich
convent under their control. They too had endured sore tribulation for
my sake, and to their fervent prayers I firmly believed that I owed the
grace of my deliverance by God. Accordingly, when these things came into
my mind, I decided for the route to Florence. I might have travelled
free of expense with the Cardinal or with that other train of his, but I
chose to take my own way by myself. Eventually I joined company with a
very famous clockmaker, called Maestro Cherubino, my esteemed friend.
Thrown together by accident, we performed the journey with much
enjoyment on both sides.

I had left Rome on Monday in Passion Week, together with Pagolo and
Ascanio. [3] At Monte Ruosi we joined the company which I have
mentioned. Since I had expressed my intention of following the Cardinal,
I did not anticipate that any of my enemies would be upon the watch to
harm me. Yet I ran a narrow risk of coming to grief at Monte Ruosi; for
a band of men had been sent forward, well armed, to do me mischief
there. It was so ordained by God that, while we were at dinner, these
fellows, on the news that I was not travelling in the Cardinal’s suite,
made preparation to attack me. Just at that moment the Cardinal’s
retinue arrived, and I was glad enough to travel with their escort
safely to Viterbo. From that place onward I had no apprehension of
danger, especially as I made a point of travelling a few miles in front,
and the best men of the retinue kept a good watch over me. [4] I arrived
by God’s grace safe and sound at Viterbo, where my cousins and all the
convent received me with the greatest kindness.

Note 1. This was the famous François de Tournon, made Cardinal in 1530,
and employed as minister by François. I.

Note 2. This official in a convent was the same as cellarer or
superintendent of the cellar and provisions.

Note 3. This was March 22, 1540.

Note 4. 'Tenevano molto conto di me.' This is perhaps equivalent to
'held me in high esteem.' But Cellini uses the same phrase with the
meaning I have given above, in Book I, chap. lxxxvi.

[Book 2, chapter 4]

I bought a new pair of stirrups, although I still hoped to regain my
good pad by persuasion; and since I was very well mounted, and well
armed with shirt and sleeves of mail, and carried an excellent arquebuse
upon my saddle-bow, I was not afraid of the brutality and violence which
that mad beast was said to be possessed of. I had also accustomed my
young men to carry shirts of mail, and had great confidence in the
Roman, who, while we were in Rome together, had never left it off, so
far as I could see; Ascanio too, although he was but a stripling, was in
the habit of wearing one. Besides, as it was Good Friday, I imagined
that the madnesses of madmen might be giving themselves a holiday. When
we came to the Camollia gate, I at once recognised the postmaster by the
indications given me; for he was blind of the left eye. Riding up to him
then, and leaving my young men and companions at a little distance, I
courteously addressed him: “Master of the post, if I assure you that I
did not override your horse, why are you unwilling to give me back my
pad and stirrups?” The reply he made was precisely as mad and brutal as
had been foretold me. This roused me to exclaim: “How then! are you not
a Christian? or do you want upon Good Friday to force us both into a
scandal?” He answered that Good Friday or the Devil’s Friday was all the
same to him, and that if I did not take myself away, he would fell me to
the ground with a spontoon which he had taken up--me and the arquebuse I
had my hand on. Upon hearing these truculent words, an old gentleman of
Siena joined us; he was dressed like a citizen, and was returning from
the religious functions proper to that day. It seems that he had
gathered the sense of my arguments before he came up to where we stood;
and this impelled him to rebuke the postmaster with warmth, taking my
side, and reprimanding the man’s two sons for not doing their duty to
passing strangers; so that their manners were an offence to God and a
disgrace to the city of Siena. The two young fellows wagged their heads
without saying a word, and withdrew inside the house. Their father,
stung to fury by the scolding of that respectable gentleman, poured out
a volley of abusive blasphemies, and levelled his spontoon, swearing he
would murder me. When I saw him determined to do some act of bestial
violence, I pointed the muzzle of my arquebuse, with the object only of
keeping him at a distance. Doubly enraged by this, he flung himself upon
me. Though I had prepared the arquebuse for my defence, I had not yet
levelled it exactly at him; indeed it was pointed too high. It went off
of itself; and the ball, striking the arch of the door and glancing
backwards, wounded him in the throat, so that he fell dead to earth.
Upon this the two young men came running out; one caught up a partisan
from the rack which stood there, the other seized the spontoon of his
father. Springing upon my followers, the one who had the spontoon smote
Pagolo the Roman first above the left nipple. The other attacked a
Milanese who was in our company, and had the ways and manners of a
perfect fool. This man screamed out that he had nothing in the world to
do with me, and parried the point of the partisan with a little stick he
held; but this availed him naught: in spite of his words and fencing, he
received a flesh wound in the mouth. Messer Cherubino wore the habit of
a priest; for though he was a clockmaker by trade, he held benefices of
some value from the Pope. Ascanio, who was well armed, stood his ground
without trying to escape, as the Milanese had done; so these two came
off unhurt. I had set spurs to my horse, and while he was galloping, had
charged and got my arquebuse in readiness again; but now I turned back,
burning with fury, and meaning to play my part this time in earnest. I
thought that my young men had been killed, and was resolved to die with
them. The horse had not gone many paces when I met them riding toward
me, and asked if they were hurt. Ascanio answered that Pagolo was
wounded to the death. Then I said: “O Pagolo, my son, did the spontoon
then pierce through your armour?” “No,” he replied, “for I put my shirt
of mail in the valise this morning.” “So then, I suppose, one wears
chain-mail in Rome to swagger before ladies, but where there is danger,
and one wants it, one keeps it locked up in a portmanteau? You deserve
what you have got, and you are now the cause of sending me back to die
here too.” While I was uttering these words, I kept riding briskly
onward; but both the young men implored me for the love of God to save
myself and them, and not to rush on certain death. Just then I met
Messer Cherubino and the wounded Milanese. The former cried out that no
one was badly wounded; the blow given to Pagolo had only grazed the
skin, [2] but the old postmaster was stretched out dead; his sons with
other folk were getting ready for attack, and we must almost certainly
be cut to pieces: “Accordingly, Benvenuto, since fortune has saved us
from this first tempest, do not tempt her again, for things may not go
so favourably a second time.” To this I replied: “If you are satisfied
to have it thus, so also am I;” and turning to Pagolo and Ascanio, I
said: “Strike spurs to your horses, and let us gallop to Staggia without
stopping; [3] there we shall be in safety.” The wounded Milanese groaned
out: “A pox upon our peccadilloes! the sole cause of my misfortune was
that I sinned by taking a little broth this morning, having nothing else
to break my fast with.” In spite of the great peril we were in, we could
not help laughing a little at the donkey and his silly speeches. Then we
set spurs to our horses, and left Messer Cherubino and the Milanese to
follow at their leisure.

Note 1. The word I have translated by “pad” above is 'cucino' in the
original. It seems to have been a sort of cushion flung upon the saddle,
and to which the stirrups were attached.

Note 2. The Italian is peculiar: 'il colpo di Pagolo era ito tanto ritto
che non era isfandato.'

Note 3. Staggia is the next post on the way to Florence.

[Book 2, chapter 5]

WHILE we were making our escape, the sons of the dead man ran to the
Duke of Melfi, and begged for some light horsemen to catch us up and
take us prisoners. [1] The Duke upon being informed that we were the
Cardinal of Ferrara’s men, refused to give them troops or leave to
follow. We meanwhile arrived at Staggia, where we were in safety. There
we sent for a doctor, the best who could be had in such a place; and on
his examining Pagolo, we discovered that the wound was only skin-deep;
so I felt sure [2] that he would escape without mischief. Then we
ordered dinner; and at this juncture there arrived Messer Cherubino and
that Milanese simpleton, who kept always muttering: “A plague upon your
quarrels,” and complaining that he was excommunicated because he had not
been able to say a single Paternoster on that holy morning. He was very
ugly, and his mouth, which nature had made large, had been expanded at
least three inches by his wound; so that what with his ludicrous
Milanese jargon and his silly way of talking, he gave us so much matter
for mirth, that, instead of bemoaning our ill-luck, we could not hold
from laughing at every word he uttered. When the doctor wanted to sew up
his wound, and had already made three stitches with his needle, the
fellow told him to hold hard a while, since he did not want him out of
malice to sew his whole mouth up. Then he took up a spoon, and said he
wished to have his mouth left open enough to take that spoon in, in
order that he might return alive to his own folk. These things he said
with such odd waggings of the head, that we never stopped from laughing,
and so pursued our journey mirthfully to Florence.

We dismounted at the house of my poor sister, who, together with her
husband, overwhelmed us with kind attentions. Messer Cherubino and the
Milanese went about their business. In Florence we remained four days,
during which Pagolo got well. It was lucky for us that whenever we
talked about that Milanese donkey, we laughed as much as our misfortunes
made us weep, so that we kept laughing and crying both at the same
moment.

Pagolo recovered, as I have said, with ease; and then we travelled
toward Ferrara, where we found our lord the Cardinal had not yet
arrived. He had already heard of all our accidents, and said, when he
expressed his concern for them: “I pray to God that I may be allowed to
bring you alive to the King, according to my promise.” In Ferrara he
sent me to reside at a palace of his, a very handsome place called
Belfiore, close under the city walls. There he provided me with all
things necessary for my work. A little later, he arranged to leave for
France without me; and observing that I was very ill pleased with this,
he said to me: “Benvenuto, I am acting for your welfare; before I take
you out of Italy, I want you to know exactly what you will have to do
when you come to France. Meanwhile, push on my basin and the jug with
all the speed you can. I shall leave orders with my factor to give you
everything that you may want.”

He then departed, and I remained sorely dissatisfied, and more than once
I was upon the point of taking myself off without license. The only
thing which kept me back was that he had procured my freedom from Pope
Paolo; for the rest, I was ill-contented and put to considerable losses.
However, I clothed my mind with the gratitude due to that great benefit,
and disposed myself to be patient and to await the termination of the
business. So I set myself to work with my two men, and made great
progress with the jug and basin. The air was unwholesome where we
lodged, and toward summer we all of us suffered somewhat in our health.
During our indisposition we went about inspecting the domain; it was
very large, and left in a wild state for about a mile of open ground,
haunted too by multitudes of peacocks, which bred and nested there like
wildfowl. This put it into my head to charge my gun with a noiseless
kind of powder; then I tracked some of the young birds, and every other
day killed one, which furnished us with abundance of meat, of such
excellent quality that we shook our sickness off. For several months
following we went on working merrily, and got the jug and basin forward;
but it was a task that required much time.

Note 1. The Duke of Melfi, or Amalfi, was at this time Alfonso
Piccolomini, acting as captain-general of the Sienese in the interests
of Charles V.

Note 2. 'Cognobbi.' The subject to this verb may be either Cellini or
the doctor.

[Book 2, chapter 6]

AT that period the Duke of Ferrara came to terms with Pope Paul about
some old matters in dispute between them relating to Modena and certain
other cities. The Church having a strong claim to them, the Duke was
forced to purchase peace by paying down an enormous sum of money; I
think that it exceeded three hundred thousand ducats of the Camera.
There was an old treasurer in the service of the Duke, who had been
brought up by his father, Duke Alfonso, and was called Messer Girolamo
Giliolo. He could not endure to see so much money going to the Pope, and
went about the streets crying: “Duke Alfonso, his father, would sooner
have attacked and taken Rome with this money than have shown it to the
Pope.” Nothing would induce him to disburse it; at last, however, the
Duke compelled him to make the payments, which caused the old man such
anguish that he sickened of a dangerous colic and was brought to death’s
door. During this man’s illness the Duke sent for me, and bade me take
his portrait; this I did upon a circular piece of black stone about the
size of a little trencher. The Duke took so much pleasure in my work and
conversation, that he not unfrequently posed through four or five hours
at a stretch for his own portrait, and sometimes invited me to supper.
It took me eight days to complete his likeness; then he ordered me to
design the reverse. On it I modelled Peace, giving her the form of a
woman with a torch in her hand, setting fire to a trophy of arms; I
portrayed her in an attitude of gladness, with very thin drapery, and
below her feet lay Fury in despair, downcast and sad, and loaded with
chains. I devoted much study and attention to this work, and it won me
the greatest honour. The Duke was never tired of expressing his
satisfaction, and gave me inscriptions for both sides of the medal. That
on the reverse ran as follows: 'Pretiosa in conspectu Domini;' it meant
that his peace with the Pope had been dearly bought.
