Book Two, Chapters 7 to 12 (Symonds)

[Book 2, chapter 7]

WHILE I was still engaged upon the reverse of this medal, the Cardinal
sent me letters bidding me prepare for my journey, since the King had
asked after me. His next communication would contain full details
respecting all that he had promised. Accordingly, I had my jug and basin
packed up, after showing them to the Duke. Now a Ferrarese gentleman
named Alberto Bendedio was the Cardinal’s agent, and he had been twelve
years confined to his house, without once leaving it, by reason of some
physical infirmity. One day he sent in a vast hurry for me, saying I
must take the post at once, in order to present myself before the King
of France, who had eagerly been asking for me, under the impression that
I was in France. By way of apology, the Cardinal told him that I was
staying, slightly indisposed, in his abbey at Lyons, but that he would
have me brought immediately to his Majesty. Therefore I must lose no
time, but travel with the post.

Now Messer Alberto was a man of sterling worth, but proud, and illness
had made his haughty temper insupportable. As I have just said, he bade
me to get ready on the spot and take the journey by the common post. I
said that it was not the custom to pursue my profession in the post, and
that if I had to go, it was my intention to make easy stages and to take
with me the workmen Ascanio and Pagolo, whom I had brought from Rome.
Moreover, I wanted a servant on horseback to be at my orders, and money
sufficient for my costs upon the way. The infirm old man replied, upon a
tone of mighty haughtiness, that the sons of dukes were wont to travel
as I had described, and in no other fashion. I retorted that the sons of
my art travelled in the way I had informed him, and that not being a
duke’s son, I knew nothing about the customs of such folk; if he treated
me to language with which my ears were unfamiliar, I would not go at
all; the Cardinal having broken faith with me, and such scurvy words
having been spoken, I should make my mind up once for all to take no
further trouble with the Ferrarese. Then I turned my back, and, he
threatening, I grumbling, took my leave.

I next went to the Duke with my medal, which was finished. He received
me with the highest marks of honour and esteem. It seems that he had
given orders to Messer Girolamo Giliolo to reward me for my labour with
a diamond ring worth two hundred crowns, which was to be presented by
Fiaschino, his chamberlain. Accordingly, this fellow, on the evening
after I had brought the medal, at one hour past nightfall, handed me a
ring with a diamond of showy appearance, and spoke as follows on the
part of his master: “Take this diamond as a remembrance of his
Excellency, to adorn the unique artist’s hand which has produced a
masterpiece of so singular merit.” When day broke, I examined the ring,
and found the stone to be a miserable thin diamond, worth about ten
crowns. I felt sure that the Duke had not meant to accompany such
magnificent compliments with so trifling a gift, but that he must have
intended to reward me handsomely. Being then convinced that the trick
proceeded from his rogue of a treasurer, I gave the ring to a friend of
mine, begging him to return it to the chamberlain, Fiaschino, as he best
could. The man I chose was Bernardo Saliti, who executed his commission
admirably. Fiaschino came at once to see me, and declared, with vehement
expostulations, that the Duke would take it very ill if I refused a
present he had meant so kindly; perhaps I should have to repent of my
waywardness. I answered that the ring his Excellency had given me was
worth about ten crowns, and that the work I had done for him was worth
more than two hundred. Wishing, however, to show his Excellency how
highly I esteemed his courtesy, I should be happy if he bestowed on me
only one of those rings for the cramp, which come from England and are
worth tenpence. [1] I would treasure that so long as I lived in
remembrance of his Excellency, together with the honourable message he
had sent me; for I considered that the splendid favours of his
Excellency had amply recompensed my pains, whereas that paltry stone
insulted them. This speech annoyed the Duke so much that he sent for his
treasurer, and scolded him more sharply than he had ever done before. At
the same time he gave me orders, under pain of his displeasure, not to
leave Ferrara without duly informing him; and commanded the treasurer to
present me with a diamond up to three hundred crowns in value. The
miserly official found a stone rising a trifle above sixty crowns, and
let it be heard that it was worth upwards of two hundred.

Note 1. 'Anello del granchio,' a metal ring of lead and copper, such as
are now worn in Italy under the name of 'anello di salute.'

[Book 2, chapter 8]

MEANWHILE Messer Alberto returned to reason, and provided me with all I
had demanded. My mind was made up to quit Ferrara without fail that very
day; but the Duke’s attentive chamberlain arranged with Messer Alberto
that I should get no horses then. I had loaded a mule with my baggage,
including the case which held the Cardinal’s jug and basin. Just then a
Ferrarese nobleman named Messer Alfonso de’ Trotti arrived. [1] He was
far advanced in years, and a person of excessive affectation; a great
dilettante of the arts, but one of those men who are very difficult to
satisfy, and who, if they chance to stumble on something which suits
their taste, exalt it so in their own fancy that they never expect to
see the like of it again. Well, this Messer Alonso arrived, and Messer
Alberto said to him: “I am sorry that you are come so late; the jug and
basin we are sending to the Cardinal in France have been already
packed.” He answered that it did not signify to him; and beckoning to
his servant, sent him home to fetch a jug in white Faenzo clay, the
workmanship of which was very exquisite. During the time the servant
took to go and return, Messer Alfonso said to Messer Alberto: “I will
tell you why I do not care any longer to look at vases; it is that I
once beheld a piece of silver, antique, of such beauty and such finish
that the human imagination cannot possibly conceive its rarity.
Therefore I would rather not inspect any objects of the kind, for fear
of spoiling the unique impression I retain of that. I must tell you that
a gentleman of great quality and accomplishments, who went to Rome upon
matters of business, had this antique vase shown to him in secret. By
adroitly using a large sum of money, he bribed the person in whose hands
it was, and brought it with him to these parts; but he keeps it
jealously from all eyes, in order that the Duke may not get wind of it,
fearing he should in some way be deprived of his treasure.” While
spinning out this lengthy yarn, Messer Alfonso did not look at me,
because we were not previously acquainted. But when that precious clay
model appeared, he displayed it with such airs of ostentation, pomp, and
mountebank ceremony, that, after inspecting it, I turned to Messer
Alberto and said: “I am indeed lucky to have had the privilege to see
it!” [2] Messer Alfonso, quite affronted, let some contemptuous words
escape him, and exclaimed: “Who are you, then, you who do not know what
you are saying?” I replied: “Listen for a moment, and afterwards judge
which of us knows best what he is saying.” Then turning to Messer
Alberto, who was a man of great gravity and talent, I began: “This is a
copy from a little silver goblet, of such and such weight, which I made
at such and such a time for that charlatan Maestro Jacopo, the surgeon
from Carpi. He came to Rome and spent six months there, during which he
bedaubed some scores of nobleman and unfortunate gentlefolk with his
dirty salves, extracting many thousands of ducats from their pockets. At
that time I made for him this vase and one of a different pattern. He
paid me very badly; and at the present moment in Rome all the miserable
people who used his ointment are crippled and in a deplorable state of
health. [3] It is indeed great glory for me that my works are held in
such repute among you wealthy lords; but I can assure you that during
these many years past I have been progressing in my art with all my
might, and I think that the vase I am taking with me into France is far
more worthy of cardinals and kings than that piece belonging to your
little quack doctor.”

After I had made this speech, Messer Alfonso seemed dying with desire to
see the jug and basin, but I refused to open the box. We remained some
while disputing the matter, when he said that he would go to the Duke
and get an order from his Excellency to have it shown him. Then Messer
Alberto Bendedio, in the high and mighty manner which belonged to him,
exclaimed: “Before you leave this room, Messer Alfonso, you shall see
it, without employing the Duke’s influence.” On hearing these words I
took my leave, and left Ascanio and Pagolo to show it. They told me
afterwards that he had spoken enthusiastically in my praise. After this
he wanted to become better acquainted with me; but I was wearying to
leave Ferrara and get away from all its folk. The only advantages I had
enjoyed there were the society of Cardinal Salviati and the Cardinal of
Ravenna, and the friendship of some ingenious musicians; [4] no one else
had been to me of any good: for the Ferrarese are a very avaricious
people, greedy of their neighbours’ money, however they may lay their
hands on it; they are all the same in this respect.

At the hour of twenty-two Fiaschino arrived, and gave me the diamond of
sixty crowns, of which I spoke above. He told me, with a hang-dog look
and a few brief words, that I might wear it for his Excellency’s sake. I
replied: “I will do so.” Then putting my foot in the stirrup in his
presence, I set off upon my travels without further leave-taking. The
man noted down my act and words, and reported them to the Duke, who was
highly incensed, and showed a strong inclination to make me retrace my
steps.

Note 1. This man was a member of a very noble Ferrarese family, and much
esteemed for his official talents.

Note 2. 'Pur beato che io l’ ho veduto!' Leclanché translates thus:
'“Par Dieu! il y a longtemps que je l’ ai vu!”' I think Cellini probably
meant to hint that he had seen it before.

Note 3. See above, book i., p. 51, for this story.

Note 4. Cardinal Giovanni Salviati was Archbishop of Ferrara; Cardinal
Benedetto Accolti, Archbishop of Ravenna, was then staying at Ferrara;
the court was famous for its excellent orchestra and theatrical display
of all kinds.

[Book 2, chapter 9]

THAT evening I rode more than ten miles, always at a trot; and when,
upon the next day, I found myself outside the Ferrarese domain, I felt
excessively relieved; indeed I had met with nothing to my liking there,
except those peacocks which restored my health. We journeyed by the
Monsanese, avoiding the city of Milan on account of the apprehension I
have spoken of, [1] so that we arrived safe and sound at Lyons. Counting
Pagolo and Ascanio and a servant, we were four men, with four very good
horses. At Lyons we waited several days for the muleteer, who carried
the silver cup and basin, as well as our other baggage; our lodging was
in an abbey of the Cardinal’s. When the muleteer arrived, we loaded all
our goods upon a little cart, and then set off toward Paris. On the road
we met with some annoyances, but not of any great moment.

We found the Court of the King at Fontana Beliò; [2] there we presented
ourselves to the Cardinal, who provided us at once with lodgings, and
that evening we were comfortable. On the following day the cart turned
up; so we unpacked our things, and when the Cardinal heard this he told
the King, who expressed a wish to see me at once. I went to his Majesty
with the cup and basin; then, upon entering his presence, I kissed his
knee, and he received me very graciously. I thanked his Majesty for
freeing me from prison, saying that all princes unique for generosity
upon this earth, as was his Majesty, lay under special obligations to
set free men of talent, and particularly those that were innocent, as I
was; such benefits, I added, were inscribed upon the book of God before
any other good actions. The King, while I was delivering this speech,
continued listening till the end with the utmost courtesy, dropping a
few words such as only he could utter. Then he took the vase and basin,
and exclaimed: “Of a truth I hardly think the ancients can have seen a
piece so beautiful as this. I well remember to have inspected all the
best works, and by the greatest masters of all Italy, but I never set my
eyes on anything which stirred me to such admiration.” These words the
King addressed in French to the Cardinal of Ferrara, with many others of
even warmer praise. Then he turned to me and said in Italian:
“Benvenuto, amuse yourself for a few days, make good cheer, and spend
your time in pleasure; in the meanwhile we will think of giving you the
wherewithal to execute some fine works of art for us.”

Note 1. The 'Monsanese' is the 'Mont Cenis.' Cellini forgets that he has
not mentioned this apprehension which made him turn aside from Milan. It
may have been the fear of plague, or perhaps of some enemy.

Note 2. It is thus that Cellini always writes Fontainebleau.

[Book 2, chapter 10]

THE CARDINAL OF FERRARA saw that the King had been vastly pleased by my
arrival; he also judged that the trifles which I showed him of my
handicraft had encouraged him to hope for the execution of some
considerable things he had in mind. At this time, however, we were
following the court with the weariest trouble and fatigue; the reason of
this was that the train of the King drags itself along with never less
than 12,000 horse behind it; this calculation is the very lowest; for
when the court is complete in times of peace, there are some 18,000,
which makes 12,000 less than the average. Consequently we had to journey
after it through places where sometimes there were scarcely two houses
to be found; and then we set up canvas tents like gipsies, and suffered
at times very great discomfort. I therefore kept urging the Cardinal to
put the King in mind of employing me in some locality where I could stop
and work. The Cardinal answered that it was far better to wait until the
King should think of it himself, and that I ought to show myself at
times to his Majesty while he was at table. This I did then; and one
morning, at his dinner, the King called me. He began to talk to me in
Italian, saying he had it in his mind to execute several great works,
and that he would soon give orders where I was to labour, and provide me
with all necessaries. These communications he mingled with discourse on
divers pleasant matters. The Cardinal of Ferrara was there, because he
almost always ate in the morning at the King’s table. He had heard our
conversation, and when the King rose, he spoke in my favour to this
purport, as I afterwards was informed: “Sacred Majesty, this man
Benvenuto is very eager to get to work again; it seems almost a sin to
let an artist of his abilities waste his time.” The King replied that he
had spoken well, and told him to arrange with me all things for my
support according to my wishes.

Upon the evening of the day when he received this commission, the
Cardinal sent for me after supper, and told me that his Majesty was
resolved to let me begin working, but that he wanted me first to come to
an understanding about my appointments. To this the Cardinal added: “It
seems to me that if his Majesty allows you three hundred crowns a year,
you will be able to keep yourself very well indeed, furthermore, I
advise you to leave yourself in my hands, for every day offers the
opportunity of doing some service in this great kingdom, and I shall
exert myself with vigour in your interest.” Then I began to speak as
follows: “When your most reverend lordship left me in Ferrara, you gave
me a promise, which I had never asked for, not to bring me out of Italy
before I clearly understood the terms on which I should be placed here
with his Majesty. Instead of sending to communicate these details, your
most reverend lordship urgently ordered me to come by the post, as if an
art like mine was carried on post-haste. Had you written to tell me of
three hundred crowns, as you have now spoken, I would not have stirred a
foot for twice that sum. Nevertheless, I thank God and your most
reverend lordship for all things, seeing God has employed you as the
instrument for my great good in procuring my liberation from
imprisonment. Therefore I assure your lordship that all the troubles you
are now causing me fall a thousand times short of the great good which
you have done me. With all my heart I thank you, and take good leave of
you; wherever I may be, so long as I have life, I will pray God for
you.” The Cardinal was greatly irritated, and cried out in a rage: “Go
where you choose; it is impossible to help people against their will.”
Some of his good-for-nothing courtiers who were present said: “That
fellow sets great store on himself, for he is refusing three hundred
ducats a year.” Another, who was a man of talent, replied: “The King
will never find his equal, and our Cardinal wants to cheapen him, as
though he were a load of wood.” This was Messer Luigi Alamanni who spoke
to the above effect, as I was afterwards informed. All this happened on
the last day of October, in Dauphiné, at a castle the name of which I do
not remember.

[Book 2, chapter 11]

ON leaving the Cardinal I repaired to my lodging, which was three miles
distant, in company with a secretary of the Cardinal returning to the
same quarters. On the road, this man never stopped asking me what I
meant to do with myself, and what my own terms regarding the appointment
would have been. I gave him only one word back for answer which was
that--I knew all. When we came to our quarters, I found Pagolo and
Ascanio there; and seeing me much troubled, they implored me to tell
them what was the matter. To the poor young men, who were all dismayed,
I said for answer: “To-morrow I shall give you money amply sufficient
for your journey home. I mean myself to go about a most important
business without you, which for a long time I have had it in my mind to
do.” Our room adjoined that of the secretary; and I think it not
improbable that he wrote to the Cardinal, and informed him of my
purpose. However, I never knew anything for certain about this. The
night passed without sleep, and I kept wearying for the day, in order to
carry out my resolution.

No sooner did it dawn than I ordered out the horses, made my
preparations in a moment, and gave the two young men everything which I
had brought with me, and fifty ducats of gold in addition. I reserved
the same sum for myself, together with the diamond the Duke had given
me; I only kept two shirts and some well-worn riding-clothes which I had
upon my back. I found it almost impossible to get free of the two young
men, who insisted upon going with me, whatever happened. At last I was
obliged to treat them with contempt, and use this language: “One of you
has his first beard, and the other is just getting it; and both of you
have learned as much from me as I could teach in my poor art, so that
you are now the first craftsmen among the youths of Italy. Are you not
ashamed to have no courage to quit this go-cart, but must always creep
about in leading-strings? The thing is too disgraceful! Or if I were to
send you away without money, what would you say then? Come, take
yourselves out of my sight, and may God bless you a thousand times.
Farewell!”

I turned my horse and left them weeping. Then I took my way along a very
fair road through a forest, hoping to make at least forty miles that
day, and reach the most out-of-the-way place I could. I had already
ridden about two miles, and during that short time had resolved never to
revisit any of those parts where I was known. I also determined to
abandon my art so soon as I had made a Christ three cubits in height,
reproducing, so far as I was able, that infinite beauty which He had
Himself revealed to me. So then, being thoroughly resolved, I turned my
face toward the Holy Sepulchre. [1] Just when I thought I had got so far
that nobody could find me, I heard horses galloping after. They filled
me with some uneasiness, because that district is infested with a race
of brigands, who bear the name of Venturers, and are apt to murder men
upon the road. Though numbers of them are hanged every day, it seems as
though they did not care. However, when the riders approached, I found
they were a messenger from the King and my lad Ascanio. The former came
up to me and said: “From the King I order you to come immediately to his
presence.” I replied: “You have been sent by the Cardinal, and for this
reason I will not come.” The man said that since gentle usage would not
bring me, he had authority to raise the folk, and they would take me
bound hand and foot like a prisoner. Ascanio, for his part, did all he
could to persuade me, reminding me that when the King sent a man to
prison, he kept him there five years at least before he let him out
again. This word about the prison, when I remembered what I had endured
in Rome, struck such terror into me, that I wheeled my horse round
briskly and followed the King’s messenger. He kept perpetually
chattering in French through all our journey, up to the very precincts
of the court, at one time bullying, now saying one thing, then another,
till I felt inclined to deny God and the world.

Note 1. See above, p. 240, for Cellini’s vow in the Castle of S. Angelo.

[Book 2, chapter 12]

ON our way to the lodgings of the King we passed before those of the
Cardinal of Ferrara. Standing at his door, he called to me and said:
“Our most Christian monarch has of his own accord assigned you the same
appointments which his Majesty allowed the painter Lionardo da Vinci,
that is, a salary of seven hundred crowns; in addition, he will pay you
for all the works you do for him; also for your journey hither he gives
you five hundred golden crowns, which will be paid you before you quit
this place.” At the end of this announcement, I replied that those were
offers worthy of the great King he was. The messenger, not knowing
anything about me, and hearing what splendid offers had been made me by
the King, begged my pardon over and over again. Pagolo and Ascanio
exclaimed: “It is God who has helped us to get back into so honoured a
go-cart!”

On the day following I went to thank the King, who ordered me to make
the models of twelve silver statues, which were to stand as candelabra
round his table. He wanted them to represent six gods and six goddesses,
and to have exactly the same height as his Majesty, which was a trifle
under four cubits. Having dictated this commission, he turned to his
treasurer, and asked whether he had paid me the five hundred crowns. The
official said that he had received no orders to that effect. The King
took this very ill, for he had requested the Cardinal to speak to him
about it. Furthermore, he told me to go to Paris and seek out a place to
live in, fitted for the execution of such work; he would see that I
obtained it.

I got the five hundred crowns of gold, and took up my quarters at Paris
in a house of the Cardinal of Ferrera. There I began, in God’s name, to
work, and fashioned four little waxen models, about two-thirds of a
cubit each in height. They were Jupiter, Juno, Apollo, and Vulcan. In
this while the King returned to Paris; whereupon I went to him at once,
taking my models with me, and my two prentices, Ascanio and Pagolo. On
perceiving that the King was pleased with my work, and being
commissioned to execute the Jupiter in silver of the height above
described, I introduced the two young men, and said that I had brought
them with me out of Italy to serve his Majesty; for inasmuch as they had
been brought up by me, I could at the beginning get more help from them
than from the Paris workmen. To this the King replied that I might name
a salary which I thought sufficient for their maintenance. I said that a
hundred crowns of gold apiece would be quite proper, and that I would
make them earn their wages well. This agreement was concluded. Then I
said that I had found a place which seemed to me exactly suited to my
industry; it was his Majesty’s own property, and called the Little
Nello. The Provost of Paris was then in possession of it from his
Majesty; but since the Provost made no use of the castle, his Majesty
perhaps might grant it me to employ in his service. [1] He replied upon
the instant: “That place is my own house, and I know well that the man I
gave it to does not inhabit or use it. So you shall have it for the work
you have to do.” He then told his lieutenant to install me in the Nello.
This officer made some resistance, pleading that he could not carry out
the order. The King answered in anger that he meant to bestow his
property on whom he pleased, and on a man who would serve him, seeing
that he got nothing from the other; therefore he would hear no more
about it. The lieutenant then submitted that some small force would have
to be employed in order to effect an entrance. To which the King
answered: “Go, then, and if a small force is not enough, use a great
one.”

The officer took me immediately to the castle, and there put me in
possession, not, however, without violence; after that he warned me to
take very good care that I was not murdered. I installed myself,
enrolled serving-men, and bought a quantity of pikes and partisans; but
I remained for several days exposed to grievous annoyances, for the
Provost was a great nobleman of Paris, and all the other gentlefolk took
part against me; they attacked me with such insults that I could hardly
hold my own against them. I must not omit to mention that I entered the
service of his Majesty in the year 1540, which was exactly the year in
which I reached the age of forty.

Note 1. This was the castle of Le Petit Nesle, on the site of which now
stands the Palace of the Institute. The Provost of Paris was then Jean
d’Estouteville, lord of Villebon.
