Book Two, Chapters 13 to 18 (Symonds)

[Book 2, chapter 13]

THE AFFRONTS and insults I received made me have recourse to the King,
begging his Majesty to establish me in some other place. He answered:
“Who are you, and what is your name?” I remained in great confusion, and
could not comprehend what he meant. Holding my tongue thus, the King
repeated the same words a second time angrily. Then I said my name was
Benvenuto. “If, then, you are the Benvenuto of whom I have heard,”
replied the King, “act according to your wont, for you have my full
leave to do so.” I told his Majesty that all I wanted was to keep his
favour; for the rest, I knew of nothing that could harm me. He gave a
little laugh, and said: “Go your ways, then; you shall never want my
favour.” Upon this he told his first secretary, Monsignor di Villerois,
to see me provided and accommodated with all I needed. 1

This Villerois was an intimate friend of the Provost, to whom the castle
had been given. It was built in a triangle, right up against the city
walls, and was of some antiquity, but had no garrison. The building was
of considerable size. Monsignor di Villerois counselled me to look about
for something else, and by all means to leave this place alone, seeing
that its owner was a man of vast power, who would most assuredly have me
killed. I answered that I had come from Italy to France only in order to
serve that illustrious King; and as for dying, I knew for certain that
die I must; a little earlier or a little later was a matter of supreme
indifference to me.

Now Villerois was a man of the highest talent, exceptionally
distinguished in all points, and possessed of vast wealth. There was
nothing he would not gladly have done to harm me, but he made no open
demonstration of his mind. He was grave, and of a noble presence, and
spoke slowly, at his ease. To another gentleman, Monsignor di Marmagna,
the treasurer of Languedoc, he left the duty of molesting me. [2] The
first thing which this man did was to look out the best apartments in
the castle, and to have them fitted up for himself. I told him that the
King had given me the place to serve him in, and that I did not choose
it should be occupied by any but myself and my attendants. The fellow,
who was haughty, bold, and spirited, replied that he meant to do just
what he liked; that I should run my head against a wall if I presumed to
oppose him, and that Villerois had given him authority to do what he was
doing. I told him that, by the King’s authority given to me, neither he
nor Villerois could do it. When I said that he gave vent to offensive
language in French, whereat I retorted in my own tongue that he lied.
Stung with rage, he clapped his hand upon a little dagger which he had;
then I set my hand also to a large dirk which I always wore for my
defence, and cried out: “If you dare to draw, I’ll kill you on the
spot.” He had two servants to back him, and I had my two lads. For a
moment or two Marmagna stood in doubt, not knowing exactly what to do,
but rather inclined to mischief, and muttering: “I will never put up
with such insults.” Seeing then that the affair was taking a bad turn, I
took a sudden resolution, and cried to Pagolo and Ascanio: “When you see
me draw my dirk, throw yourselves upon those serving-men, and kill them
if you can; I mean to kill this fellow at the first stroke, and then we
will decamp together, with God’s grace.” Marmagna, when he understood my
purpose, was glad enough to get alive out of the castle.

All these things, toning them down a trifle, I wrote to the Cardinal of
Ferrara, who related them at once to the King. The King, deeply
irritated, committed me to the care of another officer of his bodyguard
who was named Monsignor lo Iscontro d’Orbech. [3] By him I was
accommodated with all that I required in the most gracious way
imaginable.

Note 1. M. Nicholas de Neufville, lord of Villeroy.

Note 2. François l’Allemand, Seigneur de Marmagne.

Note 3. Le Vicomte d’Orbec. It seems that by 'Iscontro' Cellini meant
Viscount.

[Book 2, chapter 14]

AFTER fitting up my own lodgings in the castle and the workshop with all
conveniences for carrying on my business, and putting my household upon
a most respectable footing, I began at once to construct three models
exactly of the size which the silver statues were to be. These were
Jupiter, Vulcan and Mars. I moulded them in clay, and set them well up
on irons; then I went to the King, who disbursed three hundred pounds
weight of silver, if I remember rightly, for the commencement of the
undertaking. While I was getting these things ready, we brought the
little vase and oval basin to completion, which had been several months
in hand. Then I had them richly gilt, and they showed like the finest
piece of plate which had been seen in France.

Afterwards I took them to the Cardinal, who thanked me greatly; and,
without requesting my attendance, carried and presented them to the
King. He was delighted with the gift, and praised me as no artist was
ever praised before. In return, he bestowed upon the Cardinal an abbey
worth seven thousand crowns a year, and expressed his intention of
rewarding me too. The Cardinal, however, prevented him, telling his
Majesty that he was going ahead too fast, since I had as yet produced
nothing for him. The King, who was exceedingly generous, replied: “For
that very reason will I put heart and hope into him.” The Cardinal,
ashamed at his own meanness, said: “Sire, I beg you to leave that to me;
I will allow him a pension of at least three hundred crowns when have
taken possession of the abbey.” He never gave me anything; and it would
be tedious to relate all the knavish tricks of this prelate. I prefer to
dwell on matters of greater moment.

[Book 2, chapter 15]

WHEN I returned to Paris, the great favour shown me by the King made me
a mark for all men’s admiration. I received the silver and began my
statue of Jupiter. Many journeymen were now in my employ; and the work
went onward briskly day and night; so that, by the time I had finished
the clay models of Jupiter, Vulcan, and Mars, and had begun to get the
silver statue forward, my workshop made already a grand show.

The King now came to Paris, and I went to pay him my respects. No sooner
had his Majesty set eyes upon me than he called me cheerfully, and asked
if I had something fine to exhibit at my lodging, for he would come to
inspect it. I related all I had been doing; upon which he was seized
with a strong desire to come. Accordingly, after this dinner, he set off
with Madame de Tampes, the Cardinal of Lorraine, and some other of his
greatest nobles, among whom were the King of Navarre, his cousin, and
the Queen, his sister; the Dauphin and Dauphinéss also attended him; so
that upon that day the very flower of the French court came to visit me.
[1] I had been some time at home, and was hard at work. When the King
arrived at the door of the castle, and heard our hammers going, he bade
his company keep silence. Everybody in my house was busily employed, so
that the unexpected entrance of his Majesty took me by surprise. The
first thing he saw on coming into the great hall was myself with a huge
plate of silver in my hand, which I was beating for the body of my
Jupiter; one of my men was finishing the head, another the legs; and it
is easy to imagine what a din we made between us. It happened that a
little French lad was working at my side, who had just been guilty of
some trifling blunder. I gave the lad a kick, and, as my good luck would
have it, caught him with my foot exactly in the fork between his legs,
and sent him spinning several yards, so that he came stumbling up
against the King precisely at the moment when his Majesty arrived. The
King was vastly amused, but I felt covered with confusion. He began to
ask me what I was engaged upon, and told me to go on working; then he
said that he would much rather have me not employ my strength on manual
labour, but take as many men as I wanted, and make them do the rough
work; he should like me to keep myself in health, in order that he might
enjoy my services through many years to come. I replied to his Majesty
that the moment I left off working I should fall ill; also that my art
itself would suffer, and not attain the mark I aimed at for his Majesty.
Thinking that I spoke thus only to brag, and not because it was the
truth, he made the Cardinal of Lorraine repeat what he had said; but I
explained my reasons so fully and clearly, that the Cardinal perceived
my drift; he then advised the King to let me labour as much or little as
I liked.

Note 1. These personages were Madame d’Etampes, the King’s mistress;
John of Lorraine, son of Duke Renée II., who was made Cardinal in 1518;
Henri d’Albret II. and Marguerite de Valois, his wife; the Duaphin,
afterwards Henri II., and his wife, the celebrated Caterina de’ Medici,
daughter of Lorenzo, Duke of Urbino.

[Book 2, chapter 16]

BEING very well satisfied with what he had seen, the King returned to
his palace, after bestowing on me too many marks of favour to be here
recorded. On the following day he sent for me at his dinner-hour. The
Cardinal of Ferrara was there at meat with him. When I arrived, the King
had reached his second course; he began at once to speak to me, saying,
with a pleasant cheer, that having now so fine a basin and jug of my
workmanship, he wanted an equally handsome salt-cellar to match them;
and begged me to make a design, and to lose no time about it. I replied:
“Your Majesty shall see a model of the sort even sooner than you have
commanded; for while I was making the basin, I thought there ought to be
a saltcellar to match it; therefore I have already designed one, and if
it is your pleasure, I will at once exhibit my conception.” The King
turned with a lively movement of surprise and pleasure to the lords in
his company--they were the King of Navarre, the Cardinal of Lorraine,
and the Cardinal of Ferrara--exclaiming as he did so: “Upon my word,
this is a man to be loved and cherished by every one who knows him.”
Then he told me that he would very gladly see my model.

I set off, and returned in a few minutes; for I had only to cross the
river, that is, the Seine. I carried with me the wax model which I had
made in Rome at the Cardinal of Ferrara’s request. When I appeared again
before the King and uncovered my piece, he cried out in astonishment:
“This is a hundred times more divine a thing that I had ever dreamed of.
What a miracle of a man! He ought never to stop working.” Then he turned
to me with a beaming countenance, and told me that he greatly liked the
piece, and wished me to execute it in gold. The Cardinal of Ferrara
looked me in the face, and let me understand that he recognised the
model as the same which I had made for him in Rome. I replied that I had
already told him I should carry it out for one who was worthy of it. The
Cardinal, remembering my words, and nettled by the revenge he thought
that I was taking on him, remarked to the King: “Sire, this is an
enormous undertaking; I am only afraid that we shall never see it
finished. These able artists who have great conceptions in their brain
are ready enough to put the same in execution without duly considering
when they are to be accomplished. I therefore, if I gave commission for
things of such magnitude, should like to know when I was likely to get
them.” The King replied that if a man was so scrupulous about the
termination of a work, he would never begin anything at all; these words
he uttered with a certain look, which implied that such enterprises were
not for folk of little spirit. I then began to say my say: “Princes who
put heart and courage in their servants, as your Majesty does by deed
and word, render undertakings of the greatest magnitude quite easy. Now
that God has sent me so magnificent a patron, I hope to perform for him
a multitude of great and splendid master-pieces.” “I believe it, “ said
the King, and rose from table. Then he called me into his chamber, and
asked me how much gold was wanted for the salt-cellar. “A thousand
crowns,” I answered. He called his treasurer at once, who was the
Viscount of Orbec, and ordered him that very day to disburse to me a
thousand crowns of good weight and old gold.

When I left his Majesty, I went for the two notaries who had helped me
in procuring silver for the Jupiter and many other things. Crossing the
Seine, I then took a small hand-basket, which one of my cousins, a nun,
had given me on my journey through Florence. It made for my good fortune
that I took this basket and not a bag. So then, thinking I could do the
business by daylight, for it was still early, and not caring to
interrupt my workmen, and being indisposed to take a servant with me, I
set off alone. When I reached the house of the treasurer, I found that
he had the money laid out before him, and was selecting the best pieces
as the King had ordered. It seemed to me, however, that that thief of a
treasurer was doing all he could to postpone the payment of the money;
nor were the pieces counted out until three hours after nightfall.

I meanwhile was not wanting in despatch, for I sent word to several of
my journeymen that they should come and attend me, since the matter was
one of serious importance. When I found that they did not arrive, I
asked the messenger if he had done my errand. The rascal of a groom whom
I had sent replied that he had done so, but that they had answered that
they could not come; he, however, would gladly carry the money for me. I
answered that I meant to carry the money myself. But this time the
contract was drawn up and signed. On the money being counted, I put it
all into my little basket, and then thrust my arm through the two
handles. Since I did this with some difficulty, the gold was well shut
in, and I carried it more conveniently than if the vehicle had been a
bag. I was well armed with shirt and sleeves of mail, and having my
sword and dagger at my side, made off along the street as quick as my
two legs would carry me.

[Book 2, chapter 17]

JUST as I left the house, I observed some servants whispering among
themselves, who also went off at a round pace in another direction from
the one I took. Walking with all haste, I passed the bridge of the
Exchange, [1] and went up along a wall beside the river which led to my
lodging in the castle. I had just come to the Augustines--now this was a
very perilous passage, and though it was only five hundred paces distant
from my dwelling, yet the lodging in the castle being quite as far
removed inside, no one could have heard my voice if I had shouted--when
I saw four men with four swords in their hands advancing to attack me.
[2] My resolution was taken in an instant. I covered the basket with my
cape, drew my sword, and seeing that they were pushing hotly forward,
cried aloud: “With soldiers there is only the cape and sword to gain;
and these, before I give them up, I hope you’ll get not much to your
advantage.” Then crossing my sword boldly with them, I more than once
spread out my arms, in order that, if the ruffians were put on by the
servants who had seen me take my money, they might be led to judge I was
not carrying it. The encounter was soon over; for they retired step by
step, saying among themselves in their own language: “This is a brave
Italian, and certainly not the man we are after; or if he be the man, he
cannot be carrying anything.” I spoke Italian, and kept harrying them
with thrust and slash so hotly that I narrowly missed killing one or the
other. My skill in using the sword made them think I was a soldier
rather than a fellow of some other calling. They drew together and began
to fall back, muttering all the while beneath their breath in their own
tongue. I meanwhile continued always calling out, but not too loudly,
that those who wanted my cape and blade would have to get them with some
trouble. Then I quickened pace, while they still followed slowly at my
heels; this augmented my fear, for I thought I might be falling into an
ambuscade, which would have cut me off in front as well as rear.
Accordingly, when I was at the distance of a hundred paces from my home,
I ran with all my might, and shouted at the top of my voice: “To arms,
to arms! out with you, out with you! I am being murdered.” In a moment
four of my young men came running, with four pikes in their hands. They
wanted to pursue the ruffians, who could still be seen; but I stopped
them, calling back so as to let the villains hear: “Those cowards
yonder, four against one man alone, had not pluck enough to capture a
thousand golden crowns in metal, which have almost broken this arm of
mine. Let us haste inside and put the money away; then I will take my
big two-handed sword, and go with you whithersoever you like.” We went
inside to secure the gold; and my lads, while expressing deep concern
for the peril I had run, gently chided me, and said: “You risk yourself
too much alone; the time will come when you will make us all bemoan your
loss.” A thousand words and exclamations were exchanged between us; my
adversaries took to flight; and we all sat down and supped together with
mirth and gladness, laughing over those great blows which fortune
strikes, for good as well as evil, and which, what time they do not hit
the mark, are just the same as though they had not happened. [3] It is
very true that one says to oneself: “You will have had a lesson for next
time.” But that is not the case; for fortune always comes upon us in new
ways, quite unforeseen by our imagination.

Note 1. The Pont du Change, replaced by the Pont Neuf.

Note 2. The excitement of his recollection makes Cellini more than
usually incoherent about this episode. The translator has to collect the
whole sense of the passage.

Note 3. Cellini’s philosophy is summed up in the proverb: “A miss is as
good as a mile.”

[Book 2, chapter 18]

ON the morning which followed these events, I made the first step in my
work upon the great salt-cellar, pressing this and my other pieces
forward with incessant industry. My workpeople at this time, who were
pretty numerous, included both sculptors and goldsmiths. They belonged
to several nations, Italian, French, and German; for I took the best I
could find, and changed them often, retaining only those who knew their
business well. These select craftsmen I worked to the bone with
perpetual labour. They wanted to rival me; but I had a better
constitution. Consequently, in their inability to bear up against such a
continuous strain, they took to eating and drinking copiously, some of
the Germans in particular, who were more skilled than their comrades,
and wanted to march apace with me, sank under these excesses, and
perished.

While I was at work upon the Jupiter, I noticed that I had plenty of
silver to spare. So I took in hand, without consulting the King, to make
a great two-handled vase, about one cubit and a half in height. I also
conceived the notion of casting the large model of my Jupiter in bronze.
Having up to this date done nothing of the sort, I conferred with
certain old men experienced in that art at Paris, and described to them
the methods in use with us in Italy. They told me they had never gone
that way about the business; but that if I gave them leave to act upon
their own principles, they would bring the bronze out as clean and
perfect as the clay. I chose to strike an agreement, throwing on them
the responsibility, and promising several crowns above the price they
bargained for. Thereupon they put the work in progress; but I soon saw
that they were going the wrong way about it, and began on my own account
a head of Julius Cæsar, bust and armour, much larger than the life,
which I modelled from a reduced copy of a splendid antique portrait I
had brought with me from Rome. I also undertook another head of the same
size, studied from a very handsome girl, whom I kept for my own
pleasures. I called this Fontainebleau, after the place selected by the
King for his particular delight.

We constructed an admirable little furnace for the casting of the
bronze, got all things ready, and baked our moulds; those French masters
undertaking the Jupiter, while I looked after my two heads. Then I said:
“I do not think you will succeed with your Jupiter, because you have not
provided sufficient vents beneath for the air to circulate; therefore
you are but losing your time and trouble.” They replied that, if their
work proved a failure, they would pay back the money I had given on
account, and recoup me for current expenses; but they bade me give good
heed to my own proceedings, [1] for the fine heads I meant to cast in my
Italian fashion would never succeed.

At this dispute between us there were present the treasurers and other
gentlefolk commissioned by the King to superintend my proceedings.
Everything which passed by word or act was duly reported to his Majesty.
The two old men who had undertaken to cast my Jupiter postponed the
experiment, saying they would like to arrange the moulds of my two
heads. They argued that, according to my method, no success could be
expected, and it was a pity to waste such fine models. When the King was
informed of this, he sent word that they should give their minds to
learning, and not try to teach their master.

So then they put their now piece into the furnace with much laughter;
while I, maintaining a firm carriage, showing neither mirth nor anger
(though I felt it), placed my two heads, one on each side of the
Jupiter. The metal came all right to melting, and we let it in with joy
and gladness; it filled the mould of the Jupiter most admirably, and at
the same time my two heads. This furnished them with matter for
rejoicing and me with satisfaction; for I was not sorry to have
predicted wrongly of their work, and they made as though they were
delighted to have been mistaken about mine. Then, as the custom in
France is, they asked to drink, in high good spirits. I was very
willing, and ordered a handsome collation for their entertainment. When
this was over, they requested me to pay the money due to them and the
surplus I had promised. I replied: “You have been laughing over what, I
fear, may make you weep. On reflection, it seems to me that too much
metal flowed into you mould. Therefore I shall wait until to-morrow
before I disburse more money.” The poor fellows swallowed my words and
chewed the cud of them; then they went home without further argument.

At daybreak they began, quite quietly, to break into the pit of the
furnace. They could not uncover their large mould until they had
extracted my two heads; these were in excellent condition, and they
placed them where they could be well seen. When they came to Jupiter,
and had dug but scarcely two cubits, they sent up such a yell, they and
their four workmen, that it woke me up. Fancying it was a shout of
triumph, I set off running, for my bedroom was at the distance of more
than five hundred paces. On reaching the spot, I found them looking like
the guardians of Christ’s sepulchre in a picture, downcast and
terrified. Casting a hasty glance upon my two heads, and seeing they
were all right, I tempered my annoyance with the pleasure that sight
gave me. Then they began to make excuses, crying: “Our bad luck!” I
retorted: “Your luck has been most excellent, but what has been indeed
bad is your deficiency of knowledge; had I only seen you put the soul
[2] into your mould, I could have taught you with one word how to cast
the figure without fault. This would have brought me great honour and
you much profit. I shall be able to make good my reputation; but you
will now lose both your honour and your profit. Let then this lesson
teach you another time to work, and not to poke fun at your masters.”

Note 1. 'Ma che io guardassi bene, che, &c.' This is perhaps: 'but they
bade me note well that.'

Note 2. I have here translated the Italian 'anima' literally by the
English word soul. It is a technical expression, signifying the block,
somewhat smaller than the mould, which bronze-founders insert in order
to obtain a hollow, and not a solid cast from the mould which gives form
to their liquid metal.
