Book Two, Chapters 27 to 32 (Symonds)

[Book 2, chapter 27]

IT happened that just at this period an action was brought against me in
Paris by the second lodger I had ousted from my castle, who pretended
that on that occasion I had stolen a large quantity of his effects. This
lawsuit tormented me beyond measure, and took up so much of my time that
I often thought of decamping in despair from the country. Now the French
are in the habit of making much capital out of any action they commence
against a foreigner, or against such persons as they notice to be
indolent in litigation. No sooner do they observe that they are getting
some advantage in the suit, than they find the means to sell it; some
have even been known to give a lawsuit in dowry with their daughters to
men who make a business out of such transactions. They have another ugly
custom, which is that the Normans, nearly all of them, traffic in false
evidence; so that the men who buy up lawsuits, engage at once the
services of four or six of these false witnesses, according to their
need; their adversary, if he neglect to produce as many on the other
side, being perhaps unacquainted with the custom, is certain to have the
verdict given against him.

All this happened in my case, and thinking it a most disgraceful breach
of justice, I made my appearance in the great hall of Paris, to defend
my right. There I saw a judge, lieutenant for the King in civil causes,
enthroned upon a high tribunal. He was tall, stout, and fat, and of an
extremely severe countenance. All round him on each side stood a crowd
of solicitors and advocates, ranged upon the right hand and the left.
Others were coming, one by one, to explain their several causes to the
judge. From time to time, too, I noticed that the attorneys at the side
of the tribunal talked all at once: and much admiration was roused in me
by that extraordinary man, the very image of Pluto, who listened with
marked attention first to one and then to the other, answering each with
learning and sagacity. I have always delighted in watching and
experiencing every kind of skill; so I would not have lost this
spectacle for much. It happened that the hall being very large, and
filled with a multitude of folk, they were strict in excluding every one
who had no business there, and kept the door shut with a guard to hold
it. Sometimes the guardian, in his effort to prevent the entrance of
some improper person, interrupted the judge by the great noise he made,
and the judge in anger turned to chide him. This happened frequently, so
that my attention was directed to the fact. On one occasion, when two
gentlemen were pushing their way in as spectators, and the porter was
opposing them with violence, the judge raised his voice, and spoke the
following words precisely as I heard them: “Keep peace, Satan, begone,
and hold your tongue.” These words in the French tongue sound as
follows: 'Phe phe, Satan, Phe, Phe, alé, phe!' [1] Now I had learned the
French tongue well; and on hearing this sentence, the meaning of that
phrase used by Dante came into my memory, when he and his master Virgil
entered the doors of Hell. Dante and the painter Giotto were together in
France, and particularly in the city of Paris, where, owing to the
circumstances I have just described, the hall of justice may be truly
called a hell. Dante then, who also understood French well, made use of
the phrase in question, and it has struck me as singular that this
interpretation has never yet been put upon the passage; indeed, it
confirms my opinion that the commentators make him say things which
never came into his head.

Note 1. 'Paix, paix, Satan, allez, paix.' The line in Dante to which
Cellini alludes is the first of the seventh canto of the 'Inferno.' His
suggestion is both curious and ingenious; but we have no reason to think
that French judges used the same imprecations, when interrupted, in the
thirteenth as they did in the sixteenth century, or that what Cellini
heard on this occasion was more than an accidental similarity of sounds,
striking his quick ear and awakening his lively memory.

[Book 2, chapter 28]

WELL, then, to return to my affairs. When certain decisions of the court
were sent me by those lawyers, and I perceived that my cause had been
unjustly lost, I had recourse for my defence to a great dagger which I
carried; for I have always taken pleasure in keeping fine weapons. The
first man I attacked was the plaintiff who had sued me; and one evening
I wounded him in the legs and arms so severely, taking care, however,
not to kill him, that I deprived him of the use of both his legs. Then I
sought out the other fellow who had brought the suit, and used him also
in such wise that he dropped it.

Returning thanks to God for this and every other dispensation, and
hoping to be left awhile without worries, I bade the young men of my
household, especially the Italians, for God’s sake to attend each
diligently to the work I set him, and to help me till such time as I
could finish the things I had in hand. I thought they might soon be
completed, and then I meant to return to Italy, being no longer able to
put up with the rogueries of those Frenchmen; the good King too, if he
once grew angry, might bring me into mischief for many of my acts in
self-defence. I will describe who these Italians were; the first, and
the one I liked best, was Ascanio, from Tagliacozzo in the kingdom of
Naples; the second was Pagolo, a Roman of such humble origin that he did
now know his own father. These were the two men who had been with me in
Rome, and whom I had taken with me on the journey. Another Roman had
also come on purpose to enter my service; he too bore the name of
Pagolo, and was the son of a poor nobleman of the family of the
Macaroni; he had small acquirements in our art, but was an excellent and
courageous swordsman. I had another from Ferrara called Bartolommeo
Chioccia. There was also another from Florence named Pagolo Micceri; his
brother, nicknamed “Il Gatta,” was a clever clerk, but had spent too
much money in managing the property of Tommaso Guadagni, a very wealthy
merchant. This Gatta put in order for me the books in which I wrote the
accounts of his most Christian Majesty and my other employers. Now
Pagolo Micceri, having learned how to keep them from his brother, went
on doing this work for me in return for a liberal salary. He appeared,
so far as I could judge, to be a very honest lad, for I noticed him to
be devout, and when I heard him sometimes muttering psalms, and
sometimes telling his beads, I reckoned much upon his feigned virtue.

Accordingly I called the fellow apart and said to him, “Pagolo, my
dearest brother, you know what a good place you have with me, and how
you had formerly nothing to depend on; besides, you are a Florentine. I
have also the greater confidence in you because I observe that you are
pious and religious, which is a thing that pleases me. I beg you
therefore to assist me, for I cannot put the same trust in any of your
companions: so then I shall ask you to keep watch over two matters of
the highest importance, which might prove a source of much annoyance to
me. In the first place, I want you to guard my property from being
stolen, and not touch it yourself. In the next place, you know that poor
young girl, Caterina; I keep her principally for my art’s sake, since I
cannot do without a model; but being a man also, I have used her for my
pleasures, and it is possible that she may bear me a child. Now I do not
want to maintain another man’s bastards, nor will I sit down under such
an insult. If any one in this house had the audacity to attempt anything
of the sort, and I were to become aware of it, I verily believe that I
should kill both her and him. Accordingly, dear brother, I entreat you
to be my helper; should you notice anything, tell it me at once; for I
am sure to send her and her mother and her fellow to the gallows. Be you
the first upon your watch against falling into this snare.” The rascal
made a sign of the cross from his head to his feet and cried out: “O
blessed Jesus! God preserve me from ever thinking of such a thing! In
the first place, I am not given to those evil ways; in the next place,
do you imagine I am ignorant of your great benefits toward me?” When I
heard these words, which he uttered with all appearance of simplicity
and affection for me, I believed that matters stood precisely as he
asserted.

[Book 2, chapter 29]

TWO days after this conversation, M. Mattio del Nazaro took the occasion
of some feast-day to invite me and my workpeople to an entertainment in
a garden. [1] He was an Italian in the King’s service, and practised the
same art as we did with remarkable ability. I got myself in readiness,
and told Pagolo that he might go abroad too and amuse himself with us;
the annoyances arising from that lawsuit being, as I judged, now settled
down. The young man replied in these words: “Upon my word, it would be a
great mistake to leave the house so unprotected. Only look how much of
gold, silver, and jewels you have here. Living as we do in a city of
thieves, we ought to be upon our guard by day and night. I will spend
the time in religious exercises, while I keep watch over the premises.
Go then with mind at rest to take your pleasure and divert your spirits.
Some other day another man will take my place as guardian here.”

Thinking that I could go of with a quiet mind, I took Pagolo, Ascanio,
and Chioccia to the garden, where we spent a large portion of the day
agreeably. Toward the middle of the afternoon, however, when it began to
draw toward sundown, a suspicion came into my head, and I recollected
the words which that traitor had spoken with his feigned simplicity. So
I mounted my horse, and with two servants to attend me, returned to the
castle, where I all but caught Pagolo and that little wretch Caterina
'in flagrante.' No sooner had I reached the place, than that French
bawd, her mother, screamed out: “Pagolo! Caterina! here is the master!”
When I saw the pair advancing, overcome with fright, their clothes in
disorder, not knowing what they said, nor, like people in a trance,
where they were going, it was only too easy to guess what they had been
about. The sight drowned reason in rage, and I drew my sword, resolved
to kill them both. The man took to his heels; the girl flung herself
upon her knees, and shrieked to Heaven for mercy. In my first fury I
wanted to strike at the male; but before I had the time to catch him up,
second thoughts arose which made me think it would be best for me to
drive them both away together. I had so many acts of violence upon my
hands, that if I killed him I could hardly hope to save my life. I said
then to Pagolo: “Had I seen with my own eyes, scoundrel, what your
behaviour and appearance force me to believe, I should have run you with
this sword here ten times through the guts. Get out of my sight; and if
you say a Paternoster, let it be San Giuliano’s.” [2] Then I drove the
whole lot forth, mother and daughter, lamming into them with fist and
foot. They made their minds up to have the law of me, and consulted a
Norman advocate, who advised them to declare that I had used the girl
after the Italian fashion; what this meant I need hardly explain. [3]
The man argued: “At the very least, when this Italian hears what you are
after, he will pay down several hundred ducats, knowing how great the
danger is, and how heavily that offence is punished in France.” Upon
this they were agreed. The accusation was brought against me, and I
received a summons from the court.

Note 1. Matteo del Nassaro, a native of Verona, was employed in France
as engraver, die-caster, and musician.

Note 2. See Boccaccio, 'Decam.,' Gior. ii. Nov. ii.

Note 3. 'Qual modo s’intendeva contro natura, cioè in soddomia.'

[Book 2, chapter 30]

THE MORE I sought for rest, the more I was annoyed with all sorts of
embarrassments. Being thus daily exposed to divers persecutions, I
pondered which of two courses I ought to take; whether to decamp and
leave France to the devil, or else to fight this battle through as I had
done the rest, and see to what end God had made me. For a long while I
kept anxiously revolving the matter. At last I resolved to make off,
dreading to tempt my evil fortune, lest this should bring me to the
gallows. My dispositions were all fixed; I had made arrangements for
putting away the property I could not carry, and for charging the
lighter articles, to the best of my ability, upon myself and servants;
yet it was with great and heavy reluctance that I looked forward to such
a departure.

I had shut myself up alone in a little study. My young men were advising
me to fly; but I told them that it would be well for me to meditate this
step in solitude, although I very much inclined to their opinion.
Indeed, I reasoned that if I could escape imprisonment and let the storm
pass over, I should be able to explain matters to the King by letter,
setting forth the trap which had been laid to ruin me by the malice of
my enemies. And as I have said above, my mind was made up to this point;
when, just as I rose to act on the decision, some power took me by the
shoulder and turned me round, and I heard a voice which cried with
vehemence: “Benvenuto, do as thou art wont, and fear not!” Then, on the
instant, I changed the whole course of my plans, and said to my
Italians: “Take your good arms and come with me; obey me to the letter;
have no other thought, for I am now determined to put in my appearance.
If I were to leave Paris, you would vanish the next day in smoke; so do
as I command, and follow me.” They all began together with one heart and
voice to say: “Since we are here, and draw our livelihood from him, it
is our duty to go with him and bear him out so long as we have life to
execute what he proposes. He has hit the mark better than we did in this
matter; for on the instant when he leaves the place, his enemies will
send us to the devil. Let us keep well in mind what great works we have
begun here, and what vast importance they possess; we should not know
how to finish them without him, and his enemies would say that he had
taken flight because he shrank before such undertakings.” Many other
things bearing weightily upon the subject were said among them. But it
was the young Roman, Macaroni, who first put heart into the company; and
he also raised recruits from the Germans and the Frenchmen, who felt
well disposed toward me.

We were ten men, all counted. I set out, firmly resolved not to let
myself be taken and imprisoned alive. When we appeared before the judges
for criminal affairs, I found Caterina and her mother waiting; and on
the moment of my arrival, the two women were laughing with their
advocate. I pushed my way in, and called boldly for the judge, who was
seated, blown out big and fat, upon a tribunal high above the rest. On
catching sight of me, he threatened with his head, and spoke in a
subdued voice: “Although your name is Benvenuto, this time you are an
ill-comer.” I understood his speech, and called out the second time:
“Despatch my business quickly. Tell me what I have come to do here.”
Then the judge turned to Caterina, and said: “Caterina, relate all that
happened between you and Benvenuto.” She answered that I had used her
after the Italian fashion. The judge turned to me and said: “You hear
what Caterina deposes, Benvenuto.” I replied: “If I have consorted with
her after the Italian fashion, I have only done the same as you folk of
other nations do.” He demurred: “She means that you improperly abused
her.” I retorted that, so far from being the Italian fashion, it must be
some French habit, seeing she knew all about it, while I was ignorant;
and I commanded her to explain precisely how I had consorted with her.
Then the impudent baggage entered into plain and circumstantial details
regarding all the filth she lyingly accused me of. I made her repeat her
deposition three times in succession. When she had finished, I cried out
with a loud voice: “Lord judge, lieutenant of the Most Christian King, I
call on you for justice. Well I know that by the laws of his Most
Christian Majesty both agent and patient in this kind of crime are
punished with the stake. The woman confesses her guilt; I admit nothing
whatsoever of the sort with regard to her; her go-between of a mother is
here, who deserves to be burned for either one or the other offence.
Therefore I appeal to you for justice.” These words I repeated over and
over again at the top of my voice, continually calling out: “To the
stake with her and her mother!” I also threatened the judge that, if he
did not send her to prison there before me, I would go to the King at
once, and tell him how his lieutenant in criminal affairs of justice had
wronged me. When they heard what a tumult I was making, my adversaries
lowered their voices, but I lifted mine the more. The little hussy and
her mother fell to weeping, while I shouted to the judge: “Fire, fire!
to the stake with them!” The coward on the bench, finding that the
matter was not going as he intended, began to use soft words and excuse
the weakness of the female sex. Thereupon I felt that I had won the
victory in a nasty encounter; and, muttering threats between my teeth, I
took myself off, not without great inward satisfaction. Indeed, I would
gladly have paid five hundred crowns down to have avoided that
appearance in court. However, after escaping from the tempest, I thanked
God with all my heart, and returned in gladness with my young men to the
castle.

[Book 2, chapter 31]

WHEN adverse fortune, or, if we prefer to call it, our malignant planet,
undertakes to persecute a man, it never lacks new ways of injuring him.
So now, when I thought I had emerged from this tempestuous sea of
troubles, and hoped my evil star would leave me quiet for a moment, it
began to set two schemes in motion against me before I had recovered my
breath from that great struggle. Within three days two things happened,
each of which brought my life into extreme hazard. One of these occurred
in this way: I went to Fontainebleau to consult with the King; for he
had written me a letter saying he wanted me to stamp the coins of his
whole realm, and enclosing some little drawings to explain his wishes in
the matter; at the same time he left me free to execute them as I liked;
upon which I made new designs according to my own conception, and
according to the ideal of art. When I reached Fontainebleau, one of the
treasurers commissioned by the King to defray my expenses (he was called
Monsignor della Fa 1) addressed me in these words: “Benvenuto, the
painter Bologna has obtained commission from the King to execute your
great Colossus, and all the orders previously given as on your behalf
have been transferred to him. [2] We are all indignant; and it seems to
us that that countryman of yours has acted towards you in a most
unwarrantable manner. The work was assigned you on the strength of your
models and studies. He is robbing you of it, only through the favour of
Madame d’Etampes; and though several months have passed since he
received the order, he has not yet made any sign of commencing it.” I
answered in surprise: “How is it possible that I should have heard
nothing at all about this?” He then informed me that the man had kept it
very dark, and had obtained the King’s commission with great difficulty,
since his Majesty at first would not concede it; only the importunity of
Madame d’Etampes secured this favour for him.

When I felt how greatly and how wrongfully I had been betrayed, and saw
a work which I had gained with my great toil thus stolen from me, I made
my mind up for a serious stroke of business, and marched off with my
good sword at my side to find Bologna. [3] He was in his room, engaged
in studies; after telling the servant to introduce me, he greeted me
with some of his Lombard compliments, and asked what good business had
brought me hither. I replied: “A most excellent business, and one of
great importance.” He then sent for wine, and said: “Before we begin to
talk, we must drink together, for such is the French custom.” I
answered: “Messer Francesco, you must know that the conversation we have
to engage in does not call for drinking at the commencement; after it is
over, perhaps we shall be glad to take a glass.” Then I opened the
matter in this way: “All men who wish to pass for persons of worth allow
it to be seen that they are so by their actions; if they do the
contrary, they lose the name of honest men. I am aware that you knew the
King had commissioned me with that great Colossus; it had been talked of
these eighteen months past; yet neither you nor anybody else came
forward to speak a word about it. By my great labours I made myself
known to his Majesty, who approved of my models and gave the work into
my hands. During many months I have heard nothing to the contrary; only
this morning I was informed that you have got hold of it, and have
filched it from me. I earned it by the talents I displayed, and you are
robbing me of it merely by your idle talking.”

Note 1. His name in full was Jacques de la Fa. He and his son Pierre
after him held the office of 'trésorier de l’epargne.' See Plon, p. 63.

Note 2. By Colossus, Cellini means the fountain with the great statue of
Mars.

Note 3. 'I. e.,' Primaticcio.

[Book 2, chapter 32]

TO this speech Bologna answered: “O Benvenuto! all men try to push their
affairs in every way they can. If this is the King’s will, what have you
to say against it? You would only throw away your time, because I have
it now, and it is mine. Now tell me what you choose, and I will listen
to you.” I replied: “I should like you to know, Messer Francesco, that I
could say much which would prove irrefragably, and make you admit, that
such ways of acting as you have described and used are not in vogue
among rational animals. I will, however, come quickly to the point at
issue; give close attention to my meaning, because the affair is
serious.” He made as though he would rise form the chair on which he was
sitting, since he saw my colour heightened and my features greatly
discomposed. I told him that the time had not yet come for moving; he
had better sit and listen to me. Then I recommenced: “Messer Francesco,
you know that I first received the work, and that the time has long gone
by during which my right could be reasonably disputed by any one. Now I
tell you that I shall be satisfied if you will make a model, while I
make another in addition to the one I have already shown. Then we will
take them without any clamour to our great King; and whosoever in this
way shall have gained the credit of the best design will justly have
deserved the commission. If it falls to you, I will dismiss from my mind
the memory of the great injury you have done me, and will bless your
hands, as being worthier than mine of so glorious a performance. Let us
abide by this agreement, and we shall be friends; otherwise we must be
enemies; and God, who always helps the right, and I, who know how to
assert it, will show you to what extent you have done wrong.” Messer
Francesco answered: “The work is mine, and since it has been given me, I
do not choose to put what is my own to hazard.” To this I retorted:
“Messer Francesco, if you will not take the right course which is just
and reasonable, I will show you another which shall be like your own,
that is to say, ugly and disagreeable. I tell you plainly that if I ever
hear that you have spoken one single word about this work of mine, I
will kill you like a dog. We are neither in Rome, nor in Bologna, nor in
Florence; here one lives in quite a different fashion; if then it comes
to my ears that you talk about this to the King or anybody else, I vow
that I will kill you. Reflect upon the way you mean to take, whether
that for good which I formerly described, or this latter bad one I have
just now set before you.”

The man did not know what to say or do, and I was inclined to cut the
matter short upon the spot rather than to postpone action. Bologna found
no other words than these to utter: “If I act like a man of honesty, I
shall stand in no fear.” I replied: “You have spoken well, but if you
act otherwise, you will have to fear, because the affair is serious.”
Upon this I left him, and betook myself to the King. With his Majesty I
disputed some time about the fashion of his coinage, a point upon which
we were not of the same opinion; his council, who were present, kept
persuading him that the monies ought to be struck in the French style,
as they had hitherto always been done. I urged in reply that his Majesty
had sent for me from Italy in order that I might execute good work; if
he now wanted me to do the contrary, I could not bring myself to submit.
So the matter was postponed till another occasion, and I set off again
at once for Paris.
