Book Two, Chapters 55 to 61 (Symonds)

[Book 2, chapter 55]

I HAD got all the above-mentioned things in order, and was making
vigorous preparations for my great undertaking--indeed a portion of the
lime had been already used--when I received sudden notice to appear
before the majordomo. I found him, after his Excellency’s dinner, in the
hall of the clock. [1] On entering, I paid him marked respect, and he
received me with the greatest stiffness. Then he asked who had installed
me in the house, and by whose authority I had begun to build there,
saying he marvelled much that I had been so headstrong and foolhardy. I
answered that I had been installed in the house by his Excellency, and
that his lordship himself, in the name of his Excellency, had given the
orders to Lattanzio Gorini. “Lattanzio brought stone, sand, and lime,
and provided what I wanted, saying he did so at your lordship’s orders.”
When I had thus spoken, the brute turned upon me with still greater
tartness, vowing that neither I nor any of those whom I had mentioned
spoke the truth. This stung me to the quick, and I exclaimed: “O
majordomo, so long as your lordship [2] chooses to use language
befitting the high office which you hold, I shall revere you, and speak
to you as respectfully as I do to the Duke; if you take another line
with me, I shall address you as but one Ser Pier Francesco Riccio.” He
flew into such a rage that I thought he meant to go mad upon the spot,
anticipating the time ordained by Heaven for him to do so. [3] Pouring
forth a torrent of abuse, he roared out that he was surprised at himself
for having let me speak at all to a man of his quality. Thereupon my
blood was up, and I cried: “Mark my words, then, Ser Pier Francesco
Riccio! I will tell you what sort of men are my equals, and who are
yours--mere teachers of the alphabet to children!” His face contracted
with a spasm, while he raised his voice and repeated the same words in a
still more insulting tone. I, too, assumed an air of menace, and
matching his own arrogance with something of the same sort, told him
plainly that men of my kind were worthy to converse with popes and
emperors, and great kings, and that perhaps there were not two such men
alive upon this earth, while ten of his sort might be met at every
doorway. On hearing these words he jumped upon a window-seat in the hall
there, and defied me to repeat what I had said. I did so with still
greater heat and spirit, adding I had no farther mind to serve the Duke,
and that I should return to France, where I was always welcome. The
brute remained there stupefied and pale as clay; I went off furious,
resolved on leaving Florence; and would to God that I had done so!

The Duke cannot, I think, have been informed at once of this diabolical
scene, for I waited several days without hearing from him. Giving up all
thoughts of Florence, except what concerned the settlement of my
sister’s and nieces’ affairs, I made preparations to provide for them as
well as I could with the small amount of money I had brought, and then
to return to France and never set my foot in Italy again. This being my
firm purpose, I had no intention to ask leave of the Duke or anybody,
but to decamp as quickly as I could; when one morning the majordomo, of
his own accord, sent very humbly to entreat my presence, and opened a
long pedantic oration, in which I could discover neither method, nor
elegance, nor meaning, nor head, nor tail. I only gathered from it that
he professed himself a good Christian, wished to bear no man malice, and
asked me in the Duke’s name what salary I should be willing to accept.
Hearing this, I stood a while on guard, and made no answer, being firmly
resolved not to engage myself. When he saw that I refused to reply, he
had at least the cleverness to put in: “Benvenuto, dukes expect to be
answered; and what I am saying to you, I am saying from his Excellency’s
lips.” Then I rejoined that if the message came from his Excellency, I
would gladly reply, and told him to report to the Duke that I could not
accept a position inferior to that of any one employed by him as artist.
The majordomo answered: “Bandinello receives two hundred crowns a year;
if then you are contented with that, your salary is settled.” I agreed
upon these terms, adding that what I might earn in addition by the merit
of my performances, could be given after they were seen; that point I
left entirely to the good judgment of his Excellency. Thus, then,
against my will, I pieced the broken thread again, and set to work; the
Duke continually treating me with the highest imaginable marks of favour.

Note 1. One of the rooms in the Palazzo Vecchio, so called because the
famous cosmographical timepiece, made about 1484 for Lorenzo de’ Medici
by Lorenzo della Volpaia, stood there.

Note 2. It was the custom at that epoch to address princes by the title
of 'Signore' or 'Vostra Signoria;' gentlemen (armigeri) had the title of
'Messer;' simple 'Ser' was given to plebeians with some civil or
ecclesiastical dignity.

Note 3. Vasari, in his 'Life of Montorsoli,' says in effect that this
Riccio died about 1559, after having been insane several years.

[Book 2, chapter 56]

I RECEIVED frequent letters from France, written by my most faithful
friend Messer Guido Guidi. As yet they told nothing but good news; and
Ascanio also bade me enjoy myself without uneasiness, since, if anything
happened, he would let me know at once.

Now the King was informed that I had commenced working for the Duke of
Florence, and being the best man in the world, he often asked: “Why does
not Benvenuto come back to us?” He put searching questions on the
subject to my two workmen, both of whom replied that I kept writing I
was well off where I was, adding they thought I did not want to re-enter
the service of his Majesty. Incensed by these presumptuous words, which
were none of my saying, the King exclaimed: “Since he left us without
any cause, I shall not recall him; let him e’en stay where he is.” Thus
the thievish brigands brought matters exactly to the pass they desired;
for if I had returned to France, they would have become mere workmen
under me once more, whereas, while I remained away, they were their own
masters and in my place; consequently, they did everything in their
power to prevent my coming back.

[Book 2, chapter 57]

WHILE the workshop for executing my Perseus was in building, I used to
work in a ground-floor room. Here I modelled the statue in plaster,
giving it the same dimensions as the bronze was meanst to have, and
intending to cast it from this mould. But finding that it would take
rather long to carry it out in this way, I resolved upon another
expedient, especially as now a wretched little studio had been erected,
brick on brick, so miserably built that the mere recollection of it
gives me pain. So then I began the figure of Medusa, and constructed the
skeleton in iron. Afterwards I put on the clay, and when that was
modelled, baked it.

I had no assistants except some little shopboys, among whom was one of
great beauty; he was the son of a prostitute called La Gambetta. I made
use of the lad as a model, for the only books which teach this art are
the natural human body. Meanwhile, as I could not do everything alone, I
looked about for workmen in order to put the business quickly through;
but I was unable to find any. There were indeed some in Florence who
would willingly have come, but Bandinello prevented them, and after
keeping me in want of aid awhile, told the Duke that I was trying to
entice his work-people because I was quite incapable of setting up so
great a statue by myself. I complained to the Duke of the annoyance
which the brute gave me, and begged him to allow me some of the
labourers from the Opera. [1] My request inclined him to lend ear to
Bandinello’s calumnies; and when I noticed that, I set about to do my
utmost by myself alone. The labour was enormous: I had to strain every
muscle night and day; and just then the husband of my sister sickened,
and died after a few days’ illness. He left my sister, still young, with
six girls of all ages, on my hands. This was the first great trial I
endured in Florence, to be made the father and guardian of such a
distressed family.

Note 1. That is, the Opera del Duomo, or permanent establishment for
attending to the fabric of the Florentine Cathedral.

[Book 2, chapter 58]

IN my anxiety that nothing should go wrong, I sent for two
hand-labourers to clear my garden of rubbish. They came from Ponte
Vecchio, the one an old man of sixty years, the other a young fellow of
eighteen. After employing them about three days, the lad told me that
the old man would not work, and that I had better send him away, since,
beside being idle, he prevented his comrade from working. The little I
had to do there could be done by himself, without throwing money away on
other people. The youth was called Bernardino Mannellini, of Mugello.
When I saw that he was so inclined to labour, I asked whether he would
enter my service, and we agreed upon the spot. He groomed my horse,
gardened, and soon essayed to help me in the workshop, with such success
that by degrees he learned the art quite nicely. I never had a better
assistant than he proved. Having made up my mind to accomplish the whole
affair with this man’s aid, I now let the Duke know that Bandinello was
lying, and that I could get on famously without his workpeople.

Just at this time I suffered slightly in the loins, and being unable to
work hard, I was glad to pass my time in the Duke’s wardrobe with a
couple of young goldsmiths called Gianpagolo and Domenico Poggini, [1]
who made a little golden cup under my direction. It was chased in
bas-relief with figures and other pretty ornaments, and his Excellency
meant it for the Duchess to drink water out of. He furthermore
commissioned me to execute a golden belt, which I enriched with gems and
delicate masks and other fancies. The Duke came frequently into the
wardrobe, and took great pleasure in watching me at work and talking to
me. When my health improved, I had clay brought, and took a portrait of
his Excellency, considerably larger than life-size, which I modelled
while he stayed with me for pastime. He was highly delighted with this
piece, and conceived such a liking for me that he earnestly begged me to
take up my working quarters in the palace, selecting rooms large enough
for my purpose, and fitting them up with furnaces and all I wanted, for
he greatly enjoyed watching the processes of art. I replied that this
was impossible; I should not have finished my undertakings in a hundred
years.

Note 1. These two brothers were specially eminent as die-casters.
Gianpagolo went to Spain, and served Philip II.

[Book 2, chapter 59]

THE DUCHESS also treated me with extraordinary graciousness, and would
have been pleased if I had worked for her alone, forgetting Perseus and
everything besides. I for my part, while these vain favours were being
showered upon me knew only too well that my perverse and biting fortune
could not long delay to send me some fresh calamity, because I kept ever
before my eyes the great mistake I had committed while seeking to do a
good action. I refer to my affairs in France. The King could not swallow
the displeasure he felt at my departure; and yet he wanted me to return,
if only this could be brought about without concessions on his part. I
thought that I was entirely in the right, and would not bend
submissively, because I judged that if I wrote in humble terms, those
enemies of mine would say in their French fashion that I had confessed
myself to blame, and that certain misdoings with which they wrongfully
taxed me were proved true. Therefore I stood upon my honour, and wrote
in terms of haughty coldness, which was precisely what those two
traitors, my apprentices, most heartily desired. In my letters to them I
boasted of the distinguished kindness shown me in my own birthplace by a
prince and princess the absolute masters of Florence. Whenever they
received one of these despatches, they went to the King, and besieged
his Majesty with entreaties for the castle upon the same terms as he had
granted it to me. The King, who was a man of great goodness and
perspicacity, would never consent to the presumptuous demands of those
scoundrels, since he scented the malignity of their aims. Yet, wishing
to keep them in expectation, and to give me the opportunity of coming
back, he caused an angry letter to be written to me by his treasurer,
Messer Giuliano Buonaccorsi, a burgher of Florence. The substance was as
follows: If I wanted to preserve the reputation for honesty which I had
hitherto enjoyed, it was my plain duty, after leaving France with no
cause whatsoever, to render an account of all that I had done and dealt
with for his Majesty.

The receipt of this letter gave me such pleasure that, If I had
consulted my own palate, I could not have wished for either more or
less. I sat down to write an answer, and filled nine pages of ordinary
paper. In this document I described in detail all the works which I had
executed, and all the adventures I had gone through while performing
them, and all the sums which had been spent upon them. The payments had
always been made through two notaries and one of his Majesty’s
treasurers; and I could show receipts from all the men into whose hands
they passed, whether for goods supplied or labour rendered. I had not
pocketed one penny of the money, nor had I received any reward for my
completed works. I brought back with me into Italy nothing but some
marks of favour and most royal promises, truly worthy of his Majesty.
“Now, though I cannot vaunt myself of any recompense beyond the salaries
appointed for my maintenance in France, seven hundred golden crowns of
which are still due, inasmuch as I abstained from drawing them until I
could employ them on my return-journey; yet knowing that malicious foes
out of their envious hearts have played some knavish trick against me, I
feel confident that truth will prevail. I take pride in his Most
Christian Majesty and am not moved by avarice. I am indeed aware of
having performed for him far more than I undertook; and albeit the
promised reward has not been given me, my one anxiety is to remain in
his Majesty’s opinion that man of probity and honour which I have always
been. If your Majesty entertains the least doubt upon this point, I will
fly to render an account of my conduct, at the risk even of my life. But
noticing in what slight esteem I am held I have had no mind to come back
and make an offer of myself, knowing that I shall never lack for bread
whithersoever I may go. If, however, I am called for, I will always
answer.” The letter contained many further particulars worthy of the
King’s attention, and proper to the preservation of my honour. Before
despatching it, I took it to the Duke, who read it with interest; then I
sent it into France, addressed to the Cardinal of Ferrara.

[Book 2, chapter 60]

ABOUT this time Bernardone Baldini, [1] broker in jewels to the Duke,
brought a big diamond from Venice, which weighed more than thirty-five
carats. Antonio, son of Vittorio Landi, was also interested in getting
the Duke to purchase it. [2] The stone had been cut with a point; but
since it did not yield the purity of lustre which one expects in such a
diamond, its owners had cropped the point, and, in truth, it was not
exactly fit for either point or table cutting. [3] Our Duke, who greatly
delighted in gems, though he was not a sound judge of them, held out
good hopes to the rogue Bernardaccio that he would buy this stone; and
the fellow, wanting to secure for himself alone the honour of palming it
off upon the Duke of Florence, abstained from taking his partner Antonio
Landi into the secret. Now Landi had been my intimate friend from
childhood, and when he saw that I enjoyed the Duke’s confidence, he
called me aside (it was just before noon at a corner of the Mercato
Nuovo), and spoke as follows: “Benvenuto, I am convinced that the Duke
will show you a diamond, which he seems disposed to buy; you will find
it a big stone. Pray assist the purchase; I can give it for seventeen
thousand crowns. I feel sure he will ask your advice; and if you see
that he has a mind for it, we will contrive that he secures it.” Antonio
professed great confidence in being able to complete the bargain for the
jewel at that price. In reply, I told him that if my advice was taken, I
would speak according to my judgment, without prejudice to the diamond.

As I have above related, the Duke came daily into our goldsmith’s
workshop for several hours; and about a week after this conversation
with Antonio Landi he showed me one day after dinner the diamond in
question, which I immediately recognised by its description, both as to
form and weight. I have already said that its water was not quite
transparent, for which reason it had been cropped; so, when I found it
of that kind and quality, I felt certainly disinclined to recommend its
acquisition. However, I asked his Excellency what he wanted me to say;
because it was one thing for jewellers to value a stone after a prince
had bought it, and another thing to estimate it with a view to purchase.
He replied that he bought it, and that he only wanted my opinion. I did
not choose to abstain from hinting what I really thought about the
stone. Then he told me to observe the beauty of its great facets. [4] I
answered that this feature of the diamond was not so great a beauty as
his Excellency supposed, but came from the point having been cropped. At
these words my prince, who perceive that I was speaking the truth, made
a wry face, and bade me give good heed to valuing the stone, and saying
what I thought it worth. I reckoned that, since Landi had offered it to
me for 17,000 crowns, the Duke might have got it for 15,000 at the
highest; so, noticing that he would take it ill if I spoke the truth, I
made my mind up to uphold him in his false opinion, and handing back the
diamond, said: “You will probably have paid 18,000 crowns.” On hearing
this the Duke uttered a loud “Oh!” opening his mouth as wide as a well,
and cried out: “Now am I convinced that you understand nothing about the
matter.” I retorted: “You are certainly in the wrong there, my lord. Do
you attend to maintaining the credit of your diamond, while I attend to
understanding my trade. But pray tell me at least how much you paid, in
order that I may learn to understand it according to the way of your
Excellency.” The Duke rose, and, with a little sort of angry grin,
replied: “Twenty-five thousand crowns and more, Benvenuto, did that
stone cost me!”

Having thus spoken he departed. Giovanpagolo and Domenico Poggini, the
goldsmiths, were present; and Bachiacca, the embroiderer, who was
working in an adjacent room, ran up at the noise. [5] I told them that I
should never have advised the Duke to purchase it; but if his heart was
set on having it, Antonio Landi had offered me the stone eight days ago
for 17,000 crowns. I think I could have got it for 15,000 or less. But
the Duke apparently wishes to maintain his gem in credit; for when
Antonio Landi was willing to let it go at that price, how the devil can
Bernardone have played off such a shameful trick upon his Excellency?
Never imagining that the matter stood precisely as the Duke averred, we
laughingly made light of his supposed credulity.

Note 1. Varchi and Ammirato both mention him as an excellent jeweller.

Note 2. Antonio Landi was a Florentine gentleman, merchant, and author.
A comedy of his called 'Commodo' is extant.

Note 3. Italians distinguished cut diamonds of three sorts: 'in tavola,
a faccette,' and 'in punta.' The word I have translated 'cropped' is
'ischericato,' which was properly applied to an unfrocked or degraded
ecclesiastic.

Note 4. 'Filetti,' the sharp lines which divide one facet from another.

Note 5. Antonio Ubertini, called Il Bachiacca, a brother of Cellini’s
friend in Rome. See p. 56. He enjoyed great reputation, and was praised
by Varchi in a sonnet for his mastery of embroidery.

[Book 2, chapter 61]

MEANWHILE I was advancing with my great statue of Medusa. I had covered
the iron skeleton with clay, which I modelled like an anatomical
subject, and about half an inch thinner than the bronze would be. This I
baked well, and then began to spread on the wax surface, in order to
complete the figure to my liking. [1] The Duke, who often came to
inspect it, was so anxious lest I should not succeed with the bronze,
that he wanted me to call in some master to case it for me.

He was continually talking in the highest terms of my acquirements and
accomplishments. This made his majordomo no less continually eager to
devise some trap for making me break my neck. Now his post at court gave
him authority with the chief-constables and all the officers in the poor
unhappy town of Florence. Only to think that a fellow from Prato, our
hereditary foeman, the son of a cooper, and the most ignorant creature
in existence, should have risen to such a station of influence, merely
because he had been the rotten tutor of Cosimo de’ Medici before he
became Duke! Well, as I have said, he kept ever on the watch to serve me
some ill turn; and finding that he could not catch me out on any side,
he fell at last upon this plan, which meant mischief. He betook himself
to Gambetta, the mother of my apprentice Cencio; and this precious pair
together--that knave of a pedant and that rogue of a strumpet--invented
a scheme for giving me such a fright as would make me leave Florence in
hot haste. Gambetta, yielding to the instinct of her trade, went out,
acting under the orders of that mad, knavish pedant, the majordomo--I
must add that they had also gained over the Bargello, a Bolognese, whom
the Duke afterwards dismissed for similar conspiracies. Well, one
evening, after sunset, Gambetta came to my house with her son, and told
me she had kept him several days indoors for my welfare. I answered that
there was no reason to keep him shut up on my account; and laughing her
whorish arts to scorn, I turned to the boy in her presence, and said
these words: “You know, Cencio, whether I have sinned with you!” He
began to shed tears, and answered, “No!” Upon this the mother, shaking
her head, cried out at him: “Ah! you little scoundrel! Do you think I do
not know how these things happen?” Then she turned to me, and begged me
to keep the lad hidden in my house, because the Bargello was after him,
and would seize him anywhere outside my house, but there they would not
dare to touch him. I made answer that in my house lived my widowed
sister and six girls of holy life, and that I wanted nobody else there.
Upon that she related that the majordomo had given orders to the
Bargello, and that I should certainly be taken up: only, if I would not
harbour her son, I might square accounts by paying her a hundred crowns;
the majordomo was her crony, and I might rest assured that she could
work him to her liking, provided I paid down the hundred crowns. This
cozenage goaded me into such a fury that I cried: “Out with you,
shameful strumpet! Were it not for my good reputation, and for the
innocence of this unhappy boy of yours here, I should long ago have cut
your throat with the dagger at my side; and twice or thrice I have
already clasped my fingers on the handle.” With words to this effect,
and many ugly blows to boot, I drove the woman and her son into the
street.

Note 1. This is an important passage, which has not, I think, been
properly understood by Cellini’s translators. It describes the process
he now employed in preparing a mould for bronze-casting. First, it
seems, he made a solid clay model, somewhat smaller than the bronze was
meant to be. This he overlaid with wax, and then took a hollow mould of
the figure thus formed. Farther on we shall see how he withdrew the wax
from the hollow mould, leaving the solid model inside, with space enough
between them for the metal to flow in.
