Book Two, Chapters 101 to 107 (Symonds)

[Book 2, chapter 101]

BANDINELLO had received information of the crucifix which, as I have
said above, I was now engaged upon. Accordingly he laid his hands at
once upon a block of marble, and produced the Pietà which may be seen in
the church of the Annunziata. Now I had offered my crucifix to S. Maria
Novella, and had already fixed up the iron clamps whereby I meant to
fasten it against the wall. I only asked for permission to construct a
little sarcophagus upon the ground beneath the feet of Christ, into
which I might creep when I was dead. The friars told me that they could
not grant this without the consent of their building committee. [1] I
replied: “Good brethren, why did not you consult your committee before
you allowed me to place my crucifix? Without their leave you suffered me
to fix my clamps and other necessary fittings.”

On this account I refused to give those fruits of my enormous labours to
the church of S. Maria Novella, even though the overseers of the fabric
came and begged me for the crucifix. I turned at once to the church of
the Annunziata, and when I explained the terms on which I had sought to
make a present of it to S. Maria Novella, those virtuous friars of the
Nunziata unanimously told me to place it in their church, and let me
make my grave according to my will and pleasure. When Bandinello became
aware of this, he set to work with great diligence at the completion of
his Pietà, and prayed the Duchess to get for him the chapel of the Pazzi
for his monument. This he obtained with some difficulty; and on
receiving the permission, he erected his Pietà with great haste. It was
not altogether completed when he died.

The Duchess then said that, even as she had protected him in life, so
would she protect him in the grave, and that albeit he was dead, I need
never try to get that block of marble. Apropos of which, the broken
Bernardone, meeting me one day in the country, said that the Duchess had
assigned the marble. I replied: “Unhappy piece of stone! In the hands of
Bandinello it would certainly have come to grief; but in those of
Ammanato its fate is a hundred times worse.” Now I had received orders
from the Duke to make a clay model, of the same size as the marble would
allow; he also provided me with wood and clay, set up a sort of screen
in the Loggia where my Perseus stands, and paid me one workman. I went
about my business with all diligence, and constructed the wooden
framework according to my excellent system. Then I brought the model
successfully to a conclusion, without caring whether I should have to
execute it in marble, since I knew the Duchess was resolved I should not
get the commission. Consequently I paid no heed to that. Only I felt
very glad to undergo this labour, hoping to make the Duchess, who was
after all a person of intelligence, as indeed I had the means of
observing at a later period, repent of having done so great a wrong both
to the marble and herself. Giovanni the Fleming also made a model in the
cloister of S. Croce; Vinzenzio Danti of Perugia another in the house of
Messer Ottaviano de’ Medici; the son of Moschino began a third at Pisa,
and Bartolommeo Ammanato a fourth in the Loggia, which we divided
between us. 2

When I had blocked the whole of mine out well, and wanted to begin upon
the details of the head, which I had already just sketched out in
outline, the Duke came down from the palace, and Giorgetto, the painter,
[3] took him into Ammanato’s workshed. This man had been engaged there
with his own hands several days, in company with Ammanato and all his
workpeople. While, then, the Duke was inspecting Ammanato’s model, I
received intelligence that he seemed but little pleased with it. In
spite of Giorgetto’s trying to dose him with his fluent nonsense, the
Duke shook his head, and turning to Messer Gianstefano, [4] exclaimed:
“Go and ask Benvenuto if his colossal statue is far enough forward for
him to gratify us with a glance at it.” Messer Gianstefano discharged
this embassy with great tact, and in the most courteous terms. He added
that if I did not think my work quite ready to be seen yet, I might say
so frankly, since the Duke knew well that I had enjoyed but little
assistance for so large an undertaking. I replied that I entreated him
to do me the favour of coming; for though my model was not far advanced,
yet the intelligence of his Excellency would enable him to comprehend
perfectly how it was likely to look when finished. This kindly gentleman
took back my message to the Duke, who came with pleasure. No sooner had
he entered the enclosure and cast his eyes upon my work, than he gave
signs of being greatly satisfied. Then he walked all round it, stopping
at each of the four points of view, exactly as the ripest expert would
have done. Afterwards he showed by nods and gestures of approval that it
pleased him; but he said no more than this: “Benvenuto, you have only to
give a little surface to your statue.” Then he turned to his attendants,
praising my performance, and saying: “The small model which I saw in his
house pleased me greatly, but this has far exceeded it in merit.”

Note 1. 'I loro Operai.'

Note 2. Gian Bologna, or Jean Boullogne, was born at Douai about 1530.
He went, while a very young man, to Rome, and then settled at Florence.
There he first gained reputation by a Venus which the Prince Francesco
bought. The Neptune on the piazza at Bologna, which is his work, may
probably have been executed from the model he made in competition upon
this occasion. Vincenzo Danti was born at Perugia in 1530. He produced
the bronze statute of Pope Julius III., which may still be seen in his
native city. Simone Cioli, called Il Mosca, was a very fair sculptor who
died in 1554, leaving a son, Francesco, called Il Moschino, who was also
a sculptor, and had reached the age of thirty at this epoch. It is
therefore to this Moschino probably that Cellini refers above.

Note 3. Giorgio Vasari.

Note 4. Probably Gianstefano Lalli.

[Book 2, chapter 102]

IT pleased God, who rules all things for our good--I mean, for those who
acknowledge and believe in Him; such men never fail to gain His
protection--that about this time a certain rascal from Vecchio called
Piermaria d’Anterigoli, and surnamed Lo Sbietta, introduced himself to
me. He is a sheep-grazier; and being closely related to Messer Guido
Guidi, the physician, who is now provost of Pescia, I lent ear to his
proposals. The man offered to sell me a farm of his for the term of my
natural life. I did not care to go and see it, since I wanted to
complete the model of my colossal Neptune. There was also no reason why
I should visit the property, because Sbietta only sold it to me for the
income. [1] This he had noted down at so many bushels of grain, so much
of wine, oil, standing corn, chestnuts, and other produce. I reckoned
that, as the market then ran, these together were worth something
considerably over a hundred golden crowns in gold; and I paid him 650
crowns, which included duties to the state. Consequently, when he left a
memorandum written in his own hand, to the effect that he would always
keep up these products of the farm in the same values during my
lifetime, I did not think it necessary to inspect it. Only I made
inquiries, to the best of my ability, as to whether Sbietta and his
brother Ser Filippo were well off enough to give me good security. Many
persons of divers sorts, who knew them, assured me that my security was
excellent. We agreed to call in Ser Pierfrancesco Bertoldi, notary at
the Mercantanzia; and at the very first I handed him Sbietta’s
memorandum, expecting that this would be recited in the deed. But the
notary who drew it up was so occupied with detailing twenty-two
boundaries described by Sbietta, [2] that, so far as I can judge, he
neglected to include in the contract what the vendor had proposed to
furnish. While he was writing, I went on working; and since it took him
several hours, I finished a good piece of my Neptune’s head.

After the contract was signed and sealed, Sbietta began to pay me the
most marked attentions, which I returned in like measure. He made me
presents of kids, cheese, capons, fresh curds, and many sorts of fruits,
until I began to be almost ashamed of so much kindness. In exchange for
these courtesies I always took him from the inn to lodge with me when he
came into Florence, often inviting a relative or two who happened to
attend him. On one of these occasions he told me with a touch of
pleasantry that it was really shameful for me to have bought a farm,
and, after the lapse of so many weeks, not yet to have left my business
for three days in the hands of my workpeople, so as to have come to look
at it. His wheedling words and ways induced me to set off, in a bad hour
for my welfare, on a visit to him. Sbietta received me in his own house
with such attentions and such honours as a duke might covet. His wife
caressed me even more than he did; and these excellent relations
continued between us until the plans which he and his brother Ser
Filippo had in mind were fully matured.

Note 1. What Cellini means is that Sbietta was to work the farm, paying
Cellini its annual value. It appears from some particulars which follow
that the 'entrate' were to be paid in kind.

Note 2. The word 'confini,' which I have translated 'boundaries,' may
mean 'limiting conditions.'

[Book 2, chapter 103]

MEANWHILE I did not suspend my labours on the Neptune, which was now
quite blocked out upon an excellent system, undiscovered and unknown
before I used it. Consequently, although I knew I should not get the
marble for the reasons above narrated, I hoped to have it soon
completed, and to display it on the piazza simply for my satisfaction.

It was a warm and pleasant season; and this, together with the
attentions of those two rascals, disposed me to set out one Wednesday,
which happened to be a double holiday, for my country-house at
Trespiano. [1] Having spent some time over an excellent lunch, it was
past twenty o’clock when I reached Vicchio. There, at the towngate, I
met Ser Filippo, who appeared to know already whither I was bound. He
loaded me with attentions, and took me to Sbietta’s house, where I found
that fellow’s strumpet of a wife, who also overwhelmed me with caresses.
I gave the woman a straw hat of the very finest texture, the like of
which she told me she had never seen. Still, up to this time, Sbietta
had not put in his appearance.

Toward the end of the afternoon we all sat down to supper in excellent
spirits. Later on, they gave me a well appointed bedroom, where I went
to rest in a bed of the most perfect cleanliness. Both of my servants,
according to their rank, were equally well treated. On the morrow, when
I rose, the same attentions were paid me. I went to see my farm, which
pleased me much; and then I had some quantities of grain and other
produce handed over. But when I returned to Vicchio, the priest Ser
Filippo said to me: “Benvenuto do not be uneasy; although you have not
found here quite everything you had the right to look for, yet put your
mind to rest; it will be amply made up in the future, for you have to
deal with honest folk. You ought, by the way, to know that we have sent
that labourer away, because he was a scoundrel.” The labourer in
question bore the name of Mariano Rosegli; and this man now kept
frequently repeating in my ear: “Look well after yourself; in the end
you will discover which of us here is the greatest villain.” The
country-fellow, when he spoke those words, smiled with an evil kind of
sneer, and jerked his head as though to say: “Only go up there, and you
will find out for yourself.”

I was to some extent unfavourably influenced by these hints, yet far
from forming a conception of what actually happened to me. So, when I
returned from the farm, which is two miles distant from Vicchio, toward
the Alpi, [2] I met the priest, who was waiting for me with his
customary politeness. We then sat down together to breakfast; it was not
so much a dinner as an excellent collation. Afterwards I took a walk
through Vicchio--the market had just opened--and noticed how all the
inhabitants fixed their eyes upon me, as on something strange. This
struck me particularly in the case of a worthy old man, who has been
living for many years at Vicchio, and whose wife bakes bread for sale.
He owns some good property at the distance of about a mile; however, he
prefers this mode of life, and occupies a house which belongs to me in
the town of Vicchio. This had been consigned to me together with the
farm above mentioned, which bears the name of Della Fonte. The worthy
old man spoke as follows: “I am living in your house, and when it falls
due I shall pay you your rent; but if you want it earlier, I will act
according to your wishes. You may reckon on never having any disputes
with me.” While we were thus talking I noticed that he looked me hard in
the face, which compelled me to address him thus: “Prithee, tell me,
friend Giovanni, why you have more than once stared at me in that way?”
He replied: “I am quite willing to tell you, if, being the man of worth
I take you for, you will promise not to say that I have told you.” I
gave the promise and he proceeded: “You must know then that that
worthless priest, Ser Filippo, not many days since, went about boasting
of his brother Sbietta’s cleverness, and telling how he had sold his
farm to an old man for his lifetime, and that the purchaser could hardly
live the year out. You have got mixed up with a set of rogues; therefore
take heed to living as long as you are able, and keep your eyes open,
for you have need of it. I do not choose to say more.”

Note 1. From Cellini’s 'Ricordi' it appears that he bought a farm at
this village, north-east of Florence, on October 26, 1548. In 1556 he
also purchased land there.

Note 2. The Alpi are high mountain pastures in the Apennines.

[Book 2, chapter 104]

DURING my promenade through the market, I met Giovan Battista Santini,
and he and I were taken back to supper by the priest. As I have related
above, we supped at the early hour of twenty, because I made it known
that I meant to return to Trespiano. Accordingly they made all ready;
the wife of Sbietta went bustling about in the company of one Cecchino
Buti, their knave of all work. After the salads had been mixed and we
were preparing to sit down to table, that evil priest, with a certain
nasty sort of grin, exclaimed: “I must beg you to excuse me, for I
cannot sup with you; the reason is that some business of importance has
occurred which I must transact for my brother Sbietta. In his absence I
am obliged to act for him.” We all begged him to stay, but could not
alter his determination; so he departed and we began our supper. After
we had eaten the salads on some common platters, and they were preparing
to serve the boiled meat, each guest received a porringer for himself.
Santini, who was seated opposite me at table exclaimed: “Do you notice
that the crockery they give you is different from the rest? Did you ever
see anything handsomer?” I answered that I had not noticed it. He also
prayed me to invite Sbietta’s wife to sit down with us; for she and that
Cecchino Buti kept running hither and thither in the most extraordinary
fuss and hurry. At last I induced the woman to join us; when she began
to remonstrate: “You do not like my victuals, since you eat so little.”
I answered by praising the supper over and over again, and saying that I
had never eaten better or with heartier appetite. Finally, I told her
that I had eaten quite enough. I could not imagine why she urged me so
persistently to eat. After supper was over, and it was past the hour of
twenty-one, I became anxious to return to Trespiano, in order that I
might recommence my work next morning in the Loggia. Accordingly I bade
farewell to all the company, and having thanked our hostess, took my
leave.

I had not gone three miles before I felt as though my stomach was on
fire, and suffered such pain that it seemed a thousand years till I
arrived at Trespiano. However, it pleased God that I reached it after
nightfall with great toil, and immediately proceeded to my farm, where I
went to bed. During the night I got no sleep, and was constantly
disturbed by motions of my bowels. When day broke, feeling an intense
heat in the rectum, I looked eagerly to see what this might mean, and
found the cloth covered with blood. Then in a moment I conceived that I
had eaten something poisonous, and racked my brains to think what it
could possibly have been. It came back to my memory how Sbietta’s wife
had set before me plates, and porringers, and saucers different from the
others, and how that evil priest, Sbietta’s brother, after giving
himself such pains to do me honour, had yet refused to sup with us.
Furthermore, I remembered what the priest had said about Sbietta’s doing
such a fine stroke of business by the sale of his farm to an old man for
life, who could not be expected to survive a year. Giovanni Sardella had
reported these words to me. All things considered, I made my mind up
that they must have administered a dose of sublimate in the sauce, which
was very well made and pleasant to the taste, inasmuch as sublimate
produces all the symptoms. I was suffering from. Now it is my custom to
take but little sauce or seasoning with my meat, excepting salt; and yet
I had eaten two moderate mouthfuls of that sauce because it was so
tasteful. On further thinking, I recollected how often that wife of
Sbietta had teased me in a hundred ways to partake more freely of the
sauce. On these accounts I felt absolutely certain that they had given
me sublimate in that very dish.

[Book 2, chapter 105]

ALBEIT I was suffering so severely, I forced myself to work upon my
Colossus in the Loggia; but after a few days I succumbed to the malady
and took to my bed. No sooner did the Duchess hear that I was ill, than
she caused the execution of that unlucky marble to be assigned to
Bartolommeo Ammanato. [1] He sent word to me through Messer&hellip;.
living&hellip;. Street, that I might now do what I liked with my model
since he had won the marble. This Messer&hellip;. was one of the lovers
of Bartolommeo Ammanato’s wife; and being the most favoured on account
of his gentle manners and discretion, Ammanato made things easy for him.
There would be much to say upon this topic; however, I do not care to
imitate his master, Bandinello, who always wandered from the subject in
his talk. Suffice it to say that I told Ammanato’s messenger I had
always imagined it would turn out thus; let the man strain himself to
the utmost in proof of gratitude to Fortune for so great a favour so
undeservedly conferred on him by her.

All this while I stayed with sorry cheer in bed, and was attended by
that most excellent man and physician, Maestro Francesco da Montevarchi.
Together with him Maestro Raffaello de’ Pilli undertook the surgical
part of my case, forasmuch as the sublimate had so corroded the
intestines that I was unable to retain my motions. When Maestro
Francesco saw that the poison had exerted all its strength, being indeed
insufficient in quantity to overcome my vigorous constitutions, he said
one day: “Benvenuto, return thanks to God, for you have won the battle.
Have no anxiety, since I mean to cure you in spite of the rogues who
sought to work your ruin.” Maestro Raffaello then put in: “This will be
one of the finest and most difficult cures which was ever heard of; for
I can tell you, Benvenuto, that you swallowed a good mouthful of
sublimate.” Thereupon Maestro Francesco took him up and said: “It may
possibly have been some venomous caterpillar.” I replied: “I know for
certain what sort of poison it was, and who gave it to me;” upon which
we all were silent. They attended me more than six full months, and I
remained more than a whole year before I could enjoy my life and vigour.

Note 1. What follows has been so carefully erased, possibly by Cellini’s
own hand, in the autograph, that it is illegible. Laura Battiferra,
Ammanato’s wife, was a woman of irreproachable character, whom Cellini
himself praised in a sonnet.

[Book 2, chapter 106]

AT this time [1] the Duke went to make his triumphal entry into Siena,
and Ammanato had gone there some months earlier to construct the arches.
A bastard of his, who stayed behind in the Loggia, removed the cloths
with which I kept my model of Neptune covered until it should be
finished. As soon as I knew this, I complained to Signor Don Francesco,
the Duke’s son, who was kindly disposed toward me, and told him how they
had disclosed my still imperfect statue; had it been finished, I should
not have given the fact a thought. The Prince replied with a threatening
toss of his head: “Benvenuto, do not mind your statue having been
uncovered, because these men are only working against themselves; yet if
you want me to have it covered up, I will do so at once.” He added many
other words in my honour before a crowd of gentlemen who were there. I
then begged his Excellency to give me the necessary means for finishing
it, saying that I meant to make a present of it together with the little
model to his Highness. He replied that he gladly accepted both gifts,
and that he would have all the conveniences I asked for put at my
disposal. Thus, then, I fed upon this trifling mark of favour, which, in
fact, proved the salvation of my life; for having been overwhelmed by so
many evils and such great annoyances all at one fell swoop, I felt my
forces failing; but this little gleam of encouragement inspired me with
some hope of living.

Note 1. October 28, 1560.

[Book 2, chapter 107]

A YEAR had now passed since I bought the farm of Della Fonte from
Sbietta. In addition to their attempt upon my life by poisoning and
their numerous robberies, I noticed that the property yielded less than
half what had been promised. Now, in addition to the deeds of contract,
I had a declaration written by Sbietta’s own hand, in which he bound
himself before witnesses to pay me over the yearly income I have
mentioned. Armed with these documents, I had recourse to the Lords
Counsellors. At that time Messer Alfonso Quistello was still alive and
Chancellor of the Exchequer; he sat upon the Board, which included
Averardo Serristori and Federigo de’ Ricci. I cannot remember the names
of all of them, but I know that one of the Alessandri was a member.
Suffice it to say, the counsellors of that session were men of weight
and worth. When I had explained my cause to the magistracy, they all
with one voice ruled that Sbietta should give me back my money, except
Federigo de’ Ricci, who was then employing the fellow himself; the
others unanimously expressed sorrow to me that Federigo de’ Ricci
prevented them from despatching the affair. Averardo Serristori and
Alessandri in particular made a tremendous stir about it, but Federigo
managed to protect matters until the magistracy went out of office;
whereupon Serristori, meeting me one morning after they had come out
upon the Piazza dell’ Annunziata, cried aloud, without the least regard
to consequences: “Federigo de’ Ricci has been so much stronger than all
of us put together that you have been massacred against our will.” I do
not intend to say more upon this topic, since it would be too offensive
to the supreme authorities of state; enough that I was cruelly wronged
at the will of a rich citizen, only because he made use of that
shepherd-fellow.
