THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — TRANSLATION STRATEGY
=======================================================

WHAT THIS BOOK IS, AND WHY IT IS ON THIS SHELF
----------------------------------------------

The Nights is not one book by one author. It is a fifteen-hundred-year
drift of stories out of India, Persia and Arabia, written down by many
hands between roughly 800 and 1400, and held together by one of the
great inventions of world literature: a woman telling stories to stay
alive.

Richard Francis Burton translated it into English between 1885 and 1888,
sixteen volumes, and what he produced is the strangest thing in this
whole project. THE ARCHAISM IS NOT IN THE ORIGINAL. The Arabic of the
Nights is plain, quick, popular storytelling — closer to a market
storyteller than to anything literary. Burton put it into a deliberate
mock-Elizabethan that no one has ever spoken or written: "hight" for
named, "quoth" for said, "whenas" for when, "an" for if, "wone" for
dwelling. He invented compounds when he ran out ("the Sunderer of
Societies", "Gobbo" for the hunchback). He did it on purpose and said so,
to make the English feel as remote to a Victorian as the Arabic felt to
him.

The result is a book with an archaism density of 19.83 per thousand words
— the highest measured anywhere on this project's roadmap, higher than
Bunyan, higher than the King James cadences of the eighteenth-century
political writers. And every point of it is a costume over a text that
was never dressed that way.

So this modernization is the purest case the project has. Everywhere else
we take a difficult author and make him easier, and we owe his voice
something. Here the voice we are removing is not the author's. It is a
Victorian's idea of how a medieval Arab ought to sound. Taking it off
does not simplify the Nights; it uncovers them.

That is the thesis, and it should govern every sentence. Do not treat
Burton's diction as something precious to preserve a flavour of. Treat it
as varnish.


WHAT IS IN THIS VOLUME
----------------------

Burton's complete Nights runs to about 1.8 million words — five Don
Quixotes. This is a SELECTED volume, on the shape already used for
Montaigne's essays, Cato's letters and Plutarch's lives. 45 tales, 72
files, ~218,000 words:

  The frame          Shahryar and Shahrazad, the two betrayed kings, the
                     vizier's daughter who volunteers. Plus, at the end,
                     the Conclusion out of volume ten — WITHOUT WHICH THE
                     BOOK HAS NO ENDING and Shahrazad is never released.

  The Baghdad cycle  Trader and the Jinni; Fisherman and the Jinni; the
                     Ensorcelled Prince; the Porter and the Three Ladies
                     of Baghdad and the three Kalandars nested inside it.

  The Hunchback      The comic masterpiece: a hunchback choked at dinner,
                     four men who each think they killed him, and the
                     Barber, who is the most exhausting man in literature
                     and has six brothers, each with a tale of his own.

  Sindbad            All seven voyages, plus the Calcutta manuscript's
                     completely different seventh voyage, which Burton
                     prints after the first.

  The City of Brass  The strangest thing in the book: an expedition into
                     the desert to find Solomon's sealed jars, which turns
                     into a long meditation on death and empty cities.

  Aladdin, Ali Baba  The two "orphan" tales — not in Burton's main Arabic
                     text at all, printed in his Supplemental volumes.
                     They are the two everyone knows.

BURTON'S APPARATUS IS NOT PART OF THIS BOOK. 95,000 words of footnotes
across the four volumes, plus the Terminal Essay: Victorian racial and
sexual ethnography, written by Burton in his own person, riding his own
hobby-horses. It is cut in prep.py and kept in reference/ as a crib only,
on the bunyan/Offor precedent. Consult a note when a modern reader
genuinely cannot follow without the fact in it. Take the fact. Never take
the voice, and never quote it.


THE VOICE TO WRITE IN
---------------------

A storyteller with an audience in front of her, who has to hold them and
knows it. Quick, concrete, physical. Sentences that move.

Shahrazad is not reciting literature; she is buying a night. Every tale
in this book is being TOLD OUT LOUD by somebody who wants something —
Shahrazad wants morning, the Kalandars want a bed, the Barber wants an
audience, the four men over the hunchback's body want not to be hanged.
The telling is never neutral, and the tales get told the way people
actually tell stories: leaning in, taking too long, insisting on detail,
enjoying themselves.

REGISTER SHIFTS PER TALE, and flattening them is the failure mode. This
is the Ovid lesson exactly. The book contains, and needs to keep apart:

  wonder      Sindbad's roc, the valley of diamonds, the loadstone
              mountain, the whale that is an island
  comedy      the Barber, the hunchback passed from house to house like
              a stolen parcel, the fifth brother's daydream that ends
              with him kicking over his own tray of glass
  horror      the ensorcelled prince, half stone and beaten every day;
              the ghoul's larder; the black stone city
  pathos      the City of Brass and its inscriptions; the queen of the
              dead city on her bier
  eroticism   the three ladies of Baghdad, and a great deal else
  piety       the doxologies, the poems on Fate, the endless invocations

Sindbad in particular must not be written as a children's adventure. He
is a merchant who keeps going back out, and he is frank that greed and
restlessness send him — after each voyage he says he had everything he
could want and got bored. That is the tale's real subject.


THE SPECIFIC PROBLEMS OF THIS TEXT
----------------------------------

1. THE ENORMOUS PARAGRAPHS. The source sets a whole night as one
   unbroken block — the largest is 3,698 words. This is how the Arabic
   runs and how Burton transcribed it. BREAK THEM INTO MODERN
   PARAGRAPHS. This is straightforward formatting modernization and it
   is the single biggest readability gain in the book. Break at scene
   changes, at changes of speaker, at the turn of an action.

2. THE NIGHT-BREAKS — 147 of them, and they are the book, not filler.
   The full formula is three parts:

       ...and I struck at the slave's neck:—And Shahrazad perceived the
       dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Eighth Night,

       She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that...

   KEEP EVERY ONE. Keep the night NUMBER exactly as printed (they are
   spelled out, and this selection is not contiguous, so the numbers
   jump — that is honest and correct: these tales really do fall on
   those nights). Keep the cut mid-sentence: the whole joke of the
   device is that she stops at the worst possible moment. The locked
   modern wording for all three parts is in running_notes.txt and must
   not drift — the formula's power is that it is identical every time.

   Burton has TWO wordings for the first part ("perceived the dawn of
   day", 70 times; "was surprised by the dawn of day", 76). That is his
   inconsistency, not the Arabic's. Use one wording throughout.

3. THE VERSE — 176 poems, several hundred lines. In the source each
   couplet is one long line with a centred asterisk at the caesura;
   prep.py has already split these into hemistichs, tab-indented, one
   per line. Keep that shape.

   Render as plain modern English verse. DO NOT FORCE RHYME. Burton
   rhymes ferociously and it is what makes his poetry unreadable — he
   will wreck a line's sense to land on "-ain" for the eighth time. The
   Arabic monorhyme cannot be reproduced in English and every attempt
   has failed. Give the images and the shape; let the rhythm carry it.
   The poems are mostly about: love as an illness, the treachery of
   Fate, the beauty of a specific face, and grief. Keep them short and
   sharp. Do not pad to fill a line.

4. SAJ' — rhymed and cadenced prose. Burton renders it with internal
   rhyme ("in tide of yore and in time long gone before"). It is real:
   Arabic uses it to mark a heightened moment. Keep the HEIGHTENING —
   the cadence, the doubling, the formal parallel — and let the rhyme
   go except where it falls out naturally. The opening doxology is the
   longest stretch of it and prep.py has already set it as an indented
   block, one rhyme-unit per line.

5. THE FORMULAE. Arabic oral storytelling runs on set phrases, and they
   should stay recognisable and consistent, not be varied for elegance:

     "It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that..."
     "And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day..."
     "on the twain be peace!" / "extolled and exalted be He!"
     "Hearkening and obedience!"
     "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!"
     "O Commander of the Faithful"
     "he wept till he wetted his gown"

   These are a modern reader's handhold in a strange book. Lock each
   one and repeat it exactly, the way soap-bubbles/ kept "elastic skin".

6. THE NESTING. The Nights' architecture is boxes inside boxes, four
   deep at the extreme: Shahrazad tells of the Porter, who meets the
   Kalandars, one of whom tells of a man who tells of his brother. WHEN
   A TALE OPENS INSIDE A TALE, MAKE THE SEAM VISIBLE — a paragraph
   break and a clear "he began:" — and when it closes, return the
   reader to the outer frame explicitly. Burton lets these seams blur
   and readers get lost. This is where a modern edition earns its keep.

   FOLLOWING THE OVID CONVENTION: a long embedded tale renders as
   PRIMARY NARRATION, with no enclosing quotation marks around the
   whole thing. Reserve quotes for framing remarks and for dialogue
   inside the tale, single quotes for dialogue nested inside that.
   Quotation marks four levels deep are unreadable.


VOCABULARY — THE TWO CLASSES, AND THE LINE BETWEEN THEM
--------------------------------------------------------

CLASS ONE: BURTON'S COSTUME. Modernize silently, all of it. These words
do not correspond to anything special in the Arabic; they are Burton
being Elizabethan. Counts from the selection:

  whereupon (201) quoth (125) aught (97) naught (75) whereat (56)
  forthright (46) ere (42) sooth (31) albeit (31) wot (26) whenas (24)
  withal (24) hight (17) forthwith (12) anent (12) belike (10)
  peradventure (9) methinks (5) prithee (5) whilome (5) wone (4)
  eke (4) lief (4) perchance (4) fain (22) wist (2) trow (1)

  Also: "an" for if, "and" for if, "for that" for because, "the
  which", "needs must", "he ceased not to" for he kept on, "fared
  forth", inverted "quoth he", "said she", and Burton's home-made
  compounds (verroterie for glassware, fid for chunk, Gobbo for the
  hunchback, stound for moment, leven for lightning, undight for
  unveiled). None of these survive.

CLASS TWO: THE ARABIC. These are real words for real things and the
Arabic uses them. Locked glossary — pick one English form, gloss it
ONCE at first appearance in a natural clause (never a bracketed note),
then never re-gloss. Caps spent, as in ethics/ and symbolic-logic/:

  Wazir (187)      -> vizier. The familiar English form. No gloss needed.
  Ifrit (86)       -> ifrit. Gloss once: a jinni of the fiercer kind.
  Shaykh (65)      -> depends. Old man / elder / chief, by context.
  Jinni, Jinn (67) -> jinni, jinn. Gloss once against "genie", which is
                      the same word and is what a reader is expecting.
  Kalandar (33)    -> kalandar. Gloss once: a wandering holy beggar, a
                      dervish under a vow. KEEP the word — the three
                      Kalandars are known by it and it is their identity.
  Rukh (22)        -> roc. The standard English. Never "rukh".
  Marid (19)       -> marid. Gloss once with the ifrit.
  Hammam (28)      -> the baths / bathhouse.
  Kazi (16)        -> judge (a qadi; use "judge").
  Wali (4)         -> the governor / the chief of police, by context.
  Emir (75)        -> emir.  Caliph (84) -> caliph.  Sultan (179) -> sultan.
  dinar/dirham     -> KEEP. They are money and the amounts matter.
  Mameluke (25)    -> Mamluk. Gloss once: a soldier-slave.
  Nazarene (12)    -> Christian. "Nazarene" is not what a modern reader
                      hears it as, and the Arabic simply means Christian.
  Moslem (11)      -> Muslim.  Ramazan -> Ramadan.  Kaaba -> Kaaba.
  Houri (4)        -> houri, glossed once.
  bazar (26)       -> bazaar, or market.

NAMES: use the familiar form where English has settled on one, Burton's
where it has not.

  Alaeddin       -> ALADDIN. English settled this a century ago.
  Shahrazad      -> SHAHRAZAD, glossed at her first appearance against
                    Scheherazade, which is what a reader has heard. One
                    inline gloss, then never again.
  Shahryar, Shah Zaman, Dunyazad, Kasim, Morgiana, Sindbad — as printed.
  Simsim         -> SESAME. "Open, Sesame!" is one of about six phrases
                    this book has given the language. See must_contain.


CONTENT THAT NEEDS CARE
-----------------------

The Verne rule governs, and it governs hard: this is a medieval text and
its assumptions are medieval. Render them as the text's, in full,
without softening and without the editorial wink. Nothing here is
gratuitous and nothing is cut.

1. SEX. The Nights are frankly, cheerfully sexual and the frame turns on
   it. Shahryar's queen sleeps with an enslaved man of the household;
   the discovery is what starts the killing. This is in the Arabic — it
   is not Burton's addition, though he took an unwholesome interest in
   it. Translate at full length, plainly, with gravity and without
   titillation, exactly as quixote/ handled Dorotea. Do not use clinical
   vocabulary and do not use pornographic vocabulary. The register is
   matter-of-fact.

2. RACE. The frame's adulterers are Black enslaved men, and the text
   describes them with contempt. Burton then piles on with words a
   modern edition cannot simply reproduce ("blackamoor", 11; "negro",
   8). The rule, following bunyan/'s Flatterer:

   - The FACT that the man is Black and enslaved is load-bearing and
     stays. It is why Shahryar's humiliation is total in his own eyes,
     and the tale does not work without it.
   - Burton's slur-vocabulary does not stay. Write "a Black man", "the
     enslaved man", as the sentence needs.
   - The CONTEMPT stays where the text has it, as the text's, marked as
     belonging to the character or the narrator. Do not launder it into
     neutrality and do not add commentary. A modern reader can see what
     they are looking at.
   - Where a description is purely Burton's ornament and carries no
     content ("a big slobbering blackamoor with rolling eyes"), render
     it as description, not as caricature.

   The ball/ precedent applies to the enslavement itself: say "enslaved"
   rather than "slave" where the sentence allows it, because it is MORE
   explicit and a young reader should not miss what is being described.

3. SLAVERY generally. It is everywhere — the household, the market, the
   army. It is simply the world of the book. Do not soften "bought",
   "sold", "gave her to him". Do not editorialise.

4. RELIGION. The book is devout and the piety is not decoration. Keep
   every doxology, every "if Allah will", every prayer. Keep "Allah" —
   not "God"; it is the word the text uses and it is now ordinary
   English. Keep the anti-Christian and anti-Jewish moments in the
   Hunchback cycle as the text's own: the cycle's joke is that the
   Christian, the Jew, the steward and the tailor are ALL guilty and all
   equally absurd, and flattening any of the four breaks the symmetry.
   Do not sharpen them either.

5. VIOLENCE. Shahryar kills a wife every morning for three years. The
   text says so flatly and so should we. Beatings, mutilations,
   crucifixions and the hunchback's assorted deaths are all played at
   the level the text plays them — the hunchback is comedy, the
   ensorcelled prince is horror, and the difference is entirely in the
   telling.

6. THE CONCLUSION contains a reference to "the story of Ma'aruf", the
   last tale of volume ten, which is not in this selection. Reconcile
   it, on the quixote rule — a reader could only read it as our error.
   Log the change in running_notes.txt.


FAMOUS PASSAGES THAT MUST SURVIVE
---------------------------------

Listed in must_contain.txt and checked mechanically by verify.py:

  "Open, Sesame!"                              (Ali Baba)
  "New lamps for old"                          (Aladdin)
  the night-break formula, both halves
  "It has reached me, O fortunate King"
  "the Old Man of the Sea"                     (Sindbad, fifth voyage)
  "the valley of diamonds"                     (Sindbad, second voyage)
  "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah"
  "Commander of the Faithful"

These are what the Nights have given English. Getting any of them
"better" would be getting them wrong.


RATIO
-----

EN -> EN modernization of an over-written Victorian source. I predicted
slightly UNDER 1.0, reasoning that Burton pads. MEASUREMENT SAYS
OTHERWISE: files 000 and 001 both landed at 1.05, and the band below is
the measured one, not the predicted one. Two things cost more than his
padding saves — unstacking his compressed archaic verbs ("bade prepare"
-> "had it got ready", "he ceased not to" -> "he kept on"), and making
the nesting seams explicit, which is deliberate policy.

  verify.py nights --min-ratio 0.85 --max-ratio 1.25

Target 0.98-1.12 per file. Under 0.95 on a file means checking for
summarisation; over 1.15 means padding. Do NOT pad to hit a number — the
whole point of the exercise is that a lot of Burton's words are not
carrying anything.
