Front Matter

Frontispiece

[Figure front: A fountain lit by intermittent flashes of light, so that the drops it has broken into appear to hang stationary in the air. The fountain has been broken up regularly by a musical note. The experiment is described in Lecture Three.]

Dedication

To G. F. Rodwell, the first science master appointed at Marlborough College, this book is dedicated by the author, as a token of esteem and gratitude, and in the hope that it may excite in a few young people some small fraction of the interest and enthusiasm which his arrival and his lectures awakened in the author — upon whom the light of science then shone for the first time.

Preface

To those readers who have grown up, and who may be inclined to find fault with this book on the ground that it is incomplete at so many points, or that much of it is elementary and well known, I would ask you to remember that these lectures were meant for young people, and for young people only.

And to those young people I would say: do your best to repeat the experiments described here. You will find that in many cases nothing is needed beyond a few pieces of glass or rubber tubing, or other simple things easily got hold of. If you will take that trouble you will be well repaid — and if, instead of being discouraged by a few failures, you keep at it with the best means at your disposal, you will soon find more to interest you in the experiments that only come right after some trouble than in the ones that work perfectly the first time. Some are so simple that no help can possibly be needed; some will probably prove too difficult even with help. But to encourage those who want to see the experiments I have described for themselves, I have given such hints at the end of the book as I thought would be most useful.

I have made free use of the published work of many distinguished men, among whom I may mention Savart, Plateau, Clerk Maxwell, Sir William Thomson, Lord Rayleigh, Mr. Chichester Bell, and Professor Rücker. Most of the experiments have been described by them; some I have taken from the journals; a few I have devised or arranged myself. I am also indebted to Professor Rücker for the use of various pieces of apparatus that had been prepared for his own lectures.
