Lecture Three: Singing Fountains and Bubbles Inside Bubbles

(Part 1 of 3)

At the end of the last lecture I showed you some curious experiments with a fountain of water, which I now have to explain.

Consider what I said about a liquid cylinder. If it is a little more than three times as long as it is wide, it cannot keep its shape; and if it is made very much more than three times as long, it will break up into a series of beads. Now suppose a series of necks could somehow be developed along a cylinder, less than three diameters apart. Some of them would tend to heal up, because a piece of cylinder less than three diameters long is stable. If they were about three diameters apart, the form being then unstable, the necks would grow more pronounced as time went on and would break through at last, so that beads would be formed. And if the necks were made at distances of more than three diameters apart, the cylinder would go on breaking up by the narrowing of those necks — and it would break up most easily of all when the necks were just four and a half diameters apart.

In other words: if a fountain issued from a nozzle held perfectly still, the water would break into beads most easily at a spacing of four and a half diameters; but it would break into a greater number closer together, or a smaller number further apart, if slight disturbances of the jet impressed very slight waists on the issuing cylinder of water. When you make a fountain play from a jet which you hold as still as you can, there are still accidental tremors of all kinds, and these impress slightly narrow and slightly wide places on the issuing cylinder at irregular distances. So the cylinder breaks up irregularly, into drops of different sizes at different distances apart.

Now these drops, at the moment they are separating from one another and drawing out the waist, as you have seen, are for that moment being pulled towards one another by the elasticity of the skin of the waist. And since they are free to move as they will in the air, this makes the one behind hurry on and the one in front lag back — so that unless they are all exactly alike, both in size and in spacing, a great many of them will bump into one another before long. You would expect that when they hit one another they would join; but I shall be able to show you in a moment that they do not. They behave like two rubber balls, and bounce apart again. And it is not hard to see that if you have a series of drops of different sizes at irregular distances, bouncing off one another frequently, they will tend to separate and to fall, as we have seen them fall, all over the paper below.

So what did the sealing-wax do, or the smoky flame? And what can a musical sound do to stop this happening?

Let me take the sealing-wax first. A piece of sealing-wax rubbed on your coat is electrified, and will attract light scraps of paper up to it. The sealing-wax acts electrically on the different water drops and makes them attract one another — feebly, it is true, but with enough force where they meet to make them break through the film of air between them and join.

To show that this is no fancy, I have here in front of the lantern two fountains of clean water coming from separate bottles, and you can see that they bounce apart perfectly (Figure 44). To show that they really do bounce, I have coloured the water in the two bottles differently. The sealing-wax is in my pocket. I shall retire to the other side of the room — and the instant it appears, the jets of water coalesce (Figure 45). This can be repeated as often as you like, and it never fails. These two bouncing jets are in fact one of the most delicate tests for the presence of electricity that exist.

You are now able to understand the first experiment. The separate drops which bounced away from one another and scattered in all directions are unable to bounce when the sealing-wax is held up, because of its electrical action. They therefore unite; and the result is that instead of a great number of little drops falling all over the paper, the stream pours down in a single line and great drops, like the ones you see in a thunderstorm, fall on top of one another. There can be no doubt that this is why the drops of rain in a thunderstorm are so large. This experiment and its explanation are due to Lord Rayleigh.

[Figure 44: Two fountains of clean water from separate bottles, the water in each coloured differently. Where they meet they bounce apart without mixing at all.]

[Figure 45: The same two fountains at the instant a stick of electrified sealing-wax appears across the room. The drops can no longer bounce, and the two jets coalesce into one.]

The smoky flame, as Mr. Bidwell has lately shown, does the same thing. The reason is probably that the dirt breaks through the film of air, just as dust in the air will make the two fountains join as they did when they were electrified. It is possible, though, that oily matter condensed on the water has something to do with the effect, because oil alone works quite as well as a flame; but the action of oil in this case, like its action in smoothing a stormy sea, is by no means so easily understood.

When I held the sealing-wax closer, the drops coalesced in the same way; but then they were so much more strongly electrified that they repelled one another, as similarly electrified bodies are known to do, and that produced the electrical scattering.

You may already see why the tuning fork made the drops follow in one line, but I shall explain. A musical note is, as everybody knows, caused by a rapid vibration, and the more rapid the vibration the higher the pitch of the note. For instance, I have a toothed wheel here which I can turn round very rapidly if I want to. Turning it slowly, you can hear the separate teeth knocking against a card I am holding in my other hand. Now I am turning faster, and the card is giving out a note of low pitch. As I make the wheel turn faster and faster the pitch of the note gradually rises, and if only I could turn fast enough it would give so high a note that we should not be able to hear it at all.

A tuning fork vibrates at a certain definite rate, and therefore gives a definite note. The fork now sounding vibrates 128 times every second. The nozzle is therefore made to vibrate — almost imperceptibly — 128 times a second, and to impress 128 imperceptible waists a second on the issuing cylinder of water. Now it depends entirely on the size of the jet, and on how fast the water is coming out, whether those waists are about four and a half diameters apart in the cylinder. If the jet is larger, the water must pass faster, or under greater pressure, for that to be the case; if the jet is finer, a lower speed will do.

And if it happens that the waists so made are anywhere about four diameters apart, then even though they are so slightly developed that you could not detect the least change of diameter in an exact drawing of them, they will grow at a great rate. The water column will therefore break up regularly: every drop will be like the one behind it and like the one in front of it, instead of all being different, as they are when the breaking up depends on nothing but accidental tremors. And if the drops are all alike in every respect, they of course all follow the same path, and so appear to fall in a continuous stream.

The jet breaks up most easily when the waists are about four and a half diameters apart; but it will break up, as I said, under the influence of a considerable range of notes, which set the waists at other distances, provided those distances are more than three diameters. If two notes are sounded at the same time, then very often each will produce its own effect, and the result is that drops of two different sizes are formed alternately, which makes the jet divide into two separate streams. Three, four or even many more distinct streams can be produced this way.

[Figure 46: Photographs of musical fountains, taken by the instantaneous flash of an electric spark. Drops of each size follow their own distinct path; at the cross, two drops are caught in the act of bouncing, flattened where they meet like rubber balls.]

I can now show you photographs of some of these musical fountains, taken by the instantaneous flash of an electric spark, in which you can see the separate paths described by drops of different sizes (Figure 46). In one photograph there are eight distinct fountains, all breaking from the same jet but following quite distinct paths, each of them clearly marked out by a perfectly regular series of drops. You can also see, in these photographs, drops actually in the act of bouncing against one another, flattened where they meet as if they were rubber balls. In the photograph now on the screen, the effect of this rebound — which happens at the place marked with a cross — is to hurry on the upper and more forward drop and to hold the other one back, and so to send them travelling at slightly different speeds in slightly different directions. That is why they afterwards follow distinct paths. The smaller drops had no doubt been acted on in the same way, but the part of the fountain where it happened was just outside the photographic plate, so there is no record of it.

The very little drops I have so often spoken about are generally thrown out sideways from a fountain of water under the influence of a musical sound, after which they describe neat little curves of their own, quite distinct from the main stream. They can of course only get out sideways after one or two bounces off the regular drops in front of them and behind them. You can easily show that they are really formed lower down than the place where they first become visible, by taking a piece of electrified sealing-wax, holding it near the stream close to the nozzle, and raising it gradually. When it comes opposite the place where the little drops are really formed, it will act on them more powerfully than on the large drops, and will pull them out at once from a place where the moment before none seemed to exist. They will then circulate in perfect little orbits round the sealing-wax, just as the planets do round the sun — except that here, being met by the resistance of the air, the orbits are spirals, and after many revolutions the little drops fall onto the wax at last, just as the planets would fall into the sun after many revolutions if their motion through space were interfered with by friction of any kind.

There is only one thing still needed to make the demonstration of a musical jet complete, and that is that you should see these drops yourselves, in their different positions, in a real fountain of water. If I were to produce one powerful electric spark, it is true that some of you might catch sight of the drops for an instant, but I do not think most of you would see anything at all. But suppose that instead of making one flash only, I made another just as each drop had travelled to the position the one in front of it occupied before, and then another when each had moved on one place again, and so on. Then all the drops, at the moments the flashes of light fell on them, would be occupying the same positions as before, and so every drop would appear to hang fixed in the air — though of course they are all really travelling quite fast enough.

If, however, I do not quite manage to keep exact time with my flashes of light, a curious appearance is produced. Suppose the flashes follow one another a little too quickly. Then each drop will not quite have had time to reach its proper place at each flash, and so at the second flash all the drops will be seen slightly behind the positions they occupied at the first; at the third flash, further behind still; and so on. They will therefore appear to be moving slowly backwards. Whereas if my flashes do not follow quite quickly enough, then every time there is a flash the drops will have travelled a little too far, and so they will all appear to be moving slowly forwards.

Now let us try the experiment. There is the electric lantern, throwing a powerful beam of light onto the screen. I bring this to a focus with a lens and then let it pass through a small hole in a piece of card. The light then spreads out and falls on the screen. The fountain of water is between the card and the screen, so it casts a shadow which is conspicuous enough. Now I place just behind the card a little electric motor, which will spin a disc of card with six holes near its edge round very fast. The holes come opposite the hole in the fixed card one after another, so at every turn six flashes of light are produced. When the card is turning about 21 1/2 times a second, the flashes will follow one another at the right rate. I have started the motor, and after a moment or two I shall have the right speed. I can tell when I have it by blowing through the holes, which produces a musical note: higher than the fork if the speed is too high, lower than the fork if it is too low, and exactly the same as the fork when it is right.
