Lecture Three: Singing Fountains and Bubbles Inside Bubbles

(Part 2 of 3)

To make it still more obvious when the speed is exactly right, I have put the tuning fork in the beam as well, between the light and the screen, so that you can see it lit up and see its shadow on the screen. I have not let the water flow yet; I want you to look at the fork. For a moment I have stopped the motor, so that the light is steady, and you can tell the fork is moving because its legs look blurred at the ends, where of course the movement is fastest. Now the motor is started, and almost at once the fork looks quite different. It now looks like a piece of rubber slowly opening and shutting — and now it appears perfectly still, though the noise it is making shows that it is anything but still. The legs of the fork are vibrating, but the light only falls on them at regular intervals which match their movement, and so, just as I explained in the case of the water drops, the fork appears to be at rest. Now the speed is slightly altered, and, as I have explained, each new flash of light comes just too soon or just too late and shows the fork a little before or a little behind the position the previous flash showed. You therefore see the fork slowly going through its motions, though in reality its legs are moving backwards and forwards 128 times a second. By watching the fork, or its shadow, you can tell whether the light is keeping exact time with the vibrations, and therefore with the water drops.

Now the water is running, and you see all the separate drops apparently stationary, strung like pearls or beads of silver upon an invisible wire (see the Frontispiece). If I make the card turn ever so little more slowly, all the drops will appear to march slowly onwards; and what is so beautiful — though I am afraid few of you will see it — each little drop can be seen gradually breaking off, drawing out a waist which becomes a little drop of its own; and then, when the main drop is free, it slowly swings about, becoming wide and long, or turning over and over as it goes on its way. If a double or multiple jet happens to be forming, you can see the little drops moving up to one another, squeezing each other where they meet, and bouncing away again.

Now the card is turning a little too fast, and the drops appear to be moving backwards, so that the water seems to be coming up out of the tank on the floor, going quietly over my head, down into the nozzle, and so back into the water supply of the building. Of course nothing of the kind is happening, as you know perfectly well, and as you will see if I simply try to put my finger between two of these drops: the water splashing in all directions shows that it is not moving quite as quietly as it appears. There is one more thing I should mention about this experiment. Every time the flashing light gains or loses one complete flash on the motion of the tuning fork, the fork will appear to make one complete swing, and the water drops will appear to move back or forward by one place.

I must now come to one of the most beautiful applications of these musical jets to a practical purpose that it is possible to imagine. What I shall show you now are a few out of a great number of experiments by Mr. Chichester Bell, cousin of Mr. Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone.

To begin with, I have a very small jet of water forced through the nozzle at great pressure, as you can see if I point it at the ceiling — the water rises eight or ten feet. Now if I let this stream fall on a rubber sheet stretched over the end of a tube about as big as my little finger, the little sheet will be pushed down by the water, and pushed down further if the stream is stronger. If I hold the jet close to the sheet, the smooth column of liquid presses on it steadily and it stays quiet. But if I gradually take the jet further away, then any waists that have formed in the liquid column — which grow as they travel — make their existence perfectly plain. When a wide part of the column strikes the sheet, the sheet is pushed down rather more than usual; when a narrow part follows, it is pushed down less.

In other words, the very slightest vibration given to the jet is magnified by the growth of the waists, and the rubber sheet reproduces the vibration on a magnified scale. Now if you remember that sound consists of vibrations, you will understand that a jet is a machine for magnifying sound. To show that this is so: I am directing the jet onto the sheet now, and you can hear nothing. But I shall hold a piece of wood against the nozzle — and now, if the jet on the whole tends to break up at one particular rate rather than any other, or if the wood or the rubber sheet vibrates most readily at some particular rate, then the first few vibrations at that rate will be given to the wood, which will impress them on the nozzle and so on the cylinder of liquid, where they will be magnified. The result is that the jet begins to sing of its own accord, giving out a loud note (Figure 47).

Now I shall take the piece of wood away. On placing an ordinary lever watch against the nozzle, the jolt given to the case at every tick — small though it is, far too small for you to detect — jolts the nozzle too, and so starts a neck in the jet of water which grows as it travels, and produces a loud tick, audible in every part of this large room (Figure 48). Now I want you to notice how much the vibration is magnified by the action I have described. I hold the nozzle close to the rubber sheet, and you can hear nothing. As I gradually raise it, a faint echo appears, and grows louder and louder, until at last it is more like a hammer striking an anvil than the tick of a watch.

[Figure 47: A fine jet of water at high pressure playing on a rubber sheet stretched over the end of a tube. With a piece of wood held against the nozzle, the jet begins to sing a loud note of its own accord.]

[Figure 48: A watch held against the nozzle. The tiny jolt of each tick starts a neck in the jet, which grows as it travels, and the rubber sheet gives out a tick loud enough to fill the room.]

I shall now change this watch for another, which I am able to use thanks to a friend. This watch is a repeater — that is, if you press a button it will strike first the hour, then the quarters, and then the minutes. I think the water jet will let you all hear what time it is. Listen! One, two, three, four;... ting-tang, ting-tang;... one, two, three, four, five, six. Six minutes after half-past four. Notice that you not only heard the number of strokes; the jet faithfully reproduced the musical notes too, so that you could tell one note from the others.

I can make the jet play a tune in the same way, simply by resting the nozzle against a long stick which is pressed against a musical box. The musical box is carefully shut up in a double box of thick felt, and you can hardly hear anything from it; but the moment the nozzle is rested against the stick and the water is directed onto the rubber sheet, the sound of the box is heard loudly — I hope in every part of the room. It is usual to speak of a fountain as playing; it is now clear that a fountain can even play a tune. There is, however, one peculiarity which is perfectly evident. The jet breaks up at certain rates more easily than at others — or in other words, it responds to certain sounds in preference to others. You can hear that as the musical box plays, certain notes are emphasized in a curious way, much the same effect you get if you lay a penny on the upper strings of a horizontal piano.

[Figure 49: The screw surface, made by dipping in soap water a wire wound in an open helix with both ends bent in to meet a second wire running down the centre.]

Now, returning to our soap bubbles: you may remember that I said the catenoid and the plane were the only figures of revolution which have no curvature, and which therefore produce no pressure. There are plenty of other surfaces which appear to be curved in all directions and yet have no curvature, and which therefore produce no pressure — but these are not figures of revolution; that is, they cannot be got by simply spinning a curved line about an axis. They can be produced in any quantity by making wire frames of various shapes and dipping them in soap and water. When you take them out, a wonderful variety of surfaces of no curvature will be found on them.

One such surface is the one known as the screw surface. To produce it, all you need do is take a piece of wire wound a few times into an open helix — commonly called a spiral — and bend the two ends so as to meet a second wire passing down the centre. The screw surface that appears when this frame is dipped in soap water is well worth seeing (Figure 49). It is impossible to give any idea of the perfection of the form in a picture, but fortunately this is an experiment anybody can easily perform.

[Figure 50: A wire frame in the shape of the edges of a triangular prism, after dipping. Every film is flat, and along the central line three films meet one another at equal angles.]

Then again, if a wire frame is made in the shape of the edges of any of the regular geometrical solids, very beautiful figures will be found on it after it has been dipped in soap water. In the case of the triangular prism these surfaces are all flat, and at the edges where the planes meet one another there are always three meeting each other at equal angles (Figure 50). Since the frame is three-sided, that is not surprising.

After looking at this three-sided frame with its three films meeting down the central line, you might expect that a four-sided or square frame would have four films meeting each other in a line down the middle. But here is a curious thing: it does not matter how irregular the frame may be, or how complicated a mass of froth may be — there can never be more than three films meeting in an edge, or more than four edges, or six films, meeting in a point. What is more, the films and the edges can only meet one another at equal angles. If by some accident four films do meet in the same edge for a moment, or if the angles are not exactly equal, then the form, whatever it is, is unstable. It cannot last: the films slide over one another and never rest until they have settled into a position in which the conditions of stability are satisfied.

This can be illustrated by a very simple experiment which you can easily try at home, and which you can see projected on the screen now. There are two pieces of window glass about half an inch apart, forming the sides of a sort of box, into which some soap and water have been poured. On blowing through a pipe which is under the water, a great number of bubbles are formed between the plates. If the bubbles are all large enough to reach across from one plate to the other, you will see at once that there are nowhere more than three films meeting one another, and that where they meet, the angles are all equal. The curvature of the bubbles makes it difficult to see at first that the angles really are all alike; but if you look only at a very short piece close to where they meet, and so avoid being confused by the curvature, you will see that what I have said is true. You will also see, if you are quick, that when the bubbles are blown four films do sometimes meet for a moment — but that the films then at once slide over one another and settle down into their only possible position of rest (Figure 51).
