I. Introduction

In 1931 there appeared in a German scientific periodical a relatively short paper with the forbidding title “Uber formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme” (“On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems”). Its author was Kurt Gödel, then a young mathematician of 25 at the University of Vienna and since 1938 a permanent member of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton. The paper is a milestone in the history of logic and mathematics. When Harvard University awarded Gödel an honorary degree in 1952, the citation described the work as one of the most important advances in logic in modern times.

At the time of its appearance, however, neither the title of Gödel’s paper nor its content was intelligible to most mathematicians. The *Principia Mathematica* mentioned in the title is the monumental three-volume treatise by Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell on mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics; and familiarity with that work is not a prerequisite to successful research in most branches of mathematics. Moreover, Gödel’s paper deals with a set of questions that has never attracted more than a comparatively small group of students. The reasoning of the proof was so novel at the time of its publication that only those intimately conversant with the technical literature of a highly specialized field could follow the argument with ready comprehension. Nevertheless, the conclusions Gödel established are now widely recognized as being revolutionary in their broad philosophical import. It is the aim of the present essay to make the substance of Gödel’s findings and the general character of his proof accessible to the non-specialist.

Gödel’s famous paper attacked a central problem in the foundations of mathematics. It will be helpful to give a brief preliminary account of the context in which the problem occurs. Everyone who has been exposed to elementary geometry will doubtless recall that it is taught as a *deductive* discipline. It is not presented as an experimental science whose theorems are to be accepted because they are in agreement with observation. This notion, that a proposition may be established as the conclusion of an explicit *logical proof,* goes back to the ancient Greeks, who discovered what is known as the “axiomatic method” and used it to develop geometry in a systematic fashion. The axiomatic method consists in accepting *without* proof certain propositions as axioms or postulates (e.g., the axiom that through two points just one straight line can be drawn), and then deriving from the axioms all other propositions of the system as theorems. The axioms constitute the “foundations” of the system; the theorems are the “superstructure,” and are obtained from the axioms with the exclusive help of principles of logic.

The axiomatic development of geometry made a powerful impression upon thinkers throughout the ages; for the relatively small number of axioms carry the whole weight of the inexhaustibly numerous propositions derivable from them. Moreover, if in some way the truth of the axioms can be established—and, indeed, for some two thousand years most students believed without question that they are true of space—both the truth and the mutual consistency of all the theorems are automatically guaranteed. For these reasons the axiomatic form of geometry appeared to many generations of outstanding thinkers as the model of scientific knowledge at its best. It was natural to ask, therefore, whether other branches of thought besides geometry can be placed upon a secure axiomatic foundation. However, although certain parts of physics were given an axiomatic formulation in antiquity (e.g., by Archimedes), until modern times geometry was the only branch of mathematics that had what most students considered a sound axiomatic basis.

But within the past two centuries the axiomatic method has come to be exploited with increasing power and vigor. New as well as old branches of mathematics, including the familiar arithmetic of cardinal (or “whole”) numbers, were supplied with what appeared to be adequate sets of axioms. A climate of opinion was thus generated in which it was tacitly assumed that each sector of mathematical thought can be supplied with a set of axioms sufficient for developing systematically the endless totality of true propositions about the given area of inquiry.

Gödel’s paper showed that this assumption is untenable. He presented mathematicians with the astounding and melancholy conclusion that the axiomatic method has certain inherent limitations, which rule out the possibility that even the ordinary arithmetic of the integers can ever be fully axiomatized. What is more, he proved that it is impossible to establish the internal logical consistency of a very large class of deductive systems—elementary arithmetic, for example—unless one adopts principles of reasoning so complex that their internal consistency is as open to doubt as that of the systems themselves. In the light of these conclusions, no final systematization of many important areas of mathematics is attainable, and no absolutely impeccable guarantee can be given that many significant branches of mathematical thought are entirely free from internal contradiction.

Gödel’s findings thus undermined deeply rooted preconceptions and demolished ancient hopes that were being freshly nourished by research on the foundations of mathematics. But his paper was not altogether negative. It introduced into the study of foundation questions a new technique of analysis comparable in its nature and fertility with the algebraic method that René Descartes introduced into geometry. This technique suggested and initiated new problems for logical and mathematical investigation. It provoked a reappraisal, still under way, of widely held philosophies of mathematics, and of philosophies of knowledge in general.

The details of Gödel’s proofs in his epoch-making paper are too difficult to follow without considerable mathematical training. But the basic structure of his demonstrations and the core of his conclusions can be made intelligible to readers with very limited mathematical and logical preparation. To achieve such an understanding, the reader may find useful a brief account of certain relevant developments in the history of mathematics and of modern formal logic. The next four sections of this essay are devoted to this survey.
