II. The Problem of Consistency

The nineteenth century witnessed a tremendous expansion and intensification of mathematical research. Many fundamental problems that had long withstood the best efforts of earlier thinkers were solved; new departments of mathematical study were created; and in various branches of the discipline new foundations were laid, or old ones entirely recast with the help of more precise techniques of analysis. To illustrate: the Greeks had proposed three problems in elementary geometry: with compass and straight-edge to trisect any angle, to construct a cube with a volume twice the volume of a given cube, and to construct a square equal in area to that of a given circle. For more than 2,000 years unsuccessful attempts were made to solve these problems; at last, in the nineteenth century it was proved that the desired constructions are logically impossible. There was, moreover, a valuable by-product of these labors. Since the solutions depend essentially upon determining the kind of roots that satisfy certain equations, concern with the celebrated exercises set in antiquity stimulated profound investigations into the nature of number and the structure of the number continuum. Rigorous definitions were eventually supplied for negative, complex, and irrational numbers; a logical basis was constructed for the real number system; and a new branch of mathematics, the theory of infinite numbers, was founded.

But perhaps the most significant development in its long-range effects upon subsequent mathematical history was the solution of another problem that the Greeks raised without answering. One of the axioms Euclid used in systematizing geometry has to do with parallels. The axiom he adopted is logically equivalent to (though not identical with) the assumption that through a point outside a given line only one parallel to the line can be drawn. For various reasons, this axiom did not appear “self-evident” to the ancients. They sought, therefore, to deduce it from the other Euclidean axioms, which they regarded as clearly self-evident.¹ Can such a proof of the parallel axiom be given? Generations of mathematicians struggled with this question, without avail. But repeated failure to construct a proof does not mean that none can be found any more than repeated failure to find a cure for the common cold establishes beyond doubt that mankind will forever suffer from running noses. It was not until the nineteenth century, chiefly through the work of Gauss, Bolyai, Lobachevsky, and Riemann, that the *impossibility* of deducing the parallel axiom from the others was demonstrated. This outcome was of the greatest intellectual importance. In the first place, it called attention in a most impressive way to the fact that a *proof* can be given of the *impossibility of proving* certain propositions within a given system. As we shall see, Gödel’s paper is a proof of the impossibility of demonstrating certain important propositions in arithmetic. In the second place, the resolution of the parallel axiom question forced the realization that Euclid is not the last word on the subject of geometry, since new systems of geometry can be constructed by using a number of axioms different from, and incompatible with, those adopted by Euclid. In particular, as is well known, immensely interesting and fruitful results are obtained when Euclid’s parallel axiom is replaced by the assumption that more than one parallel can be drawn to a given line through a given point, or, alternatively, by the assumption that no parallels can be drawn. The traditional belief that the axioms of geometry (or, for that matter, the axioms of any discipline) can be established by their apparent self-evidence was thus radically undermined. Moreover, it gradually became clear that the proper business of the pure mathematician is to *derive theorems from postulated assumptions,* and that it is not his concern as a mathematician to decide whether the axioms he assumes are actually true. And, finally, these successful modifications of orthodox geometry stimulated the revision and completion of the axiomatic bases for many other mathematical systems. Axiomatic foundations were eventually supplied for fields of inquiry that had hitherto been cultivated only in a more or less intuitive manner. (See Appendix, no. 1.)

Footnote: ¹ The chief reason for this alleged lack of self-evidence seems to have been the fact that the parallel axiom makes an assertion about *infinitely remote* regions of space. Euclid defines parallel lines as straight lines in a plane that, “being produced indefinitely in both directions,” do not meet. Accordingly, to say that two lines are parallel is to make the claim that the two lines will not meet even “at infinity.” But the ancients were familiar with lines that, though they do not intersect each other in any finite region of the plane, do meet “at infinity.” Such lines are said to be “asymptotic.” Thus, a hyperbola is asymptotic to its axes. It was therefore not intuitively evident to the ancient geometers that from a point outside a given straight line only one straight line can be drawn that will not meet the given line even at infinity.

The over-all conclusion that emerged from these critical studies of the foundations of mathematics is that the age-old conception of mathematics as “the science of quantity” is both inadequate and misleading. For it became evident that mathematics is simply the discipline *par excellence* that draws the conclusions logically implied by any given set of axioms or postulates. In fact, it came to be acknowledged that the validity of a mathematical inference in no sense depends upon any special meaning that may be associated with the terms or expressions contained in the postulates. Mathematics was thus recognized to be much more abstract and formal than had been traditionally supposed: more abstract, because mathematical statements can be construed in principle to be about anything whatsoever rather than about some inherently circumscribed set of objects or traits of objects; and more formal, because the validity of mathematical demonstrations is grounded in the structure of statements, rather than in the nature of a particular subject matter. The postulates of any branch of demonstrative mathematics are not inherently about space, quantity, apples, angles, or budgets; and any special meaning that may be associated with the terms (or “descriptive predicates”) in the postulates plays no essential role in the process of deriving theorems. We repeat that the sole question confronting the pure mathematician (as distinct from the scientist who employs mathematics in investigating a special subject matter) is not whether the postulates he assumes or the conclusions he deduces from them are true, but whether the alleged conclusions are in fact the *necessary logical consequences* of the initial assumptions.

Take this example. Among the undefined (or “primitive”) terms employed by the influential German mathematician David Hilbert in his famous axiomatization of geometry (first published in 1899) are ‘point’, ‘line’, ‘lies on’, and ‘between’. We may grant that the customary meanings connected with these expressions play a role in the process of discovering and learning theorems. Since the meanings are familiar, we feel we understand their various interrelations, and they motivate the formulation and selection of axioms; moreover, they suggest and facilitate the formulation of the statements we hope to establish as theorems. Yet, as Hilbert plainly states, insofar as we are concerned with the primary mathematical task of exploring the purely logical relations of dependence between statements, the familiar connotations of the primitive terms are to be ignored, and the sole “meanings” that are to be associated with them are those assigned by the axioms into which they enter.² This is the point of Russell’s famous epigram: pure mathematics is the subject in which we do not know what we are talking about, or whether what we are saying is true.

Footnote: ² In more technical language, the primitive terms are “implicitly” defined by the axioms, and whatever is not covered by the implicit definitions is irrelevant to the demonstration of theorems.

A land of rigorous abstraction, empty of all familiar landmarks, is certainly not easy to get around in. But it offers compensations in the form of a new freedom of movement and fresh vistas. The intensified formalization of mathematics emancipated men’s minds from the restrictions that the customary interpretation of expressions placed on the construction of novel systems of postulates. New kinds of algebras and geometries were developed which marked significant departures from the mathematics of tradition. As the meanings of certain terms became more general, their use became broader and the inferences that could be drawn from them less confined. Formalization led to a great variety of systems of considerable mathematical interest and value. Some of these systems, it must be admitted, did not lend themselves to interpretations as obviously intuitive (i.e., commonsensical) as those of Euclidean geometry or arithmetic, but this fact caused no alarm. Intuition, for one thing, is an elastic faculty: our children will probably have no difficulty in accepting as intuitively obvious the paradoxes of relativity, just as we do not boggle at ideas that were regarded as wholly unintuitive a couple of generations ago. Moreover, as we all know, intuition is not a safe guide: it cannot properly be used as a criterion of either truth or fruitfulness in scientific explorations.

However, the increased abstractness of mathematics raised a more serious problem. It turned on the question whether a given set of postulates serving as foundation of a system is internally consistent, so that no mutually contradictory theorems can be deduced from the postulates. The problem does not seem pressing when a set of axioms is taken to be about a definite and familiar domain of objects; for then it is not only significant to ask, but it may be possible to ascertain, whether the axioms are indeed true of these objects. Since the Euclidean axioms were generally supposed to be true statements about space (or objects in space), no mathematician prior to the nineteenth century ever considered the question whether a pair of contradictory theorems might some day be deduced from the axioms. The basis for this confidence in the consistency of Euclidean geometry is the sound principle that logically incompatible statements cannot be simultaneously true; accordingly, if a set of statements is true (and this was assumed of the Euclidean axioms), these statements are mutually consistent.

The non-Euclidean geometries were clearly in a different category. Their axioms were initially regarded as being plainly false of space, and, for that matter, doubtfully true of anything; thus the problem of establishing the internal consistency of non-Euclidean systems was recognized to be both formidable and critical. In Riemannian geometry, for example, Euclid’s parallel postulate is replaced by the assumption that through a given point outside a line *no* parallel to it can be drawn. Now suppose the question: Is the Riemannian set of postulates consistent? The postulates are apparently not true of the space of ordinary experience. How, then, is their consistency to be shown? How can one prove they will not lead to contradictory theorems? Obviously the question is not settled by the fact that the theorems already deduced do not contradict each other—for the possibility remains that the very next theorem to be deduced may upset the apple cart. But, until the question is settled, one cannot be certain that Riemannian geometry is a true alternative to the Euclidean system, i.e., equally valid mathematically. The very possibility of non-Euclidean geometries was thus contingent on the resolution of this problem.

A general method for solving it was devised. The underlying idea is to find a “model” (or “interpretation”) for the abstract postulates of a system, so that each postulate is converted into a true statement about the model. In the case of Euclidean geometry, as we have noted, the model was ordinary space. The method was used to find other models, the elements of which could serve as crutches for determining the consistency of abstract postulates. The procedure goes something like this. Let us understand by the word ‘class’ a collection or aggregate of distinguishable elements, each of which is called a member of the class. Thus, the class of prime numbers less than 10 is the collection whose members are 2, 3, 5, and 7. Suppose the following set of postulates concerning two classes K and L, whose special nature is left undetermined except as “implicitly” defined by the postulates:

	1. Any two members of K are contained in just one member of L.
	2. No member of K is contained in more than two members of L.
	3. The members of K are not all contained in a single member of L.
	4. Any two members of L contain just one member of K.
	5. No member of L contains more than two members of K.

From this small set we can derive, by using customary rules of inference, a number of theorems. For example, it can be shown that K contains just three members. But is the set consistent, so that mutually contradictory theorems can never be derived from it? The question can be answered readily with the help of the following model:

	Let K be the class of points consisting of the vertices of a triangle, and L the class of lines made up of its sides; and let us understand the phrase ‘a member of K is contained in a member of L’ to mean that a point which is a vertex lies on a line which is a side. Each of the five abstract postulates is then converted into a true statement. For instance, the first postulate asserts that any two points which are vertices of the triangle lie on just one line which is a side. (See Fig. 1.) In this way the set of postulates is proved to be consistent.

[Figure aa]

The consistency of plane Riemannian geometry can also, ostensibly, be established by a model embodying the postulates. We may interpret the expression ‘plane’ in the Riemannian axioms to signify the surface of a Euclidean sphere, the expression ‘point’ a point on this surface, the expression ‘straight line’ an arc of a great circle on this surface, and so on. Each Riemannian postulate is then converted into a theorem of Euclid. For example, on this interpretation the Riemannian parallel postulate reads: Through a point on the surface of a sphere, no arc of a great circle can be drawn parallel to a given arc of a great circle. (See Fig. 2.)

At first glance this proof of the consistency of Riemannian geometry may seem conclusive. But a closer look is disconcerting. For a sharp eye will discern that the problem has not been solved; it has merely been shifted to another domain. The proof attempts to settle the consistency of Riemannian geometry by appealing to the consistency of Euclidean geometry. What emerges, then, is only this: Riemannian geometry is consistent if Euclidean geometry is consistent. The authority of Euclid is thus invoked to demonstrate the consistency of a system which challenges the exclusive validity of Euclid. The inescapable question is: Are the axioms of the Euclidean system itself consistent?

An answer to this question, hallowed, as we have noted, by a long tradition, is that the Euclidean axioms are true and are therefore consistent. This answer is no longer regarded as acceptable; we shall return to it presently and explain why it is unsatisfactory. Another answer is that the axioms jibe with our actual, though limited, experience of space and that we are justified in extrapolating from the small to the universal. But, although much inductive evidence can be adduced to support this claim, our best proof would be logically incomplete. For even if all the observed facts are in agreement with the axioms, the possibility is open that a hitherto unobserved fact may contradict them and so destroy their title to universality. Inductive considerations can show no more than that the axioms are plausible or probably true.

[Figure ab]

Hilbert tried yet another route to the top. The clue to his way lay in Cartesian coordinate geometry. In his interpretation Euclid’s axioms were simply transformed into algebraic truths. For instance, in the axioms for plane geometry, construe the expression ‘point’ to signify a pair of numbers, the expression ‘straight line’ the (linear) relation between numbers expressed by a first degree equation with two unknowns, the expression ‘circle’ the relation between numbers expressed by a quadratic equation of a certain form, and so on. The geometric statement that two distinct points uniquely determine a straight line is then transformed into the algebraic truth that two distinct pairs of numbers uniquely determine a linear relation; the geometric theorem that a straight line intersects a circle in at most two points, into the algebraic theorem that a pair of simultaneous equations in two unknowns (one of which is linear and the other quadratic of a certain type) determine at most two pairs of real numbers; and so on. In brief, the consistency of the Euclidean postulates is established by showing that they are satisfied by an algebraic model. This method of establishing consistency is powerful and effective. Yet it, too, is vulnerable to the objection already set forth. For, again, a problem in one domain is resolved by transferring it to another. Hilbert’s argument for the consistency of his geometric postulates shows that if algebra is consistent, so is his geometric system. The proof is clearly relative to the assumed consistency of another system and is not an “absolute” proof.

In the various attempts to solve the problem of consistency there is one persistent source of difficulty. It lies in the fact that the axioms are interpreted by models composed of an infinite number of elements. This makes it impossible to encompass the models in a finite number of observations; hence the truth of the axioms themselves is subject to doubt. In the inductive argument for the truth of Euclidean geometry, a finite number of observed facts about space are presumably in agreement with the axioms. But the conclusion that the argument seeks to establish involves an extrapolation from a finite to an infinite set of data. How can we justify this jump? On the other hand, the difficulty is minimized, if not completely eliminated, where an appropriate model can be devised that contains only a finite number of elements. The triangle model used to show the consistency of the five abstract postulates for the classes K and L is finite; and it is comparatively simple to determine by actual inspection whether all the elements in the model actually satisfy the postulates, and thus whether they are true (and hence consistent). To illustrate: by examining in turn all the vertices of the model triangle, one can learn whether any two of them lie on just one side—so that the first postulate is established as true. Since all the elements of the model, as well as the relevant relations among them, are open to direct and exhaustive inspection, and since the likelihood of mistakes occurring in inspecting them is practically nil, the consistency of the postulates in this case is not a matter for genuine doubt.

Unfortunately, most of the postulate systems that constitute the foundations of important branches of mathematics cannot be mirrored in finite models. Consider the postulate in elementary arithmetic which asserts that every integer has an immediate successor differing from any preceding integer. It is evident that the model needed to test the set to which this postulate belongs cannot be finite, but must contain an infinity of elements. It follows that the truth (and so the consistency) of the set cannot be established by an exhaustive inspection of a limited number of elements. Apparently we have reached an impasse. Finite models suffice, in principle, to establish the consistency of certain sets of postulates; but these are of slight mathematical importance. Non-finite models, necessary for the interpretation of most postulate systems of mathematical significance, can be described only in general terms; and we cannot conclude as a matter of course that the descriptions are free from concealed contradictions.

It is tempting to suggest at this point that we can be sure of the consistency of formulations in which non-finite models are described if the basic notions employed are transparently “clear” and “distinct.” But the history of thought has not dealt kindly with the doctrine of clear and distinct ideas, or with the doctrine of intuitive knowledge implicit in the suggestion. In certain areas of mathematical research in which assumptions about infinite collections play central roles, radical contradictions have turned up, in spite of the intuitive clarity of the notions involved in the assumptions and despite the seemingly consistent character of the intellectual constructions performed. Such contradictions (technically referred to as “antinomies”) have emerged in the theory of infinite numbers, developed by Georg Cantor in the nineteenth century; and the occurrence of these contradictions has made plain that the apparent clarity of even such an elementary notion as that of *class* (or *aggregate*) does not guarantee the consistency of any particular system built on it. Since the mathematical theory of classes, which deals with the properties and relations of aggregates or collections of elements, is often adopted as the foundation for other branches of mathematics, and in particular for elementary arithmetic, it is pertinent to ask whether contradictions similar to those encountered in the theory of infinite classes infect the formulations of other parts of mathematics.

In point of fact, Bertrand Russell constructed a contradiction within the framework of elementary logic itself that is precisely analogous to the contradiction first developed in the Cantorian theory of infinite classes. Russell’s antinomy can be stated as follows. Classes seem to be of two kinds: those which do not contain themselves as members, and those which do. A class will be called “normal” if, and only if, it does not contain itself as a member; otherwise it will be called “non-normal.” An example of a normal class is the class of mathematicians, for patently the class itself is not a mathematician and is therefore not a member of itself. An example of a non-normal class is the class of all thinkable things; for the class of all thinkable things is itself thinkable and is therefore a member of itself. Let ‘N’ by definition stand for the class of *all* normal classes. We ask whether N itself is a normal class. If N is normal, it is a member of itself (for by definition N contains all normal classes); but, in that case, N is non-normal, because by definition a class that contains itself as a member is non-normal. On the other hand, if N is non-normal, it is a member of itself (by definition of non-normal); but, in that case, N is normal, because by definition the members of N are normal classes. In short, N is normal if, and only if, N is non-normal. It follows that the statement ‘N is normal’ is both true and false. This fatal contradiction results from an uncritical use of the apparently pellucid notion of class. Other paradoxes were found later, each of them constructed by means of familiar and seemingly cogent modes of reasoning. Mathematicians came to realize that in developing consistent systems familiarity and intuitive clarity are weak reeds to lean on.

We have seen the importance of the problem of consistency, and we have acquainted ourselves with the classically standard method for solving it with the help of models. It has been shown that in most instances the problem requires the use of a non-finite model, the description of which may itself conceal inconsistencies. We must conclude that, while the model method is an invaluable mathematical tool, it does not supply a final answer to the problem it was designed to solve.
