CHAPTER 9

Of the Profits of Capital

The rise and fall of profits on capital depend on the same causes as the rise and fall of wages -- namely, whether the wealth of the society is growing or declining. But these causes affect wages and profits very differently.

The growth of capital, which raises wages, tends to lower profits. When the capital of many wealthy merchants flows into the same trade, their competition naturally drives down its profits. And when there's a similar increase of capital across all the different trades in a society, the same competition must produce the same effect in every one of them.

It's already been observed that it's not easy to determine the average wages of labor even in a particular place and time. The best we can usually do is identify the most common wages. But even that is rarely possible when it comes to the profits of capital. Profit is so volatile that a person running a particular business often can't tell you himself what his average annual profit is. It's affected not only by every change in the price of the goods he deals in, but by the good or bad luck of both his competitors and his customers, and by a thousand other accidents to which goods are vulnerable whether they're being shipped by sea or land, or even just stored in a warehouse. Profit varies, therefore, not only from year to year but from day to day, almost from hour to hour. Determining the average profit across all the different trades in a large country must be far more difficult still, and trying to assess what it was in earlier times or distant periods is simply impossible.

But even though we can't precisely determine what the average profits of capital are or were -- either now or in the past -- we can form some idea of them from the interest rate on money. It can be stated as a general rule that wherever a great deal of money can be made by investing capital, a great deal will be paid for the use of it; and wherever little can be made, little will be paid. As the usual market rate of interest varies in any country, we can be sure that the ordinary profits of capital vary with it -- falling as interest falls and rising as it rises. The trajectory of interest rates, then, can give us some idea of the trajectory of profits.

Under a statute of Henry VIII, all interest above ten percent was declared illegal. Even higher rates had apparently sometimes been charged before that. Under Edward VI, religious zeal prohibited all interest entirely. This prohibition, however, like all others of its kind, is said to have had no effect and probably made the problem of excessive interest worse rather than better. Henry VIII's statute was revived under Elizabeth I, and ten percent remained the legal ceiling until the reign of James I, when it was lowered to eight percent. It was reduced to six percent soon after the Restoration, and to five percent under Queen Anne. All these various statutory changes seem to have been made wisely. They appear to have followed the market rate of interest -- the rate at which creditworthy people actually borrowed -- rather than trying to lead it. Since the time of Queen Anne, five percent seems to have been slightly above the market rate rather than below it. Before the recent war, the government was borrowing at three percent, and creditworthy people in London and many other parts of the country at three and a half, four, and four and a half percent.

Since the time of Henry VIII, the wealth and income of the country have been continually advancing, and the pace of that advance seems to have been gradually accelerating rather than slowing down. The economy seems to have been not only growing, but growing faster and faster. Wages have been continually rising during the same period, while profits in the greater part of different trades and industries have been falling.

It generally takes more capital to carry on any trade in a large city than in a country village. The large amounts of capital invested in every line of business, and the greater number of wealthy competitors, generally push the profit rate in the city below what it is in the countryside. But wages are generally higher in a large city than in a country village. In a thriving city, people with large amounts of capital to invest frequently can't find enough workers and bid against each other to hire them. This pushes wages up and profits down. In remote parts of the country, there's often not enough capital to employ everyone, so workers bid against each other for the available jobs. This pushes wages down and profits up.

In Scotland, though the legal interest rate is the same as in England, the market rate is somewhat higher. Even the most creditworthy people there rarely borrow below five percent. Private bankers in Edinburgh actually pay four percent on their promissory notes, from which depositors can withdraw at any time. Private bankers in London pay no interest at all on deposits. Most trades can be run with less capital in Scotland than in England. The ordinary rate of profit must therefore be somewhat higher. Wages, as already noted, are lower in Scotland than in England. The country is not only much poorer, but the steps by which it's advancing to a better condition -- and it is clearly advancing -- seem to be much slower and more gradual.

The legal interest rate in France has not always followed the market rate during the present century. In 1720, interest was cut from five to two percent. In 1724, it was raised to three and a third percent. In 1725, it went back up to five percent. In 1766, under the administration of Monsieur Laverdy, it was cut to four percent. The Abbe Terray later raised it back to the old rate of five percent. The supposed purpose of many of these dramatic interest rate cuts was to prepare the way for reducing the interest on the national debt -- a purpose that was sometimes actually carried out. France is probably not as rich a country as England at present. And although the legal interest rate has frequently been lower in France than in England, the market rate has generally been higher -- because in France, as in other countries, there are several safe and easy ways to get around the law. The profits of trade, I've been assured by British merchants who have done business in both countries, are higher in France than in England. This no doubt explains why many British businesspeople choose to invest their capital in a country where commerce is looked down upon, rather than in one where it's highly respected. Wages are lower in France than in England. When you travel from Scotland to England, the difference you notice in the dress and appearance of the common people in the two countries is a clear sign of the difference in their circumstances. The contrast is even more striking when you come back from France. France, though no doubt wealthier than Scotland, doesn't seem to be moving forward as fast. It's a common and even popular opinion in France that the country is actually going backward -- an opinion that I think is mistaken even regarding France, but which no one could possibly hold about Scotland who has seen the country now and saw it twenty or thirty years ago.

The province of Holland, on the other hand, relative to the size of its territory and population, is a richer country than England. The Dutch government borrows at two percent, and creditworthy private individuals at three. Wages are said to be higher in Holland than in England, and the Dutch, as everyone knows, trade on lower profit margins than any other people in Europe. Some have claimed that Dutch trade is declining, and it may be true that certain specific branches of it are. But these symptoms are sufficient to show that there is no general decline. When profits shrink, merchants are very quick to complain that trade is decaying -- though falling profits are the natural result of prosperity, or of more capital being invested than before. During the recent war, the Dutch captured the entire shipping trade of France, and they still hold a very large share of it. The enormous amounts they've invested in both French and English government bonds -- reportedly about forty million pounds in the English funds alone, though I suspect that's a considerable exaggeration -- and the large sums they lend to private borrowers in countries where the interest rate is higher than at home, certainly demonstrate that their capital has grown beyond what they can profitably invest in their own country's domestic business. But this doesn't prove that domestic business itself has declined. Just as a private individual's wealth, though originally built up in a particular trade, can grow beyond what that trade can absorb -- while the trade itself continues to expand -- the same can happen with the capital of a great nation.

In our North American and West Indian colonies, not only wages but also interest rates -- and consequently the profits of capital -- are higher than in England. In the different colonies, both the legal and market interest rates run between six and eight percent. High wages and high profits, however, are things that almost never go together, except in the special circumstances of new colonies. A new colony must, for some time, have too little capital relative to the size of its territory and too few people relative to the size of its capital, compared with most established countries. The colonists have more land than they have capital to farm. What capital they have is therefore applied only to cultivating the most fertile and best-situated land -- along the seacoast and the banks of navigable rivers. Such land is often purchased at a price below the value of even what it would produce naturally. Capital invested in buying and improving such land must yield a very large profit and can therefore afford to pay a very high rate of interest. The rapid accumulation of capital in such a profitable setting enables the planter to increase his workforce faster than he can find new workers in a fresh settlement. Those he can find are therefore very generously paid. As the colony grows, the profits of capital gradually decline. Once all the most fertile and best-located land has been taken, less profit can be made from cultivating inferior land, and less interest can be afforded on the capital invested in it. In most of our colonies, accordingly, both the legal and market rates of interest have fallen considerably during the present century. As wealth, development, and population have increased, interest has declined. But wages don't fall as profits fall. The demand for labor grows with the growth of capital, whatever its rate of profit. And after profits have diminished, capital may not only continue to grow, but may grow much faster than before. It's the same with prosperous nations as with prosperous individuals: a large fortune, even with small returns, generally grows faster than a small fortune with high returns. Money, as the proverb says, makes money. Once you've got a little, it's often easy to get more. The great difficulty is getting that first little bit. The connection between the growth of capital and the growth of industry -- or of the demand for productive labor -- has already been partly explained and will be explored more fully later, in the discussion of capital accumulation.

The acquisition of new territory or new branches of trade may sometimes raise the profits of capital, and with them the interest rate, even in a country that's rapidly growing richer. When the country's total capital isn't enough to handle all the new business opportunities that such acquisitions create, it gets directed toward the branches that offer the greatest profit. Some capital that had previously been invested in other trades is necessarily pulled out and redirected into the new, more profitable ones. In all those older trades, competition therefore decreases, the market becomes less fully supplied with many types of goods, their price rises, and higher prices yield greater profits to those who deal in them -- who can therefore afford to borrow at higher interest. For some time after the end of the recent war, not only the most creditworthy private individuals but some of the largest companies in London were commonly borrowing at five percent, having previously paid no more than four or four and a half. The enormous new territory and trade gained through our acquisitions in North America and the West Indies is sufficient to explain this, without assuming any decline in the nation's total capital. Such a massive amount of new business, to be conducted with the existing capital, must necessarily have reduced the amount invested in many established trades. With less competition in those trades, profits must have been higher. I'll have occasion later to explain the reasons why I believe the capital of Great Britain was not actually reduced even by the enormous expense of the recent war.

When the total capital of a society does actually decline -- when the funds available for supporting industry shrink -- this lowers wages and raises profits, and consequently raises interest rates. With wages lower, the owners of whatever capital remains can bring their goods to market more cheaply. And with less capital supplying the market, they can sell those goods at higher prices. Their profits are thus boosted on both ends, and they can well afford to pay high interest. The great fortunes so suddenly and easily acquired in Bengal and the other British settlements in the East Indies should convince us that where wages are very low, the profits of capital are very high -- in those devastated countries. Interest rates are proportionally extreme. In Bengal, money is frequently lent to farmers at forty, fifty, and sixty percent, with the next harvest pledged as collateral. Since profits that can support such interest rates must consume almost the entire rent that should go to the landlord, such outrageous lending rates must in turn consume most of those profits. Before the fall of the Roman Republic, similarly extreme interest rates seem to have been common in the provinces, under the ruinous administration of their provincial governors. The supposedly virtuous Brutus lent money in Cyprus at forty-eight percent, as we learn from the letters of Cicero.

In a country that had reached the full capacity of wealth that its soil, climate, and position relative to other countries would allow -- one that could advance no further and wasn't going backward -- both wages and profits would probably be very low. In a country fully populated relative to what its territory could support or its capital could employ, the competition for jobs would be so intense that wages would be driven down to barely enough to maintain the number of workers -- and since the country would already be fully populated, that number could never be increased. In a country fully invested, with as much capital as could be deployed in every branch of business, competition would be everywhere at its maximum and ordinary profits would be as low as possible.

But perhaps no country has ever actually reached this point. China seems to have been stagnant for a long time, and had probably long ago reached the full level of wealth consistent with its laws and institutions. But that level may be far below what different laws and institutions could achieve given its soil, climate, and geographic position. A country that neglects or scorns foreign trade, and allows foreign ships into only one or two of its ports, cannot do the same volume of business it could with different policies. In a country where the wealthy and the owners of large capital enjoy considerable security but the poor and owners of small capital enjoy almost none -- where they're liable at any time to be robbed and plundered by petty officials under the pretense of justice -- the total capital invested in business can never reach what the nature and scale of that business would allow. In every industry, the oppression of the poor establishes the monopoly of the rich, who, by controlling the entire trade themselves, can extract very large profits. Twelve percent is accordingly said to be the standard interest rate in China, and the ordinary profits of capital must be high enough to support that kind of rate.

A deficiency in the legal system may sometimes push interest rates considerably above what the country's level of wealth or poverty would normally require. When the law doesn't enforce contracts, it puts all borrowers in roughly the same position as bankrupts or people of questionable credit in better-regulated countries. The uncertainty of getting his money back forces the lender to charge the same exorbitant interest usually demanded from bankrupts. Among the peoples who overran the western provinces of the Roman Empire, contract enforcement was left for many centuries to the good faith of the parties involved. The courts of their kings rarely got involved. The high interest rates that prevailed in those ancient times may be partly explained by this.

When the law prohibits interest altogether, it doesn't actually prevent it. Many people must borrow, and nobody will lend without compensation for the use of their money -- compensation adequate not only to what can be earned by investing it, but to the difficulty and danger of breaking the law. The high interest rates throughout the Muslim world are attributed by Montesquieu not to poverty, but partly to the prohibition of interest and partly to the difficulty of recovering the money.

The lowest ordinary rate of profit must always be somewhat more than enough to cover the occasional losses that every investment of capital is subject to. Only this surplus is the net or clear profit. What's called gross profit frequently includes not only this surplus but also a reserve for compensating those occasional losses. The interest a borrower can afford to pay is proportional only to the clear profit.

The lowest ordinary rate of interest must likewise be somewhat more than enough to compensate for the occasional losses that lending, even with reasonable caution, involves. If it weren't, the only motives for lending would be charity or friendship.

In a country that had reached its full capacity of wealth -- where the maximum possible capital was invested in every branch of business -- the ordinary rate of clear profit would be very small. The usual market rate of interest that could be paid from it would be so low that it would be impossible for anyone except the very wealthiest to live on the interest from their money. Everyone with a small or moderate fortune would have to personally manage the investment of their own capital. Almost everyone would need to be a businessperson or engage in some kind of trade. The province of Holland seems to be approaching this condition. There, it's unfashionable not to be in business. Necessity makes it the norm for nearly everyone, and custom everywhere shapes fashion. Just as it would be ridiculous not to get dressed, it's somewhat ridiculous there not to be employed like everyone else. Just as a civilian professional looks out of place in a military camp and is even at some risk of being looked down on, so does an idle person among people of business.

The highest ordinary rate of profit would be one that, in the price of most commodities, consumes everything that should go to rent on the land, leaving only enough to pay for the labor of preparing and bringing goods to market at the lowest rate labor can possibly be paid -- bare subsistence for the worker. The worker must always have been fed somehow while doing the work, but the landlord needn't necessarily have been paid. The profits of the trade that the servants of the East India Company conduct in Bengal may not be very far from this rate.

The proportion that the usual market rate of interest should bear to the ordinary rate of clear profit necessarily varies as profit rises or falls. In Great Britain, double the interest rate is considered what merchants call a "good, moderate, reasonable profit" -- terms that I take to mean nothing more than a common and usual profit. In a country where the ordinary rate of clear profit is eight or ten percent, it may be reasonable for half of it to go to interest when business is conducted with borrowed money. The capital is at the borrower's risk -- he's effectively insuring it for the lender -- and four or five percent may, in most trades, be both adequate compensation for the risk of this insurance and adequate reward for the trouble of managing the capital. But this proportion between interest and clear profit might not hold in countries where the ordinary rate of profit was either much lower or much higher. If it were much lower, perhaps half couldn't be spared for interest. If it were much higher, more could be.

In countries that are rapidly growing richer, the low rate of profit may, in the price of many commodities, offset the high wages of labor, enabling those countries to sell as cheaply as their less prosperous neighbors, where wages may be lower.

In fact, high profits tend to raise the price of goods much more than high wages do. Suppose that in the linen industry, the wages of all the different workers -- the flax-dressers, spinners, weavers, and so on -- were all raised by two pence a day. The price of a piece of linen would need to increase by only the number of workers involved, multiplied by the number of days they worked, multiplied by two pence. The wage component of the commodity's price would, through all the different stages of manufacturing, rise only in a simple, additive (arithmetic) proportion to the wage increase. But if the profits of all the different employers of those workers were raised by five percent, the profit component of the price would, through all the stages of manufacturing, rise in a compounding (geometric) proportion. The employer of the flax-dressers would, when selling his processed flax, require an additional five percent on the entire value of both the materials and wages he had advanced to his workers. The employer of the spinners would require an additional five percent on both the now-higher price of the flax and the wages of his spinners. And the employer of the weavers would require an additional five percent on both the now-higher price of the linen yarn and the wages of his weavers. In raising the price of commodities, higher wages work like simple interest on a debt. Higher profits work like compound interest. Our merchants and factory owners complain loudly about the terrible effects of high wages in raising prices and reducing the sale of their goods both at home and abroad. They say nothing about the effects of high profits. They are silent about the damaging consequences of their own gains. They complain only about other people's.
