Digression on the Changing Value of Silver Over the Last Four Centuries

First Period

In 1350, and for some time before that, the average price of a quarter of wheat in England appears to have been no less than four ounces of silver (Tower-weight), equal to about twenty shillings in today's money. From that price, it seems to have gradually fallen to two ounces of silver -- about ten shillings in today's money -- the price we find it at by the beginning of the sixteenth century, where it stayed until around 1570.

In 1350, the 25th year of Edward III's reign, a law called the Statute of Laborers was enacted. In its preamble, it complains bitterly about the insolence of servants who were trying to raise their wages. It therefore orders that all servants and laborers must from now on be content with the same wages and liveries they had been receiving in the 20th year of the king's reign and the four years before that. ("Liveries" in those days meant not just clothing but food and provisions.) Under this law, their livery wheat was not to be valued higher than tenpence a bushel anywhere, and the master always had the option of paying them in either wheat or money.

Tenpence a bushel, then, was considered a very moderate price for wheat in 1350 -- otherwise it wouldn't have taken a special statute to force servants to accept it instead of their usual food provisions. And it had been considered a reasonable price ten years earlier, in the 16th year of the king's reign, which is the reference point the statute uses. Now, in the 16th year of Edward III, tenpence contained about half an ounce of silver (Tower-weight) and was roughly equal to half a crown in today's money. Four ounces of silver (Tower-weight), therefore -- equal to six shillings and eightpence in the money of those times, and to roughly twenty shillings today -- must have been considered a moderate price for a quarter (eight bushels) of wheat.

This statute is surely better evidence of what was considered a moderate grain price in those times than the prices from particular years that historians tend to record. Those prices were typically noted because they were extraordinarily high or low, which makes it hard to judge what the ordinary price actually was. There are other reasons too for believing that in the early fourteenth century, and for some time before, the common price of wheat was no less than four ounces of silver per quarter, with other grains priced proportionally.

In 1309, Ralph de Born, prior of St. Augustine's in Canterbury, threw a feast for his installation, and William Thorn preserved not just the menu but the prices of many items. At this feast, they consumed: first, fifty-three quarters of wheat costing nineteen pounds (seven shillings and twopence per quarter, equal to about twenty-one shillings and sixpence in today's money); second, fifty-eight quarters of malt costing seventeen pounds ten shillings (six shillings per quarter, equal to about eighteen shillings today); and third, twenty quarters of oats costing four pounds (four shillings per quarter, equal to about twelve shillings today). The prices of malt and oats here seem higher than their usual ratio to wheat prices.

These prices weren't recorded because they were unusually high or low. They were mentioned incidentally as the actual prices paid for large quantities of grain consumed at a feast that was famous for its magnificence.

In 1262, the 51st year of Henry III's reign, an ancient statute called the Assize of Bread and Ale was revived. The king says in the preamble that it had been made in the times of his ancestors, former kings of England. It probably dates back at least to his grandfather Henry II, and may even be as old as the Norman Conquest. This statute regulated the price of bread according to wheat prices ranging from one shilling to twenty shillings per quarter (in the money of those times). Now, statutes of this kind generally aim to cover all deviations from the middle price equally -- those below it as well as those above it. Ten shillings, therefore -- containing six ounces of silver (Tower-weight), equal to about thirty shillings in today's money -- must, on this reasoning, have been considered the middle price of a quarter of wheat when the statute was first enacted, and must have still been so in 1262 under Henry III. We can't be far off, then, in assuming that the middle price was at least one-third of the highest price that the statute covers -- that is, six shillings and eightpence of that era's money, containing four ounces of silver (Tower-weight).

From all these facts, we have good reason to conclude that around the mid-fourteenth century, and for a considerable time before, the ordinary price of a quarter of wheat was thought to be no less than four ounces of silver (Tower-weight).

From the mid-fourteenth century to the early sixteenth century, the reasonable and moderate price of wheat -- that is, the ordinary or average price -- seems to have gradually fallen to about half of this, settling at around two ounces of silver (Tower-weight), equal to about ten shillings in today's money. It stayed at this price until around 1570.

In the household account book of Henry, the fifth Earl of Northumberland, drawn up in 1512, wheat is estimated at two different prices. One values it at six shillings and eightpence per quarter, the other at just five shillings and eightpence. In 1512, six shillings and eightpence contained only two ounces of silver (Tower-weight) and was equal to about ten shillings in today's money.

From the 25th year of Edward III to the beginning of Elizabeth's reign -- a span of more than two hundred years -- six shillings and eightpence had continued, according to several different statutes, to be considered the moderate and reasonable (that is, the ordinary or average) price of wheat. The actual quantity of silver contained in that nominal sum was, however, continually shrinking during this period due to various changes made to the coinage. But the increase in silver's value seems to have roughly offset the reduction in the amount of silver in the coins, so the legislature apparently didn't think the discrepancy was worth addressing.

So in 1436, a law was passed allowing wheat to be exported without a license when the price was as low as six shillings and eightpence. And in 1463, another law prohibited wheat imports unless the price exceeded six shillings and eightpence per quarter. The reasoning was that when the price was that low, exporting wouldn't cause any problems, but when it rose higher, it became wise to allow imports. Six shillings and eightpence -- containing about the same amount of silver as thirteen shillings and fourpence in today's money (one-third less silver than the same nominal sum contained in Edward III's time) -- was still considered the moderate and reasonable price of wheat.

In 1554, under Philip and Mary, and in 1558, under Elizabeth, wheat exports were similarly prohibited whenever the quarter price exceeded six shillings and eightpence, which by then contained barely two pennies' worth more silver than the same nominal sum does today. But it was quickly discovered that prohibiting exports until the price dropped that low was, in practice, banning exports entirely. So in 1562, under Elizabeth, wheat exports were allowed from certain ports whenever the quarter price didn't exceed ten shillings -- containing nearly the same amount of silver as ten shillings does today. This price was then considered the moderate and reasonable price of wheat. It aligns closely with the Northumberland household book's estimate from 1512.

In France, the average grain price similarly fell in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries compared to the two preceding centuries, as both Mr. Dupre de St. Maur and the elegant author of the Essay on the Regulation of Grain have observed. The same decline probably occurred across most of Europe during this period.

This rise in silver's value relative to grain may have been caused entirely by increased demand for silver (due to growing economic improvement) while the supply stayed the same. Or, with demand holding steady, it may have been caused entirely by a gradual decline in supply, since most of the known mines were becoming exhausted and therefore more expensive to work. Or it may have been partly due to both factors. By the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, most of Europe was approaching a more stable form of government than it had enjoyed for centuries. Greater security would naturally boost industry and economic improvement. The demand for precious metals, like the demand for every other luxury, would naturally increase along with rising wealth. A larger annual output of goods would require more coinage to circulate it, and a greater number of wealthy people would want more silver plates and other silver ornaments. It's also reasonable to suppose that most of the mines then supplying the European market were becoming significantly depleted and more expensive to operate. Many of them had been worked since Roman times.

However, most writers who have studied commodity prices in ancient times have held that from the Norman Conquest -- or perhaps even from Julius Caesar's invasion -- until the discovery of the American mines, the value of silver was continually falling. They seem to have been led to this view partly by their observations about the prices of grain and some other raw agricultural products, and partly by the popular belief that as the quantity of silver naturally increases with a country's growing wealth, its value must decrease as its quantity grows.

Three different things seem to have frequently misled them in their observations about grain prices.

First, in ancient times nearly all rents were paid in kind -- a certain amount of grain, cattle, poultry, and so on. Sometimes, however, the landlord would stipulate his right to demand from the tenant either the annual payment in kind or a fixed sum of money instead. In Scotland, the price at which the in-kind payment was exchanged for money is called the "conversion price." Since the landlord always had the option of taking either the goods or the cash, the conversion price needed to be set below the average market price for the tenant's protection. In many places, accordingly, it was not much above half the market price. Throughout most of Scotland, this custom still continues for poultry, and in some places for cattle. It probably would have continued for grain too, had the institution of the "public fiars" not replaced it. These are official annual valuations of the average price of all different types and qualities of grain, based on actual market prices in each county. This system made it safe enough for tenants and much more convenient for landlords to convert their grain rents at whatever the fiars price turned out to be each year, rather than at some fixed price.

But the writers who collected grain prices from ancient times seem frequently to have confused the conversion price with the actual market price. Fleetwood himself admits on one occasion that he made this mistake. However, since he wrote his book for a particular purpose, he doesn't make this admission until after he has already cited this conversion price fifteen times. The price in question is eight shillings per quarter of wheat. In 1423, the year he starts with, this sum contained the same amount of silver as sixteen shillings in today's money. But by 1562, the year he ends with, it contained no more than eight shillings does today.

Second, these writers have been misled by the sloppy way some ancient pricing statutes were transcribed by lazy copyists -- and sometimes perhaps sloppily drafted by the legislature itself.

The ancient statutes of assize seem to have always started by determining what bread and ale should cost when wheat and barley were at their lowest price, then proceeded step by step through higher and higher grain prices. But the copyists often thought it was enough to transcribe only the first three or four prices -- the lowest ones -- saving themselves the trouble and apparently assuming this was sufficient to show the pattern that applied at all higher prices.

So in the Assize of Bread and Ale from 1262 (the 51st year of Henry III), the price of bread was regulated according to wheat prices from one shilling to twenty shillings per quarter (in the money of those times). But in the manuscripts from which all pre-Ruffhead editions of the statutes were printed, the copyists had only transcribed the regulation up to twelve shillings. Several writers, misled by this truncated copy, naturally concluded that the middle price -- six shillings per quarter, equal to about eighteen shillings in today's money -- was the ordinary average price of wheat at that time.

In the Statute of Tumbrel and Pillory, enacted around the same period, the price of ale is regulated according to every sixpence rise in barley prices, from two shillings to four shillings per quarter. But four shillings was not considered the highest price barley could reach in those times. These prices were merely given as examples of the pattern to be followed at all other prices, high or low. We can tell this from the statute's final words: "et sic deinceps crescetur vel diminuetur per sex denarios" -- the phrasing is quite sloppy, but the meaning is clear enough: "And the price of ale is to be raised or lowered in this manner for every sixpence change in barley prices." The legislature itself seems to have been just as careless in drafting this statute as the copyists were in transcribing the other one.

In an ancient manuscript of the Regiam Majestatem, an old Scottish law book, there's a statute of assize that regulates the price of bread according to wheat prices from tenpence to three shillings per Scottish boll (about half an English quarter). Three Scottish shillings, at the time this statute was supposedly enacted, were equal to about nine shillings sterling in today's money. Mr. Ruddiman seems to have concluded from this that three shillings was the highest price wheat ever reached in those times, and that tenpence, one shilling, or at most two shillings were the normal prices. But when you actually consult the manuscript, it's clear that all these prices are merely examples of the proportional relationship between wheat and bread prices. The statute's closing words make this plain: "reliqua judicabis secundum praescripta habendo respectum ad pretium bladi" -- "You shall judge the remaining cases according to the rules written above, with due regard to the price of grain."

Third, these writers were also misled by the very low prices at which wheat was sometimes sold in very ancient times, imagining that since its lowest price was much lower then than in later periods, its ordinary price must have been much lower too. But they could just as easily have noticed that the highest prices in those ancient times were just as far above anything seen in later periods as the lowest prices were below them.

For example, in 1270, Fleetwood gives us two prices for a quarter of wheat. One is four pounds sixteen shillings (in the money of those times, equal to fourteen pounds eight shillings today). The other is six pounds eight shillings (equal to nineteen pounds four shillings today). No prices from the late fifteenth or early sixteenth century come anywhere close to these extremes.

Grain prices, though always subject to fluctuation, swing most wildly in turbulent, disorderly societies where disrupted commerce and communication prevent the abundance of one region from relieving the scarcity of another. In the chaotic England of the Plantagenets, who governed from roughly the mid-twelfth to the late fifteenth century, one district might have plenty while another nearby district -- whose crops had been destroyed by bad weather or by the raid of some neighboring baron -- suffered the horrors of famine. Yet if the lands of a hostile lord lay between them, the prosperous district might have no way to help the starving one. Under the vigorous rule of the Tudors, who governed England through the latter fifteenth and all of the sixteenth century, no baron was powerful enough to dare disturb the public peace.

At the end of this chapter, the reader will find all the wheat prices Fleetwood collected from 1202 to 1597, converted to today's money and organized chronologically into seven periods of twelve years each. At the end of each period, the twelve-year average is also given. Over that long stretch, Fleetwood was only able to collect prices for eighty out of those nearly four hundred years, leaving the final twelve-year period four years short. I've therefore added, from Eton College's records, the prices for 1598, 1599, 1600, and 1601 -- my only addition. The reader will see that from the early thirteenth century through the mid-sixteenth century, the average price for each twelve-year period gradually falls, and that toward the end of the sixteenth century it begins rising again. The prices Fleetwood managed to collect were mainly those noted for being either remarkably expensive or remarkably cheap, and I won't pretend that any very certain conclusion can be drawn from them. But insofar as they prove anything at all, they confirm the account I've been trying to give.

Fleetwood himself, however, seems to have believed -- along with most other writers -- that throughout this entire period, silver's value was continually falling due to increasing abundance. The grain prices he himself collected certainly don't support that view. They agree perfectly with the account of Mr. Dupre de St. Maur, and with the one I've been trying to explain here. Bishop Fleetwood and Mr. Dupre de St. Maur are the two authors who seem to have collected the most diligent and faithful records of ancient prices. It's somewhat curious that despite their very different opinions, their facts -- at least regarding grain prices -- line up so precisely.

However, it's not so much from the low price of grain as from the low prices of other raw agricultural products that the most thoughtful writers have inferred that silver was very valuable in those ancient times. Grain, they've argued, is essentially a manufactured product -- in those primitive ages, it was much more expensive relative to most other commodities. By "other commodities," I take them to mean unprocessed goods: cattle, poultry, wild game, and so on. And it's undeniably true that in those times of poverty, such products were proportionally much cheaper than grain.

But this cheapness wasn't caused by silver being more valuable. It was caused by those commodities being less valuable. It wasn't because silver could buy more labor, but because those raw goods represented much less labor than they would in times of greater wealth and development.

Silver is certainly cheaper in Spanish America than in Europe -- cheaper in the country where it's produced than in the one to which it must be shipped at the cost of a long journey by land and sea, plus freight and insurance charges. Yet we're told by Ulloa that not many years ago, in Buenos Aires, the price of an ox chosen from a herd of three or four hundred was just twenty-one and a half pence sterling. And according to Mr. Byron, a good horse in the capital of Chile cost sixteen shillings sterling. In a naturally fertile country where the vast majority of land is uncultivated, cattle, poultry, game, and the like -- since they can be acquired with very little labor -- will command very little in return. Their low money price doesn't prove that silver is very valuable there; it proves that those commodities have very little value.

We must always remember: it's labor -- not any particular commodity or set of commodities -- that is the real measure of the value of both silver and everything else.

In countries that are mostly empty or thinly populated, cattle, poultry, game, and similar products are spontaneous productions of nature, and nature frequently produces far more of them than the inhabitants can consume. In such conditions, supply regularly exceeds demand. In different stages of social development, therefore, such commodities will represent very different quantities of labor.

In every state of society and every stage of development, grain is a product of human industry. But the average output of every type of industry is always more or less matched to average consumption -- average supply to average demand. At every stage of improvement, moreover, raising equal amounts of grain on the same quality of land in the same climate requires, on average, roughly equal amounts of labor (or what comes to the same thing, roughly equal costs). The continual increase in labor productivity that comes with agricultural improvement is more or less offset by the continually rising price of cattle, the principal tools of agriculture.

For all these reasons, we can be confident that equal quantities of grain will, in every state of society, more closely represent equal quantities of labor than equal quantities of any other raw agricultural product. As I've already noted, grain is a more accurate measure of value across different stages of wealth and development than any other commodity. We can therefore judge the real value of silver more reliably by comparing it with grain than with anything else.

Beyond this, grain -- or whatever the common staple food of the people happens to be -- makes up the main part of a laborer's subsistence in every civilized country. Thanks to the spread of agriculture, every country produces far more plant food than animal food, and laborers everywhere live mainly on the cheapest and most abundant wholesome food available. Meat, except in the most prosperous countries where labor is best rewarded, makes up only a small part of a laborer's diet. Poultry is an even smaller part, and game essentially none of it. In France, and even in Scotland (where labor is somewhat better paid than in France), working people rarely eat meat except on holidays and other special occasions.

The money price of labor, therefore, depends much more on the average money price of grain -- the laborer's main food -- than on the price of meat or any other raw product. The real value of gold and silver -- the real amount of labor they can buy -- depends much more on how much grain they can purchase than on how much meat or anything else.

Such scattered observations about the prices of grain or other commodities wouldn't have misled so many intelligent writers, however, if they hadn't also been influenced by the popular belief that as the quantity of silver naturally grows with increasing wealth, its value falls as its quantity grows. This notion, however, seems to be entirely groundless.

The quantity of precious metals may increase in any country for two distinct reasons. First, the mines supplying it may become more abundant. Second, the people may become wealthier -- the annual product of their labor may grow. The first cause is indeed necessarily connected with a decrease in the metals' value, but the second is not.

When richer mines are discovered, more precious metals come to market. If the quantity of goods and necessities available for exchange remains the same, equal amounts of metal will exchange for smaller amounts of commodities. So when precious metals increase because of more abundant mines, their value necessarily falls.

But when a country's wealth increases -- when the annual output of its labor grows steadily greater -- more coinage is needed to circulate more goods. And the people, having more to trade for it, will naturally acquire more and more silver plate and ornaments. The quantity of coinage increases out of necessity; the quantity of silverware increases out of vanity and ostentation -- for the same reason that fine statues, paintings, and every other luxury multiply in a prosperous society. But just as sculptors and painters don't get paid less in times of wealth and prosperity than in times of poverty, gold and silver won't be paid for less either.

When there's no accidental discovery of richer mines to push prices down, the price of gold and silver naturally rises with a country's wealth. Whatever the state of the mines, it's always naturally higher in a rich country than in a poor one. Gold and silver, like all other commodities, seek the market where they'll fetch the best price -- and the best price for everything is usually offered by the country that can best afford to pay it.

Remember, labor is the ultimate price paid for everything. In countries where labor is equally well rewarded, the money price of labor will be proportional to the cost of a laborer's subsistence. But gold and silver will exchange for a greater quantity of subsistence in a rich country than in a poor one. If the two countries are far apart, the difference may be enormous -- because although metals naturally flow from the worse market to the better one, it's hard to transport enough to equalize prices across great distances. If the countries are nearby, the difference will be smaller and sometimes barely noticeable, since transportation is easy.

China is a much richer country than any part of Europe, and the difference between the cost of food in China and in Europe is very large. Rice in China is much cheaper than wheat anywhere in Europe. England is much richer than Scotland, but the difference in grain prices between those two countries is much smaller -- barely noticeable. Measured by quantity, Scottish grain generally appears considerably cheaper than English. But measured by quality, it's actually somewhat more expensive. Scotland imports large quantities of grain from England every year, and any commodity must ordinarily cost somewhat more in the country it's shipped to than in the country it comes from. English grain, therefore, must be more expensive in Scotland than in England -- yet relative to its quality, it can't usually be sold for more than the Scottish grain competing with it in the same market.

The difference between the money price of labor in China and in Europe is even greater than that between the money prices of food, because the real compensation of labor is higher in Europe than in China. Most of Europe is in a state of economic improvement, while China seems to be standing still. The money price of labor is lower in Scotland than in England because real compensation is much lower there too. Scotland is advancing toward greater wealth, but much more slowly than England. The frequency of emigration from Scotland and its rarity from England are proof enough that labor demand is very different in the two countries. The proportion between the real compensation of labor in different countries, it must be remembered, is naturally determined not by their actual wealth or poverty, but by whether their condition is improving, stagnant, or declining.

Gold and silver are naturally most valuable among the richest nations and least valuable among the poorest. Among hunter-gatherer societies -- the poorest of all nations -- they're barely valuable at all.

In large cities, grain is always more expensive than in remote parts of the country. But this isn't because silver is cheap in cities -- it's because grain is expensive there. It doesn't cost less labor to bring silver to a major city than to the countryside, but it costs a great deal more to bring grain.

In some very wealthy and commercial countries, like Holland and the territory of Genoa, grain is expensive for the same reason it's expensive in major cities: they don't produce enough to feed their inhabitants. They're rich in the skill and industry of their craftsmen and manufacturers, in every kind of labor-saving machinery, in shipping, and in every other instrument and means of transportation and trade. But they're poor in grain, which must be imported from distant countries and therefore costs more to cover the shipping expense. It doesn't cost less labor to bring silver to Amsterdam than to Danzig, but it costs a great deal more to bring grain. The real cost of silver is nearly the same in both places, but the real cost of grain is very different.

Reduce the real wealth of Holland or Genoa while keeping their populations the same. Reduce their ability to bring in food from distant countries. The price of grain, instead of falling along with the decrease in silver that must accompany this decline (whether as cause or effect), will rise to famine levels. When we're desperate for necessities, we'll trade away all our luxuries -- and luxuries, whose value rises in prosperous times, plunge in value during poverty and distress. It's the opposite with necessities. Their real price -- the amount of labor they can command -- rises in times of poverty and falls in times of prosperity, which are always times of great abundance (otherwise they wouldn't be prosperous times). Grain is a necessity. Silver is only a luxury.

Whatever, therefore, may have been the increase in precious metals during the period from the mid-fourteenth to the mid-sixteenth century that resulted from growing wealth and development, it could not have tended to reduce their value -- not in Great Britain, and not anywhere else in Europe. If those who collected ancient prices had no reason to infer that silver was declining in value from their observations of grain or other commodity prices, they had even less reason to infer it from any supposed increase in wealth and development.
