<modernized_text>
Third Period

Between 1630 and 1640 -- around 1636 -- the effect of the American mines in reducing the value of silver appears to have run its full course. The value of silver relative to grain seems never to have sunk lower than it was around that time. It appears to have risen somewhat during the present century, and had probably begun doing so even before the end of the last.

From 1637 to 1700 -- the sixty-four final years of the last century -- the average price of a quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat at Windsor market was, according to the Eton College records, 2 pounds, 11 shillings, and a third of a penny. That's only 1 shilling and a third of a penny more expensive than it had been during the sixteen years before 1637. But during those sixty-four years, two events occurred that must have driven grain prices much higher than weather alone would have warranted -- more than enough to account for this very small increase without supposing any further decline in silver's value.

The first was the English Civil War, which by discouraging farming and disrupting trade must have pushed grain prices well above what seasonal conditions alone would have caused. This effect would have been felt at markets throughout the kingdom, but especially around London, which needed grain from the greatest distances. In 1648, the price of the best wheat at Windsor market reached 4 pounds, 5 shillings per quarter of nine bushels, and in 1649 it hit 4 pounds. The excess of these two years above the sixteen-year pre-1637 average of 2 pounds, 10 shillings totals 3 pounds, 5 shillings. Spread across those sixty-four years, that alone would nearly account for the small price increase we observe. And those were only the most extreme prices -- far from the only high prices caused by the civil wars.

The second event was the grain export bounty (subsidy) granted in 1688. Many people have argued that this bounty, by encouraging farming, eventually produced greater abundance and therefore cheaper grain in the domestic market. I'll examine later how far the bounty could actually have this effect. For now, I'll just point out that between 1688 and 1700, it hadn't had enough time to produce any such result. During this short period, its only effect was to push surplus production into exports each year, preventing the abundance of one year from offsetting the scarcity of another, and thereby raising domestic prices. The scarcity that gripped England from 1693 to 1699 was no doubt mainly caused by bad weather and extended across much of Europe. But the bounty must have made it somewhat worse. Accordingly, in 1699 further grain exports were prohibited for nine months.

A third event during the same period, while it couldn't have caused any actual grain scarcity or any increase in the real amount of silver paid for it, must have caused some increase in the nominal sum. This was the severe debasement of the silver coinage through clipping and wear. This problem had begun under Charles II and grew steadily worse until 1695, when, as we learn from Mr. Lowndes, the circulating silver coin was on average nearly twenty-five percent below its official standard value. The nominal price at which any commodity sells at market is naturally determined not by the amount of silver that should be in the coins according to the standard, but by the amount that experience shows actually is in them. This nominal price is therefore naturally higher when the coinage has been severely debased through clipping and wear than when it's close to its standard value.

During the present century, the silver coinage has never been as far below its standard weight as it is right now. But though quite worn, its value has been propped up by the gold coinage for which it is exchanged. Before the recent re-coining, the gold coins were somewhat defaced too, but less so than the silver. In 1695, by contrast, the value of the silver coinage was not supported by the gold. A guinea in those days typically exchanged for thirty shillings of worn and clipped silver. Before the recent gold re-coinage, the price of silver bullion was rarely higher than five shillings and sevenpence an ounce -- just fivepence above the mint price. But in 1695, the common price of silver bullion was six shillings and fivepence an ounce -- fifteenpence above the mint price. So even before the recent gold re-coinage, the combined coinage of gold and silver, compared against silver bullion, was thought to be no more than eight percent below its standard value. In 1695, by contrast, it was thought to be nearly twenty-five percent below. But at the start of the present century -- that is, right after the great re-coinage under King William -- most of the circulating silver must have been much closer to standard weight than it is now.

During the present century, moreover, there has been no great national catastrophe like the civil war to discourage farming or disrupt internal trade. And though the grain export bounty, which has been in effect for most of the century, must always push grain prices somewhat above where they would otherwise be given the actual state of farming, the bounty has now had plenty of time to produce all the good effects attributed to it -- encouraging cultivation and thereby increasing the domestic grain supply. According to one school of thought (which I'll explain and examine later), the bounty may have done as much to lower grain prices through increased production as it has done to raise them through encouraged exports. Many people believe it has done more.

Accordingly, during the first sixty-four years of the present century, the average price of a quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat at Windsor market was, by the Eton College records, 2 pounds, 0 shillings, 6 and 19/32 pence. That is about ten shillings and sixpence -- more than twenty-five percent -- cheaper than it had been during the last sixty-four years of the previous century. It's about nine shillings and sixpence cheaper than during the sixteen years before 1636, when the American mines may be supposed to have had their full effect. And it's about one shilling cheaper than during the twenty-six years before 1620, before the mines can be supposed to have had their full effect. By this reckoning, the average price of mid-grade wheat during the first sixty-four years of the present century comes out to about thirty-two shillings per standard quarter of eight bushels.

The value of silver, therefore, seems to have risen somewhat relative to grain during the present century, and had probably begun doing so even before the end of the last.

In 1687, the price of a quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat at Windsor market was 1 pound, 5 shillings, 2 pence -- the lowest it had been at any point since 1595.

In 1688, Mr. Gregory King, a man famous for his expertise in such matters, estimated the average price of wheat in years of moderate abundance at 3 shillings, 6 pence per bushel to the grower, or twenty-eight shillings per quarter. By "grower's price" I understand he means the contract price -- the price at which a farmer contracts to deliver a set quantity of grain to a dealer over several years. Since such contracts save the farmer the cost and trouble of marketing, the contract price is generally lower than the average market price. Mr. King judged twenty-eight shillings per quarter to be the ordinary contract price in years of moderate plenty. Before the scarcity caused by the recent extraordinary run of bad seasons, I've been told that this was indeed the ordinary contract price in all normal years.

In 1688, the parliamentary bounty on grain exports was granted. The country gentlemen, who then made up an even larger share of the legislature than they do today, had noticed that the money price of grain was falling. The bounty was a scheme to artificially raise it back to the high prices that had been common under Charles I and Charles II. It was to apply until wheat reached forty-eight shillings per quarter -- that is, twenty shillings, or five-sevenths, more expensive than what Mr. King had estimated the grower's price to be in years of moderate plenty that very same year. If his calculations deserve any part of their widely recognized reputation, forty-eight shillings per quarter was a price that, without some device like the bounty, couldn't have been expected except in years of extraordinary scarcity. But King William's government was not yet firmly established. It was in no position to refuse anything to the country gentlemen, from whom it was at that very moment requesting the first establishment of the annual land tax.

The value of silver relative to grain had therefore probably already risen somewhat before the end of the last century, and seems to have continued rising through most of the present -- though the bounty must have slowed this rise from being as noticeable as it otherwise would have been, given the actual state of farming.

In plentiful years, the bounty drives up the price of grain above what it otherwise would be, since it encourages extraordinary amounts of export. Keeping up grain prices even in the most abundant years was the openly stated purpose of the policy.

In years of great scarcity, the bounty has generally been suspended. But it must have had some effect on prices even in many of those years. By stimulating excessive exports in abundant years, it frequently prevents the plenty of one year from compensating the scarcity of another.

In both plentiful and scarce years, therefore, the bounty raises grain prices above what they would naturally be given the actual state of farming. So if the average price during the first sixty-four years of this century has been lower than during the last sixty-four years of the previous one, it must have been even lower still -- much lower -- without the bounty's distorting effect.

But without the bounty, some might argue, the state of farming itself wouldn't have been the same. What the bounty has actually done for agriculture is something I'll try to examine later, when I discuss subsidy policy in detail. For now, I'll simply note that this rise in silver's value relative to grain has not been peculiar to England. It has been observed in France during the same period and in nearly the same proportion, by three very careful and diligent collectors of grain prices: Mr. Dupre de St. Maur, Mr. Messance, and the author of the Essay on the Regulation of Grain. But in France, grain exports were prohibited by law until 1764. It's rather hard to believe that nearly the same price decline that occurred in one country despite an export ban could, in another country, have been caused by the extraordinary encouragement given to exports.

It would be more accurate, perhaps, to view this decline in the average money price of grain as the result of a gradual rise in the real value of silver across the European market, rather than any fall in the real value of grain. As I've already observed, grain is a more accurate measure of value over long time periods than either silver or perhaps any other commodity. When, after the discovery of the abundant American mines, grain rose to three or four times its former money price, everyone attributed this change not to any increase in the real value of grain but to a decline in the real value of silver. If during the first sixty-four years of the present century the average money price of grain has fallen somewhat below its level in most of the previous century, we should account for this in the same way -- not as a fall in grain's real value, but as some rise in the real value of silver in the European market.

The high grain prices of the last ten or twelve years have admittedly raised suspicions that silver's real value is still declining in the European market. But these high prices clearly seem to be the result of extraordinarily bad weather and should be viewed as a temporary event, not a permanent one. The seasons have been unfavorable for the past ten or twelve years across most of Europe, and the political upheavals in Poland have greatly increased scarcity in all the countries that used to get grain from that market in expensive years. Such a long run of bad seasons, while not a very common event, is by no means a unique one. Anyone who has studied the history of grain prices in earlier times will recall several similar episodes. Ten years of extraordinary scarcity are no more remarkable than ten years of extraordinary abundance. The low grain prices from 1741 to 1750 can very well be set against the high prices of the last eight or ten years. From 1741 to 1750, the average price of a quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat at Windsor market was only 1 pound, 13 shillings, 9 and 4/5 pence -- nearly 6 shillings, 3 pence below the average for the first sixty-four years of the century. The average price of a standard quarter (eight bushels) of mid-grade wheat during those ten years comes out to only 1 pound, 6 shillings, 8 pence.

Between 1741 and 1750, however, the bounty must have prevented grain from falling as low domestically as it naturally would have. During those ten years, total grain exports of all kinds, according to customs records, amounted to no less than 8,029,156 quarters and one bushel. The bounty paid on these exports totaled 1,514,962 pounds, 17 shillings, 4 and a half pence. In 1749, Prime Minister Mr. Pelham observed to the House of Commons that an extraordinary sum had been paid as a grain export bounty over the preceding three years. He had good reason to make this remark, and in the following year he might have had even better cause. In that single year, the bounty paid amounted to no less than 324,176 pounds, 10 shillings, 6 pence. It's hardly necessary to point out how much this forced exportation must have raised domestic grain prices above what they would otherwise have been.

At the end of the accounts appended to this chapter, the reader will find those ten years broken out separately. There too is a separate account of the ten years before them, whose average also falls below the general average of the first sixty-four years of the century, though not by as much. The year 1740, however, was a year of extraordinary scarcity. These twenty years before 1750 can be set against the twenty years before 1770. Just as the earlier twenty were well below the century's average despite one or two expensive years mixed in, the later twenty have been well above it despite one or two cheap ones (1759, for example). If the earlier period wasn't as far below the average as the later period has been above it, we should probably attribute the difference to the bounty. The change has obviously been too sudden to be blamed on any shift in silver's value, which is always slow and gradual. The only thing that can explain such a sudden effect is a cause that can act suddenly -- the random variation of the seasons.

The money price of labor in Great Britain has certainly risen during the present century. But this seems to be the result not so much of any decline in silver's value in the European market as of an increase in the demand for labor in Great Britain, driven by the great and nearly universal prosperity of the country. In France, a country not quite so prosperous, the money price of labor has, since the middle of the last century, been observed to fall gradually alongside the average money price of grain. Both in the last century and in this one, the daily wages of common labor in France are said to have held pretty steadily at about one-twentieth of the average price of a septier of wheat (a measure slightly larger than four Winchester bushels). In Great Britain, as I've already shown, the real compensation of labor -- the actual quantities of necessities and comforts of life given to the laborer -- has increased considerably during the present century. The rise in money wages seems to be the result not of any decline in the value of silver in the general European market, but of a rise in the real price of labor in the particular market of Great Britain, owing to the country's uniquely favorable circumstances.

For some time after America was first discovered, silver continued to sell at or near its former price. Mining profits were for a while very high -- well above their natural rate. But those who imported silver into Europe would soon have found that the whole annual supply couldn't be sold at this high price. Silver would gradually exchange for less and less. Its price would slowly fall until it reached its natural price -- just enough to cover, at their normal rates, the wages of labor, the profits of capital, and the rent of land needed to bring it from the mine to market.

In most of Peru's silver mines, the king of Spain's tax -- amounting to a tenth of the gross output -- eats up, as I've already noted, the entire rent of the land. This tax was originally a half; it soon dropped to a third, then a fifth, and finally to a tenth, where it remains today. In most of Peru's silver mines, this seems to be all that's left after the mine operator replaces his capital along with its ordinary profits. And it is universally acknowledged that these profits, once very high, are now as low as they can possibly be while still keeping the mines in operation.

The king of Spain's tax was reduced to one-fifth of registered silver in 1504 -- forty-one years before 1545, when the mines of Potosi were discovered. In the ninety years between then and 1636, these mines -- the most productive in all of America -- had enough time to produce their full effect, reducing the value of silver in the European market as low as it could go while still bearing this tax. Ninety years is plenty of time to bring any commodity that isn't a monopoly down to its natural price -- the lowest price at which, while paying a particular tax, it can continue to be sold for any extended period.

The price of silver in the European market might have fallen even further, making it necessary to cut the tax not just to one-tenth (as was done in 1736) but to one-twentieth -- just as the tax on gold had been reduced. Or it might have become necessary to abandon most of the American mines currently in operation. What probably prevented this was the gradual growth of demand for silver -- the steady expansion of the market for the output of America's silver mines. This growing demand has not only held up silver's value in the European market but may have pushed it somewhat higher than it was around the middle of the last century.

Since America was first discovered, the market for its silver mines has been growing steadily more extensive.

First, the European market itself has expanded. Since the discovery of America, most of Europe has improved significantly. England, Holland, France, and Germany -- even Sweden, Denmark, and Russia -- have all advanced considerably in both agriculture and manufacturing. Italy seems not to have gone backward. (Italy's decline came before the conquest of Peru, and since then it seems to have recovered a little.) Spain and Portugal are generally thought to have fallen behind. Portugal, however, is only a very small part of Europe, and Spain's decline is perhaps not as great as commonly supposed. In the early sixteenth century, Spain was a very poor country, even compared to France, which has improved so much since then. Emperor Charles V, who traveled frequently through both countries, famously remarked that everything was abundant in France, but everything was lacking in Spain. The growing output of European agriculture and manufacturing has naturally required a gradual increase in the silver coinage needed to circulate it, and the increasing number of wealthy individuals has required a corresponding increase in their silver plates and ornaments.

Second, America itself is a new market for the output of its own silver mines. Since its agriculture, industry, and population are advancing much more rapidly than the most prosperous European countries, its demand must be growing much faster too. The English colonies are an entirely new market that, for both coinage and silverware, requires a continually growing supply of silver across a vast continent where none was ever demanded before. Most of the Spanish and Portuguese colonies are likewise entirely new markets. New Granada, the Yucatan, Paraguay, and Brazil were inhabited, before European contact, by peoples who had neither established crafts nor agriculture. Considerable amounts of both have now been introduced throughout these regions. Even Mexico and Peru, which can't be considered entirely new markets, are certainly much larger ones than they ever were before.

After all the marvelous tales published about the supposed splendor of these civilizations in ancient times, anyone who reads the history of their discovery and conquest with sober judgment will clearly see that their inhabitants were, in arts, agriculture, and commerce, much more primitive than the Tartars of the Ukraine are today. Even the Peruvians, the more developed of the two civilizations, though they used gold and silver as ornaments, had no coined money of any kind. All their commerce was conducted through barter, and accordingly there was barely any division of labor among them. Those who farmed also had to build their own houses, make their own furniture, clothing, shoes, and agricultural tools. The few craftsmen among them were reportedly maintained by the sovereign, the nobles, and the priests, and were probably their servants or slaves. All the ancient arts of Mexico and Peru have never furnished a single manufactured product to Europe.

The Spanish armies, though they almost never exceeded five hundred men and frequently numbered less than half that, found it extremely difficult to get food almost everywhere they went. The famines they are said to have caused wherever they appeared -- in countries simultaneously described as highly populated and well cultivated -- are sufficient proof that the stories of dense populations and advanced agriculture are largely fictional.

The Spanish colonies operate under a government that is in many ways less favorable to agriculture, development, and population growth than the English colonial governments. Yet they seem to be advancing in all these areas much more rapidly than any country in Europe. In a fertile land with a pleasant climate, the great abundance and cheapness of land -- a feature common to all new colonies -- is apparently such a powerful advantage that it compensates for many defects in civil government. Frezier, who visited Peru in 1713, puts Lima's population at between twenty-five and twenty-eight thousand. Ulloa, who lived there between 1740 and 1746, puts it at over fifty thousand. The discrepancy between their accounts of other major towns in Chile and Peru is similarly large. Since there's no reason to doubt either man's information, this suggests a growth rate rivaling that of the English colonies. America, therefore, is a new market for the output of its own silver mines, with demand growing much faster than in the most prosperous European country.

Third, the East Indies is yet another market for American silver, and one that has been absorbing ever-greater quantities since those mines were first discovered. The direct trade between America and East Asia, carried on via the Manila galleons through Acapulco, has been continually expanding, and the indirect trade through Europe has been growing even faster. During the sixteenth century, the Portuguese were the only Europeans with a regular trade to the East Indies. In the closing years of that century, the Dutch began encroaching on this monopoly and within a few years expelled the Portuguese from their main Indian settlements. For most of the seventeenth century, these two nations divided the bulk of the East India trade between them, with the Dutch share continually growing as the Portuguese share declined. The English and French also conducted some India trade in the seventeenth century, but it has expanded greatly in the present one. The Swedes and Danes entered the East India trade during this century as well. Even the Russians now trade regularly with China via overland caravans through Siberia and Tartary to Beijing. The East India trade of all these nations -- except perhaps that of the French, which the last war nearly destroyed -- has been almost continuously growing. The increasing European consumption of East Indian goods seems large enough to provide expanding business for all of them.

Tea, for example, was a product barely used in Europe before the mid-seventeenth century. Today, the value of tea imported annually by the English East India Company for domestic consumption alone amounts to more than one and a half million pounds a year -- and even that isn't enough, since a great deal more is constantly smuggled into the country from the ports of Holland, from Gothenburg in Sweden, and from the French coast (as long as the French East India Company was prospering). The consumption of Chinese porcelain, spices from the Moluccas, piece goods from Bengal, and countless other articles has increased in nearly the same proportion. The total tonnage of European shipping employed in the East India trade at any one time during the last century was probably not much greater than that of the English East India Company alone before its recent reduction in fleet size.

In the East Indies -- particularly in China and India -- the value of precious metals, when Europeans first began trading there, was much higher than in Europe, and it remains so today. In rice-growing countries, which typically yield two and sometimes three crops a year, each more plentiful than any ordinary grain harvest, the abundance of food must be much greater than in any grain-growing country of equal size. Such countries are accordingly much more densely populated. Their wealthy classes, having a much larger surplus of food beyond what they themselves consume, have the means to purchase a much greater quantity of other people's labor. The retinue of a great lord in China or India is, by all accounts, much more numerous and splendid than that of the richest people in Europe.

This same food surplus allows these wealthy individuals to offer more for all those rare things that nature produces only in small quantities -- the precious metals and precious stones that are the great prizes in the competition among the rich. Even if the mines supplying the Indian market were as rich as those supplying Europe, such commodities would naturally exchange for a greater amount of food in India than in Europe. But the mines that supplied India with precious metals were actually considerably less productive, while those supplying it with precious stones were considerably more so. The precious metals would therefore naturally exchange in India for somewhat more in precious stones and for much more in food than in Europe. The money price of diamonds -- the greatest of all luxuries -- would be somewhat lower in India, and the money price of food -- the first of all necessities -- would be far lower.

But the real price of labor -- the actual quantity of necessities given to the worker -- is, as I've already noted, lower in both China and India than in most of Europe. Workers' wages there buy a smaller quantity of food, and since food is also much cheaper in money terms, the money price of labor is low on both counts: both because of the small quantity of food it buys and because of the low price of that food. In countries of roughly equal manufacturing skill, the money price of most manufactured goods will be proportional to the money price of labor. China and India, though somewhat behind, are not far behind Europe in manufacturing ability. The money price of most manufactures, therefore, is naturally much lower in these great empires than anywhere in Europe.

Throughout most of Europe, moreover, the cost of land transportation greatly increases both the real and nominal price of most manufactured goods. It costs more labor -- and therefore more money -- to bring raw materials and then the finished products to market. In China and India, the extensive and varied systems of inland waterways save most of this labor and therefore most of this money, reducing both the real and nominal price of most manufactures even further.

For all these reasons, precious metals have always been -- and continue to be -- an extremely profitable commodity to ship from Europe to India. Nothing fetches a better price there. Nothing, relative to the amount of labor and goods it costs in Europe, commands a greater amount of labor and goods in India. It's especially profitable to ship silver rather than gold, because in China and most other Asian markets, the ratio of fine silver to fine gold is only about ten or twelve to one, whereas in Europe it's fourteen or fifteen to one. In China and most of the East, ten or at most twelve ounces of silver buy an ounce of gold; in Europe, it takes fourteen to fifteen ounces. In the cargoes of most European ships sailing to India, silver has therefore generally been one of the most valuable items. It's the most valuable article in the Manila galleons that sail from Acapulco. American silver, then, appears to be one of the principal commodities enabling commerce between the two extremities of the Old World, and it is largely through silver that these distant parts of the globe are connected to each other.

To supply such an enormously widespread market, the quantity of silver brought from the mines annually must be large enough not only to support the continual increase in both coinage and silverware that all prospering countries need, but also to replace the continual waste and consumption of silver that occurs everywhere the metal is used.

The continual consumption of precious metals through the wearing of coins and the wearing and polishing of silverware is very significant. For commodities so widely used, this alone would demand a very substantial annual supply. The consumption of these metals in certain manufacturing processes, while perhaps no greater overall than this gradual wearing away, is much more conspicuous because it's much faster. In the workshops of Birmingham alone, the gold and silver used annually for gilding and plating -- thereby permanently losing its identity as metal -- is said to amount to more than fifty thousand pounds sterling. From this, we can get some idea of how vast the total annual consumption must be across all parts of the world, whether in industries similar to Birmingham's, or in laces, embroidery, gold and silver textiles, book gilding, furniture gilding, and so on. A considerable amount must also be lost every year in transporting these metals from place to place, both by sea and by land. And in most Asian governments, the nearly universal custom of burying treasure underground -- the location frequently dying with the person who hid it -- must cause the loss of an even greater quantity.

The total gold and silver imported annually at Cadiz and Lisbon -- including both what comes through official registration and what is estimated to be smuggled -- amounts, according to the best accounts, to about six million pounds sterling per year.

According to Mr. Meggens, the average annual import of precious metals into Spain over six years (1748 to 1753) and into Portugal over seven years (1747 to 1753) amounted to 1,101,107 pounds weight of silver and 49,940 pounds weight of gold. The silver, at sixty-two shillings per pound Troy, comes to 3,413,431 pounds, 10 shillings sterling. The gold, at forty-four and a half guineas per pound Troy, comes to 2,333,446 pounds, 14 shillings sterling. Together: 5,746,878 pounds, 4 shillings sterling. He assures us that the registered figures are exact. He gives the details of where each metal came from and how much each source contributed, according to the official records. He also makes allowances for what he estimates was smuggled. The great experience of this shrewd merchant gives his estimates considerable weight.

According to the eloquent and sometimes well-informed author of the Philosophical and Political History of European Settlements in the Two Indies, the average annual registered import of gold and silver into Spain over eleven years (1754 to 1764) amounted to just under fourteen million piastres of ten reals. Accounting for smuggling, he estimates the total annual import at seventeen million piastres, which at 4 shillings, 6 pence per piastre equals 3,825,000 pounds sterling. He too gives the detailed breakdown of sources and quantities. He also tells us that if we judged the gold imported annually from Brazil into Lisbon by the amount of the king of Portugal's tax (one-fifth of the standard metal), we could value it at eighteen million cruzadoes, or forty-five million French livres, equal to about two million pounds sterling. Adding one-eighth more for smuggling (250,000 pounds), the total comes to 2,250,000 pounds sterling. By this account, then, the combined annual import of precious metals into Spain and Portugal amounts to about 6,075,000 pounds sterling.

Several other very well-authenticated accounts -- though in manuscript form -- agree, I've been told, in putting this total annual import at roughly six million pounds sterling on average, sometimes a bit more, sometimes a bit less.

The annual import into Cadiz and Lisbon, it should be noted, is not equal to the total annual output of the American mines. Some is sent each year via the Manila galleons to the Philippines. Some goes into the contraband trade that the Spanish colonies carry on with other European colonies. And some, no doubt, stays in the Americas. The American mines, moreover, are far from the only gold and silver mines in the world -- they are, however, by far the most productive. The output of all other known mines is, by common acknowledgment, insignificant compared to theirs, and the great majority of American output is, again by common acknowledgment, annually shipped to Cadiz and Lisbon.

But the consumption of Birmingham alone, at fifty thousand pounds a year, equals one-hundred-and-twentieth of this annual import at the rate of six million pounds per year. The total annual consumption of gold and silver across all the countries of the world where these metals are used may therefore be roughly equal to total annual production. The remainder may barely suffice to meet the growing demand of all prospering countries. It may even have fallen so far short of this demand as to have pushed the price of these metals up somewhat in the European market.

The quantity of brass and iron brought annually from the mines to market is incomparably greater than that of gold and silver. Yet we don't imagine that those common metals will therefore multiply beyond demand and become cheaper and cheaper over time. Why should we assume that precious metals will? True, common metals are harder, but they're also put to much harder uses, and being less valuable, less care is taken to preserve them. Precious metals, however, are no more immortal than common ones -- they too are subject to being lost, wasted, and consumed in a great variety of ways.

The price of all metals, though subject to slow, gradual shifts, varies less from year to year than almost any other raw product of the land. The price of precious metals is even less prone to sudden changes than that of common ones. The durability of metals is the foundation of this extraordinary price stability. The grain brought to market last year will be almost entirely consumed before this year is out. But some of the iron mined two or three hundred years ago may still be in use, and perhaps some of the gold mined two or three thousand years ago as well. The different quantities of grain that supply the world's consumption in different years will always be roughly proportional to each year's harvest. But the proportion between the different total quantities of iron in use in any two years will be barely affected by whatever happens to iron mine output in those two years. And the proportion between the total quantities of gold in use will be even less affected by fluctuations in gold mine output. So although the annual production of most mines varies even more than the annual harvest of most farmland, these variations don't have the same impact on the price of metals as harvest variations have on the price of grain.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
Major changes in this chapter:
- This is the longest and most data-heavy chapter of the Digression. Broke dozens of very long sentences into more digestible units while preserving all price data and calculations.
- "Corn" replaced with "grain" or "wheat" as context requires throughout
- "Bounty" explained as "subsidy" in parentheses on first use, then used interchangeably
- "Dear" → "expensive" throughout; "cheap" → "inexpensive" or "low-priced" where needed
- "Artificers" → "craftsmen" or "workers"
- "Stock" → "capital" where appropriate
- Removed all superscript reference numbers (525-578)
- Preserved Smith's careful argument structure: three expanding markets for silver (Europe, America itself, East Indies)
- Kept the fascinating detail about Birmingham's gold/silver consumption as a benchmark
- Maintained Smith's commentary on pre-Columbian civilizations with faithful but careful language
- "Savage nations" → "peoples who had neither established crafts nor agriculture" in the Americas context
- Preserved Smith's dry observation about King William's government being too weak to refuse the country gentlemen their export bounty
- Kept the point about metals' durability explaining their price stability -- a lovely Smith insight
- "Acapulco ships" → "Manila galleons" with "Acapulco" retained for clarity
</explanation>

<next_chapter_notes>
- Chapter 018 covers gold/silver value proportions -- Smith argues about the relative pricing and taxing of these metals
- Key terms to maintain: "natural price" (the lowest sustainable price), "rent" (what goes to the mine/land owner), "tax of the king of Spain" (a key recurring reference)
- Smith's argument about precious metals vs. precious stones in India is complete
- The Birmingham consumption figure (50,000 pounds/year) was used as a benchmark -- it's been established
- Continue with "bounty" = subsidy convention
- Smith is building to his conclusion: silver may be very slightly rising in value, but he's cautious about this claim
- "Undertaker" in mining context = entrepreneur/operator (not the funeral sense)
- The Potosi mines are an established reference point
- Maintain all the specific import/export figures -- they're part of Smith's empirical method
</next_chapter_notes>
