CHAPTER III: The Accumulation of Capital, or Productive and Unproductive Labor

There are two kinds of labor. One adds to the value of the thing it's applied to; the other doesn't. The first kind, since it produces value, can be called productive labor. The second can be called unproductive labor.

A factory worker's labor, for example, generally adds to the value of the materials he works on -- enough to cover both his own wages and his employer's profit. A household servant's labor, by contrast, adds value to nothing. Although the factory worker's wages are advanced by his employer, the worker really costs his employer nothing in the end, because the value of those wages is recovered, with a profit, in the increased value of the finished product. But the cost of maintaining a household servant is never recovered. A person grows rich by employing many factory workers; he grows poor by maintaining many household servants.

The labor of the servant, however, has its value and deserves its pay just as much as the factory worker's. But the factory worker's labor becomes embedded in some specific, sellable product that lasts for at least some time after the work is done. It's like a certain quantity of labor stored up, ready to be put to use on some other occasion if needed. That product -- or equivalently, its price -- can afterward set in motion a quantity of labor equal to what originally produced it. The household servant's labor, by contrast, doesn't become embedded in any specific, sellable product. His services generally vanish the instant they're performed, rarely leaving any trace of value behind for which an equal quantity of service could later be obtained.

The labor of some of society's most respected groups is, like that of household servants, unproductive of any value. It doesn't become embedded in any lasting, sellable commodity that endures after the labor is done. The head of state, for example, along with all the officials of justice and the military who serve under him -- the entire army and navy -- are unproductive laborers. They are public servants, maintained by a portion of the annual output of other people's industry. Their service, however honorable, useful, or necessary, produces nothing for which an equal quantity of service could afterward be obtained. This year's protection, security, and defense of the nation won't pay for next year's protection, security, and defense.

The same category must include some of the most serious and important professions alongside some of the most trivial: clergy, lawyers, doctors, writers of all kinds, actors, comedians, musicians, opera singers, ballet dancers, and so on. The labor of the humblest of these has a value, determined by the same principles that govern every other type of labor. And the labor of the most distinguished and most useful produces nothing that could afterward purchase an equal quantity of labor. Like an actor's performance, an orator's speech, or a musician's tune, the work of all of them perishes the instant it's produced.

Productive workers, unproductive workers, and people who don't work at all are all equally sustained by the annual output of the country's land and labor. This output, however large, can never be infinite -- it has definite limits. So the larger the share employed in any given year to maintain unproductive workers, the less remains for productive ones, and the following year's output will be smaller accordingly. After all, the entire annual output (setting aside what the earth produces spontaneously) is the result of productive labor.

Although a country's entire annual output is ultimately intended to supply its inhabitants' consumption and provide them with income, when it first comes from the ground or from the hands of productive workers, it naturally splits into two parts. One part -- often the larger -- goes first to replacing capital: replenishing the provisions, materials, and finished goods that had been withdrawn from someone's capital. The other part forms someone's income, either as profit on their capital or as rent on their land. On a farm, for instance, one part of the harvest replaces the farmer's capital; the other pays his profit and the landlord's rent. In a large manufacturing operation, similarly, one part (always the largest) replaces the business owner's capital, while the other pays his profit.

The portion of annual output that goes to replacing capital is never immediately used to maintain anyone except productive workers. It pays productive labor only. The portion that goes directly to forming income -- as either profit or rent -- can support either productive or unproductive workers indiscriminately.

Whatever part of his capital a person invests as capital, he always expects to get it back with a profit. He therefore uses it to maintain productive workers only. After serving as his capital, it becomes their income. Whenever he uses any part of it to support unproductive workers, that amount is immediately withdrawn from his capital and placed in his fund for personal consumption.

Unproductive workers, and people who don't work at all, are maintained entirely by income. This comes from two sources. First, from that portion of annual output originally designated as someone's income -- whether as rent on land or profits on capital. Second, from the portion that was originally meant to replace capital and maintain productive workers only, but which, once it reaches those workers' hands, includes an amount beyond what they need for basic subsistence. This surplus can be spent on maintaining either productive or unproductive workers. So not just the great landlord or the wealthy merchant, but even the ordinary worker, if his wages are high enough, might employ a household servant. Or he might occasionally attend a play or a puppet show, contributing his share to the support of one group of unproductive workers. Or he might pay taxes, helping to maintain another group -- more honorable and useful, certainly, but equally unproductive.

However, no portion of the annual output originally meant to replace capital is ever diverted to supporting unproductive workers until after it has first set in motion its full complement of productive labor -- all the productive labor it could set in motion given how it was employed. The worker must have earned his wages through work done before he can spend any of them this way. And the amount he can spare is generally small. Productive workers rarely have much surplus income, though they usually have some. And when it comes to paying taxes, the large number of productive workers can partly compensate for the small size of each one's contribution.

Rent on land and profits on capital are therefore everywhere the main sources of support for unproductive workers. These are the two types of income whose owners generally have the most to spare. They could use it to support either productive or unproductive workers, but they seem to have a preference for the latter. The spending of a great lord generally feeds more idle people than industrious ones. The wealthy merchant, though he employs only productive workers with his capital, tends to spend his personal income feeding the same kind of idle people as the great lord.

The proportion between productive and unproductive workers in any country depends heavily on the split between, on one hand, the portion of annual output devoted to replacing capital (as soon as it comes from the ground or from productive workers) and, on the other, the portion designated as income -- either rent or profit. This split is very different in rich countries than in poor ones.

In today's wealthy European countries, a very large share of agricultural output -- often the largest -- goes to replacing the capital of the substantial, independent farmer. The rest pays his profit and the landlord's rent. But in earlier times, under feudalism, only a tiny share of the harvest was needed to replace the capital used in farming. That capital typically amounted to a few miserable cattle, fed entirely on the natural growth of uncultivated land and really just part of that natural growth. It usually belonged to the landlord, who advanced it to the people working the land. All the rest of the output belonged to the landlord too, whether as rent or as profit on this paltry capital. The people who worked the land were generally serfs, whose persons and possessions were the landlord's property. Those who weren't serfs were tenants at will. Although the rent they nominally paid was often little more than a token payment, it effectively amounted to the land's entire output. The lord could command their labor in peacetime and their military service in wartime. Though they might live far from his manor house, they were as dependent on him as the retainers who lived under his roof. The entire output of the land belongs, after all, to whoever can command the labor and service of everyone that output sustains.

In modern Europe, the landlord's share rarely exceeds a third, sometimes not even a fourth, of the total agricultural output. Yet rents in all the improved parts of the country have tripled and quadrupled since feudal times. This third or fourth of today's output is, it seems, three or four times greater than the entire output used to be. As agriculture improves, rent increases in absolute amount but decreases as a proportion of total output.

In today's wealthy European countries, enormous amounts of capital are invested in trade and manufacturing. In earlier times, the little trade that existed and the few crude manufactures that were carried on required very small amounts of capital. These must, however, have yielded very high profits, since the interest rate was never below ten percent, and profits had to be high enough to cover such interest. Today, the interest rate in the more developed parts of Europe is nowhere above six percent and in some of the most advanced countries is as low as four, three, or even two percent. Although total income from profits on capital is always much greater in rich countries than in poor ones, this is because the total capital is much greater. Relative to the amount of capital, profit rates are generally much lower.

The portion of annual output devoted to replacing capital is therefore not only much larger in rich countries than in poor ones, but also represents a much greater share relative to the portion going directly to income as rent or profit. The funds for maintaining productive labor are not only much larger in wealthy countries but also represent a much greater proportion compared to those funds that, while they could support either productive or unproductive workers, tend to favor the latter.

The balance between these different funds inevitably shapes the general character of a country's population -- their industriousness or their idleness. We are more hardworking than our ancestors because the funds dedicated to supporting industry are now much larger, relative to those likely to support idleness, than they were two or three centuries ago. Our ancestors were idle because they lacked sufficient incentive to be industrious. As the proverb says: better to play for nothing than to work for nothing.

In commercial and manufacturing towns, where the working class is mainly supported by the employment of capital, people are generally hardworking, sober, and prosperous -- as in many English towns and most Dutch ones. In towns that depend mainly on the presence of a royal court, where the working class is primarily supported by the spending of income, people are generally idle, dissolute, and poor -- as in Rome, Versailles, Compiegne, and Fontainebleau.

Apart from Rouen and Bordeaux, there is little trade or industry in any of the parliamentary towns of France. The working class, sustained mainly by the spending of court officials and the litigants who appear before them, is generally idle and poor. The thriving trade of Rouen and Bordeaux seems to be entirely the result of their geographic advantages. Rouen is inevitably the hub for nearly all goods imported from abroad or from France's coastal provinces for consumption in Paris. Bordeaux is similarly the hub for wines grown along the banks of the Garonne and its tributaries -- one of the world's richest wine-producing regions, seemingly producing wines best suited for export and most pleasing to foreign tastes. Such advantageous locations naturally attract large amounts of capital by offering so much scope for its employment. And the employment of this capital is what drives the industry of these two cities. In France's other parliamentary towns, barely any capital seems to be employed beyond what's needed for local consumption -- the bare minimum.

The same can be said of Paris, Madrid, and Vienna. Of the three, Paris is by far the most industrious. But Paris itself is the main market for all the goods manufactured there, and its own consumption is the primary object of all its trade. London, Lisbon, and Copenhagen are perhaps the only three cities in Europe that are both permanent royal residences and genuine trading cities -- cities that trade not just for their own consumption but for that of other cities and countries. All three have extremely advantageous locations that naturally make them hubs for a large share of goods destined for distant markets.

In a city where a great deal of income is spent, it's probably harder to profitably invest capital for any purpose beyond supplying local consumption than in a city where working people depend entirely on the employment of capital for their livelihood. The idleness of most people maintained by the spending of income probably corrupts the industriousness of those who should be maintained by the employment of capital, making it less profitable to invest there than elsewhere.

There was little trade or industry in Edinburgh before the Union with England. When the Scottish Parliament no longer met there, and when it ceased to be the necessary residence of Scotland's principal nobility and gentry, it became a city of some trade and industry. It still serves as the seat of Scotland's principal courts of justice, customs boards, and tax authorities, so considerable income is still spent there. But in trade and industry it remains far inferior to Glasgow, whose inhabitants are mainly supported by the employment of capital. It has sometimes been observed that the inhabitants of a large village, after making considerable progress in manufacturing, have become idle and poor after a great lord took up residence in their neighborhood.

The ratio of capital to income, therefore, seems everywhere to determine the ratio of industry to idleness. Wherever capital predominates, industry prevails. Wherever income predominates, idleness prevails. Every increase or decrease in capital therefore naturally tends to increase or decrease the real quantity of industry, the number of productive workers, and consequently the exchange value of the country's annual output -- the real wealth and income of all its inhabitants.

Capital is increased by thrift and decreased by extravagance and mismanagement.

Whatever a person saves from his income, he adds to his capital. He either invests it himself in employing additional productive workers, or enables someone else to do so by lending it at interest -- that is, for a share of the profits. Just as an individual's capital can grow only through what he saves from his annual income or earnings, so a nation's capital -- which is simply the combined capital of all its members -- can grow only in the same way.

Thrift, not industry, is the immediate cause of capital growth. Industry does provide the material that thrift accumulates. But no matter how much industry might produce, if thrift didn't save and store it up, capital would never grow.

Thrift, by increasing the funds available for maintaining productive workers, tends to increase the number of workers whose labor adds value to whatever they work on. It therefore tends to increase the exchange value of the country's annual output. It sets additional industry in motion, which adds additional value to the annual output.

Here's a crucial point: what is annually saved is consumed just as surely as what is annually spent, and at nearly the same pace too -- but it's consumed by a different group of people. The portion of income that a rich man spends each year is mostly consumed by idle guests and household servants, who leave nothing behind to show for their consumption. The portion he saves each year, being immediately invested as capital for the sake of profit, is consumed in the same way and at nearly the same pace, but by a different group: by laborers, manufacturers, and skilled workers who reproduce, with a profit, the full value of what they consume.

Suppose his income is paid in money. If he had spent it all, the food, clothing, and shelter the whole amount could have bought would have been distributed among idle consumers. By saving a part of it and immediately investing it as capital (either himself or through someone else), the food, clothing, and shelter that this saved portion can buy is necessarily reserved for productive workers instead. The total consumption is the same, but the consumers are different.

What a frugal person saves each year doesn't just provide maintenance for additional productive workers for that year or the next. Like the founder of a public workshop, he effectively establishes a permanent fund for maintaining an equal number of productive workers in perpetuity. This perpetual fund isn't always protected by any formal law, trust, or legal restriction. But it is always protected by a very powerful force: the clear and obvious self-interest of every individual who owns any share of it. No part of it can ever afterward be diverted from productive to unproductive hands without an obvious loss to the person who makes the diversion.

The spendthrift makes exactly this diversion. By failing to keep his spending within his income, he eats into his capital. Like someone who diverts the revenues of a charitable endowment to worldly purposes, he pays the wages of idleness with funds that the thrift of earlier generations had, in a sense, consecrated to the maintenance of industry. By shrinking the funds available for productive employment, he necessarily shrinks -- as far as it depends on him -- the quantity of labor that adds value, and consequently the value of the country's entire annual output, the real wealth and income of all its inhabitants. If the extravagance of some weren't offset by the frugality of others, every spendthrift, by feeding the idle with bread meant for the industrious, would tend not only to bankrupt himself but to impoverish his country.

Even if the spendthrift bought only domestically produced goods and nothing from abroad, the effect on the country's productive capacity would be the same. Every year, a certain quantity of food and clothing that should have maintained productive workers would instead maintain unproductive ones. Every year, the value of the country's annual output would be somewhat less than it would otherwise have been.

Now, someone might point out that spending on domestic goods, unlike spending on foreign goods, doesn't cause any export of gold and silver -- so the same amount of money stays in the country. True. But if the food and clothing consumed by those unproductive workers had instead been given to productive workers, those productive workers would have reproduced, with a profit, the full value of what they consumed. The same amount of money would have remained in the country, and there would have been an equal value of consumable goods reproduced as well. There would have been two values instead of one.

Besides, the same quantity of money can't long remain in a country whose annual output is declining. Money's only use is to circulate consumable goods -- to buy and sell provisions, materials, and finished products and distribute them to consumers. The amount of money a country can employ must therefore be determined by the value of consumable goods it circulates annually. These goods consist either of the country's own output or of things purchased with that output. Their value must decline as the country's output declines, and with it the amount of money needed to circulate them.

But the money thrown out of domestic circulation by this annual decline in output won't be left sitting idle. Whoever holds it has an interest in putting it to work. Finding no employment at home, it will be sent abroad -- despite any laws or prohibitions -- to purchase consumable goods of some use at home. This annual export of gold and silver will for a while add something to the country's consumption beyond its own annual output. What had been saved from that output in prosperous times and used to buy gold and silver will help support consumption for a while during decline. The export of gold and silver in such cases is not the cause of the decline but its effect, and may even soften the blow for a time.

Conversely, as the value of a country's annual output increases, the quantity of money must naturally increase too. Greater value in consumable goods circulating within the country will require more money to circulate them. Part of the increased output will therefore naturally be used to purchase whatever additional gold and silver is needed. The increase in those metals will be the effect, not the cause, of public prosperity. Gold and silver are purchased the same way everywhere. The food, clothing, and shelter -- the income and maintenance -- of everyone whose labor or capital is employed in bringing them from the mine to the market is the price paid for them, in Peru as in England. The country that can pay this price will never long lack the quantity of those metals it needs, and no country will long hold on to a quantity it doesn't need.

So whether we define a country's real wealth and income as the value of its annual output (as plain reason suggests) or as the quantity of precious metals circulating within it (as popular prejudice supposes), in either case every spendthrift is a public enemy, and every frugal person is a public benefactor.

The effects of mismanagement are often the same as those of extravagance. Every poorly conceived and unsuccessful project in agriculture, mining, fishing, trade, or manufacturing tends in the same way to diminish the funds available for productive employment. In every such project, although the capital is consumed by productive workers only, because those workers are employed so badly that they don't reproduce the full value of what they consume, there must always be some reduction in what would otherwise have been society's productive funds.

It rarely happens, however, that the extravagance or mismanagement of private individuals can seriously affect a great nation. The wastefulness or bad judgment of some people is almost always more than offset by the frugality and good judgment of others.

As for extravagance: the impulse that drives spending is the desire for immediate enjoyment -- a passion that, though sometimes overwhelming and hard to resist, is generally only momentary and occasional. But the impulse that drives saving is the desire to improve our condition -- a desire that, though generally calm and quiet, is born with us and never leaves us until the grave. In the entire span between those two moments, there is perhaps hardly a single instant when any person is so perfectly satisfied with their situation as to have no wish for any change or improvement whatsoever. Increasing their wealth is the means by which most people aim to improve their condition. It's the most common and obvious means. And the surest way to increase their wealth is to save and accumulate some part of what they earn, either regularly or on special occasions. So although the urge to spend prevails in almost all people on some occasions, and in some people on almost all occasions, in the majority of people, taking the whole course of their lives on average, the instinct for frugality not only predominates -- it predominates by a very wide margin.

As for mismanagement: the number of sensible and successful ventures everywhere greatly exceeds the number of foolish and failing ones. Despite all our complaints about the frequency of bankruptcies, the unlucky people who suffer this fate make up a very small fraction of everyone engaged in business of all kinds -- perhaps no more than one in a thousand. Bankruptcy is perhaps the greatest and most humiliating disaster that can befall an innocent person. Most people are therefore careful enough to avoid it. Some, admittedly, don't avoid it -- just as some don't avoid the gallows.

Great nations are never impoverished by private extravagance and mismanagement, though they sometimes are by public extravagance and mismanagement. Nearly the entire public revenue in most countries is spent maintaining unproductive workers: the people who make up a large and lavish royal court, an elaborate religious establishment, vast navies and armies -- people who produce nothing in peacetime and acquire nothing in wartime that can compensate the cost of maintaining them, even while the war lasts. Since they produce nothing themselves, they're all maintained by other people's labor. When their numbers grow unnecessary large, they may in a single year consume such a great share of the country's output that not enough remains to maintain the productive workers who need to reproduce it the following year. Next year's output will therefore be smaller, and if the same pattern continues, the year after that will be smaller still. These unproductive workers, who should be supported by only a portion of people's surplus income, may consume such a large share of the country's entire income that many people are forced to eat into their capital -- the funds meant to maintain productive labor. When this happens, all the private frugality and good judgment in the world may not be enough to offset the waste and destruction caused by this violent encroachment.

But on most occasions, experience shows that private frugality and good judgment are sufficient to offset not only the private extravagance and mismanagement of individuals, but the public extravagance of government as well. The steady, constant, and uninterrupted effort of every person to improve their own condition -- the force from which both public and private prosperity ultimately springs -- is frequently powerful enough to keep things moving toward improvement despite both the extravagance of government and the worst errors of administration. Like some mysterious principle of animal vitality, it frequently restores health and vigor to the body despite not only the disease itself, but the absurd prescriptions of the doctor.

A nation's annual output can be increased in value by only two means: increasing either the number of its productive workers or the productive powers of workers already employed. The number of productive workers obviously can't increase much without an increase in capital -- the funds for maintaining them. The productive powers of existing workers can't increase without either improvements to the machines and tools that make labor easier and more efficient, or a better division and organization of work. In either case, additional capital is almost always needed. It's only through additional capital that a business owner can either equip his workers with better machinery or organize their work more efficiently. When a job consists of many different parts, keeping each worker constantly employed on just one part requires much more capital than when every worker occasionally does every different part.

When we compare a nation at two different points in time and find that its annual output is obviously greater at the later date -- its lands better cultivated, its manufacturing more extensive and more flourishing, its trade broader -- we can be sure that its capital increased during the interval. More must have been added to it by the good management of some people than was taken from it by the private mismanagement of others or the public extravagance of government.

This has been the case in nearly every nation during all reasonably peaceful times, even nations that haven't had the most prudent or frugal governments. To judge this accurately, however, we need to compare the country's condition at points fairly far apart. Progress is often so gradual that over short periods, improvement isn't just hard to detect -- the decline of certain industries or certain regions (which sometimes occurs even when the country as a whole is thriving) can actually create the false impression that the nation's wealth and industry are declining overall.

England's annual output, for example, is certainly much greater now than it was just over a century ago, at the Restoration of Charles II. Though few people today would doubt this, hardly five years have passed during this period without some book or pamphlet being published -- written skillfully enough to gain some authority with the public -- claiming to demonstrate that the nation's wealth was rapidly declining, the countryside depopulating, agriculture neglected, manufacturing decaying, and trade ruined. Nor have these all been partisan propaganda, the miserable products of dishonesty and corruption. Many were written by very honest and very intelligent people who wrote nothing they didn't believe, and for no other reason than that they believed it.

England's annual output at the Restoration was certainly much greater than it had been roughly a hundred years earlier, at the accession of Elizabeth. At that point too, the country was almost certainly more advanced than it had been a century before that, near the end of the Wars of the Roses between the houses of York and Lancaster. Even then, it was probably better off than at the Norman Conquest, and at the Norman Conquest better than during the chaos of the Saxon Heptarchy. Even in that early period, it was certainly more developed than when Julius Caesar invaded, when its inhabitants were in roughly the same condition as the indigenous peoples of North America.

In every one of these periods, however, there was not only a great deal of private and public waste, many expensive and unnecessary wars, and a massive diversion of annual output from productive to unproductive uses -- but sometimes, in the chaos of civil war, such outright destruction of capital as might be expected not only to slow down (as it certainly did) the natural accumulation of wealth, but to leave the country poorer at the end of the period than at the beginning.

Consider even the happiest and most fortunate of these periods -- the years since the Restoration. How many disasters and disruptions have occurred that, if anyone had foreseen them, would have led people to predict not merely the impoverishment but the complete ruin of the country! The Great Fire and the Great Plague of London; two wars with the Dutch; the upheavals of the Glorious Revolution; the war in Ireland; four expensive wars with France in 1688, 1702, 1742, and 1756; and the two Jacobite rebellions of 1715 and 1745. In those four French wars alone, the nation accumulated more than 145 million pounds of debt, on top of all the other extraordinary annual expenses the wars caused -- bringing the total to no less than 200 million pounds.

An enormous share of the country's annual output has therefore, since the Glorious Revolution, been devoted to maintaining extraordinarily large numbers of unproductive workers. Had those wars not diverted so much capital to this purpose, most of it would naturally have been used to employ productive workers -- workers whose labor would have reproduced, with a profit, the entire value of what they consumed. The annual output would have grown considerably each year, and each year's growth would have accelerated the next. More houses would have been built, more land improved, and previously improved land better cultivated. More manufacturing enterprises would have been established, and existing ones expanded. To what heights the nation's real wealth and income might have risen by now is perhaps not easy even to imagine.

But although government extravagance has undoubtedly slowed England's natural progress toward wealth and improvement, it hasn't been able to stop it. The annual output of England's land and labor is undoubtedly much greater now than at either the Restoration or the Glorious Revolution. The capital employed in cultivating that land and supporting that labor must likewise be much greater. In the midst of all the government's demands, this capital has been silently and gradually accumulated through the private frugality and good judgment of individuals -- through their universal, continuous, and uninterrupted effort to improve their own condition.

It is this effort -- protected by law and given liberty to pursue what's most advantageous -- that has maintained England's progress toward prosperity in virtually all past eras, and will hopefully continue to do so in all future ones. England, however, has never been blessed with a particularly frugal government, and thrift has at no time been the defining virtue of its people. It is therefore the height of arrogance and presumption for kings and ministers to imagine they should supervise the household budgets of private citizens and restrain their spending through sumptuary laws or by banning the import of foreign luxuries. They themselves are always, without exception, the biggest spendthrifts in society. Let them watch their own spending, and they can safely trust private people with theirs. If their own extravagance doesn't ruin the nation, that of their subjects never will.

Just as frugality increases and extravagance decreases the public capital, the behavior of those whose spending exactly equals their income -- neither accumulating nor encroaching -- neither increases nor decreases it. Some kinds of spending, however, seem to contribute more to public prosperity than others.

An individual may spend his income on things consumed immediately -- where one day's spending neither helps nor supports the next -- or on more durable things that can be accumulated, where each day's spending can build on the last. A wealthy man, for example, might spend his income on lavish banquets and a large staff of servants, dogs, and horses. Or, content with a modest table and few attendants, he might spend most of it decorating his house or country estate, on useful or decorative buildings, on useful or decorative furniture, on collecting books, statues, and paintings, or on more frivolous things -- jewels, trinkets, and curiosities of various kinds. Or, most trivially of all, he might amass a vast wardrobe of fine clothes, like the favorite minister of a great prince who died a few years ago.

If two men of equal wealth spent their income differently -- one mainly on the first type of expenditure and the other mainly on the second -- the splendor of the man who spent on durable goods would constantly increase, each day's spending adding to and enhancing what came before. The other's would be no greater at the end than at the beginning. The first man would also end up richer. He'd have an accumulation of goods that, while perhaps not worth everything he paid for them, would always be worth something. Of the second man's spending, no trace would remain. The effects of ten or twenty years of extravagant entertaining would be as completely gone as if they had never existed.

Just as one type of spending is more favorable to an individual's wealth, it's more favorable to a nation's wealth as well. The houses, furniture, and clothing of the rich eventually become available to the middle and lower classes. These groups can afford to buy them when their superiors tire of them, and the general standard of living gradually improves as this pattern becomes universal among the wealthy. In countries that have been rich for a long time, you'll frequently find ordinary people living in houses and using furniture that are perfectly good but clearly weren't built or made for people of their station. What was once a seat of the Seymour family is now an inn on the Bath road. The marriage bed of James I of Great Britain, which his queen brought from Denmark as a gift fit for one sovereign to give another, was a few years ago the showpiece of a tavern in Dunfermline.

In some old cities that have either stagnated or declined, you'll hardly find a single house that could have been built for its current occupants. Go inside these houses and you'll often find many excellent, if old-fashioned, pieces of furniture still perfectly serviceable, and clearly never made for the present residents. Noble palaces, magnificent country houses, great collections of books, statues, paintings, and other treasures are frequently an ornament and an honor not just to their neighborhood but to the entire country. Versailles is an ornament and honor to France; Stowe and Wilton to England. Italy still commands a certain reverence for the sheer number of such cultural monuments it possesses, even though the wealth that produced them has faded and the creative genius that designed them seems to have been extinguished -- perhaps from lack of the same opportunities.

Spending on durable goods is favorable not only to accumulation but to frugality itself. If someone overspends on durable goods, they can easily cut back without public embarrassment. But drastically reducing your staff of servants, changing from lavish dinners to simple meals, or giving up your carriage after once having one -- these are changes your neighbors can't help noticing, and they're assumed to be an admission of previous financial irresponsibility. Few people who have once launched into this kind of extravagant living have the courage to reform voluntarily. They keep going until ruin and bankruptcy force their hand. But if someone has spent too much on building, furniture, books, or paintings, no irresponsibility is implied by a change of course. These are things where past spending often makes further spending unnecessary. When a person stops, he appears to do so not because he's exceeded his means but because he's satisfied his taste.

Besides, spending on durable goods generally supports a greater number of people than even the most lavish hospitality. Of the two or three hundred pounds' weight of food that might be served at a grand feast, perhaps half gets thrown away, and a great deal more is wasted. But if the cost of that feast had instead been spent employing masons, carpenters, upholsterers, and other skilled workers, an equal value in food would have been distributed among an even larger number of people, who would have bought it in small, careful quantities and not wasted a single ounce. Moreover, one type of spending supports productive workers while the other supports unproductive ones. One therefore increases the exchange value of the country's annual output; the other doesn't.

I wouldn't, however, want anyone to think that spending on durable goods always reflects a more generous spirit than spending on hospitality. When a wealthy man spends his income mainly on entertaining, he shares most of it with his friends and companions. But when he spends it on durable goods, he often spends the entire amount on himself, giving nothing to anyone without getting something in return. The latter type of spending, especially when directed toward frivolous objects -- little ornaments for clothing and furniture, jewels, trinkets, and knickknacks -- often indicates not just a trivial disposition but a selfish one. All I mean to say is that spending on durable goods, since it always results in some accumulation of valuable property, since it's more favorable to private frugality and therefore to the growth of public capital, and since it supports productive rather than unproductive workers, contributes more than the other kind to the growth of public prosperity.
