Chapter II: Restrictions on Importing Foreign Goods That Could Be Produced at Home

By imposing either heavy duties or outright bans on importing goods from foreign countries that could be produced domestically, the government more or less hands the home market as a monopoly to the domestic industries that produce those goods. For example, the ban on importing live cattle or salt-cured meat from abroad guarantees British cattle ranchers a monopoly on the domestic market for butcher's meat. The heavy duties on importing grain -- which during times of reasonable plenty effectively amount to a ban -- give the same kind of advantage to grain growers. The ban on importing foreign woolens is equally favorable to British woolen manufacturers. The silk industry, even though it works entirely with foreign raw materials, has recently gained the same advantage. The linen industry hasn't gotten there yet, but it's making rapid progress. Many other kinds of manufacturers have similarly obtained either a complete or near-complete monopoly against their fellow countrymen in Great Britain. The variety of goods whose import into Great Britain is banned -- either absolutely or under certain circumstances -- far exceeds what anyone would guess unless they're intimately familiar with customs law.

Nobody doubts that this home-market monopoly often gives a big boost to whichever industry enjoys it, frequently directing a larger share of both the labor and capital of society toward that industry than would naturally flow there. But whether it actually increases the overall productivity of society, or directs it in the most beneficial way -- that's not nearly so obvious.

A society's total industry can never exceed what its total capital can support. Just as the number of workers any individual employer can keep busy must be proportional to his capital, the number of workers that an entire society can continuously employ must be proportional to its total capital -- and can never exceed that proportion. No trade regulation can increase the total amount of industry in any society beyond what its capital can sustain. All it can do is divert part of that industry into a direction it might not otherwise have gone. And it is by no means certain that this artificial redirection will benefit society more than whatever direction things would have taken on their own.

Every individual is constantly working to find the most profitable use for whatever capital he controls. It's his own advantage he has in mind, of course, not society's. But pursuing his own advantage naturally -- or rather, necessarily -- leads him to prefer the use of his capital that is most beneficial to society as well.

First, every individual tries to invest his capital as close to home as he can, and therefore supports domestic industry as much as possible -- provided he can earn the usual rate of profit, or close to it.

So when profits are equal or nearly equal, every wholesale merchant naturally prefers domestic trade to foreign trade, and foreign trade to the carrying trade. In domestic trade, his capital is never out of his sight for very long, as it frequently is in foreign trade. He knows the character and circumstances of the people he deals with better, and if something goes wrong, he's more familiar with the laws he'd need to rely on for a remedy. In the carrying trade, the merchant's capital is essentially split between two foreign countries, with no part of it necessarily coming home or staying under his direct control. Consider an Amsterdam merchant who carries grain from Konigsberg to Lisbon, and fruit and wine from Lisbon to Konigsberg. Half his capital is generally sitting in Konigsberg and the other half in Lisbon. None of it needs to ever come to Amsterdam. Logically, such a merchant should live in either Konigsberg or Lisbon -- only very unusual circumstances would make him prefer Amsterdam. But the anxiety he feels at being so far from his capital usually drives him to route some of the Konigsberg goods destined for Lisbon, and some of the Lisbon goods destined for Konigsberg, through Amsterdam. Even though this means paying for double loading and unloading, plus extra duties and customs charges, he willingly accepts these extra costs just to keep part of his capital where he can see it and manage it. This is exactly how every country with a significant carrying trade becomes a general hub and marketplace for the goods of all the countries whose trade it handles. To save himself a second round of loading and unloading, the merchant always tries to sell as much as possible from all these different countries' goods in the home market. In this way, he works to convert his carrying trade into a foreign trade for domestic consumption. Similarly, a merchant engaged in importing goods for resale will always prefer, given equal or nearly equal profits, to sell as much as possible at home. He saves himself the risk and hassle of exporting. In this way he converts his foreign trade into domestic trade. Home, in this sense, is the center around which every country's capital constantly orbits, always gravitating back even when particular circumstances temporarily push it toward more distant ventures. And as I've already shown, capital employed in domestic trade necessarily puts a greater amount of domestic industry into motion and provides income and employment to more of the country's inhabitants than an equal amount of capital employed in foreign trade. Foreign trade capital, in turn, has the same advantage over capital in the carrying trade. So when profits are equal or nearly equal, every individual naturally tends to invest his capital in the way that supports the most domestic industry and provides income and employment to the greatest number of his fellow citizens.

Second, every individual who invests his capital in domestic industry naturally tries to direct that industry so that its output will be as valuable as possible.

The output of industry is what it adds to the raw materials it works with. The greater the value of this output, the greater the employer's profit. But profit is the only reason anyone invests capital in industry, so he will always try to direct it toward the kind of production whose output is likely to be worth the most -- that is, the kind that can be exchanged for the greatest amount of money or other goods.

Now, the annual income of every society is always exactly equal to the exchange value of the total annual output of its industry -- or rather, it is precisely the same thing as that exchange value. Since every individual therefore tries both to invest his capital in domestic industry and to direct that industry so its output has the greatest possible value, every individual necessarily works to make the annual income of the society as large as he can. He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring to support domestic industry over foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry so that its output may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it. I have never known much good done by those who affected to trade for the public good. It is an affectation, indeed, not very common among merchants, and very few words need be employed in dissuading them from it.

What kind of domestic industry his capital can be used in, and which kind is likely to produce the most valuable output -- every individual can obviously judge far better from his own local knowledge than any politician or lawmaker could judge for him. The politician who tries to tell private people how to invest their capital would not only be taking on an utterly unnecessary task, but claiming an authority that could not safely be entrusted to any single person, nor to any council or legislature whatsoever -- an authority that would be most dangerous in the hands of someone foolish and presumptuous enough to think himself qualified to wield it.

Granting the domestic monopoly of the home market to any particular trade or industry is, in effect, telling private people how to invest their capital, and it must almost always be either a useless or a harmful regulation. If domestic products can be brought to market as cheaply as foreign ones, the regulation is obviously useless. If they can't, it's generally harmful. It's the basic rule of every sensible household: never try to make at home what will cost more to make than to buy. The tailor doesn't try to make his own shoes -- he buys them from the shoemaker. The shoemaker doesn't try to make his own clothes -- he hires a tailor. The farmer doesn't try to do either -- he employs these different craftsmen. They all find it in their interest to focus their efforts on what they do best, and to buy everything else they need with part of their output, or with the money they earn from it.

What's sensible for every individual household can hardly be foolish for a great nation. If a foreign country can supply us with a product cheaper than we can make it ourselves, we're better off buying it from them with some of the output of our own industries -- industries where we have the advantage. The country's total industry, being always proportional to the capital that supports it, won't shrink because of this. It will simply be redirected toward its most productive uses. Industry is certainly not being used to best advantage when it's aimed at producing something it could buy more cheaply. The value of the country's annual output is reduced whenever it's diverted away from producing more valuable goods toward producing less valuable ones. By our own assumption, the product in question could be bought from abroad with only part of the output -- or the value of only part of the output -- that an equal amount of capital would have produced at home, if left to follow its natural course. So the country's industry gets redirected from a more profitable use to a less profitable one, and the total value of its annual output, instead of increasing as the lawmakers intended, must necessarily shrink with every such regulation.

True, protective regulations can sometimes help a country develop a particular industry sooner than it otherwise would have, and eventually that industry might produce goods as cheaply or even more cheaply than foreign competitors. But even though industry may be channeled into a particular direction sooner than it otherwise would have been, it doesn't follow that the total amount of industry or income will be any larger because of such regulation. A society's industry can only grow as its capital grows, and its capital can only grow from what gets saved out of its income. But the immediate effect of every such regulation is to reduce income -- and anything that reduces income is certainly not likely to increase capital faster than it would have grown on its own, if both capital and industry had been left to find their natural paths.

Even if a society never develops the targeted industry because there are no protective regulations, it wouldn't necessarily be any poorer at any point in time. At every stage, all its capital and industry could still have been employed -- just on different things -- in whatever way was most profitable at the time. Its income at every point could have been the largest its capital could support, and both capital and income could have been growing as fast as possible.

The natural advantages one country has over another in producing particular goods are sometimes so enormous that the whole world acknowledges it's pointless to fight them. Using greenhouses, heated beds, and heated walls, you can grow perfectly good grapes in Scotland, and even make perfectly good wine from them -- at roughly thirty times the cost of importing equally good wine from abroad. Would it be reasonable to ban all foreign wine imports just to promote the production of claret and burgundy in Scotland? But if it would be obviously absurd to direct thirty times more capital and labor toward producing something than it would cost to simply buy it from abroad, then there must be an absurdity of exactly the same kind -- if not quite so glaring -- in directing even a thirtieth, or a three-hundredth, more of either toward any such purpose. Whether one country's advantage over another is natural or acquired makes no difference here. As long as one country has the advantage and the other doesn't, the one without it will always be better off buying from the one that has it. After all, the advantage one craftsman has over his neighbor in a different trade is merely an acquired one, yet they both find it more profitable to buy from each other rather than try to do what the other does.

Merchants and manufacturers are the people who benefit most from this home-market monopoly. The bans on importing foreign cattle and salt-cured meat, along with the heavy duties on foreign grain that effectively amount to a ban during times of moderate plenty, aren't nearly as beneficial to British ranchers and farmers as similar regulations are to merchants and manufacturers. Manufactured goods -- especially the finer kinds -- are far more easily shipped from one country to another than grain or cattle. That's why foreign trade mainly involves manufactured goods. In manufacturing, even a small cost advantage lets foreigners undersell domestic producers, even in the home market. In raw agricultural products, it would take an enormous advantage. So if we allowed the free import of foreign manufactured goods, several domestic manufacturers would probably suffer, and some might go bankrupt entirely. A significant amount of capital and labor currently employed in those industries would have to find new uses. But completely free import of raw agricultural products would barely affect the country's agriculture.

Take the import of foreign cattle, for example. Even if it were made completely free, so few could actually be imported that it would barely affect the British cattle industry. Live cattle are perhaps the only commodity that's more expensive to transport by sea than by land. On land, they walk themselves to market. By sea, you have to carry not just the cattle but their food and water too -- at considerable cost and inconvenience. The short sea crossing between Ireland and Great Britain does make importing Irish cattle somewhat easier. But even if permanent free import were allowed (recently it was permitted only temporarily), it couldn't significantly affect British cattle ranchers. The parts of Great Britain that border the Irish Sea are all grazing country. Irish cattle couldn't be brought in for local use -- they'd have to be driven through these vast grazing regions at considerable cost and trouble before reaching their proper market. Fat cattle couldn't be driven that far. So only lean cattle could be imported, and that would affect not the fattening operations (for which it would actually be beneficial, by lowering the price of lean cattle) but only the breeding regions. The small number of Irish cattle that have actually been imported since the ban was lifted, together with the continued strong prices for lean cattle, seem to prove that even British breeding regions have nothing to fear from free imports. The common people of Ireland are said to have sometimes violently opposed the export of their cattle. But if the exporters had found great profit in the trade, they could easily have overcome this unruly opposition when the law was on their side.

Besides, fattening regions must always be highly developed land, while breeding regions are generally uncultivated. The high price of lean cattle, by raising the value of uncultivated land, actually discourages agricultural improvement -- it works like a subsidy against development. For any highly developed country, it would be more advantageous to import lean cattle than to breed them. The province of Holland reportedly does exactly this. The mountains of Scotland, Wales, and Northumberland are not capable of much improvement and seem naturally destined to be Britain's breeding grounds. The freest possible import of foreign cattle would have no effect other than to prevent these breeding regions from exploiting the rest of the kingdom's growing population and prosperity, jacking up their prices to outrageous levels, and imposing what amounts to a real tax on all the more developed and cultivated parts of the country.

Similarly, free import of salt-cured meat would barely affect British ranchers. Salt provisions are not only bulky but, compared to fresh meat, they're inferior in quality and more expensive (because they require more labor). They could never compete with fresh meat, only with domestically salt-cured provisions. They might be used for provisioning ships on long voyages and similar purposes, but could never become a significant part of the population's diet. The small amount of salt provisions imported from Ireland since the ban was lifted is experimental proof that ranchers have nothing to fear. The price of butcher's meat doesn't appear to have been noticeably affected.

Even the free import of foreign grain could barely affect British farmers. Grain is far bulkier than meat. A pound of wheat at a penny is as expensive, pound for pound, as butcher's meat at fourpence. The small amount of foreign grain imported even in the worst shortages should reassure farmers that they have nothing to fear from the freest possible imports. According to the very well-informed author of the tracts on the grain trade, the average annual import amounts to only 23,728 quarters of all sorts of grain -- less than one five-hundred-and-seventy-first of annual consumption. But since the grain subsidy causes greater exports in years of plenty, it must also cause greater imports in years of scarcity than would otherwise occur. The abundance of one year doesn't compensate for the scarcity of another. As the average quantity exported is necessarily increased by the subsidy, so too must the average quantity imported. Without the subsidy, as less grain would be exported, probably less would be imported, year over year, than at present. The grain merchants -- the middlemen who move grain between Britain and foreign countries -- would have much less business and might suffer considerably. But the landowners and farmers would barely notice. It's the grain merchants, in fact, not the landowners and farmers, in whom I've noticed the greatest anxiety about renewing and continuing the subsidy.

Landowners and farmers are, to their great credit, the people least susceptible to the wretched spirit of monopoly. The owner of a large factory sometimes gets alarmed if a competitor sets up within twenty miles of him. The Dutch owner of the woolen factory at Abbeville stipulated that no similar operation could be established within thirty leagues of the city. Farmers and landowners, on the other hand, are generally inclined to encourage rather than obstruct the development of their neighbors' farms and estates. They have no trade secrets like most manufacturers do, and they're actually eager to share any new technique they've found beneficial. As old Cato said: "Farming is the most stable, least envied of occupations, and those who pursue it harbor the fewest ill intentions." Farmers and landowners, scattered across the countryside, can't easily band together the way merchants and manufacturers can. The latter, concentrated in towns and accustomed to the exclusive, guild-like mentality that prevails there, naturally try to obtain the same exclusive privileges over all their fellow citizens that they generally hold over the inhabitants of their own towns. They appear to have been the original inventors of these import restrictions that secure for them the monopoly of the home market. It was probably in imitation of them -- trying to level the playing field against people they felt were oppressing them -- that British landowners and farmers so far forgot the generosity natural to their station as to demand the exclusive privilege of supplying their countrymen with grain and meat. They perhaps didn't stop to consider how much less their interests would be affected by free trade than the interests of the people whose example they were following.

To permanently ban the import of foreign grain and cattle is, in reality, to decree that the country's population and industry shall never exceed what the raw produce of its own soil can support.

There seem, however, to be two cases where it's generally beneficial to place some burden on foreign goods in order to encourage domestic industry.

The first is when a particular industry is necessary for national defense. The defense of Great Britain, for example, depends heavily on its number of sailors and ships. The Navigation Act therefore quite properly tries to give British sailors and shipping a monopoly on their own country's trade -- in some cases through outright bans, in others through heavy burdens on foreign shipping. Here are the main provisions of that act.

First, all ships whose owners, masters, and three-fourths of the crew aren't British subjects are prohibited from trading to British settlements and colonies, or from engaging in Britain's coastal trade, on pain of forfeiting both ship and cargo.

Second, many of the bulkiest imported goods can only be brought into Britain either in ships meeting those requirements, or in ships belonging to the country that produced the goods (with the owners, masters, and three-fourths of the crew from that country). Even when imported in the latter type of ship, they're subject to double the normal duties for foreign ships. Importing in ships of any other country means forfeiting both ship and goods. When this act was passed, the Dutch were -- as they still are -- the great freight carriers of Europe. This regulation effectively shut them out of carrying goods to Britain, or importing to Britain the goods of any other European country.

Third, many of the bulkiest imported goods are prohibited from being brought into Britain, even in British ships, from any country other than where they were produced, on pain of forfeiting ship and cargo. This regulation was also probably aimed at the Dutch. Holland was then, as now, the great emporium for all European goods, and this rule prevented British ships from loading up in Holland with other European countries' products.

Fourth, all fish, whale products, oil, and blubber not caught and processed by British vessels face double foreign duties when imported into Britain. The Dutch, who were then the only European nation that tried to supply foreign markets with fish, and who remain the principal one, were thus hit with a very heavy burden on any fish they might supply to Britain.

When the Navigation Act was passed, England and Holland weren't actually at war, but the most intense hostility simmered between the two nations. This animosity had begun during the Long Parliament, which first drafted the act, and it erupted into the Dutch Wars during the Protectorate and the reign of Charles II. It's entirely possible, therefore, that some of the act's regulations were driven by national grudge rather than policy. But they're as wise as if they'd been crafted by the most careful deliberation. National hostility at that particular time happened to aim at the very same objective that the wisest policy would have recommended: reducing the naval power of Holland, the only naval power that could threaten England's security.

The Navigation Act is not favorable to foreign commerce, or to the growth of the prosperity that comes from it. A nation's interest in foreign trade is the same as a merchant's interest in dealing with his customers: to buy as cheaply and sell as dearly as possible. A nation is most likely to buy cheaply when, through completely free trade, it encourages all nations to bring their goods to its shores. For the same reason, it's most likely to sell dearly when its markets are flooded with the greatest number of buyers. The Navigation Act, it's true, doesn't burden foreign ships that come to buy British goods. Even the old duties on exports that foreign merchants used to pay have mostly been removed. But if foreigners are prevented by bans or heavy duties from coming to sell, they can't always afford to come to buy either -- because coming without cargo means losing the freight cost from their own country to Britain. By reducing the number of sellers, we necessarily reduce the number of buyers, and end up not only buying foreign goods at higher prices but selling our own at lower ones, compared to what would happen under truly free trade. However, since defense is far more important than prosperity, the Navigation Act is perhaps the wisest of all England's commercial regulations.

The second case where it's generally beneficial to place some burden on foreign goods is when a tax has been imposed on the equivalent domestic product. In that situation, it seems reasonable to impose an equal tax on the corresponding foreign product. This wouldn't give domestic industry a monopoly on the home market, or direct a larger share of capital and labor toward it than would naturally flow there. It would simply prevent the domestic tax from driving capital away to other uses, keeping the competition between foreign and domestic industry as close as possible to where it was before the tax. In Britain, whenever such a tax is placed on domestic products, it's standard practice -- to silence the loud complaints of merchants and manufacturers that they'll be undercut at home -- to slap a much heavier duty on imports of the same kind.

According to some people, this second limitation on free trade should sometimes extend much further -- not just to the specific foreign goods that compete with taxed domestic ones. When the necessities of life are taxed in any country, they argue, it becomes appropriate to tax not only similar imported necessities but all foreign goods that compete with anything produced domestically. The cost of living, they say, necessarily rises because of such taxes, and the price of labor must always rise with the cost of workers' subsistence. Every domestically produced commodity, even if not directly taxed, becomes more expensive because the labor that produces it costs more. Such taxes, they claim, effectively amount to a tax on every domestically produced commodity. Therefore, to keep domestic industry on an even footing with foreign competition, it becomes necessary to impose a duty on every foreign good equal to this increase in the price of domestic goods.

Whether taxes on necessities of life -- such as those in Britain on soap, salt, leather, candles, and so on -- actually raise the price of labor and consequently of all other goods, I'll examine later when I discuss taxes. But suppose for now that they do have this effect (and they undoubtedly do). This general increase in all prices due to higher labor costs differs from a particular price increase caused by a specific tax in two important ways.

First, you can always calculate precisely how much a specific tax raises the price of a specific product. But you could never determine with any reasonable accuracy how much a general increase in labor costs affects the price of every different product that labor is used to produce. It would therefore be impossible to accurately calibrate a tax on each foreign good to match this general price increase across all domestic goods.

Second, taxes on necessities of life have essentially the same effect on people's circumstances as poor soil and a bad climate. They make provisions more expensive, just as if it required extraordinary labor and expense to produce them. Just as it would be absurd, when nature makes farming difficult because of poor soil and harsh weather, to dictate to people how they should use their capital and labor -- it's equally absurd to do so when the difficulty comes from artificial scarcity created by taxes. In both cases, the obviously best policy is to let people adapt their industry to their situation as best they can, and find whatever pursuits give them some advantage, whether in the domestic or foreign market. To pile on new taxes because people are already overburdened with taxes, because they already pay too much for the necessities of life, to make them also pay too much for most other goods -- that is certainly the most absurd way of trying to make it up to them.

Such taxes, when they pile up high enough, become a curse as devastating as barren earth and brutal weather. And yet it's in the richest and most industrious countries that they've been imposed most heavily. No other countries could survive such a burden. Just as only the strongest bodies can stay healthy on a terrible diet, only the nations with the greatest natural and acquired advantages in every kind of industry can survive and prosper under such taxes. Holland is the country in Europe where these taxes are most abundant, and it continues to prosper -- from its own peculiar circumstances -- not because of them, as has been absurdly suggested, but in spite of them.

Just as there are two cases where it's generally beneficial to burden foreign goods to encourage domestic industry, there are two others where it may sometimes be worth deliberating: in one case, whether to continue allowing free import of certain foreign goods; in the other, how best to restore free imports after they've been interrupted for some time.

The case where it may be worth deliberating about continuing free imports arises when a foreign nation restricts our manufactures with heavy duties or bans. The natural instinct here is revenge -- retaliation -- imposing similar duties and bans on their products. Nations almost always do retaliate in this way. The French have been especially aggressive in favoring their own manufacturers by blocking competing foreign goods. This was a major part of the policy of Colbert, who -- despite his great abilities -- seems to have been taken in by the self-serving arguments of merchants and manufacturers, who are always demanding monopoly at the expense of their fellow citizens. The most knowledgeable people in France today believe his policies of this kind did not benefit the country. In 1667, Colbert imposed very heavy duties on a wide range of foreign manufactures. When he refused to reduce them for the Dutch, they retaliated in 1671 by banning French wines, brandies, and manufactures. The war of 1672 seems to have been caused in part by this commercial dispute. The Peace of Nijmegen ended it in 1678 by moderating some duties for the Dutch, who in turn lifted their ban. Around the same time, France and England began mutually strangling each other's industries with similar duties and bans -- the French apparently having started it. The hostility between the two nations has so far prevented either side from backing down. In 1697, England banned the import of bone lace, a Flemish product. The Flemish government, then under Spanish rule, retaliated by banning English woolens. In 1700, the English ban on bone lace was lifted on the condition that English woolens would once again be admitted to Flanders on the same terms as before.

There may be good strategy in such retaliatory measures when there's a reasonable chance they'll force the other side to repeal its duties or bans. Regaining a major foreign market will generally more than compensate for the temporary inconvenience of paying higher prices for some goods in the short term. But judging whether retaliation is likely to produce this result may not really fall within the science of the legislator, whose deliberations should be guided by general principles that are always the same. It belongs more to the skill of that sly and crafty creature commonly known as a politician, whose decisions are shaped by the shifting circumstances of the moment. When there's no prospect of getting the offending measures repealed, it seems a poor way to compensate certain injured groups among our people by inflicting yet another injury -- not just on those groups but on nearly all others as well. When a neighbor bans one of our products, we typically ban not just the same product of theirs (which alone would barely affect them) but some other product entirely. This may encourage a particular group of our own workers, and by eliminating some of their competitors, allow them to raise their prices at home. But the workers who were hurt by the neighbor's ban won't benefit from ours at all. On the contrary, they and nearly all other citizens will have to pay more for certain goods. Every such law imposes a real tax on the whole country -- not to help the workers injured by the original ban, but to help some entirely different group.

The other case where deliberation is warranted involves how best to restore free imports after they've been blocked for some time -- specifically, when protective duties or bans have allowed particular industries to grow so large that they employ vast numbers of people. Basic decency may require that free trade be restored only gradually, with considerable caution and care. If all those high duties and bans were removed overnight, cheaper foreign goods of the same kind might flood the home market so fast as to throw many thousands of people out of their jobs and their means of support. The disruption this would cause might be very considerable. But in all probability, it would be much less severe than people commonly imagine, for two reasons.

First, all industries that routinely export some of their output to other European countries without any subsidy would barely be affected by the freest possible imports. Those products already have to be sold abroad at prices as low as competing foreign goods, which means they must be sold at home for even less. They would therefore still dominate the home market. Some fashion-conscious eccentric might occasionally prefer foreign goods simply because they're foreign, over cheaper and better domestic alternatives -- but this folly would be too rare to make any real dent in overall employment. A large share of our woolen products, tanned leather, and hardware is routinely exported to other European countries without any subsidy, and these are the industries that employ the most workers. Silk might be the industry that would suffer most from free trade, and linen after it -- though linen much less.

Second, even if free trade did suddenly throw a large number of people out of work, it wouldn't necessarily deprive them of all employment or means of support. When the army and navy were downsized at the end of the last war, more than a hundred thousand soldiers and sailors -- a number equal to the workforce of the largest industries -- were all at once thrown out of their regular employment. Though they undoubtedly suffered some hardship, they weren't left destitute. Most of the sailors probably drifted gradually into the merchant marine as they found openings. Meanwhile, both they and the soldiers were absorbed into the general population and found work in a wide variety of occupations. No major upheaval resulted -- not even any noticeable disruption -- from this massive change in the circumstances of over a hundred thousand men, all accustomed to bearing arms and many of them to plunder. The number of vagrants barely increased anywhere, and as far as I've been able to determine, wages didn't fall in any occupation except merchant shipping. Now, if we compare the habits of a soldier with those of any kind of factory worker, the worker's habits are much less likely to make him unfit for a new trade than the soldier's are to make him unfit for any trade at all. The factory worker has always depended on his labor for a living; the soldier has always expected to live off his pay. Hard work and discipline are second nature to one; idleness and dissipation to the other. And it's surely much easier to redirect someone's labor from one kind of work to another than to transform idleness and dissipation into productive activity. Besides, as I've already pointed out, most manufacturing workers can easily transfer to related industries of a similar nature. Most of them also do occasional agricultural work. The capital that employed them in one industry will still remain in the country to employ an equal number of people in some other way. If the country's total capital stays the same, demand for labor will stay the same -- or very nearly so -- even if it shifts to different places and occupations. Discharged soldiers and sailors, after all, are free to practice any trade in any town in Great Britain or Ireland. Let the same natural liberty -- the freedom to pursue whatever honest industry they choose -- be restored to all His Majesty's subjects, just as it is to soldiers and sailors. In other words: break up the exclusive privileges of guilds, repeal the apprenticeship laws (both of which are real infringements on natural liberty), and add to these the repeal of the laws of settlement, so that a poor worker thrown out of a job in one trade or one place can seek work in another trade or another place without fear of prosecution or forced removal. Then neither the public nor individuals will suffer much more from occasionally disbanding certain industries than from disbanding soldiers. Our manufacturers certainly have great merit with their country, but they can't have more merit than those who defend it with their blood, nor do they deserve to be treated with more delicacy.

To expect that truly free trade will ever be fully established in Great Britain is as absurd as expecting a Utopia to be built here. Not only do public prejudices oppose it, but far more powerfully, so do the private interests of powerful individuals. If army officers opposed any reduction in troop numbers with the same zeal and unanimity that factory owners deploy against every law that might increase their competition at home -- if officers whipped up their soldiers the same way owners incite their workers to violently attack the proposers of any such regulation -- then reducing the army would be as dangerous as it has now become to chip away at the monopoly our manufacturers have established against us. This monopoly has so expanded the ranks of certain industrial groups that, like an overgrown standing army, they've become formidable to the government itself, and on many occasions they intimidate the legislature. The member of parliament who supports every proposal to strengthen this monopoly is guaranteed not only a reputation for understanding trade, but great popularity and influence with a class of men whose numbers and wealth make them enormously important. The member who opposes them -- and especially one with enough authority to actually block them -- will find that neither the most spotless integrity, nor the highest rank, nor the greatest public service can protect him from the most vicious slander, personal insults, and sometimes even real physical danger from the raging fury of thwarted monopolists.

The owner of a large factory who is suddenly exposed to foreign competition and forced to shut down would certainly suffer considerably. The working capital he'd normally use to buy materials and pay workers could probably find other uses without too much difficulty. But the fixed capital tied up in buildings and equipment could hardly be salvaged without significant loss. A fair concern for his interests requires that changes of this kind never be introduced suddenly, but slowly, gradually, and with very long advance notice. Ideally -- if the legislature's deliberations could always be guided by a broad view of the general good rather than by the loud demands of special interests -- it should be especially careful never to establish any new monopolies of this kind, and never to extend the ones that already exist. Every such regulation introduces a real disorder into the nation's economic constitution, one that's difficult to cure later without causing yet another disorder.

How far it may be appropriate to impose tariffs on imports not to prevent them but to raise government revenue, I'll consider later when I discuss taxation. Taxes designed to prevent or reduce imports are obviously as destructive to customs revenue as they are to free trade.
