<modernized_text>
Part II: Why These Extraordinary Restrictions Are Unreasonable on Any Principles

In the first part of this chapter, I tried to show that even on the mercantile system's own terms, there's no need for extraordinary restrictions on imports from countries where the balance of trade is supposedly unfavorable.

But the whole doctrine of the balance of trade is, in fact, completely absurd -- and it's the foundation not only of these restrictions but of almost all other commercial regulations. The doctrine assumes that when two countries trade with each other, if the balance is even, neither one gains or loses. But if it tips to one side at all, one side loses and the other gains in proportion to how far it tips from perfect equilibrium. Both assumptions are wrong. Trade that is artificially forced through subsidies and monopolies may well be -- and usually is -- disadvantageous to the country it's supposed to benefit, as I'll show later. But trade that happens naturally and freely between two countries is always beneficial to both, though not always equally so.

By "advantage" or "gain," I don't mean an increase in the quantity of gold and silver. I mean an increase in the exchangeable value of the annual output of the country's land and labor -- that is, an increase in the annual income of its inhabitants.

If the balance is even and the trade consists entirely of exchanging each country's domestic products, both countries will usually gain, and gain about equally. Each provides a market for part of the other's surplus output. Each replaces a capital that had been used to produce that surplus, a capital that had been distributed among and provided income to a certain number of its inhabitants. Some of each country's inhabitants, therefore, indirectly derive their income and livelihood from the other. Since the traded goods are assumed to be of equal value, the two capitals employed in the trade will usually be equal or nearly equal. Both being used to produce each country's domestic goods, the income they distribute to each country's inhabitants will also be equal or nearly so. This mutual income will be greater or smaller in proportion to the extent of their dealings. If the annual trade amounts to a hundred thousand pounds on each side, or a million, each country would provide annual income of a hundred thousand pounds, or a million, to the inhabitants of the other.

Suppose one country exports only domestic products to the other, while receiving nothing but foreign goods in return. The balance would still be considered even, since goods are being paid for with goods. Both countries would still gain -- but not equally. The country exporting only domestic products would gain the most. If England, for example, imported from France nothing but French goods, and -- having no French-demanded products of its own -- paid for them by sending large quantities of foreign goods (say, tobacco and East Indian goods), this trade would provide some income to both countries' inhabitants. But it would provide more to France's. France's entire capital employed in the trade would be distributed among French people. But only the portion of England's capital used to produce the English goods that purchased those foreign goods would be distributed among English people. The larger portion would be replacing capitals used in Virginia, India, and China -- providing income to the inhabitants of those distant countries. So if the capitals were equal, the French capital would increase French income much more than the English capital would increase English income. France would be conducting a direct foreign trade for its own consumption with England, while England would be conducting a roundabout version of the same trade. I've already explained the different effects of direct versus roundabout foreign trade.

In reality, probably no two countries trade entirely in domestic products on both sides, or in domestic products on one side and foreign goods on the other. Almost all countries exchange a mix of both. But the country whose cargo contains the highest proportion of domestic goods and the lowest of foreign goods will always be the bigger winner.

Now suppose England paid for its French imports not with tobacco and East Indian goods but with gold and silver. In that case, the balance would be considered uneven -- goods not being paid for with goods but with precious metals. The trade would still, however, provide some income to both countries, but more to France. It would also provide something to England. The capital used to produce the English goods that purchased the gold and silver would be replaced, enabling those English workers and businesses to continue operating. England's total capital would no more be reduced by exporting gold and silver than by exporting any other goods of equal value. On the contrary, it would usually be increased. No goods are sent abroad except those expected to fetch a higher price abroad than at home -- and therefore to bring back a more valuable return. If English tobacco worth only a hundred thousand pounds at home could buy French wine worth a hundred and ten thousand in England, the exchange would increase England's capital by ten thousand pounds. If a hundred thousand pounds of English gold could buy French wine worth a hundred and ten thousand in England, the exchange would equally increase England's capital by ten thousand. A merchant with a hundred and ten thousand pounds worth of wine in his cellar is wealthier than one with only a hundred thousand worth of tobacco in his warehouse -- and wealthier than one with only a hundred thousand in gold in his coffers. He can put more industry into motion and provide income and employment to more people than either of the other two. Since the nation's total capital equals the combined capitals of all its inhabitants, and the total industry it can sustain equals what all those capitals can maintain, both the nation's capital and its supportable industry must generally be increased by such an exchange. True, it would be even better for England to buy French wine directly with its own hardware and cloth than with Virginia tobacco or Brazilian and Peruvian gold and silver. A direct foreign trade is always more advantageous than a roundabout one. But a roundabout trade conducted with gold and silver isn't any less advantageous than any other roundabout trade. And a country with no mines is no more likely to run out of gold and silver from annual exports of those metals than a country that doesn't grow tobacco is likely to run out of tobacco from annual exports. A country that has the means to buy tobacco will never lack it for long. Neither will a country that has the means to buy gold and silver ever lack them for long.

Some people say that trading with a wine country is like a worker's dealings with a pub -- a losing trade. I say the pub trade isn't necessarily a losing trade. By its nature, it's just as beneficial as any other, though perhaps somewhat more susceptible to abuse. Brewing and even retailing alcoholic drinks are necessary divisions of labor, just like any other. It will generally be more economical for a worker to buy from the brewer than to brew his own beer, and if he's a poor worker, it's usually cheaper to buy by the glass from the retailer than by the barrel from the brewer. He can certainly buy too much -- just as he can buy too much from the butcher if he's a glutton, or from the tailor if he fancies himself a fashion plate among his friends. It's still beneficial to the general population that all these trades be free, even though that freedom can be abused in any of them. And though individuals may ruin their finances through excessive drinking, there seems to be no risk that an entire nation will. In every country, while some people spend more on drink than they can afford, many more spend less. It's worth noting that, based on actual experience, cheap wine seems to be a cause not of drunkenness but of sobriety. The inhabitants of wine-producing countries are generally the soberest people in Europe -- witness the Spanish, the Italians, and the people of southern France. Nobody overindulges in what they drink every day. Nobody tries to show off their generosity and good fellowship by being lavish with a drink that's as cheap as small beer. On the contrary, in countries that produce no grapes -- whether because of extreme heat or extreme cold -- where wine is therefore expensive and rare, drunkenness is a common vice: the northern nations, all those who live between the tropics, the peoples of the Guinea coast in Africa. When a French regiment stationed in the northern provinces, where wine is somewhat expensive, gets transferred to the south, where it's very cheap, the soldiers are at first seduced by the low cost and novelty of good wine. But after a few months, most of them become as sober as the locals. If the duties on foreign wines and the excise taxes on malt, beer, and ale were all abolished at once, it might trigger a fairly widespread but temporary bout of drunkenness among the middle and lower classes in Britain. This would probably be followed by a permanent and nearly universal sobriety. Currently, drunkenness is by no means a vice of fashionable people, or of those who can easily afford the most expensive drinks. A gentleman drunk on ale has almost never been seen among us. The restrictions on the wine trade in Britain don't really seem designed to keep people out of the pub, so to speak, but to keep them from going where they can buy the best and cheapest drink. They favor Portuguese wine and discourage French. The Portuguese, we're told, are better customers for our manufactures than the French, and should therefore be encouraged. Since they buy from us, supposedly we should buy from them. The petty tactics of small-time shopkeepers are thus elevated into political principles for running a great empire -- because only the pettiest shopkeepers make it a rule to patronize mainly their own customers. A serious trader always buys wherever goods are cheapest and best, without regard to such trifling considerations.

Under maxims like these, however, nations have been taught that their interest lies in impoverishing all their neighbors. Each nation has been trained to look with jealous eyes upon the prosperity of every nation it trades with, and to regard their gain as its own loss. Commerce, which should naturally be a bond of friendship among nations, just as it is among individuals, has become the most fertile source of discord and hostility. The capricious ambition of kings and ministers hasn't been more destructive to the peace of Europe, during this century and the last, than the petty jealousy of merchants and manufacturers. The violence and injustice of rulers is an ancient evil for which, I'm afraid, human nature offers little remedy. But the mean greed and monopolizing spirit of merchants and manufacturers -- who neither are nor should be the rulers of humanity -- though perhaps it can't be eliminated, can certainly be prevented from disturbing anyone's peace but their own.

That the spirit of monopoly originally invented and promoted this entire doctrine cannot be doubted. And the people who first taught it were by no means as foolish as those who believed it. In every country, it's always in the interest of the general public to buy whatever they want from whoever sells it cheapest. This is so obviously true that it seems ridiculous to bother proving it. It could never have been questioned at all if the self-serving arguments of merchants and manufacturers hadn't muddled the common sense of humanity. Their interest is directly opposed to that of the general public. Just as guild members want to prevent other inhabitants from hiring any workers but themselves, so merchants and manufacturers of every country want to secure for themselves the monopoly of the home market. Hence, in Britain and most of Europe, the extraordinary duties on goods imported by foreign merchants. Hence the heavy duties and bans on foreign manufactures that compete with domestic ones. Hence also the extraordinary restrictions on imports from countries against which national hostility happens to be most violently inflamed.

A neighboring nation's wealth, however, though dangerous in war and politics, is certainly advantageous in trade. In wartime, it may help our enemies maintain larger fleets and armies. But in peacetime, it enables them to trade with us on a larger scale and provide a better market for our goods. Just as a rich man is likely to be a better customer for the businesses in his neighborhood than a poor one, so is a rich nation. A rich man who is himself a manufacturer can be a very dangerous competitor to others in the same line. But all the rest of the neighborhood -- the vast majority -- benefits from the good market his spending creates. They even benefit from his ability to undersell poorer competitors. Similarly, a rich nation's manufacturers may be dangerous rivals to their neighbors. But this very competition benefits the general public, who also gain enormously from the good market that a wealthy nation's spending creates in every other area.

People who want to make their fortune never think of moving to the remote, poor provinces of the country. They head for the capital or the great commercial cities. They know that where little wealth circulates, there's little to be had -- but where a great deal of money is in motion, some of it may come their way. The same common sense that guides one, ten, or twenty individuals should guide one, ten, or twenty million, and should lead a whole nation to see its neighbors' prosperity as a likely opportunity to acquire prosperity of its own. A nation that wants to get rich through foreign trade will most likely succeed when its neighbors are all wealthy, industrious, and commercially active. A great nation surrounded on all sides by nomadic peoples and impoverished neighbors might certainly grow rich through cultivating its own land and developing its own domestic commerce -- but not through foreign trade. This seems to have been how the ancient Egyptians and the modern Chinese acquired their great wealth. The ancient Egyptians reportedly neglected foreign commerce, and the modern Chinese, as is well known, hold it in the utmost contempt, barely deigning to give it even the basic protection of the law. The modern doctrines of foreign commerce, by aiming to impoverish all our neighbors, tend (insofar as they succeed) to render that very commerce insignificant and worthless.

It's because of these doctrines that trade between France and England has been burdened with so many restrictions in both countries. If those two countries were to consider their real interests, free from both commercial jealousy and national hostility, French trade might be more valuable to Britain than any other country's, and for the same reason, British trade might be more valuable to France. France is Britain's nearest neighbor. In the trade between England's southern coast and the northern and northwestern coasts of France, returns could be expected four, five, or six times a year -- just like domestic trade. The capital employed in this trade could therefore keep four, five, or six times as much industry going in each country, and support four, five, or six times as many people, as an equal capital in most other foreign trades. Between the most remote parts of France and Britain, returns could be expected at least once a year, making even that trade at least as advantageous as most other European foreign trade. It would be at least three times more advantageous than the celebrated trade with the North American colonies, where returns rarely came in less than three years, and often took four or five. France, besides, is estimated to have twenty-four million inhabitants. The North American colonies were never thought to have more than three million. And France is a much richer country than North America -- though because of the more unequal distribution of wealth, there's far more poverty in one than in the other. France could therefore offer a market at least eight times larger, and -- given how much more frequently the returns come in -- twenty-four times more profitable than the North American colonies ever did. British trade would be equally valuable to France, and in proportion to each country's wealth, population, and proximity, would have the same superiority over France's trade with its own colonies. Such is the enormous difference between the trade that the wisdom of both nations has chosen to discourage and the trade it has chosen to favor.

But the very circumstances that would make free trade between these two countries so beneficial to both have created the main obstacles to that trade. Being neighbors, they are necessarily enemies. Each one's wealth and power makes it more threatening to the other. What would amplify the benefits of national friendship only intensifies the fury of national hostility. Both are rich and industrious, and the merchants and manufacturers of each dread the skill and energy of those in the other. Commercial jealousy flares up, and it both feeds and is fed by the violence of national animosity. The traders of both countries have proclaimed, with all the passionate conviction of self-interested dishonesty, the certain ruin of each from the unfavorable trade balance they claim would inevitably result from unrestricted commerce with the other.

There is no trading nation in Europe whose imminent ruin has not been repeatedly predicted by the self-appointed experts of this system, citing an unfavorable balance of trade. After all the anxiety they've stirred up, after all the futile attempts of nearly every trading nation to tilt the balance in its own favor and against its neighbors, it doesn't appear that any nation in Europe has actually been impoverished by this cause. Every town and country, on the contrary, has grown richer in proportion to how widely it has opened its ports to all nations. Far from being ruined by free trade, as the mercantile system would predict, they've been enriched by it. Though there are a few European cities that in some respects deserve to be called free ports, there's no country that does. Holland perhaps comes closest, though it's still far from the ideal. And Holland, it's universally acknowledged, derives not only its entire wealth but a great part of its basic necessities from foreign trade.

There is another balance, which I've already explained, that's very different from the balance of trade. According to whether it happens to be favorable or unfavorable, it necessarily determines the prosperity or decline of every nation. This is the balance between annual production and consumption. If the exchangeable value of annual production exceeds annual consumption, the nation's capital must grow each year by the amount of that surplus. The society is living within its income, and what's saved is naturally added to its capital, where it's put to work increasing production further. If annual production falls short of annual consumption, the nation's capital must shrink by the amount of that deficit. The society is spending beyond its income and necessarily eating into its capital. Its capital must therefore decline, and with it the value of its annual output.

This balance of production and consumption is entirely different from the balance of trade. It could exist in a nation with no foreign trade at all -- one completely cut off from the rest of the world. It applies to the entire globe, whose wealth, population, and development may be gradually increasing or gradually declining.

The balance of production and consumption may consistently favor a nation even while its balance of trade is consistently unfavorable. A nation may import more than it exports for half a century. All the gold and silver that enters during this time may be immediately sent back out. Its circulating coins may gradually decay, replaced by various forms of paper money. Its debts to other nations may steadily increase. And yet its real wealth -- the exchangeable value of its annual production of land and labor -- may have been growing at a much faster rate all along. The state of our North American colonies and the trade they conducted with Britain before the start of the current troubles (the American Revolution) may serve as proof that this is by no means an impossible scenario.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
Major changes in this chapter:

1. Simplified Smith's complex arguments about the balance of trade doctrine -- his core point is that both sides always benefit from voluntary trade, and that the relevant measure isn't gold accumulation but real income growth.

2. The colorful digression on wine and sobriety -- one of Smith's most entertaining passages -- is preserved fully. His observation that cheap wine promotes sobriety while expensive wine promotes drunkenness is surprisingly modern and data-driven.

3. "Wandering savages and poor barbarians" translated to "nomadic peoples and impoverished neighbors" per the text analysis guidelines for sensitive content, while preserving Smith's anthropological point about the Egyptians and Chinese.

4. "Negroes on the coast of Guinea" translated to "the peoples of the Guinea coast in Africa" -- modernizing the language while keeping the geographic reference.

5. "The present disturbances" clarified as "the American Revolution."

6. The powerful passage about how nations should see neighbors' wealth as opportunity, not threat, is preserved with full rhetorical force -- it's one of Smith's most quotable arguments.

7. "Corn" -> "grain." "Stock" -> "capital." "Dear" -> "expensive." "Bounties" -> "subsidies." "Liberal" -> "generous."

8. Removed all superscript references (916-930).

9. Smith's brilliant observation that "Being neighbours, they are necessarily enemies" is preserved -- characteristically dry and devastating.

10. The final distinction between "balance of trade" and "balance of production and consumption" is clarified -- this is Smith's real metric for national prosperity, as opposed to the mercantilist obsession with gold flows.
</explanation>

<next_chapter_notes>
- Chapter 040 is Book IV Ch IV: "Of Drawbacks" -- Smith discusses tariff rebates on re-exported goods.
- Key term: "drawback" = a refund of import duties when goods are re-exported. Explain this on first use, then use consistently.
- Smith's argument: drawbacks are the most reasonable of the mercantile system's expedients because they don't distort trade, they just prevent duties from distorting it. But they're only justified for truly foreign markets, not for colonial markets where monopoly already exists.
- Detailed discussion of specific duty rates on wine, tobacco, sugar -- keep the detail but make relative values clear.
- The chapter is relatively straightforward compared to the previous ones -- more policy analysis, less grand argument.
- Continue vocabulary consistency: "grain" for "corn," "capital" for "stock," "subsidy" for "bounty."
- Smith references the American colonies and their trade patterns extensively -- "the revolt of our North American colonies."
</next_chapter_notes>
