CHAPTER VI: Of Treaties of Commerce

When a nation binds itself by treaty either to admit certain goods from one foreign country while prohibiting them from all others, or to exempt one country's goods from duties that everyone else has to pay, the favored country -- or at least its merchants and manufacturers -- necessarily gains a great advantage. Those merchants and manufacturers enjoy a kind of monopoly in the country that is being so generous to them. That country becomes a market that is both larger and more profitable for their goods. Larger, because with other nations' goods either shut out or saddled with heavier duties, it buys more of theirs. More profitable, because the favored country's merchants, enjoying a sort of monopoly there, can often sell their goods at a better price than if they faced free competition from every other nation.

Such treaties, however, while advantageous to the merchants and manufacturers of the favored country, are necessarily disadvantageous to those of the country granting the favor. That country is granting a monopoly against itself to a foreign nation, and its people must frequently buy the foreign goods they need at a higher price than if other nations were allowed to compete freely. The portion of its own production that it trades for those foreign goods must consequently be sold cheaper -- because when two things are exchanged for each other, the cheapness of one is a necessary consequence of, or rather is the same thing as, the expensiveness of the other. The exchangeable value of the country's annual production is therefore likely to be reduced by every such treaty. Still, this reduction hardly ever amounts to an actual loss -- only to a smaller gain than the country might otherwise have made. Though it sells its goods cheaper than it otherwise would, it probably won't sell them for less than they cost. Nor, as happens with export subsidies, will it sell them at a price that fails to replace the capital used to bring them to market, along with the normal profit on that capital. The trade couldn't continue for long if it did. So even the country granting the favor can still gain from the trade -- just less than it would under free competition.

Some commercial treaties, however, have been considered advantageous on entirely different grounds. A trading country has sometimes granted this kind of monopoly against itself on certain goods of a foreign nation because it expected that, in the total commerce between them, it would sell more each year than it bought, and that the balance would come back to it annually in gold and silver. It's on this principle that the commercial treaty between England and Portugal, concluded in 1703 by Mr. Methuen, has been so highly praised. Here is a literal translation of that treaty, which consists of only three articles:

Article I. His sacred royal majesty of Portugal promises, in his own name and in the name of his successors, to admit forever into Portugal the woolen cloths and the other woolen manufactures of the British, just as they were admitted before they were prohibited by law -- but on the following condition:

Article II. That is to say, that her sacred royal majesty of Great Britain shall, in her own name and that of her successors, be obliged forever to admit into Britain the wines produced in Portugal -- so that at no time, whether there is peace or war between the kingdoms of Britain and France, shall anything more be demanded for these wines, under the name of customs or duty or any other title whatsoever, directly or indirectly, whether they are imported into Great Britain in pipes or hogsheads or other casks, than what is demanded for an equal quantity or measure of French wine, with one-third of the customs or duty deducted. But if at any time this deduction of customs is in any way challenged or impaired, it shall be just and lawful for his sacred royal majesty of Portugal to prohibit the woolen cloths and the rest of the British woolen manufactures once again.

Article III. The most excellent lords the plenipotentiaries promise and take upon themselves that their above-named masters shall ratify this treaty, and that the ratifications shall be exchanged within two months.

By this treaty, the crown of Portugal commits to admitting English woolens on the same footing as before the prohibition -- that is, not to raise the duties that were paid before then. But it does not commit to admitting them on any better terms than those offered to any other nation -- France or Holland, for example. The crown of Great Britain, by contrast, commits to admitting Portuguese wines at only two-thirds of the duty paid on French wines, the wines most likely to compete with them. On its face, then, this treaty is plainly advantageous to Portugal and disadvantageous to Great Britain.

Yet it has been celebrated as a masterpiece of English commercial policy. Here's the reasoning. Portugal receives more gold from Brazil every year than it can use in its domestic commerce, whether as coin or as plate -- gold and silver dishes, ornaments, and the like. The surplus is too valuable to sit idle, locked up in chests, and since it can find no profitable market at home, it must be sent abroad despite any prohibition, and exchanged for something that does have a profitable market at home. A large share of it comes to England every year, in return either for English goods or for the goods of other European nations that receive their payments through England. Mr. Baretti was told that the weekly packet-boat from Lisbon brings, one week with another, more than fifty thousand pounds in gold to England. That figure was probably exaggerated. It would amount to more than two million six hundred thousand pounds a year -- more than Brazil is believed to produce.

Some years ago, our merchants were annoyed with the crown of Portugal. Certain privileges that had been granted to them -- not by treaty, but by the free grace of that crown (probably at Britain's request, and in return for much greater favors: defense and protection from the crown of Great Britain) -- had been either violated or revoked. So the people usually most eager to celebrate the Portugal trade were, for once, inclined to portray it as less advantageous than commonly imagined. The far greater part of this annual gold importation -- almost the whole of it, they claimed -- came in not on Britain's account but on account of other European nations, since the fruits and wines Portugal sends to Great Britain each year nearly offset the value of the British goods sent there.

But suppose the whole of it came in on Great Britain's account, and suppose it amounted to an even greater sum than Mr. Baretti seems to imagine. Even then, this trade would be no more advantageous than any other trade in which we received an equal value of consumable goods in return for the same value sent out.

Only a very small part of this imported gold, we can assume, is added each year to the kingdom's plate or coin. All the rest must be sent abroad and exchanged for consumable goods of one kind or another. But if those consumable goods were purchased directly with the products of English industry, that would be better for England than first using those products to buy Portuguese gold and then using the gold to buy the consumable goods. A direct foreign trade of consumption is always more advantageous than a roundabout one, and bringing the same value of foreign goods to the home market requires a much smaller capital the direct way than the roundabout way. So if a smaller share of England's industry had been employed producing goods for the Portuguese market, and a larger share producing goods for the other markets where the consumable goods Britain actually wants can be had, England would have been better off. Obtaining both the gold it needs for its own use and the consumable goods would, this way, tie up a much smaller capital than at present. There would be capital to spare, available for other purposes -- for setting additional industry in motion and raising a greater annual production.

Even if Britain were entirely shut out of the Portugal trade, it would have very little difficulty obtaining all the gold it needs each year, whether for plate, for coin, or for foreign trade. Gold, like every other commodity, can always be had somewhere or other by those who have its value to give for it. Besides, Portugal's annual gold surplus would still have to be sent abroad, and if Great Britain didn't carry it away, some other nation would -- and that nation would be glad to sell it again for its price, exactly as Great Britain does now. In buying gold from Portugal, admittedly, we buy it firsthand, whereas buying it from any other nation except Spain means buying it secondhand, perhaps at a slightly higher price. But this difference is surely too trivial to deserve public attention.

Almost all our gold, it's said, comes from Portugal; with other nations, the balance of trade is either against us or not much in our favor. But we should remember: the more gold we import from one country, the less we must necessarily import from all the others. The effectual demand for gold, like the demand for every other commodity, is limited in every country to a certain quantity. If nine-tenths of that quantity is imported from one country, only one-tenth remains to be imported from all the rest. Moreover, the more gold imported each year from particular countries beyond what's needed for plate and coin, the more must necessarily be exported to other countries. And the more that most insignificant object of modern policy -- the balance of trade -- appears to be in our favor with some particular countries, the more it must necessarily appear to be against us with many others.

It was on this silly notion -- that England could not survive without the Portugal trade -- that toward the end of the late war (the Seven Years' War), France and Spain, without claiming any offense or provocation, demanded that the king of Portugal shut all British ships out of his ports, and, to guarantee the exclusion, accept French or Spanish garrisons into them. Had the king of Portugal submitted to these humiliating terms proposed by his brother-in-law the king of Spain, Britain would have been freed of a burden much greater than the loss of the Portugal trade: the burden of supporting a very weak ally, so unprepared for his own defense that the whole power of England, devoted entirely to that single purpose, could perhaps barely have defended him for one more campaign. The loss of the Portugal trade would no doubt have caused considerable trouble for the merchants engaged in it at the time, who might not have found an equally profitable use for their capital for a year or two. And that, probably, is the full extent of the inconvenience England would have suffered from this celebrated piece of commercial policy.

The great annual importation of gold and silver is meant neither for plate nor for coin, but for foreign trade. A roundabout foreign trade of consumption can be carried on more advantageously with these metals than with almost any other goods. Since they are the universal instruments of commerce, they are more readily accepted in exchange for all commodities than anything else. And because of their small bulk and great value, it costs less to transport them back and forth between places than almost any other kind of merchandise, and they lose less of their value in transit. Of all the commodities bought in one foreign country purely to be sold or exchanged for other goods in another, none is as convenient as gold and silver. The principal advantage of the Portugal trade is that it facilitates all the various roundabout foreign trades of consumption carried on in Great Britain. It is not a primary advantage, but it is undoubtedly a considerable one.

That any plausible annual addition to the kingdom's plate or coin would require only a very small annual importation of gold and silver seems obvious enough. And even without a direct trade with Portugal, this small quantity could always be obtained very easily somewhere or other.

Although the goldsmiths' trade is very considerable in Great Britain, the far greater part of the new plate they sell each year is made from other old plate melted down. So the annual addition to the kingdom's total stock of plate cannot be very great, and would require only a very small annual importation.

The same is true of the coin. Nobody, I believe, imagines that even the greater part of the annual coinage -- which for ten years running, before the recent reform of the gold coin, exceeded eight hundred thousand pounds a year in gold -- was an annual addition to the money already circulating in the kingdom. In a country where the government pays the cost of coining, the value of the coin, even when it contains its full standard weight of gold and silver, can never be much greater than that of an equal quantity of those metals uncoined. After all, it takes only the trouble of going to the mint, and perhaps a few weeks' delay, to convert any quantity of uncoined gold and silver into an equal quantity of coin. But in every country, most of the circulating coin is almost always more or less worn down, or otherwise degraded below its standard. In Great Britain before the recent reform, this was quite pronounced: the gold was more than two percent, and the silver more than eight percent, below standard weight. Now, if forty-four and a half guineas containing their full standard weight -- a pound weight of gold -- could purchase very little more than a pound weight of uncoined gold, then forty-four and a half guineas missing part of their weight could not purchase a pound weight, and something had to be added to make up the difference. The market price of gold bullion, instead of matching the mint price of 46 pounds 14 shillings 6 pence, was therefore about 47 pounds 14 shillings, and sometimes around forty-eight pounds. Yet when most of the coin was in this degraded condition, forty-four and a half guineas fresh from the mint would buy no more goods in the market than any other ordinary guineas. Once they entered a merchant's coffers and got mixed in with other money, they couldn't be told apart without more trouble than the difference was worth. Like other guineas, they were worth no more than 46 pounds 14 shillings 6 pence. Thrown into the melting pot, however, they yielded, without any noticeable loss, a pound weight of standard gold, which could be sold at any time for between 47 pounds 14 shillings and 48 pounds, in gold or silver that served all the purposes of coin just as well as what had been melted down. There was an obvious profit, therefore, in melting down newly coined money, and it was done so instantly that no government precaution could prevent it. The operations of the mint were, on this account, rather like the web of Penelope: the work done by day was undone by night. The mint was employed not so much in adding to the coin each day as in replacing the very best part of it, which was melted down daily.

If the private people who carry their gold and silver to the mint paid for the coining themselves, it would add to the value of those metals, just as craftsmanship adds to the value of plate. Coined gold and silver would be worth more than uncoined. The seignorage -- the minting fee charged by the government -- would, if not exorbitant, add to the bullion the entire value of the fee. Because the government everywhere holds the exclusive privilege of coining, no coin can come to market cheaper than the government chooses to supply it. If the fee were exorbitant -- that is, far above the real value of the labor and expense of coining -- then counterfeiters at home and abroad might be encouraged by the large gap between the value of bullion and the value of coin to pour in enough fake money to drive down the value of the government's money. In France, however, although the seignorage is eight percent, no noticeable problem of this kind has arisen. The dangers a counterfeiter faces everywhere if he lives in the country whose coin he counterfeits -- and the dangers his agents or correspondents face if he lives in a foreign country -- are far too great to risk for a profit of six or seven percent.

The seignorage in France raises the value of the coin above the proportion of pure gold it contains. By the edict of January 1726, the mint price of fine gold of twenty-four carats was set at seven hundred and forty livres nine sous and one and one-eleventh deniers per mark of eight Paris ounces. The French gold coin, allowing for the mint's permitted margin of error, contains twenty-one and three-quarters carats of fine gold and two and a quarter carats of alloy. The mark of standard gold is therefore worth no more than about six hundred and seventy-one livres ten deniers. But in France this mark of standard gold is coined into thirty louis d'or of twenty-four livres each -- seven hundred and twenty livres. The coining therefore increases the value of a mark of standard gold bullion by the difference between six hundred and seventy-one livres ten deniers and seven hundred and twenty livres: that is, by forty-eight livres nineteen sous and two deniers.

A seignorage will in many cases eliminate, and will in all cases reduce, the profit of melting down new coin. That profit always comes from the difference between the quantity of bullion the circulating currency ought to contain and the quantity it actually does contain. If this difference is less than the seignorage, melting yields a loss instead of a profit. If it equals the seignorage, there is neither profit nor loss. If it exceeds the seignorage, there is indeed some profit, but less than if there were no seignorage at all. For example, if before the recent reform of the gold coin there had been a seignorage of five percent on the coinage, melting down the gold coin would have produced a loss of three percent. With a seignorage of two percent, there would have been neither profit nor loss. With a seignorage of one percent, there would have been a profit -- but of only one percent instead of two. Wherever money is accepted by count rather than by weight, therefore, a seignorage is the most effective preventative against melting down the coin, and for the same reason, against exporting it. It's the best and heaviest pieces that are typically melted down or exported, because those are the ones that yield the largest profits.

The law encouraging coinage by making it free of charge was first enacted during the reign of Charles II for a limited time, then continued by various extensions until 1769, when it was made permanent. The Bank of England, in order to restock its coffers with money, is frequently obliged to carry bullion to the mint, and the Bank probably imagined that it was better for its interests to have the coining done at the government's expense than at its own. It was probably out of deference to this great company that the government agreed to make the law permanent. But if the custom of weighing gold coins should fall out of use -- as it very likely will, given how inconvenient it is -- and if English gold coin should come to be accepted by count, as it was before the recent recoinage, this great company may discover that on this matter, as on some others, it has rather seriously mistaken its own interest.

Before the recent recoinage, when the gold currency of England was two percent below its standard weight, there was no seignorage, so the currency was two percent below the value of the standard gold bullion it should have contained. When this great company bought gold bullion to have it coined, it therefore had to pay two percent more for the bullion than the coin was worth after minting. But if there had been a seignorage of two percent on the coinage, the ordinary gold currency, though two percent below its standard weight, would nonetheless have been equal in value to the quantity of standard gold it should have contained -- the value of the minting making up, in this case, for the loss of weight. The Bank would, it's true, have had the seignorage to pay; and since that was two percent, its loss on the whole transaction would have been two percent -- exactly the same as it actually was, and no greater.

If the seignorage had been five percent while the gold currency was only two percent below standard weight, the Bank would have gained three percent on the price of the bullion; but since it would have had a five percent seignorage to pay on the coinage, its loss on the whole transaction would, in the same way, have been exactly two percent.

If the seignorage had been only one percent while the gold currency was two percent below standard weight, the Bank would have lost only one percent on the price of the bullion; but with a one percent seignorage to pay as well, its loss on the whole transaction would again have been exactly two percent, just as in every other case.

If there were a reasonable seignorage while the coin contained its full standard weight -- as it very nearly has since the recent recoinage -- then whatever the Bank lost in seignorage, it would gain on the price of the bullion, and whatever it gained on the price of the bullion, it would lose in seignorage. It would neither lose nor gain on the whole transaction, and would be, in this as in all the previous cases, in exactly the same situation as if there were no seignorage at all.

When the tax on a commodity is moderate enough not to encourage smuggling, the merchant who deals in it advances the tax but doesn't really pay it, since he gets it back in the price of the commodity. The tax is ultimately paid by the final purchaser -- the consumer. But money is a commodity in which every man is a merchant. Nobody buys it except to sell it again, and in the ordinary course of things there is no final purchaser or consumer of money. So when the tax on coinage is moderate enough not to encourage counterfeiting, everybody advances the tax but nobody ultimately pays it, because everybody gets it back in the increased value of the coin.

A moderate seignorage, therefore, would never increase the costs of the Bank, or of any other private party that carries bullion to the mint to be coined -- and the absence of a moderate seignorage never reduces those costs. With or without a seignorage, if the currency contains its full standard weight, the coining costs nobody anything; and if the currency falls short of that weight, the coining must always cost the difference between the quantity of bullion the coin ought to contain and the quantity it actually does.

So when the government pays the cost of coining, it not only incurs a small expense but loses a small revenue it could collect through a proper fee -- and neither the Bank nor any other private party benefits in the slightest from this useless piece of public generosity.

The directors of the Bank, however, would probably be unwilling to agree to a seignorage on the strength of a theoretical argument that promises them no gain and only claims to insure them against loss. In the present state of the gold coin, and as long as it continues to be accepted by weight, they would certainly gain nothing from such a change. But if the custom of weighing gold coin ever falls out of use, as it very likely will, and if the gold coin ever sinks back into the degraded state it was in before the recent recoinage, the Bank's gain -- or more properly, its savings -- from a seignorage would probably be very considerable. The Bank of England is the only company that sends any significant quantity of bullion to the mint, and the burden of the annual coinage falls entirely, or almost entirely, on it. If this annual coinage had nothing to do but repair the unavoidable losses and necessary wear and tear of the coin, it could rarely exceed fifty thousand pounds, or at most a hundred thousand. But when the coin is degraded below its standard weight, the annual coinage must also fill the large gaps that exportation and the melting pot are continually opening in the circulating coin. It was for this reason that during the ten or twelve years immediately before the recent reform of the gold coin, the annual coinage averaged more than eight hundred and fifty thousand pounds. But if there had been a seignorage of four or five percent on the gold coin, it would probably -- even in the state things were in then -- have put an effective stop to both the exportation and the melting pot. Instead of losing about two and a half percent each year on bullion that was to be coined into more than eight hundred and fifty thousand pounds -- an annual loss of more than twenty-one thousand two hundred and fifty pounds -- the Bank would probably not have suffered a tenth of that loss.

The revenue that parliament allocates for the cost of coinage is only fourteen thousand pounds a year, and the real expense to the government -- the fees of the mint officers -- does not, in ordinary circumstances, I'm assured, exceed half that sum. Saving such a small sum, or even gaining another that couldn't be much larger, may seem too trivial to deserve the government's serious attention. But saving eighteen or twenty thousand pounds a year, in the event of something that is not improbable, that has frequently happened before, and that is very likely to happen again -- that is surely an objective well worth the serious attention even of a company as great as the Bank of England.

Some of the foregoing reasoning and observations might perhaps have fit better in the chapters of Book I that deal with the origin and use of money, and with the difference between the real and the nominal price of commodities. But since the law making coinage free of charge owes its origin to the vulgar prejudices introduced by the mercantile system, I judged it more appropriate to save them for this chapter. Nothing could be more agreeable to the spirit of that system than a kind of subsidy on the production of money -- the very thing the system supposes constitutes the wealth of every nation. It is one of the system's many admirable schemes for enriching the country.
