The enumerated commodities fall into two categories. First, there are products that are either uniquely American or that cannot be produced (or at least are not produced) in the mother country. These include molasses, coffee, cacao, tobacco, pimento, ginger, whale fins, raw silk, cotton, beaver pelts and other American furs, indigo, fustic, and other dyewoods. Second, there are products that are not unique to America but which can be and are produced in the mother country, just not in quantities large enough to meet most of the demand -- which is mainly supplied from foreign countries. These include all naval stores (masts, yards, and bowsprits, tar, pitch, and turpentine), pig and bar iron, copper ore, hides and skins, and pot and pearl ashes.

The largest possible imports of the first category could not compete with or undercut any product of the mother country. By confining these goods to the home market, British merchants expected not only to buy them more cheaply in the colonies (and thus sell them at a better profit at home), but also to establish a profitable carrying trade between the colonies and foreign countries -- with Great Britain necessarily serving as the hub, since these commodities had to be imported to Britain first.

Imports of the second category, it was thought, could be managed so as to compete not with domestic British products of the same kind, but with similar goods imported from foreign countries. Through carefully set duties, colonial products could be made somewhat more expensive than the domestic version, but still considerably cheaper than foreign imports. By channeling these goods through the home market, the aim was to undercut the products not of Great Britain, but of foreign countries with which Britain supposedly had an unfavorable balance of trade.

The ban on colonies exporting masts, yards, bowsprits, tar, pitch, and turpentine to any country but Great Britain naturally tended to lower timber prices in the colonies, which increased the cost of clearing land -- the main obstacle to colonial development. But around the beginning of the eighteenth century, in 1703, Sweden's pitch and tar company tried to jack up the price of their products sold to Britain by restricting exports to Swedish ships, at Swedish-set prices, in whatever quantities they chose. To counter this clever bit of mercantile maneuvering and to make herself as independent as possible -- not just of Sweden, but of all the northern European powers -- Great Britain offered a subsidy on the import of naval stores from America. The effect of this subsidy was to raise timber prices in America far more than the trade restriction could lower them. Since both policies were enacted at the same time, their combined effect actually encouraged rather than discouraged the clearing of land in America.

Although pig and bar iron were also placed on the enumerated list, they are exempt from the hefty duties charged when imported from other countries. So the duty exemption does more to encourage the building of iron furnaces in America than the trade restriction does to discourage it. No industry consumes as much wood as an iron furnace, or does as much to clear a country overgrown with forest.

The tendency of some of these regulations to raise the value of timber in America, and thereby make it easier to clear land, was probably neither intended nor understood by the legislature. But even though the beneficial effects were accidental, they were no less real for that.

The most complete freedom of trade exists between the British colonies of America and the West Indies, for both enumerated and non-enumerated goods. These colonies have grown so populous and prosperous that each of them finds a large and extensive market in the others for every part of its output. Taken together, they form a great internal market for one another's products.

Britain's generosity toward the trade of her colonies, however, has mainly applied to their raw products, or at most to what might be called the very first stage of manufacturing. The more advanced or refined manufactures, even those made from colonial raw materials, British merchants and manufacturers have chosen to reserve for themselves. They have persuaded the legislature to prevent these industries from developing in the colonies -- sometimes through high duties, sometimes through outright bans.

For example, raw muscovado sugar from the British plantations pays an import duty of only 6 shillings 4 pence per hundredweight. White sugar pays 1 pound, 1 shilling, 1 penny. Refined sugar, whether double or single, in loaves, pays 4 pounds, 2 shillings, 5 pence. When these high duties were first imposed, Great Britain was the sole market -- and still remains the primary market -- for colonial sugar exports. The duties effectively amounted to a prohibition, first against processing or refining sugar for any foreign market, and now against refining it for the market that buys more than nine-tenths of the total output. The sugar-refining industry, which has flourished in all the French sugar colonies, has consequently been barely developed in any English colony except for local consumption. When Grenada was in French hands, nearly every plantation had at least a basic sugar refinery. Since it passed to the English, almost all such operations have been shut down. As of October 1773, I am told there are no more than two or three left on the island. Currently, however, through an accommodation by customs officials, refined sugar reduced from loaves to powder is routinely imported as if it were raw muscovado.

While Great Britain encourages the production of pig and bar iron in America by exempting them from the duties charged on imports from other countries, she absolutely prohibits the building of steel furnaces and slit-mills in any of her American colonies. She will not allow her colonists to work in these more advanced industries even for their own use, but insists they buy all such goods from British merchants and manufacturers.

She prohibits the transport of hats, wool, and woolen goods produced in America from one province to another -- whether by water, by horseback, or by cart. This regulation effectively prevents the establishment of any manufacturing industry for anything beyond local trade, and confines colonial industry to the kind of crude, homemade production that any family would make for its own use or for its immediate neighbors.

To prohibit a great people from making the most of every part of their own production, or from using their capital and labor in the way they judge most advantageous to themselves, is a blatant violation of the most sacred rights of humanity. Unjust as these prohibitions are, however, they have not so far been very harmful to the colonies in practice. Land is still so cheap, and labor consequently so expensive, that the colonies can import almost all the more refined manufactures from the mother country more cheaply than they could produce them themselves. Even without these prohibitions, self-interest would probably have prevented them from setting up such industries. In their current stage of development, these restrictions -- while not actually cramping their industry or holding it back from anything it would have done on its own -- are merely insulting badges of slavery imposed on them, without any good reason, by the groundless jealousy of the merchants and manufacturers of the mother country. In a more advanced stage of development, these same restrictions might become truly oppressive and unbearable.

Great Britain also, as she restricts some of the colonies' most important products to her own market, gives some of them an advantage in that market by way of compensation. Sometimes she does this by imposing higher duties on similar products imported from other countries, and sometimes by offering subsidies on imports from the colonies. In the first way, she gives colonial sugar, tobacco, and iron an advantage in the home market. In the second way, she subsidizes colonial raw silk, hemp and flax, indigo, naval stores, and building timber. This second approach -- subsidizing colonial imports -- is, as far as I know, unique to Great Britain. The first is not. Portugal, for instance, not only imposes higher duties on tobacco from other countries but bans its import entirely, under the severest penalties.

In terms of importing goods from Europe, England has also dealt more generously with her colonies than any other nation.

Great Britain refunds a portion of the import duties on foreign goods when they are re-exported to another country -- usually at least half, generally more, and sometimes the full amount. It was easy to foresee that no independent foreign country would accept these goods if they arrived loaded with the heavy duties Britain imposes on imports. Unless some of those duties were refunded on re-export, the carrying trade -- so highly prized by the mercantile system -- would simply cease.

The colonies, of course, are not independent foreign countries. Great Britain, having claimed the exclusive right to supply them with all European goods, could have forced them to accept those goods loaded with the same duties they bore in the mother country, as other nations have done with their colonies. But instead, until 1763, the same duty refunds were given on goods re-exported to the colonies as to any independent foreign nation. In 1763, however, this generosity was significantly curtailed. A new law provided that no part of the duty called the "old subsidy" would be refunded on any European or East Indian goods exported to the British colonies in America -- with exceptions for wine, white calicoes, and muslins. Before this law, many types of foreign goods could actually be bought more cheaply in the colonies than in the mother country. Some still can.

It should be noted that the merchants who conduct the colonial trade have been the primary advisors behind most of the regulations governing it. We should not be surprised, then, that in most of these regulations, their own interests have been given more weight than either those of the colonies or those of the mother country. In their exclusive privilege of supplying the colonies with all the European goods they wanted, and of buying up all colonial products that did not compete with their own domestic trades, the colonies' interests were sacrificed to those of the merchants. In allowing the same duty refunds on re-exports to the colonies as to independent countries, the mother country's interests were sacrificed to those of the merchants -- even by the mercantile system's own logic. It was in the merchants' interest to pay as little as possible for the foreign goods they sent to the colonies, and therefore to recover as much as possible of the duties they had paid on importing those goods. This way, they could sell the same quantity at a bigger profit, or a bigger quantity at the same profit. It was also in the colonies' interest to get these goods as cheaply and abundantly as possible. But this was not always in the mother country's interest. She frequently suffered both in her tax revenue -- by refunding a large share of the import duties -- and in her manufacturing sector, which was undercut in the colonial market by foreign goods made artificially cheap through these refunds. The growth of Britain's own linen industry, it is commonly said, has been considerably held back by duty refunds on German linen re-exported to the American colonies.

But though Britain's colonial trade policy has been driven by the same mercantile thinking as other nations', it has, on the whole, been less restrictive and oppressive than any of the others.

In everything except their foreign trade, the English colonists' freedom to manage their own affairs is complete. It is in every way equal to that of their fellow citizens at home, and is secured the same way: by an elected assembly of the people's representatives, which claims the sole right to impose taxes for the support of the colonial government. The authority of this assembly keeps the executive power in check. Neither the humblest nor the most controversial colonist, as long as he obeys the law, has anything to fear from the governor or any other civil or military officer. The colonial assemblies, though -- like the House of Commons in England -- they are not always a perfectly equal representation of the people, come closer to that ideal. Since the executive either lacks the means to corrupt them or, because it is supported by the mother country, has no need to, the assemblies are generally more responsive to the actual wishes of their constituents.

The councils that serve as the upper house in colonial legislatures -- corresponding to the House of Lords in Britain -- are not made up of hereditary nobles. In some colonies, like the three New England provinces, these councils are elected by the people's representatives, not appointed by the king. In none of the English colonies is there a hereditary aristocracy. In all of them, as in all free countries, the descendant of an old colonial family is more respected than a newcomer of equal merit and fortune -- but he is only more respected, not more privileged. He has no special legal powers that could make him a nuisance to his neighbors.

Before the current American conflict began, the colonial assemblies had not only legislative power but also part of the executive power. In Connecticut and Rhode Island, they elected the governor. In the other colonies, they appointed the tax collectors, who were directly accountable to the assemblies that had appointed them. There is more equality among the English colonists than among the people of the mother country. Their manners are more republican, and their governments -- those of the three New England provinces in particular -- have been more republican as well.

The absolute governments of Spain, Portugal, and France, by contrast, are replicated in their colonies. The discretionary powers that such governments typically delegate to their subordinate officials are, because of the great distance, naturally exercised there with even greater brutality than at home. Under any absolute government, there is more liberty in the capital than in the provinces. The sovereign himself usually has neither the interest nor the inclination to pervert justice or oppress the majority of his people. In the capital, his presence restrains his officials somewhat. In the remote provinces, where complaints from the people are less likely to reach him, those officials can exercise their tyranny with far more impunity. But the European colonies in America are more remote than the most distant provinces of any empire in history. The government of the English colonies is perhaps the only one that has ever provided genuine security to the inhabitants of such a distant territory.

French colonial administration, it should be said, has always been conducted with more gentleness and restraint than that of Spain and Portugal. This fits both the character of the French nation and the nature of its government, which -- though arbitrary and violent compared to Great Britain's -- is lawful and free compared to Spain's and Portugal's.

It is in the progress of the North American colonies, however, that the superiority of English colonial policy is most evident. The French sugar colonies have grown at least as fast as, and perhaps faster than, most of the English sugar colonies. And the English sugar colonies enjoy a free government much like that of the North American colonies. But the French sugar colonies are not forbidden, as the English ones are, from refining their own sugar. And what is even more important, the nature of the French government naturally leads to better treatment of enslaved workers.

In all European colonies, sugar is grown by enslaved Africans. It was assumed that Europeans, raised in a temperate climate, could not endure the labor of digging in the ground under the burning Caribbean sun. Sugar cultivation, as currently practiced, is all done by hand -- though many people believe the drill plow could be introduced with great advantage. Now, just as the profit and success of farming with draft animals depends on how well those animals are managed, the profit and success of farming with enslaved labor depends on how well those workers are managed. And in the management of their enslaved workers, French planters are generally acknowledged to be superior to the English.

The law, insofar as it gives the enslaved person some feeble protection from the violence of his master, is more likely to be enforced in a colony under an authoritarian government than in one with a free government. In any country with the unfortunate institution of slavery, when a magistrate protects an enslaved person, he is interfering to some extent in the management of the master's private property. In a free country, where the master is perhaps a member of the colonial assembly or a voter who elects one, the magistrate barely dares to intervene, and does so only with the greatest caution. The deference he must show the master makes it harder for him to protect the enslaved person.

But in a country where the government is largely authoritarian -- where magistrates routinely intervene in the management of private property and might send a lettre de cachet to anyone who displeased them -- it is much easier for the magistrate to offer some protection to the enslaved person. And ordinary humanity naturally inclines him to do so. The protection of the magistrate makes the enslaved person somewhat less contemptible in the master's eyes, which leads the master to treat him with more respect and gentleness. Humane treatment makes enslaved people not only more loyal but also more capable, and therefore doubly more useful. They begin to approach the condition of free servants and may develop some degree of integrity and dedication to their master's interests -- virtues that free servants often possess, but that can never be found in an enslaved person who is treated the way they typically are in countries where the master faces no constraints.

That the condition of an enslaved person is better under an authoritarian government than under a free one is, I believe, supported by the history of all ages and nations. In Roman history, the first time we read of a magistrate stepping in to protect a slave from his master's violence is during the era of the emperors. When Vedius Pollio, in the presence of Augustus, ordered one of his slaves -- who had committed a minor offense -- to be cut to pieces and thrown into his fishpond to feed his fish, the emperor commanded him, with indignation, to free not only that slave but all the others who belonged to him. Under the republic, no magistrate would have had the authority to protect the slave, much less to punish the master.

It is worth noting that the capital which built up the French sugar colonies, especially the great colony of Saint-Domingue, was raised almost entirely from the gradual improvement and cultivation of those colonies themselves. It was almost wholly the product of the soil and the industry of the colonists -- or, what amounts to the same thing, the accumulated value of that production, well managed and reinvested to produce still more. But a large part of the capital that has developed and cultivated the English sugar colonies was sent out from England. It has by no means been entirely generated by the colonists themselves. The prosperity of the English sugar colonies has largely been owed to the great wealth of England, which has, in a sense, overflowed into those colonies. But the prosperity of the French sugar colonies has been entirely owed to the good management of the colonists, which must therefore have been superior to that of the English. And this superiority has been most visible in the management of their enslaved workers.

Such have been the general outlines of the policies of the different European nations toward their colonies.

European policy, therefore, has very little to boast about -- either in the original establishment of the American colonies or, as far as their internal governance is concerned, in their subsequent prosperity.

Folly and injustice seem to have been the guiding principles behind the first colonial projects: the folly of chasing after gold and silver mines, and the injustice of seizing a country whose harmless native inhabitants -- far from having ever harmed the people of Europe -- had welcomed the first adventurers with every sign of kindness and hospitality.

The adventurers who established some of the later colonies did, admittedly, combine the fantasy of finding gold mines with other motives that were more reasonable and more admirable. But even these do very little credit to European policy.

English Puritans, oppressed at home, fled to America for freedom and founded the four governments of New England. English Catholics, treated with even greater injustice, founded Maryland. The Quakers founded Pennsylvania. Portuguese Jews, persecuted by the Inquisition, stripped of their property, and banished to Brazil, introduced some degree of order and industry among the transported convicts and prostitutes who originally populated that colony, and taught them to cultivate sugarcane. In every one of these cases, it was not the wisdom and good policy of European governments that populated and cultivated America, but their disorder and injustice.

In carrying out some of the most important of these settlements, the various European governments deserved as little credit as they did for planning them. The conquest of Mexico was the project not of the Spanish royal council, but of a governor of Cuba -- and it was accomplished by the bold spirit of the adventurer entrusted with it, in spite of everything that governor (who soon regretted giving him the job) could do to obstruct him. The conquerors of Chile and Peru, and of nearly all the other Spanish settlements on the South American continent, set out with no official support beyond a general permission to make settlements and conquests in the king of Spain's name. These ventures were all undertaken at the adventurers' own risk and expense. The Spanish government contributed virtually nothing. The English government contributed just as little to several of its most important North American colonies.

When these settlements had grown large enough to attract the mother country's attention, the first regulations imposed on them always aimed at securing a monopoly on their trade -- restricting their markets and expanding the mother country's, at the colonies' expense. The goal was to dampen and discourage, rather than quicken and advance, the course of colonial prosperity. The different methods by which this monopoly has been enforced represent one of the most fundamental differences in how European nations have governed their colonies. The best approach -- England's -- is only somewhat less restrictive and oppressive than the rest.

In what way, then, has European policy contributed to either the founding or the present greatness of the American colonies? In one way only, but in that one way it has contributed a great deal. "Magna virum Mater!" -- Great Mother of Men! Europe bred and shaped the people who were capable of achieving such great things and laying the foundations of so great an empire. No other part of the world has a political culture capable of producing -- or has ever actually produced -- such people. The colonies owe to European policy the education and grand vision of their bold and enterprising founders. Some of the greatest and most important colonies, as far as their internal governance goes, owe it practically nothing else.
