PART III: Of the Advantages Which Europe Has Derived from the Discovery of America, and from the Discovery of a Passage to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope

Such are the advantages the American colonies have gained from European policy.

What are the advantages that Europe has gained from the discovery and colonization of America?

These advantages can be divided into two categories: first, the general advantages that Europe as a whole has gained from those great events; and second, the particular advantages that each colonizing country has gained from the colonies under its control.

The general advantages Europe has gained from the discovery and colonization of America are, first, an increase in its enjoyments, and second, an expansion of its industry.

The surplus products of America, imported into Europe, provide the people of this great continent with a variety of goods they could never otherwise have had -- some useful, some pleasurable, some decorative -- and thereby increase their enjoyments.

The discovery and colonization of America have clearly expanded the industry of, first, all the countries that trade directly with it -- Spain, Portugal, France, and England -- and second, all those countries that trade with it indirectly, sending their own products through other nations. Austrian Flanders and some German provinces, for example, ship considerable quantities of linen and other goods to America through the countries mentioned above. All such countries have obviously gained access to a larger market for their surplus production, and have naturally been encouraged to increase that production.

But it might seem less obvious that these great events have also boosted the industry of countries like Hungary and Poland, which may never have sent a single item of their own production to America. Yet that is precisely what has happened. Some American products are consumed in Hungary and Poland -- there is demand there for sugar, chocolate, and tobacco from the New World. But these goods must be paid for with something: either with Hungarian and Polish products, or with something purchased using Hungarian and Polish products. American goods are new values, new things to exchange, introduced into Hungary and Poland to be traded for the surplus production of those countries. By being brought there, they create a new and larger market for that surplus production. They raise its value and thereby encourage its growth. Even though none of that production may ever be shipped to America, it may be shipped to other countries that buy it with their share of America's surplus. It finds a market through the chain of commerce that was originally set in motion by American production.

These great events may even have increased the enjoyments and expanded the industry of countries that have neither sent goods to America nor received any from it. Such countries may have received a greater abundance of other goods from nations whose surplus production had been expanded by the American trade. This greater abundance must have increased their enjoyments and expanded their industry. More new goods must have been available to exchange for the surplus production of their own industries. A larger market must have opened up for that surplus, raising its value and encouraging its growth. The total mass of goods constantly circulating through the great system of European commerce, distributed by its various movements among all the nations within it, must have been increased by the entire surplus production of America. A greater share of this greater total is likely to have reached each of these nations, increasing their enjoyments and expanding their industry.

The exclusive trade claimed by the mother countries tends to reduce -- or at least to hold below what it would otherwise be -- both the enjoyments and the industry of all these nations generally, and of the American colonies in particular. It is a dead weight on one of the great engines that drives much of the world's economic activity. By making colonial products more expensive in every other country, it reduces consumption, which in turn restrains the colonies' industry. It also restrains the enjoyments and industry of all other countries, which enjoy less when they pay more for what they enjoy, and produce less when they get less for what they produce. By making other countries' products more expensive in the colonies, it similarly restrains the industry of those other countries, and both the enjoyments and the industry of the colonies themselves.

It is a drag that, for the supposed benefit of a few favored countries, burdens the pleasures and hampers the industry of all others -- but of the colonies most of all. It does not merely shut other countries out of one particular market; it confines the colonies to one particular market. And there is a vast difference between being shut out of one market when all others are open, and being confined to one market when all others are closed. The surplus production of the colonies is the original source of all the increased enjoyment and industry that Europe has gained from the discovery and colonization of America. The exclusive trade of the mother countries tends to make this source far less abundant than it would otherwise be.

The particular advantages that each colonizing country gains from its own colonies are of two kinds: first, the ordinary advantages that any empire gains from the provinces under its control; and second, the special advantages that are supposed to come from provinces as unusual as the European colonies in America.

The ordinary advantages any empire gains from subject provinces are, first, the military forces those provinces provide for defense, and second, the revenue they contribute to support the government. Roman colonies routinely provided both. Greek colonies sometimes provided military support but rarely any revenue. They seldom acknowledged themselves as subject to the mother city. They were usually allies in wartime, but very rarely subjects in peacetime.

The European colonies in America have never yet provided any military forces for the defense of the mother country. Their own military forces have never been sufficient for their own defense. In every war the mother countries have fought, the defense of their colonies has required a very significant diversion of military resources. In this respect, all the European colonies, without exception, have been a source of weakness rather than strength to their mother countries.

Only the colonies of Spain and Portugal have contributed any revenue toward the defense or civil government of the mother country. The taxes levied on other European colonies -- England's in particular -- have rarely covered the peacetime costs of maintaining them, and have never been enough to cover wartime expenses. These colonies have therefore been a source of expense, not revenue, to their mother countries.

The advantages of such colonies to their mother countries consist entirely in the special benefits that are supposed to come from provinces of such an unusual nature as the European colonies in America. And the exclusive trade, everyone acknowledges, is the sole source of all those special benefits.

Because of this exclusive trade, the entire surplus production of the English colonies that falls into the category of enumerated commodities can only be sent to England. Other countries must buy it from her afterward. It is therefore cheaper in England than anywhere else, and contributes more to increasing England's enjoyments than those of any other country. It must also do more to stimulate her industry. For all the parts of her own surplus production that England exchanges for these enumerated goods, she gets a better price than any other country can get for similar products exchanged for the same goods. English manufactures, for example, will purchase a larger quantity of sugar and tobacco from England's own colonies than the equivalent manufactures of other countries can purchase. So far as English manufactures and those of other countries are both being exchanged for colonial sugar and tobacco, this price advantage gives English industry an edge over its competitors. The exclusive colonial trade, therefore, while it depresses (or at least holds down) the enjoyments and industry of the countries that do not have it, gives a clear advantage to the country that does.

This advantage, however, may turn out to be relative rather than absolute -- giving a superiority to the country that enjoys it more by depressing the industry and output of other countries than by actually raising its own above what they would naturally be under free trade.

Maryland and Virginia tobacco, for example, certainly comes cheaper to England than to France, thanks to England's monopoly, since England commonly sells a large share of it to France. But if France and all other European countries had always been allowed free trade with Maryland and Virginia, the tobacco from those colonies might by now have become cheaper than it currently is -- not only for all those other countries, but for England too. Production of tobacco, with a market so much larger than any it has ever had, would probably have expanded enough by now to bring the profits of a tobacco plantation down to normal levels -- roughly equal to those of a grain farm, which they are still thought to exceed somewhat. The price of tobacco would probably have fallen somewhat below its current level. An equal quantity of English goods (or goods from other countries) could have bought a larger quantity of tobacco in Maryland and Virginia, and would consequently have sold for a better price there.

So to the extent that cheap and plentiful tobacco can increase the enjoyments or expand the industry of England or any other country, free trade would probably have produced both effects to a somewhat greater degree than the current system does. England would not have had any advantage over other countries in this scenario. She might have bought colonial tobacco somewhat cheaper and sold her own goods somewhat dearer. But she could not have bought cheaper or sold dearer than any other nation. She might have gained in absolute terms, but she would certainly have lost in relative terms.

To obtain this relative advantage in the colonial trade -- to carry out the hostile and spiteful project of shutting other nations out of it as much as possible -- there are very strong reasons to believe that England has not only sacrificed part of the absolute advantage that she, like every other nation, could have gained from that trade, but has also subjected herself to both an absolute and a relative disadvantage in nearly every other branch of trade.

When the Navigation Act gave England a monopoly on the colonial trade, the foreign capital that had previously been invested in it was necessarily withdrawn. English capital, which had formerly handled only part of it, now had to handle the whole thing. The capital that had previously supplied the colonies with only some of the European goods they wanted was now all that was available. But it could not supply them with everything, and the goods it did supply were inevitably sold at very high prices. The capital that had previously bought only some of the colonies' surplus production was now all that was available to buy the whole of it. But it could not buy the whole at anything close to the old price, so whatever it bought, it bought very cheaply. In a business where the merchant sells very dear and buys very cheap, the profit must have been enormous -- far above the normal level in other trades. This exceptional profitability in the colonial trade inevitably drew capital away from other branches of commerce. But as this shift gradually increased competition in the colonial trade while decreasing it in all others, it gradually lowered profits in the former while raising them in the latter, until profits across all trades settled at a new, somewhat higher overall level.

This double effect -- drawing capital away from all other trades while pushing up the general rate of profit -- was not only produced by the monopoly when it was first established, but has continued to be produced by it ever since.

First, the monopoly has continually drawn capital away from other trades and toward the colonial trade.

Although Great Britain's wealth has increased enormously since the Navigation Act was passed, it has not increased in the same proportion as the colonies' wealth. But any country's foreign trade naturally grows in proportion to its wealth, and its surplus production in proportion to its total production. Since Great Britain had claimed for herself almost the entire foreign trade of the colonies, and her own capital had not grown as fast as that trade, she could only keep up with it by continually pulling capital from other branches of trade -- and by keeping out a great deal more capital that would otherwise have flowed to those other branches. Since the Navigation Act, accordingly, the colonial trade has been continually expanding, while many other branches of foreign trade -- particularly trade with the rest of Europe -- have been continually shrinking.

British manufactures for export, instead of being designed for the nearby European market (or the somewhat more distant markets around the Mediterranean) as they were before the Navigation Act, have mostly been retooled for the much more distant colonial market -- the market where Britain has a monopoly, rather than the ones where she has many competitors. The causes of decline in other branches of foreign trade -- which other writers have blamed on excessive taxation, the high cost of labor, the spread of luxury spending, and so on -- can all be traced back to the overgrowth of the colonial trade. Britain's commercial capital, though very large and growing, is not infinite. Since it has not grown as fast as the colonial trade, that trade could only be sustained by pulling capital away from other branches -- and those other branches have inevitably declined.

England was already a great trading nation, with a large and growing commercial capital, not only before the Navigation Act established the colonial monopoly, but before the colonial trade was of any real significance. During the Dutch War under Cromwell, England's navy was superior to Holland's. In the war at the start of Charles II's reign, it was at least equal to, and perhaps stronger than, the combined fleets of France and Holland. Its relative superiority would hardly appear greater today -- at least if the Dutch navy bore the same proportion to Dutch commerce that it did then.

But this great naval power could not, in either of those wars, have been a result of the Navigation Act. During the first war, the Act had only just been drafted. By the outbreak of the second, it had been formally enacted, but no part of it had had time to produce any significant effect -- least of all the part establishing the colonial monopoly. Both the colonies and their trade were insignificant at that time compared to what they are now. Jamaica was an unhealthy, barely inhabited and barely cultivated desert. New York and New Jersey belonged to the Dutch. Half of St. Kitts belonged to the French. Antigua, the two Carolinas, Pennsylvania, Georgia, and Nova Scotia had not yet been settled. Virginia, Maryland, and New England had been settled and were growing, but there was probably not a single person in Europe or America who foresaw their astonishing future growth in wealth, population, and development. Barbados was essentially the only British colony whose condition at that time bore any resemblance to what it is today.

The colonial trade -- which England, even for some years after the Navigation Act, enjoyed only partially (since the Act was not strictly enforced for years) -- could not have been the foundation of England's great commerce or the naval power it supported. That commerce and that naval power were built on trade with Europe and the Mediterranean. But Britain's current share of that European trade could not sustain a navy of comparable strength.

If the growing colonial trade had been left open to all nations, whatever share of it fell to Britain -- and a very considerable share probably would have -- it would have been a pure addition to the great European trade she already had. Because of the monopoly, however, the expansion of the colonial trade has not so much added to Britain's existing commerce as totally redirected it.

Second, the monopoly has inevitably kept the rate of profit in all branches of British trade higher than it would otherwise have been if all nations had been allowed free access to the British colonies.

The colonial monopoly, by drawing a larger share of British capital into that trade than would have gone there naturally, and by expelling all foreign capital, reduced the total amount of capital in the colonial trade below what free competition would have produced. By reducing competition among capitals in that particular trade, it raised the rate of profit there. By reducing competition among British capitals in all other trades, it raised the rate of British profit in those other trades as well. Whatever the state of Britain's commercial capital at any time since the Navigation Act, the colonial monopoly must have pushed the ordinary rate of British profit higher than it would otherwise have been -- both in the colonial trade itself and in every other branch of British trade. If the ordinary rate of British profit has in fact fallen considerably since the Navigation Act (which it certainly has), it would have fallen even further without the monopoly propping it up.

But whatever raises the ordinary rate of profit in any country above its natural level inevitably subjects that country to both an absolute and a relative disadvantage in every branch of trade where it does not have a monopoly.

It subjects her to an absolute disadvantage, because in those trades her merchants cannot earn this inflated profit without selling at higher prices -- both the foreign goods they import and the domestic goods they export. The country must buy dearer and sell dearer. It must buy less and sell less. It must enjoy less and produce less than it otherwise would.

It subjects her to a relative disadvantage, because in those same trades it puts other countries -- which are not burdened by the same absolute disadvantage -- either further above her or less far below her than they would otherwise be. It enables them to enjoy more and produce more relative to what she enjoys and produces. It makes their superiority greater or their inferiority smaller. By pushing the price of British products above their natural level, it allows the merchants of other countries to undercut British goods in foreign markets and to elbow Britain out of nearly every branch of trade where she does not have a monopoly.

British merchants frequently blame high British wages for the fact that their manufactures are undersold in foreign markets, but they say nothing about high British profits. They complain about other people's excessive gains but keep quiet about their own. Yet high profits on British capital may contribute as much to raising the price of British goods in many cases -- and in some cases perhaps even more -- than high British wages do.

In this way, British capital has partly been drawn and partly been driven from most branches of trade where Britain does not have a monopoly -- particularly from European trade and Mediterranean commerce.

It has been drawn from those trades by the lure of higher profits in the colonial trade, which has been continually growing while the capital devoted to it has been continually insufficient from one year to the next.

It has been driven from them by the competitive advantage that artificially high British profit rates give to other countries in every branch of trade where Britain lacks a monopoly.

Just as the colonial monopoly has pulled British capital out of other branches of trade, it has pushed foreign capital into them. In those other trades, it has reduced the competition from British capital (and thus raised British profit rates) while increasing the competition from foreign capital (and thus lowered foreign profit rates). In both ways, it has clearly subjected Great Britain to a relative disadvantage in all those other trades.

It might be argued that the colonial trade is more profitable for Great Britain than any other, and that the monopoly, by forcing a larger share of British capital into it, has directed capital toward a more advantageous use for the country.

The most advantageous use of any capital for the country it belongs to is the one that employs the greatest quantity of productive labor at home and adds the most to the annual output of the nation's land and labor. But the quantity of productive labor that any capital employed in foreign trade can support is directly proportional to how frequently its returns come in, as was shown in the second book. A capital of a thousand pounds employed in foreign trade that turns over once a year can keep employed the same amount of productive labor as a thousand pounds can support for a year. If the turnover happens twice or three times a year, it can support as much productive labor as two or three thousand pounds.

A foreign trade carried on with a nearby country is therefore generally more advantageous than one with a distant country, because the returns come in more often. And for the same reason, a direct foreign trade is generally more advantageous than a roundabout one, as was also shown in the second book.

But the colonial monopoly, as it has affected the use of British capital, has in every case forced some of it out of nearby foreign trade into more distant trade, and in many cases has forced it from direct foreign trade into roundabout trade.

First, the monopoly has in every case forced some British capital from trade with nearby countries into trade with more distant ones.

It has, in every case, shifted some capital away from trade with Europe and the Mediterranean toward trade with the far more distant regions of America and the West Indies, where the returns are inevitably less frequent. This is not only because of the greater distance, but because of the particular circumstances of those countries. New colonies, as I have already observed, are always short of capital. Their own capital is always far less than what they could employ profitably in developing their land. They are constantly in need of more capital than they have, and to make up the shortfall, they try to borrow as much as they can from the mother country. They are therefore perpetually in debt.

The most common way colonists go into this debt is not by formally borrowing from wealthy people in the mother country (though they sometimes do that too), but by running up tabs with the merchants who supply them with European goods -- as large as those merchants will allow. Their annual payments frequently amount to no more than a third of what they owe, and sometimes even less. So the total capital that their suppliers advance to them rarely returns to Britain in less than three years, and sometimes not in less than four or five. A British capital of a thousand pounds that comes back only once every five years can continuously employ only one-fifth the amount of British industry it could support if it came back every year. Instead of the labor that a thousand pounds can maintain for a year, it can maintain only what two hundred pounds can.

The planter, no doubt, compensates his supplier for this delay through the high prices he pays for European goods, the interest on the long-dated bills he issues, and the commissions on the short-dated bills he renews. He may more than compensate the individual merchant. But he cannot compensate Great Britain as a whole. In a trade with very slow returns, the merchant's profit may be as great as -- or even greater than -- in a trade with fast returns. But the benefit to his home country, the quantity of productive labor continuously supported there, and the annual output of its land and labor, must always be far less.

That the returns from American trade -- and still more from West Indian trade -- are generally not only more distant but also more irregular and more uncertain than those from European or Mediterranean trade, I imagine everyone with experience in these different branches will readily agree.

Second, the monopoly has in many cases forced some British capital from direct foreign trade into roundabout trade.

Among the enumerated commodities that can only be sent to Great Britain, there are several produced in quantities far exceeding British consumption, so a portion must be re-exported to other countries. But this cannot be done without forcing some British capital into a roundabout foreign trade. Maryland and Virginia, for example, ship more than 96,000 hogsheads of tobacco annually to Great Britain, and British consumption is said to be no more than 14,000. More than 82,000 hogsheads must therefore be re-exported to other countries -- France, Holland, and the Baltic and Mediterranean nations.

The British capital that brings these 82,000 hogsheads to Britain, re-exports them, and brings back goods or money in return, is engaged in a roundabout foreign trade. It has been forced into this arrangement in order to dispose of this enormous surplus. If we want to calculate how long it takes for all this capital to return to Britain, we must add the delay of the secondary trade to the already slow American returns. If capital in direct American trade often takes three or four years to come back, capital in this roundabout trade is unlikely to come back in less than four or five. If direct trade can keep only a third or a quarter of the domestic industry continuously employed that the same capital could support with annual returns, roundabout trade can keep only a fourth or a fifth.

At some outports, credit is typically extended to the foreign buyers of re-exported tobacco. In London, it is usually sold for cash -- "weigh and pay" is the rule. So at London, the final returns from the full roundabout circuit are delayed beyond the American returns only by however long the goods sit unsold in the warehouse (which can sometimes be quite a while).

But if the colonies had not been confined to the British market for their tobacco, very little more of it would probably have come to Britain than what was needed for domestic consumption. The goods Britain currently buys with the great surplus of tobacco she re-exports would probably have been purchased instead with the direct output of British industry or British manufactures. Those manufactures, instead of being designed almost entirely for one great market, would probably have been adapted to many smaller ones. Instead of one great roundabout foreign trade, Britain would probably have carried on many small direct trades. Because of the more frequent returns, perhaps only a small fraction -- maybe a third or a quarter -- of the capital currently tied up in this great roundabout trade could have sustained an equal quantity of British industry through all those small direct trades. All the purposes of the trade would have been served with much less capital, leaving a large surplus to be applied to other uses: improving the land, expanding manufacturing, and extending Britain's commerce. This spare capital would have entered into competition with other British capital in all these different areas, lowering the rate of profit across the board and giving Britain an even greater edge over other nations than she currently enjoys.

The colonial monopoly has also forced some British capital out of all foreign trade entirely and into the carrying trade -- thereby shifting it from supporting British industry to supporting, in part, the industry of the colonies and of other countries.

The goods purchased with the surplus of 82,000 hogsheads of re-exported tobacco, for example, are not all consumed in Britain. Some of them -- linen from Germany and Holland, for instance -- are sent on to the colonies for their use. The British capital that buys the tobacco, then buys the linen with the tobacco proceeds, is necessarily withdrawn from supporting British industry and devoted instead to supporting partly the colonies' industry and partly the industry of the countries that supply the linen.
