For any province to be a worthwhile part of an empire, it ought to produce, in peacetime, enough revenue not only to cover the entire cost of its own government and defense, but also to contribute its fair share to the support of the imperial government as a whole. Every province inevitably adds to the cost of running the empire. If any particular province does not pay its share of those costs, an unfair burden is thrown onto the rest of the empire. For the same reason, the extra revenue a province generates in wartime should bear the same proportion to the empire's total wartime revenue as its ordinary revenue bears to the empire's total in peacetime.

That neither the ordinary nor the extraordinary revenue Great Britain receives from her colonies meets this standard will be readily admitted. It has been argued that the monopoly, by increasing the private income of the British people and thereby enabling them to pay higher taxes, compensates for the colonies' shortfall in public revenue. But this monopoly, as I have tried to show, though it is a very heavy tax on the colonies, and though it may increase the income of one particular class in Britain, actually reduces the income of the great majority of the people. It therefore reduces, rather than increases, the public's ability to pay taxes. And the class whose income the monopoly does increase is one that is both absolutely impossible to tax above its proportionate share and extremely unwise to even attempt to, as I will try to show in the next book. No special revenue, therefore, can be extracted from this particular class.

The colonies can be taxed in one of two ways: either by their own assemblies or by the British Parliament.

It seems very unlikely that the colonial assemblies could ever be managed well enough to levy taxes sufficient not only to maintain their own civil and military establishments at all times, but also to pay their proper share of the general government of the British Empire. It took a very long time before even the English Parliament -- sitting right under the king's nose -- could be brought to cooperate well enough to adequately fund even England's own civil and military establishment. That level of cooperation was achieved only by distributing a large share of government offices and appointments among individual members of Parliament.

But the colonial assemblies are far from the king's eye. They are numerous, scattered, and governed by different constitutions. Managing them in the same way would be extremely difficult even if the crown had the same tools -- and it does not. It would be absolutely impossible to distribute among all the leading members of all the colonial assemblies enough offices or patronage to persuade them to sacrifice their popularity at home and tax their own constituents for the support of an imperial government whose benefits would mostly flow to strangers. The inevitable ignorance of administrators about the relative importance of the different members of these various assemblies, the offenses that would constantly be given, and the blunders that would constantly be made in trying to manage them this way, seem to make such a system completely unworkable.

Besides, the colonial assemblies cannot be expected to know what is needed for the defense and support of the empire as a whole. That responsibility is not theirs. It is not their job, and they have no reliable way of getting the information they would need. A provincial assembly, like a parish council, may be perfectly competent to judge the affairs of its own district, but it has no proper basis for judging the affairs of the entire empire. It cannot even properly judge its own province's proportion of the imperial burden, or its relative wealth and importance compared to other provinces -- because those other provinces are not under its inspection or oversight. What is needed for the defense and support of the whole empire, and in what proportion each part should contribute, can only be judged by the assembly that oversees the affairs of the whole empire.

It has been proposed, accordingly, that the colonies should be taxed by requisition -- with Parliament determining the amount each colony should pay, and each colonial assembly assessing and collecting it in whatever way best suited its circumstances. Imperial matters would be decided by the assembly that oversees the whole empire, while each colony's local affairs would still be managed by its own assembly. The colonies would have no representatives in the British Parliament under this arrangement. But if experience is any guide, there is no reason to think parliamentary requisitions would be unreasonable. Parliament has never shown the slightest inclination to overtax the parts of the empire not represented in it. The Channel Islands of Guernsey and Jersey, which have no way of resisting Parliament's authority, are more lightly taxed than any part of Great Britain. In its attempts to exercise its supposed right to tax the colonies -- whether that right is legitimate or not -- Parliament has never demanded anything approaching a fair proportion of what their fellow subjects at home pay. If, moreover, the colonies' contribution were to rise and fall in step with the land tax, Parliament could not tax the colonies without simultaneously taxing its own constituents. The colonies might in this case be considered virtually represented in Parliament.

There are precedents for empires in which different provinces are not taxed as a single unit, but where the sovereign sets the amount each province owes, directly assessing and collecting it in some provinces while leaving others to assess and collect it themselves. In some provinces of France, the king both sets and collects whatever taxes he sees fit. From other provinces, he demands a set sum but leaves it to the provincial legislature to determine how it is assessed and collected. Under a system of taxation by requisition, the British Parliament would stand in roughly the same relationship to the colonial assemblies as the king of France does to the provincial legislatures in those parts of France that still have them -- the provinces generally considered the best governed in France.

Under this scheme, the colonies would have no just reason to fear that their tax burden would ever exceed their fair share relative to their fellow citizens at home. But Great Britain might have good reason to fear that it would never reach that fair share. Parliament has not, for some time, wielded the same established authority in the colonies that the French king has in his provincial legislatures. The colonial assemblies, unless they were very favorably disposed (and unless they were managed far more skillfully than they have been so far, they are unlikely to be), could always find pretexts for evading or rejecting even the most reasonable parliamentary requisitions.

Suppose a war with France breaks out. Ten million pounds must be raised immediately to defend the heart of the empire. This sum must be borrowed against a parliamentary fund pledged to pay the interest. Parliament proposes to raise part of this fund through a tax in Great Britain and the rest through requisitions to the various colonial assemblies of America and the West Indies. Would investors readily lend their money against a fund that partly depended on the goodwill of all those distant assemblies -- assemblies far from the war zone, and sometimes thinking themselves not much affected by its outcome? Investors would probably lend no more than what the British tax alone could be expected to cover. The entire burden of war debt would then fall, as it always has, on Great Britain alone -- on one part of the empire, not the whole.

Great Britain is perhaps the only state in history that has expanded its empire while only increasing its expenses, never its revenues. Other empires have generally shifted a large share of defense costs onto their subject provinces. Great Britain has allowed her subject provinces to shift nearly all those costs onto her. To put Great Britain on an equal footing with her own colonies -- which the law has always treated as subordinate -- it seems necessary, under a system of taxation by requisition, that Parliament should have some means of making its requisitions immediately enforceable if the colonial assemblies tried to evade or reject them. What those means might be is not easy to imagine, and no one has yet explained them.

If, on the other hand, Parliament were to firmly establish its right to tax the colonies directly, without the consent of their assemblies, the importance of those assemblies would instantly be destroyed -- and with it, the importance of all the leading men in British America. People want a share in managing public affairs mainly because of the importance it gives them. The stability and survival of every free government depends on the ability of the leading people -- the natural aristocracy of every country -- to maintain and defend their respective importance. The whole drama of domestic politics and ambition consists of these leading figures continually attacking one another's importance and defending their own.

The leading men of America, like those of every other country, want to preserve their importance. They feel -- or imagine -- that if their assemblies, which they like to call parliaments and consider equal in authority to the Parliament of Great Britain, were so degraded as to become mere instruments and executive officers of that Parliament, the greater part of their own importance would be finished. They have therefore rejected the proposal of taxation by parliamentary requisition. Like other ambitious and proud people, they have chosen to draw the sword in defense of their own importance.

Toward the end of the Roman Republic, the allies of Rome -- who had borne the main burden of defending the state and expanding the empire -- demanded full Roman citizenship. When they were refused, the Social War broke out. During that war, Rome granted citizenship to most of the allies, one by one, as each detached itself from the general alliance. The British Parliament insists on taxing the colonies; the colonies refuse to be taxed by a parliament in which they are not represented.

If Great Britain were to offer each colony that broke from the general alliance a number of parliamentary representatives proportional to what it contributed to imperial revenue -- granting it the same taxes as British citizens at home, and in exchange the same freedom of trade, with representation increasing as its contribution increased -- a new path to importance, a new and more dazzling object of ambition, would be opened to the leading men of each colony. Instead of scrambling for the petty prizes of what might be called the small-stakes lottery of colonial politics, they might hope -- with the natural confidence people have in their own ability and good fortune -- to win some of the great prizes that come from the wheel of the grand lottery of British politics.

Unless this method or some other is found to preserve the importance and satisfy the ambition of the leading men of America (and none seems more obvious than this), it is very unlikely that they will ever voluntarily submit to us. And we should consider that the blood that must be shed to force them is, every drop, the blood of people who are -- or whom we would like to have as -- our fellow citizens. Those who flatter themselves that, given how things now stand, our colonies will be easily conquered by force alone are very badly mistaken.

The people who currently direct the decisions of what they call their Continental Congress feel, at this moment, a degree of importance that perhaps the greatest figures in Europe hardly experience. From shopkeepers, tradesmen, and lawyers, they have become statesmen and legislators, employed in designing a new form of government for a vast empire which they believe will become -- and which indeed seems very likely to become -- one of the greatest and most formidable the world has ever seen. Five hundred people, perhaps, who in various capacities act directly under the Continental Congress, and five hundred thousand more who act under those five hundred, all feel a similar rise in their own importance. Almost every individual on the governing side in America currently occupies, in his own mind, a position superior not only to anything he held before, but to anything he ever expected to hold. Unless some new avenue of ambition is presented either to him or to his leaders, if he has the ordinary spirit of a human being, he will die in defense of that position.

The French historian President Henault observed that we now read with pleasure the accounts of many small events of the Catholic League that were not considered particularly important at the time. But everyone then, he says, fancied himself a person of consequence. The innumerable memoirs that have come down to us from that era were, for the most part, written by people who enjoyed recording and exaggerating events in which they flattered themselves they had played a significant role.

How stubbornly the city of Paris defended itself on that occasion -- the dreadful famine it endured rather than submit to the best, and afterward the most beloved, of all French kings -- is well known. Most of the citizens, or those who directed most of them, fought in defense of their own importance, which they foresaw would end the moment the old government was restored. Our colonies, unless they can be persuaded to agree to a union, are very likely to defend themselves against the best of all mother countries as stubbornly as the city of Paris defended itself against one of the best of all kings.

The idea of political representation was unknown in ancient times. When the citizens of one state were admitted to citizenship in another, they had no way of exercising that right except by physically showing up to vote and deliberate with the citizens of the other state. The admission of most of the inhabitants of Italy to Roman citizenship completely destroyed the Roman Republic. It became impossible to tell who was and who was not a Roman citizen. No tribal assembly could identify its own members. Any mob could barge into the popular assemblies, drive out the genuine citizens, and decide the republic's affairs as if they belonged there.

But even if America were to send fifty or sixty new representatives to Parliament, the doorkeeper of the House of Commons would have no great difficulty telling who was a member and who was not. Although the union of Rome with the Italian allies necessarily ruined the Roman constitution, there is not the slightest reason to think the British constitution would be harmed by a union of Great Britain with her colonies. On the contrary, it would be completed by such a union. It seems imperfect without it. The assembly that deliberates and decides on the affairs of every part of the empire, if it is to be properly informed, certainly ought to have representatives from every part of it.

I do not claim that such a union could be easily accomplished, or that significant difficulties might not arise in the execution. I have not yet heard of any, however, that appear truly insurmountable. The main obstacles probably arise not from the nature of things but from the prejudices and opinions of people on both sides of the Atlantic.

We on this side of the water fear that a flood of American representatives might upset the balance of the constitution -- giving too much power to the crown on one hand, or too much to popular government on the other. But if the number of American representatives were proportional to the amount of American taxation, the number of people to manage would increase in exact proportion to the means of managing them. The monarchical and democratic elements of the constitution would, after the union, stand in precisely the same relative balance as before.

The people on the other side fear that their distance from the seat of government might expose them to oppression. But their representatives in Parliament -- whose number ought to be substantial from the start -- would easily protect them from all oppression. Distance would not significantly weaken the representative's dependence on his constituents; he would still know that he owed his seat and all the influence that came with it to their goodwill. It would be in his interest to cultivate that goodwill by using all his authority as a legislator to protest every abuse committed by any civil or military officer in those remote territories.

Besides, the Americans might flatter themselves -- with some justification -- that the distance of America from the seat of government would not last very long. Such has been the rapid progress of that country in wealth, population, and development that within little more than a century, perhaps, the output of American taxation might exceed that of British taxation. The seat of empire would then naturally shift to the part of the empire that contributed most to the common defense and support of the whole.

The discovery of America, and the discovery of a passage to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope, are the two greatest and most important events recorded in the history of the human race. Their consequences have already been immense. But in the brief period of two to three centuries since these discoveries were made, it is impossible that their full consequences can yet have been seen. What benefits or what misfortunes they may ultimately bring to humanity, no one can foresee.

By connecting, to some degree, the most distant parts of the world -- enabling them to relieve one another's shortages, increase one another's enjoyments, and stimulate one another's industries -- their general tendency would seem to be beneficial. To the native peoples, however, of both the East and the West Indies, all the commercial benefits that could have resulted from these events have been swallowed up and lost in the dreadful misfortunes they have caused. These misfortunes seem to have arisen more from accident than from anything inherent in the events themselves. At the time these discoveries were made, the Europeans happened to possess such an overwhelming advantage in military force that they were able to commit every kind of injustice in those remote countries with complete impunity.

Perhaps, in the future, the peoples of those countries will grow stronger, or those of Europe will grow weaker, and the inhabitants of all the different parts of the world will arrive at that equality of strength and courage which, by inspiring mutual fear, is the only thing that can compel independent nations to show some respect for one another's rights. But nothing seems more likely to establish this equality than the mutual exchange of knowledge and improvements of all kinds that extensive commerce between all countries naturally -- or rather, necessarily -- carries with it.

In the meantime, one of the main effects of these discoveries has been to raise the mercantile system to a level of splendor and glory it could never otherwise have achieved. The object of that system is to enrich a nation through trade and manufacturing rather than through the improvement and cultivation of the land -- through the industry of the towns rather than that of the countryside. But as a result of these discoveries, the commercial cities of Europe, instead of being manufacturers and shippers for only a small part of the world (the European Atlantic coast and the countries around the Baltic and Mediterranean), have become manufacturers for the numerous and thriving peoples of America, and shippers -- and in some ways manufacturers too -- for nearly all the nations of Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Two new worlds have been opened to their industry, each much larger than the old one, and one of them still growing bigger every day.

The countries that possess the American colonies and trade directly with the East Indies enjoy all the show and splendor of this great commerce. Other countries, however -- despite all the hostile restrictions meant to exclude them -- frequently enjoy a larger share of its real benefits. The colonies of Spain and Portugal, for example, give more genuine encouragement to the industry of other countries than to that of Spain and Portugal themselves. In linen alone, the consumption of those colonies reportedly amounts to more than three million pounds sterling a year (though I do not vouch for the exact figure). But nearly all this linen is supplied by France, Flanders, Holland, and Germany. Spain and Portugal contribute only a small share. The capital that supplies these colonies with such vast quantities of linen is annually distributed among, and provides income to, the people of those other countries. Only the profits are spent in Spain and Portugal, where they help sustain the extravagant lifestyles of the merchants of Cadiz and Lisbon.

Even the regulations by which each nation tries to secure the exclusive trade of its own colonies are frequently more harmful to the favored countries than to those they are meant to exclude. The unjust suppression of other countries' industries rebounds, as it were, on the heads of the oppressors, crushing their own industry more than that of the countries they target.

Take the Hamburg linen merchant, for example. Under these regulations, he must ship the linen he intends for the American market to London, and he must bring back through London the tobacco he wants for the German market -- because he cannot ship the linen directly to America or bring back the tobacco directly from there. This restriction probably forces him to sell the linen somewhat cheaper and buy the tobacco somewhat dearer than he otherwise would, trimming his profits a bit. But in the London-Hamburg trade, he gets his returns much faster than he ever could in direct American trade (even assuming -- which is far from the case -- that American payments were as reliable as London's). The capital the Hamburg merchant uses in this restricted trade can therefore keep far more German industry continuously employed than it could in the direct American trade from which he is excluded. Though the restricted trade may be less profitable for him personally, it cannot be less beneficial to his country.

The situation is quite the opposite for the London merchant, whose capital the monopoly naturally draws into the colonial trade. That trade may be more profitable for him than most other trades, but because of the slow returns, it cannot be more beneficial to his country.

So after all the unjust attempts of every European country to monopolize the trade of its own colonies, no country has managed to monopolize anything but the expense of maintaining colonial authority in peacetime and defending it in wartime. Each country has monopolized all the costs of its colonies for itself. The benefits of colonial trade it has been forced to share with many other nations.

At first glance, the monopoly of the great American trade naturally seems like an acquisition of enormous value. To the undiscerning eye of reckless ambition, it appears amid the confused scramble of politics and war as a dazzling prize worth fighting for. But the very dazzle of the prize -- the immense scale of the trade -- is exactly what makes the monopoly harmful. It is what causes one particular use of capital, inherently less advantageous to the country than most others, to absorb a far larger share of the nation's capital than would naturally flow to it.

A country's commercial capital, as was shown in the second book, naturally gravitates toward the uses most advantageous to that country. If it is employed in the carrying trade, the country becomes a hub for the goods of all the nations whose trade it carries. But the owner of that capital naturally wants to sell as much as possible at home, to save himself the trouble, risk, and expense of exporting. He will gladly sell domestically for a somewhat lower price, and even at a somewhat smaller profit, than he might get abroad. He naturally tries to turn his carrying trade into a direct foreign trade. If his capital is in a direct foreign trade, he will for the same reason try to sell as much of his collected goods at home as he can, trying to convert his foreign trade into domestic trade.

Commercial capital in every country naturally courts the near and avoids the distant. It naturally courts frequent returns and avoids slow ones. It naturally gravitates toward uses that employ the most productive labor at home and avoids those that employ the least. It naturally seeks the most advantageous employment and avoids the least advantageous.

But if, in any of those more distant and normally less advantageous trades, profit happens to rise somewhat above the level needed to offset the natural preference for nearer business, this excess profit will draw capital away from the nearer trades until profits everywhere return to their proper level. This excess profit is proof that, in the actual circumstances of the society, those distant trades are somewhat underserved relative to other trades, and that the society's capital is not optimally distributed among all its different uses. It is proof that something is being bought too cheaply or sold too dearly, and that some particular class of people is being short-changed or overcharged.

Though the same amount of capital will never support as much productive labor in distant trade as in nearby trade, a distant trade may still be as necessary for the society's welfare as a nearby one -- the goods it deals in may be essential for conducting many of the nearer trades. But if the profits of those who deal in such goods are above their natural level, those goods will be sold at artificially high prices, and everyone engaged in the nearer trades will suffer from those inflated prices. Their interest, therefore, requires that some capital be shifted from the nearer trades to the distant one, to bring its profits back to normal and the price of its goods back to their natural level.

In this unusual situation, the public interest requires that some capital be pulled from trades that are normally more advantageous and redirected toward one that is normally less advantageous. And in this unusual situation, individual self-interest and the public interest coincide just as perfectly as they do in all ordinary cases: people naturally pull their capital from the nearby trades and redirect it toward the distant one.

It is in this way that private interests and passions naturally lead people to distribute their capital among all the different trades of a society in roughly the proportions most beneficial to society as a whole. Without any intervention of law, private interests naturally achieve a distribution of capital that comes very close to the ideal.

All the various regulations of the mercantile system necessarily distort this natural and optimal distribution of capital to some degree. But the regulations affecting trade with America and the East Indies distort it more than any others, because trade with those two great continents absorbs more capital than any other two branches of trade. The regulations that cause this distortion are not exactly the same in both cases. Monopoly is the central mechanism in both, but it takes different forms. Monopoly of one kind or another seems to be the sole instrument of the mercantile system.

In the trade with America, every nation tries to monopolize the entire market of its own colonies by shutting out all other nations from direct trade with them. For most of the sixteenth century, the Portuguese tried to manage the East Indian trade the same way, claiming the sole right to sail the Indian Ocean on the grounds of having discovered the route. The Dutch still exclude all other European nations from any direct trade with their Spice Islands. Monopolies of this kind are clearly aimed against all other European nations, which are not only shut out of a trade they might profitably join, but are forced to pay higher prices for the goods involved than if they could import them directly from the producing countries.
