<modernized_text>
Appendix to Articles I and II: Taxes on the Capital Value of Land, Houses, and Capital

As long as property stays in the same person's hands, whatever permanent taxes are imposed on it, they've never been meant to take away any part of its capital value -- only some portion of the income it produces. But when property changes hands -- whether passed from the dead to the living, or from one living person to another -- taxes have frequently been imposed that do take away part of its capital value.

Transfers of all kinds of property from the dead to the living, and transfers of immovable property (land and houses) between living people, are transactions that are either inherently public and well-known, or at least can't be kept secret for long. Such transactions can therefore be taxed directly. But the transfer of capital or movable property between living people -- through lending money, for instance -- is often a secret transaction and can always be made one. So it can't easily be taxed directly. It has been taxed indirectly in two ways: first, by requiring that the document containing the obligation to repay be written on paper or parchment that has paid a certain stamp duty, on penalty of being declared invalid; and second, by requiring (also on penalty of invalidity) that it be recorded in either a public or secret register, with certain duties imposed on that registration. Stamp duties and registration fees have also frequently been imposed on deeds transferring property of all kinds from the dead to the living, and on deeds transferring immovable property between living people -- even though those transactions could easily have been taxed directly.

The Vicestima Hereditatum -- the "twentieth penny" on inheritances -- imposed by the Roman emperor Augustus was a tax on the transfer of property from the dead to the living. Dion Cassius, the ancient historian who writes about it most clearly, says it was imposed on all inheritances, legacies, and gifts made in anticipation of death, except those left to close relatives and to the poor.

The Dutch tax on inheritances is of the same kind. Inheritances by extended family members are taxed, according to how closely related they are, at rates ranging from five to thirty percent of the total value. Bequests and legacies to extended family members are subject to the same rates. Transfers between husband and wife are taxed at one-fifteenth. The "luctuosa hereditas" -- the "mournful inheritance" that parents leave to their children -- is taxed at only one-twentieth. Direct inheritances, where children inherit from parents who lived with them, pay no tax at all. A father's death, for children who lived in his household, rarely brings any increase in income and frequently brings a considerable decrease -- through the loss of his labor, his official position, or some income that he'd been receiving during his lifetime. A tax that made their loss worse by taking part of his estate would be cruel and oppressive. It may, however, be different for those children who, in Roman legal terms, are "emancipated" -- or in Scottish legal terms, "forisfamiliated" -- meaning those who have already received their share, started their own families, and are supported by resources separate from and independent of their father's. Whatever part of his estate came to such children would be a genuine addition to their fortune and might therefore -- with no more inconvenience than accompanies all duties of this kind -- reasonably be subject to some tax.

The "casualties" of feudal law were taxes on the transfer of land, both from the dead to the living and between living people. In ancient times, they made up one of the principal sources of royal revenue throughout Europe.

The heir of every direct vassal of the crown paid a certain duty -- generally a year's rent -- upon receiving legal possession of the estate. If the heir was a minor, all the estate's rental income during the minority went to the feudal lord, with no obligation beyond maintaining the minor and paying the widow's dowry when there was a surviving wife. When the minor came of age, another tax called "Relief" was still owed to the lord, which likewise generally amounted to a year's rent. A long minority, which in modern times so often frees a great estate from all its debts and restores a family to its former glory, had no such effect in those days. The waste of the estate, not its financial recovery, was the usual result of a long minority.

Under feudal law, a vassal couldn't sell his property without his lord's consent, and the lord generally extorted a fine or fee for granting it. This fee, which was originally set arbitrarily, came to be regulated in many countries as a fixed percentage of the sale price. In some countries where most other feudal customs have fallen into disuse, this tax on the sale of land still provides a very substantial portion of government revenue. In the canton of Bern, it's as high as one-sixth of the price for all prestigious estates, and one-tenth for less prestigious ones. In the canton of Lucerne, the tax on land sales isn't universal and applies only in certain districts. But if anyone sells his land in order to leave the territory, he pays ten percent on the full sale price. Taxes of the same kind on land sales -- whether on all land or only land held by certain kinds of tenure -- exist in many other countries and make up a more or less significant portion of government revenue.

Such transactions can also be taxed indirectly, through either stamp duties or registration fees, and those duties may or may not be proportioned to the value of the property being transferred.

In Great Britain, stamp duties are set not so much by the value of the property transferred (an eighteen-penny or half-crown stamp is sufficient for a bond of any size) as by the type of document. The highest don't exceed six pounds per sheet of paper or piece of parchment, and these high duties fall mainly on grants from the crown and on certain legal proceedings, without any regard to the value of what's at stake. In Great Britain, there are no duties on the registration of deeds or documents, except the fees paid to the officers who maintain the register -- and these are seldom more than a reasonable compensation for their work. The crown gets no revenue from them.

In Holland, there are both stamp duties and registration fees, which in some cases are proportioned to the value of the property transferred and in some cases are not. All wills must be written on stamped paper whose price is proportioned to the value of the estate being disposed of, so that stamps range in cost from three pence per sheet to three hundred florins (equal to about twenty-seven pounds ten shillings in English money). If the stamp is cheaper than what the will-maker should have used, his entire estate is confiscated. This is on top of all their other inheritance taxes. Except for bills of exchange and certain other commercial documents, all other deeds, bonds, and contracts are subject to a stamp duty. This duty, however, doesn't rise in proportion to the value of the transaction. All sales of land and houses, and all mortgages on either, must be registered, and upon registration pay a duty to the state of two and a half percent of the sale price or mortgage amount. This duty also applies to the sale of all ships and vessels of more than two tons, whether decked or not. Ships, it seems, are considered a kind of house on the water. The sale of movable property, when ordered by a court, is also subject to the same two and a half percent duty.

In France, there are both stamp duties and registration fees. The stamp duties are considered a branch of the excise taxes and are collected by excise officers in the provinces where they apply. The registration fees are considered part of the royal domain and are collected by a different set of officials.

These methods of taxation -- stamp duties and registration fees -- are quite modern inventions. In just over a century, however, stamp duties have become nearly universal in Europe, and registration fees extremely common. There is no trick that one government learns from another faster than how to drain money from the people's pockets.

Taxes on property transfers from the dead to the living fall ultimately, as well as immediately, on the person receiving the property. Taxes on land sales fall entirely on the seller. The seller is almost always under pressure to sell and must therefore take whatever price he can get. The buyer is rarely under any pressure to buy and will therefore only offer a price he likes. He considers what the land will cost him in tax and price combined. The more he has to pay in tax, the less he'll be willing to pay in price. Such taxes therefore almost always fall on someone in a desperate situation, and must frequently be cruel and oppressive. Taxes on the sale of newly built houses (where the building is sold without the land) generally fall on the buyer, because the builder has to make his profit -- otherwise he'd have to quit the business. If the builder advances the tax, the buyer generally has to reimburse him. Taxes on the sale of existing houses, for the same reason as taxes on land sales, generally fall on the seller, who is typically forced to sell by either convenience or necessity. The number of new houses brought to market each year is more or less determined by demand. Unless demand is high enough for the builder to make a profit after paying all expenses, he won't build any more houses. But the number of existing houses that happen to come on the market at any time depends on circumstances that mostly have nothing to do with demand. Two or three major bankruptcies in a commercial town will put many houses up for sale, and they'll have to be sold for whatever they can get. Taxes on the sale of ground rents fall entirely on the seller, for the same reason as land taxes. Stamp duties and registration fees on bonds and loan contracts fall entirely on the borrower and are always paid by him. Duties of the same kind on legal proceedings fall on the parties to the lawsuit. Both types reduce the capital value of whatever is in dispute. The more it costs to acquire any property, the less its net value once acquired.

All taxes on property transfers of every kind, to the extent they reduce the capital value of that property, tend to shrink the funds available for maintaining productive labor. They are all wasteful taxes that increase government revenue -- which rarely supports anyone but unproductive workers -- at the expense of the people's capital, which supports only productive workers.

Such taxes, even when proportioned to the value of the property transferred, are still unequal. Property of equal value doesn't change hands equally often. When they're not proportioned to the property's value -- as is the case with most stamp duties and registration fees -- the inequality is even worse. They are in no way arbitrary; they are, or can be, perfectly clear and certain in all cases. Though they sometimes fall on people who can't easily afford to pay, the timing of the payment is generally convenient enough. When payment comes due, the person usually has the money available. These taxes are cheap to collect and subject taxpayers to no inconvenience beyond the unavoidable one of paying the tax itself.

In France, the stamp duties aren't much complained about. The registration fees -- called the "Controle" -- are. They reportedly give rise to extensive extortion by the officers of the tax farmers who collect them, and the tax itself is largely arbitrary and uncertain. In most of the pamphlets written criticizing France's current tax system, the abuses of the Controle feature prominently. However, uncertainty doesn't seem to be inherent in the nature of such taxes. If the public complaints are justified, the abuse must arise not so much from the nature of the tax itself as from the vagueness and imprecision of the laws that impose it.

The registration of mortgages, and of property rights generally, provides great security to both creditors and buyers and is extremely beneficial to the public. But the registration of most other kinds of documents is often inconvenient and even dangerous to individuals, without providing any public benefit. All registers that everyone agrees should be kept secret clearly shouldn't exist in the first place. People's credit should certainly never depend on something as flimsy as the honesty and integrity of low-ranking revenue officers. But wherever registration fees have been turned into a source of government revenue, registry offices have multiplied endlessly -- both for the documents that genuinely should be registered and for those that shouldn't. In France, there are several kinds of secret registers. This abuse, though perhaps not inevitable, is a very natural consequence of such taxes.

Stamp duties like those in England on cards and dice, on newspapers and periodicals, and so on, are really taxes on consumption. The final payment falls on the people who use or consume those items. Stamp duties like those on licenses to sell beer, wine, and spirits, though perhaps intended to fall on the retailers' profits, are likewise ultimately paid by consumers of those drinks. Such taxes, though they share the same name and are collected by the same officers in the same manner as the stamp duties on property transfers mentioned above, are actually quite different in nature and fall on entirely different sources of income.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
Major changes in this chapter:

1. Consistent use of "capital" for "stock" in all financial contexts.
2. "Sovereign" → "government" or "government revenue" throughout.
3. Broke apart many of Smith's very long sentences, particularly the dense paragraphs on Dutch and feudal taxation.
4. Removed all superscript reference numbers (1484-1494).
5. "Neat" → "net" (archaic spelling of the same word).
6. "Unthrifty" → "wasteful" for clarity.
7. Latin and French tax terms (Vicestima Hereditatum, luctuosa hereditas, Controle) kept with translations/explanations.
8. "Libels" (in the 18th-century sense of pamphlets/tracts) → "pamphlets."
9. Feudal terminology explained inline: "casualties," "Relief," vassalage, etc.
10. Preserved Smith's excellent sardonic line: "There is no art which one government sooner learns of another, than that of draining money from the pockets of the people."
11. "Farmers-general" kept but context clarified (tax farmers = private tax collectors).
12. Smith's important economic point about productive vs. unproductive labor preserved clearly.
</explanation>

<next_chapter_notes>
- "Stock" = "capital" consistently
- "Sovereign" = "government" or "the state"
- Stamp duties and registration fees have been thoroughly explained
- The distinction between taxes on property transfers vs. taxes on consumption has been established
- "Neat" → "net" throughout
- Smith's principle about taxes falling on sellers (who are under pressure) vs. buyers (who aren't) has been established
- Feudal tax terminology has been introduced and explained
- Tax farmers (farmers-general) = private tax collectors, explained
- Keep American spelling: labor, favor, color
- "Dear" → "expensive"; "liberal" → "generous"/"substantial"
- Maintain the policy-focused, clear tone for Book V
- The next chapter likely continues with Article III or IV on different tax types
</next_chapter_notes>
