Chapter 7: Nab Has Not Come Back

_Nab has not come back yet — The reporter's thoughts — Supper — A bad night in the making — The storm is terrible — They set out in the night — A fight against rain and wind — Eight miles from the first camp_

Gédéon Spilett was standing motionless on the beach at that moment, his arms crossed, looking out to sea. In the east the horizon was melting into a great black cloud that was climbing swiftly toward the zenith. The wind was already strong, and it was freshening as the day declined. The whole sky had an ugly look, and the first signs of a gale were plain to see.

Harbert went into the Chimneys, and Pencroff walked over to the reporter, who was so deep in thought that he did not see him coming.

"We're in for a bad night, Mr. Spilett!" said the sailor. "Rain and wind enough to make the petrels happy — they're sea birds that love nothing better than a storm!"

The reporter turned around, saw Pencroff, and these were his first words:

"How far from the coast would you say the basket was when that wave hit it and carried off our companion?"

The sailor had not expected the question. He thought for a moment and answered:

"Two cable lengths, at the most."

"But what's a cable length?" asked Gédéon Spilett.

"About a hundred and twenty fathoms, or six hundred feet."

"So," said the reporter, "Cyrus Smith disappeared twelve hundred feet from shore, at the most?"

"About that," answered Pencroff.

"And his dog too?"

"Him too."

"What surprises me," the reporter went on, "supposing our companion is dead, is that Top died as well, and that neither the dog's body nor his master's has washed up on the shore!"

"That's not surprising, with a sea as rough as that," answered the sailor. "Besides, the currents may have carried them farther along the coast."

"So it really is your opinion that our companion drowned?" the reporter asked once more.

"That's my opinion."

"Well, my own opinion," said Gédéon Spilett, "with all due respect to your experience, Pencroff, is that the twofold fact of Cyrus and Top vanishing completely, alive or dead, is something inexplicable and improbable."

"I'd like to think the way you do, Mr. Spilett," answered Pencroff. "Unfortunately, my mind's made up!"

With that, the sailor went back to the Chimneys. A good fire was crackling on the hearth. Harbert had just thrown an armful of dry wood onto it, and the flames cast great bursts of light into the dark parts of the passage.

Pencroff set to work on dinner at once. He thought it right to put something substantial on the menu, since they all needed to build their strength back up. The strings of couroucous were kept for the next day, but two grouse were plucked, and soon, skewered on a stick, the birds were roasting in front of a blazing fire.

At seven o'clock in the evening Nab had still not come back. His long absence could only make Pencroff anxious about him. The sailor had to fear that some accident had befallen him in this unknown land, or else that the poor fellow had done something desperate. But Harbert drew entirely different conclusions from Nab's absence. To his mind, if Nab had not come back, it was because something new had turned up that had led him to keep searching. And anything new could only be to Cyrus Smith's advantage. Why had Nab not returned, unless some hope was keeping him? Perhaps he had found some clue — a footprint, a scrap of wreckage — that had put him on the track. Perhaps at this very moment he was following a sure trail. Perhaps he was by his master's side...

That was how the boy reasoned. That was what he said. His companions let him talk. Only the reporter nodded his approval. But to Pencroff, the likely thing was that Nab had pushed his search along the shore farther than he had the day before, and simply could not have got back yet.

All the same, Harbert, stirred up by vague forebodings, said several times that he meant to go out and meet Nab. But Pencroff made him see that it would be a useless trip — that in this darkness and this dreadful weather he would never find Nab's tracks, and that it was better to wait. If Nab had not reappeared by the next day, Pencroff would not hesitate to go with Harbert and search for him.

Gédéon Spilett agreed with the sailor that they must not split up, and Harbert had to give up his plan; but two big tears fell from his eyes.

The reporter could not help throwing his arms around the generous boy.

The bad weather had now broken in earnest. A southeasterly gale was sweeping over the coast with unequaled violence. They could hear the sea, which was falling at that hour, roaring against the edge of the first line of rocks out beyond the shore. The rain, beaten into spray by the hurricane, lifted off like a liquid fog. It looked like rags of vapor trailing along the coast, where the shingle rattled violently, like cartloads of stones being dumped. The sand, whipped up by the wind, mixed with the downpour and made its onslaught unbearable. There was as much dust of rock in the air as dust of water. Between the mouth of the river and the face of the cliff, great eddies whirled, and the masses of air pouring out of that whirlpool, finding no other way out than the narrow valley at the bottom of which the river ran, rushed into it with irresistible force. So the smoke from the hearth, driven back down the narrow flue, kept blowing back into the passages, filling them and making them impossible to live in.

That was why, as soon as the grouse were cooked, Pencroff let the fire die down and kept only some embers buried under the ashes.

At eight o'clock Nab had still not reappeared. But by now it was reasonable to suppose that this frightful weather was all that had kept him from coming back, and that he must have taken shelter in some hollow to wait for the storm to end, or at least for daylight to return. As for going out to meet him, or trying to find him in such conditions, that was impossible.

The game made up the whole of supper. They ate the meat gladly, for it was excellent. Pencroff and Harbert, whose appetites had been sharpened by a long expedition, wolfed it down.

Then each of them went off to the corner where he had slept the night before, and Harbert soon fell asleep near the sailor, who had stretched out along the hearth.

Outside, as the night wore on, the storm grew to tremendous proportions. It was a gale to match the one that had carried the prisoners all the way from Richmond to this land in the Pacific. Storms like it are frequent at the time of the equinox, rich in disasters, and terrible above all over this wide open sea, which puts no obstacle in the way of their fury! So it is easy to understand that a coast facing east like this one — that is, straight into the blows of the hurricane, and taking them full on — was battered with a force no description can convey.

Very luckily, the heap of rocks that made up the Chimneys was solid. They were enormous blocks of granite, though a few of them, not quite balanced, seemed to tremble on their bases. Pencroff could feel it: with his hand pressed against the walls, he felt quick shudders running under it. Still, he kept telling himself, and rightly, that there was nothing to fear, and that his makeshift shelter would not collapse. All the same, he could hear stones, torn loose from the top of the plateau by the eddies of the wind, falling onto the beach. Some even rolled onto the upper part of the Chimneys, or shattered there when they came straight down. Twice the sailor got up and crawled to the mouth of the passage to look outside. But these small rockfalls were no real danger, and he went back to his place in front of the hearth, where the embers crackled under the ash.

In spite of the raging hurricane, the crash of the storm, the thunder of the tempest, Harbert slept soundly. In the end sleep took hold of Pencroff too, whose life at sea had used him to all such violence. Only Gédéon Spilett was kept awake by worry. He blamed himself for not having gone with Nab. As we have seen, he had not given up all hope. The forebodings that had stirred Harbert had never stopped stirring him as well. His thoughts were fixed on Nab. Why had Nab not come back? He tossed and turned on his bed of sand, paying hardly any attention to the battle of the elements outside. Now and then his eyes, heavy with exhaustion, closed for an instant, but some quick thought opened them again almost at once.

Meanwhile the night wore on. It might have been two o'clock in the morning when Pencroff, sound asleep by then, was shaken hard.

"What is it?" he cried, waking up and collecting his wits with the quickness peculiar to seafaring men.

The reporter was leaning over him and saying:

"Listen, Pencroff, listen!"

The sailor strained his ears and could make out no sound but the gusts.

"It's the wind," he said.

"No," answered Gédéon Spilett, listening again, "I thought I heard..."

"What?"

"A dog barking!"

"A dog!" cried Pencroff, leaping to his feet.

"Yes... barking..."

"That's impossible!" answered the sailor. "Anyway, how could you, with the storm roaring like that..."

"There... listen..." said the reporter.

Pencroff listened more closely, and in a moment of calm he did indeed think he heard distant barking.

"Well?..." said the reporter, gripping the sailor's hand.

"Yes... yes!..." answered Pencroff.

"It's Top! It's Top!..." cried Harbert, who had just woken up, and all three rushed for the mouth of the Chimneys.

They had a desperate struggle to get out. The wind kept driving them back. But at last they managed it, and they could stay on their feet only by bracing themselves against the rocks. They looked; they could not speak.

The darkness was total. Sea, sky and land were merged in one equal blackness. There did not seem to be a single atom of light anywhere in the air.

For several minutes the reporter and his two companions stayed like that, as if crushed by the wind, soaked by the rain, blinded by the sand. Then, in a lull in the storm, they heard the barking once more, and they could tell that it must be quite far off.

It could only be Top barking like that! But was he alone, or was someone with him? It was more likely that he was alone, for if Nab had been with him, Nab would have headed for the Chimneys as fast as he could.

The sailor squeezed the reporter's hand — he could not make himself heard — in a way that meant "Wait!" Then he went back into the passage.

A moment later he came out again with a burning bundle of sticks, flung it into the darkness, and gave a series of shrill whistles.

At this signal — one might have thought it was expected — barking answered from much nearer, and soon a dog dashed into the passage. Pencroff, Harbert and Gédéon Spilett went back in after him.

An armful of dry wood was thrown on the coals. A bright blaze lit up the passage.

"It's Top!" cried Harbert.

It was Top, indeed — a magnificent Anglo-Norman hound, which had got from the crossing of those two breeds both speed of foot and keenness of scent, the two supreme qualities of a hunting dog.

It was the dog of the engineer Cyrus Smith.

But he was alone! Neither his master nor Nab was with him!

And yet how had his instinct been able to lead him to the Chimneys, a place he did not know? It seemed inexplicable, above all in the middle of that black night and in such a storm! But — a detail more inexplicable still — Top was neither tired nor worn out, nor even spattered with mud or sand!...

Harbert had drawn him close and was holding the dog's head between his hands. The dog let him, and rubbed his neck against the boy's hands.

"If the dog has turned up, the master will turn up too!" said the reporter.

"God grant it!" answered Harbert. "Let's go! Top will lead us!"

Pencroff did not raise a single objection. He could feel that Top's arrival might well prove his guesses wrong.

"Off we go!" he said.

Pencroff carefully covered the coals on the hearth. He laid a few pieces of wood under the ashes, so that there would be fire to come back to. Then, after taking the leftovers of supper, he plunged outside, preceded by the dog, who seemed to be urging him on with little barks, and followed by the reporter and the boy.

The storm was now at its most violent, perhaps even at its very peak. The moon, which was new — and so in conjunction with the sun — let not the faintest glimmer filter through the clouds. Keeping to a straight course was hard. The best thing was to trust to Top's instinct, and that is what they did. The reporter and the boy walked behind the dog, and the sailor brought up the rear. No talk would have been possible. The rain was not very heavy, since the hurricane's blast broke it into spray, but the hurricane itself was terrible.

One circumstance, though, worked very luckily in favor of the sailor and his two companions. The wind was blowing from the southeast, and so it was at their backs. The sand it hurled so violently, which would have been unbearable in their faces, struck them from behind, and as long as they did not turn around it could not trouble them enough to slow them down. In fact they often went faster than they meant to, and quickened their steps so as not to be knocked over. But an immense hope doubled their strength, and this time they were not walking up the shore at random. They had no doubt that Nab had found his master and had sent them the faithful dog. But was the engineer alive? Or was Nab summoning his companions only to pay their last respects to the body of the unfortunate Smith?

After passing the cut-off corner of the high ground, which they had been careful to keep well clear of, Harbert, the reporter and Pencroff stopped to catch their breath. The angle of the rock sheltered them from the wind, and they got their breath back after a quarter of an hour's march that had been more of a run.

Now they could hear one another and answer, and when the boy spoke the name of Cyrus Smith, Top gave a few short barks, as if he meant to say that his master was saved.

"Saved, isn't he?" Harbert kept repeating. "Saved, Top?"

And the dog barked as if in answer.

They set off again. It was about half past two in the morning. The sea was beginning to rise, and this tide, driven by the wind, was a spring tide — the high tide of new moon — and threatened to be very strong. The great waves thundered against the line of reefs and attacked it so violently that they were very probably sweeping right over the islet, which was completely invisible now. So that long breakwater no longer sheltered the coast, which lay wide open to the shocks of the open sea.

As soon as the sailor and his companions had left the shelter of the corner, the wind struck them again with tremendous fury. Bent over, backs to the blast, they walked very fast, following Top, who never hesitated over which way to go. They were heading north, with an endless crest of breakers on their right, crashing with a deafening roar, and on their left a dark country whose look it was impossible to make out. But they could feel that it must be fairly flat, because the hurricane now passed right over their heads without whirling back on them, as it had done when it struck the granite cliff.

By four o'clock in the morning they reckoned they had covered five miles. The clouds had lifted a little and no longer trailed along the ground. The wind, less wet now, blew in very sharp currents of air, drier and colder. Poorly protected by their clothes, Pencroff, Harbert and Gédéon Spilett must have suffered cruelly, but not one complaint passed their lips. They were determined to follow Top wherever the intelligent animal chose to lead them.

Toward five o'clock day began to break. First, at the zenith, where the mists were thinner, a few grayish tints outlined the edges of the clouds, and soon, under an opaque band, a brighter streak sharply traced the horizon of the sea. The crests of the waves were touched with faint tawny gleams, and the foam turned white again. At the same time, on the left, the broken ground along the shore began to show in a blur, but it was still only gray on black.

At six o'clock in the morning it was full day. The clouds were racing along at great speed, fairly high up. The sailor and his companions were now about six miles from the Chimneys. They were following a very flat beach, bordered out to sea by a line of rocks of which only the tops showed above the water, since it was high tide. On the left the land, broken up by a few dunes bristling with thistles, had the rather wild look of a vast sandy region. The shoreline had few indentations, and the only barrier it offered the ocean was a fairly irregular chain of hummocks. Here and there one or two trees grimaced, bent over toward the west, their branches flung out in that direction. Far behind, to the southwest, curved the edge of the last forest.

At that moment Top showed unmistakable signs of excitement. He would run ahead, come back to the sailor, and seem to be urging him to hurry. The dog had now left the beach, and, driven by his remarkable instinct, without showing the least hesitation, he had gone in among the dunes.

They followed him. The country seemed completely deserted. Not a living creature stirred in it.

The belt of dunes was very wide, made up of hummocks and even of hills scattered about in the most haphazard way. It was like a little Switzerland of sand, and it took nothing short of a prodigious instinct to find the way through it.

Five minutes after leaving the beach, the reporter and his companions came to a kind of hollow dug into the back of a tall dune. There Top stopped and gave one clear bark. Spilett, Harbert and Pencroff went into this cave.

Nab was there, kneeling beside a body stretched out on a bed of grass...

The body was that of the engineer Cyrus Smith.
