Chapter 9: Cyrus Is Here

_Cyrus is here — Pencroff's attempts — Rubbing sticks — Island or continent? — The engineer's plans — Where in the Pacific Ocean? — Deep in the forest — The stone pine — A capybara hunt — A smoke of good omen_

In a few words Gédéon Spilett, Harbert and Nab were told how things stood. This accident, which could have very serious consequences — at least, that was how Pencroff saw it — had different effects on the honest sailor's companions.

Nab, overjoyed at having found his master again, did not listen, or rather did not even want to bother himself with what Pencroff was saying.

Harbert, for his part, seemed to share the sailor's fears to some degree.

As for the reporter, he answered Pencroff's words quite simply:

"Upon my word, Pencroff, I couldn't care less!"

"But I'm telling you, we don't have a fire anymore!"

"Pooh!"

"And no way of lighting it again."

"Bah!"

"But Mr. Spilett..."

"Isn't Cyrus here?" answered the reporter. "Isn't our engineer alive? He'll find a way to make us a fire, all right!"

"And with what?"

"With nothing."

What could Pencroff have said to that? He would have said nothing, because deep down he shared the faith his companions had in Cyrus Smith. To them the engineer was a world in miniature, a compound of all human science and all human intelligence! They would rather be with Cyrus on a desert island than without Cyrus in the busiest industrial city in the Union. With him, they could want for nothing. With him, they could not lose hope. If someone had come and told these good people that a volcanic eruption was about to wipe out this land, that this land was about to sink into the depths of the Pacific, they would have answered, without turning a hair: "Cyrus is here! Ask Cyrus!"

In the meantime, though, the engineer had sunk back into an exhaustion brought on by being carried, and for the moment no one could call on his ingenuity. Supper was bound to be very thin. All the grouse meat had been eaten, and there was no way to cook any kind of game at all. Besides, the couroucous they had been keeping in reserve had disappeared. They would have to think of something.

First of all, Cyrus Smith was carried into the central passage. There they managed to make him a bed of seaweed and wrack that had stayed more or less dry. The deep sleep that had taken hold of him could only bring his strength back quickly — better, no doubt, than a big meal would have done.

Night had fallen, and with it the temperature dropped sharply, as the wind shifted round to the northeast. And since the sea had destroyed the walls Pencroff had built at certain points in the passages, drafts swept through, and the Chimneys became hardly fit to live in. So the engineer would have been in a rather bad way if his companions had not taken off their jackets and sailor's jerseys and carefully covered him with them.

Supper that evening was nothing but those inevitable lithodomes, which Harbert and Nab gathered in great quantities on the beach. To these shellfish, though, the boy added a certain amount of edible seaweed, which he collected on high rocks whose sides the sea could only wet at the time of the highest tides. This seaweed, which belonged to the family of the wracks, was a kind of sargassum. When it is dried it gives a jellylike substance that is fairly rich in nourishment. So the reporter and his companions, after swallowing a considerable quantity of lithodomes, sucked on this sargassum and found its taste quite bearable — and it must be said that along the coasts of Asia it makes up a good part of what the local people eat.

"All the same," said the sailor, "it's time Mr. Cyrus came to our rescue."

Meanwhile the cold grew bitter, and unfortunately there was no way to fight it.

The sailor, truly annoyed, tried every means he could think of to get a fire. Nab even helped him in the attempt. He had found some dry moss, and by striking two pebbles together he got sparks. But the moss was not flammable enough and did not catch. Besides, those sparks were only glowing bits of flint, and they did not have the body of the sparks that fly from the piece of steel in an ordinary flint and steel. So the attempt failed.

Next Pencroff, though he had no faith at all in the method, tried rubbing two pieces of dry wood together, the way the islanders do. Certainly, the motion he and Nab put into it, if it had all been turned into heat, as the new theories say it can be, would have been enough to boil a steamer's boiler! The result was nothing. The pieces of wood got warm, and that was all — and even then a good deal less warm than the workers themselves.

After an hour of work Pencroff was dripping with sweat, and he threw the pieces of wood down in disgust.

"When they get me to believe the islanders light fires that way," he said, "it'll be hot even in winter! I'd sooner set my arms on fire by rubbing them together!"

The sailor was wrong to deny the method. It is a well-established fact that such peoples set wood alight by rubbing it fast. But not every kind of wood will do for it, and then there is "the knack," as the saying goes, and Pencroff very probably did not have "the knack."

Pencroff's bad temper did not last long. Harbert had picked up the two pieces of wood the sailor had thrown away and was doing his best to rub them harder than ever. The sturdy sailor could not hold back a burst of laughter at the sight of the boy's efforts to succeed where he himself had failed.

"Rub, my boy, rub!" he said.

"I am rubbing," answered Harbert, laughing, "but all I'm trying to do is warm myself up in my turn instead of shivering, and soon I'll be as hot as you are, Pencroff!"

Which is what happened. Be that as it may, they had to give up getting a fire for that night. Gédéon Spilett repeated for the twentieth time that Cyrus Smith would not be stumped by so small a thing. And in the meantime he stretched out in one of the passages, on the bed of sand. Harbert, Nab and Pencroff did the same, while Top slept at his master's feet.

The next day, March 28, when the engineer woke up at about eight o'clock in the morning, he saw his companions beside him, waiting for him to wake, and, as on the day before, his first words were:

"Island or continent?"

As you can see, it was his one fixed idea.

"Well," answered Pencroff, "we don't know anything about that, Mr. Smith!"

"You still don't know?..."

"But we'll find out," Pencroff added, "once you've piloted us around this country."

"I think I'm up to trying," answered the engineer, who, without too much effort, got up and stood on his feet.

"Now that's good!" cried the sailor.

"What I was dying of was mostly exhaustion," answered Cyrus Smith. "My friends, a little food, and you won't be able to tell. You have a fire, don't you?"

This question did not get an answer right away. But after a few moments:

"Alas! We have no fire," said Pencroff, "or rather, Mr. Cyrus, we don't have one anymore!"

And the sailor told the story of what had happened the day before. He amused the engineer with the tale of their one and only match, and then his failed attempt to make fire the way the islanders do.

"We'll think of something," answered the engineer, "and if we can't find some substance like tinder..."

"Well?" asked the sailor.

"Well, we'll make matches."

"Chemical ones?"

"Chemical ones!"

"It's as simple as that!" cried the reporter, clapping the sailor on the shoulder.

The sailor did not think it was quite so simple, but he did not argue. They all went outside. The weather had turned fine again. A bright sun was rising over the horizon of the sea and sprinkling flecks of gold over the rough, prism-shaped faces of the enormous wall.

After a quick look around him, the engineer sat down on a block of rock. Harbert offered him a few handfuls of mussels and sargassum, saying:

"It's all we've got, Mr. Cyrus."

"Thank you, my boy," answered Cyrus Smith. "It will do — for this morning, at least."

And he ate this meager food with a good appetite, washing it down with a little fresh water, drawn from the river in a big shell.

His companions watched him without speaking. Then, after eating his fill as well as he could, Cyrus Smith folded his arms and said:

"So, my friends, you still don't know whether fate has thrown us onto a continent or onto an island?"

"No, Mr. Cyrus," answered the boy.

"We'll know tomorrow," the engineer went on. "Until then, there's nothing to be done."

"Yes, there is," Pencroff replied.

"What, then?"

"Fire," said the sailor, who had his fixed idea too.

"We'll make one, Pencroff," answered Cyrus Smith. "While you were carrying me yesterday, didn't I see a mountain to the west that towers over this country?"

"Yes," answered Gédéon Spilett, "a mountain that must be fairly high..."

"Good," the engineer went on. "Tomorrow we'll climb to its summit, and we'll see whether this land is an island or a continent. Until then, I say again, there's nothing to be done."

"Yes, there is — fire!" said the stubborn sailor once more.

"But we will make a fire!" Gédéon Spilett replied. "A little patience, Pencroff!"

The sailor looked at Gédéon Spilett in a way that seemed to say, "If it's up to you to make it, we won't be tasting a roast anytime soon!" But he held his tongue.

Cyrus Smith, meanwhile, had not answered. He seemed very little concerned with this question of fire. For a few moments he stayed lost in thought. Then he spoke again.

"My friends," he said, "our situation may be wretched, but in any case it is very simple. Either we're on a continent, and then, at the cost of more or less hard work, we'll reach some inhabited place; or else we're on an island. In that case, it's one of two things: if the island is inhabited, we'll see about getting out of our fix with the help of its inhabitants; if it's deserted, we'll see about getting out of our fix all by ourselves."

"Nothing could be simpler, that's certain," answered Pencroff.

"But continent or island," asked Gédéon Spilett, "where do you think this hurricane has thrown us, Cyrus?"

"I can't know exactly," answered the engineer, "but the odds favor a land in the Pacific. When we left Richmond, the wind was blowing from the northeast, and its very violence proves that its direction can't have changed. If it held that course, from northeast to southwest, we crossed the states of North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia, the Gulf of Mexico, Mexico itself at its narrow part, and then a portion of the Pacific Ocean. I put the distance the balloon traveled at no less than six or seven thousand miles, and if the wind shifted by even half a point of the compass, it must have carried us either to the Mendaña archipelago — the Marquesas — or to the Tuamotus, or even, if it blew faster than I suppose, as far as New Zealand. If that last guess is right, getting home will be easy. English or Maori, we'll always find someone to talk to. If, on the other hand, this coast belongs to some desert island in a Micronesian archipelago, perhaps we'll be able to see as much from the top of that cone that towers over the country — and then we'll set about settling here as if we were never going to leave!"

"Never!" cried the reporter. "You say 'never,' my dear Cyrus?"

"Better to assume the worst right away," answered the engineer, "and save only the best for a surprise."

"Well said!" Pencroff replied. "And let's hope too that this island, if it is one, won't lie right off the shipping lanes! That would be bad luck indeed!"

"We won't know where we stand until we've climbed the mountain, and that comes before anything else," answered the engineer.

"But tomorrow, Mr. Cyrus," asked Harbert, "will you be up to the strain of the climb?"

"I hope so," answered the engineer, "but on condition that Master Pencroff and you, my boy, prove to be clever and skillful hunters."

"Mr. Cyrus," answered the sailor, "since you mention game — if I were as sure of being able to roast it when I got back as I am of bringing it back..."

"Bring it back anyway, Pencroff," answered Cyrus Smith.

So it was agreed that the engineer and the reporter would spend the day at the Chimneys, so as to examine the shoreline and the plateau above. Meanwhile Nab, Harbert and the sailor would go back to the forest, renew the supply of wood, and lay hands on any creature with feathers or fur that came within their reach.

So they set off at about ten o'clock in the morning, Harbert confident, Nab cheerful, Pencroff muttering to himself:

"If I find a fire at home when I get back, it'll be because the thunder came in person to light it!"

All three climbed back up the bank, and when they reached the bend in the river, the sailor stopped and said to his two companions:

"Do we start as hunters or as woodcutters?"

"Hunters," answered Harbert. "Look, Top's already on the scent."

"Then let's hunt," the sailor went on. "We'll come back here afterward and lay in our wood."

That said, Harbert, Nab and Pencroff tore three sticks from the trunk of a young fir and followed Top, who was bounding through the tall grass.

This time, instead of following the course of the river, the hunters plunged more directly into the very heart of the forest. The trees were the same as before, most of them belonging to the pine family. In certain places, where they grew less crowded and stood apart in clumps, these pines reached a great size, and their growth seemed to show that this country lay at a higher latitude than the engineer supposed. A few clearings, bristling with stumps worn away by time, were covered with dead wood, and so made inexhaustible stores of fuel. Then, past the clearing, the undergrowth closed in again and became almost impossible to get through.

Finding the way among these thickets of trees, with no beaten path, was rather difficult. So every now and then the sailor marked his route by breaking a few branches in a way that would be easy to recognize. But perhaps he had been wrong not to go up along the stream, as he and Harbert had done on their first excursion, for after an hour's walk not a single head of game had shown itself. Top, running under the low branches, startled only birds that no one could get near. Even the couroucous were nowhere to be seen, and it was likely that the sailor would be forced to go back to that marshy part of the forest where he had made his lucky grouse fishing.

"Hey, Pencroff," said Nab in a slightly sarcastic tone, "if that's all the game you promised to bring back to my master, it won't take much of a fire to roast it!"

"Patience, Nab," answered the sailor. "It won't be game we're short of on the way back!"

"So you don't have faith in Mr. Smith?"

"I do."

"But you don't believe he'll make a fire?"

"I'll believe it when the wood's blazing in the hearth."

"It will blaze, because my master said so!"

"We'll see!"

The sun, meanwhile, had not yet reached the highest point of its course above the horizon. So the exploring went on, and it was usefully marked by Harbert's discovery of a tree whose fruit could be eaten. It was the stone pine, which produces an excellent nut, much prized in the temperate regions of America and Europe. These nuts were perfectly ripe, and Harbert pointed them out to his two companions, who feasted on them.

"Well," said Pencroff, "seaweed for bread, raw mussels for meat, and nuts for dessert — that's the dinner of people who haven't got a single match left in their pockets, all right!"

"We mustn't complain," answered Harbert.

"I'm not complaining, my boy," answered Pencroff. "I'm only saying again that meat is a little too scarce in this kind of meal!"

"Top's seen something!..." cried Nab, and he ran toward a thicket into which the dog had disappeared, barking. Mixed with Top's barking were some peculiar grunts.

The sailor and Harbert had followed Nab. If there was game in there, this was not the moment to argue about how they could cook it, but about how they could catch it.

The hunters had hardly entered the thicket when they saw Top struggling with an animal, which he was holding by one ear. This four-footed beast was a kind of pig about two and a half feet long, blackish brown but lighter on the belly, with hair that was coarse and fairly thin. Its toes, pressed hard against the ground just then, seemed to be joined by webs of skin.

Harbert thought he recognized the animal as a capybara — that is, one of the largest members of the order of rodents.

The capybara, however, was not fighting the dog. It was stupidly rolling its big eyes, which sat deep in a thick layer of fat. Perhaps it was seeing men for the first time.

Nab, meanwhile, had tightened his grip on his stick and was about to knock the rodent senseless, when it tore itself free of Top's teeth — Top kept only a scrap of its ear — let out a mighty grunt, rushed at Harbert, half knocked him over, and vanished into the woods.

"Ah, the scoundrel!" cried Pencroff.

At once all three had dashed off on Top's trail, and just as they were about to catch up with him, the animal disappeared under the water of a large pond, shaded by tall pines centuries old.

Nab, Harbert and Pencroff had stopped and stood motionless. Top had thrown himself into the water, but the capybara, hidden at the bottom of the pond, did not show itself again.

"Let's wait," said the boy, "because it'll soon come up to the surface to breathe."

"Won't it drown?" asked Nab.

"No," answered Harbert, "since it has webbed feet and it's almost an amphibian. But let's watch for it."

Top had stayed in the water, swimming. Pencroff and his two companions each took up a position at a different point on the bank, to cut off every escape for the capybara, which the dog was looking for as he swam about the surface of the pond.

Harbert was not mistaken. After a few minutes the animal came back up above the water. With one bound Top was on it, and kept it from diving again. A moment later the capybara, dragged to the bank, was knocked dead with a blow of Nab's stick.

"Hurrah!" cried Pencroff, who liked to use that cry of triumph. "Just one glowing coal, and this rodent will be gnawed right down to the bone!"

Pencroff hoisted the capybara onto his shoulder, and judging by the height of the sun that it must be about two o'clock, he gave the signal to head back.

Top's instinct was a great help to the hunters, who, thanks to the intelligent animal, were able to find the way they had already come. Half an hour later they reached the bend in the river.

Just as he had the first time, Pencroff quickly put together a timber raft — though, with no fire, it seemed a useless job to him — and, with the raft following the current, they made their way back toward the Chimneys.

But the sailor was not fifty paces from them when he stopped, let out another tremendous hurrah, and, stretching his hand toward the corner of the cliff, shouted:

"Harbert! Nab! Look!"

Smoke was escaping and swirling up above the rocks!
