Chapter 5: Wreckage in the Air

_A proposal to come back by the southern shore — The lay of the coast — Searching for the supposed shipwreck — Wreckage in the air — Discovery of a little natural harbor — Midnight on the banks of the Mercy — A boat adrift_

Cyrus Smith and his companions slept like innocent marmots in the cave the jaguar had so politely left at their disposal.

At sunrise they were all on the shore, at the very tip of the promontory, and once again their eyes went to the horizon, which they could see around two-thirds of its circle. One last time the engineer was able to make sure that no sail and no hull of a wrecked ship could be seen on the sea, and the spyglass could not pick out a single suspicious spot.

There was nothing on the shore either, at least along the straight stretch that made up the south coast of the promontory for three miles. Beyond that, a bend in the land hid the rest of the coast, and even from the tip of Serpentine Peninsula they could not see Claw Cape, which was hidden behind high rocks.

That left the southern shore of the island still to explore. So should they set about exploring it right away, and give this day, November 2, to the job?

That had not been part of the original plan. When they left the canoe at the sources of the Mercy, it had been agreed that after looking over the west coast they would come back for it and return to Granite House by way of the river. At the time Cyrus Smith had believed that the western shore might offer shelter either to a ship in distress or to a vessel on an ordinary voyage. But since that coast had no landing place at all, they would have to look on the south side of the island for what they had not been able to find on the west.

It was Gédéon Spilett who proposed carrying the exploration on, so that the question of the supposed shipwreck could be settled once and for all, and he asked how far Claw Cape might be from the tip of the peninsula.

"About thirty miles," the engineer answered, "if we allow for the curves of the coast."

"Thirty miles!" said Gédéon Spilett. "That'll be a hard day's march. All the same, I think we ought to go back to Granite House along the southern shore."

"But from Claw Cape to Granite House," Harbert pointed out, "it's at least another ten miles."

"Call it forty miles altogether," answered the reporter, "and let's not hesitate to do them. At least we'll get a look at that unknown shore, and we won't have to start this exploration over again."

"Quite right," said Pencroff. "But what about the canoe?"

"The canoe stayed by itself at the sources of the Mercy for one day," answered Gédéon Spilett. "It can very well stay there for two! So far we can hardly say the island is overrun with thieves!"

"All the same," said the sailor, "when I remember that business with the turtle, I don't have any more confidence than I need to."

"The turtle! The turtle!" answered the reporter. "Don't you know it was the sea that turned it back over?"

"Who knows?" murmured the engineer.

"But..." said Nab.

Nab plainly had something to say, because he kept opening his mouth to speak and then not speaking.

"What is it you want to say, Nab?" the engineer asked him.

"If we go back along the shore as far as Claw Cape," answered Nab, "then once we've rounded the cape, we'll be blocked..."

"By the Mercy! That's right," answered Harbert, "and we won't have a bridge or a boat to get across it!"

"Oh, Mr. Cyrus," answered Pencroff, "with a few floating logs, we won't have any trouble getting over that river!"

"Never mind," said Gédéon Spilett, "it'll be useful to build a bridge if we want an easy way into the Far West."

"A bridge!" cried Pencroff. "Well, isn't Mr. Smith an engineer by trade? He'll build us a bridge whenever we want a bridge! As for getting you over to the other bank of the Mercy tonight, and without wetting a thread of your clothes, leave that to me. We've still got a day's food, which is all we need, and anyway the game may not let us down today the way it did yesterday. Let's go!"

The reporter's proposal, backed very warmly by the sailor, won everyone's approval, because each of them wanted to be done with his doubts, and if they came back by way of Claw Cape, the exploration would be complete. But there was not an hour to lose. A stage of forty miles was a long one, and they could not count on reaching Granite House before nightfall.

So at six o'clock in the morning the little troop set off. In case of unpleasant encounters with animals on two legs or on four, the guns were loaded with ball, and Top, who was to lead the way, was ordered to scour the edge of the forest.

From the tip of the promontory that formed the tail of the peninsula, the coast curved around for a distance of five miles. They covered it quickly, and the most painstaking search turned up no trace whatever of any landing, old or recent — no wreckage, no remains of a camp, no ashes of a dead fire, not a single footprint!

When the colonists reached the corner where the curve ended and the coast turned northeast to form Washington Bay, they could take in the whole length of the island's southern shore at a glance. Twenty-five miles off, the coast ended at Claw Cape, which showed only faintly in the morning haze, and which a mirage lifted up so that it seemed to hang between land and water. Between the place where the colonists stood and the far end of the great bay, the shore was made up first of a wide, very smooth, very flat beach, with a fringe of trees behind it. After that the coastline grew very ragged and thrust sharp points out into the sea. And last of all a jumble of blackish rocks piled up in picturesque disorder all the way to Claw Cape.

That was the lay of this part of the island, which the explorers were seeing for the first time and which they took in at a glance after stopping for a moment.

"A ship that ran aground here," said Pencroff, "would be lost, no question about it. Sandbanks reaching far out from shore, and beyond them, reefs! Bad waters!"

"But at least there'd be something left of the ship," the reporter pointed out.

"There'd be pieces of timber left on the reefs, and nothing on the sand," answered the sailor.

"Why's that?"

"Because that sand is even more dangerous than the rocks. It swallows up everything that's thrown onto it, and a few days are enough for the hull of a ship of several hundred tons to disappear into it completely!"

"So, Pencroff," asked the engineer, "if a ship had been lost on those banks, it wouldn't be surprising if there were no trace of it left now?"

"No, Mr. Smith, not given time, or a storm. Still, even then it would be surprising if bits of the masts or a few spars hadn't been thrown up on the shore, out of reach of the sea."

"Then let's go on with our search," answered Cyrus Smith.

At one o'clock in the afternoon the colonists reached the far end of Washington Bay. By then they had covered twenty miles.

They stopped for lunch.

Here began an uneven coast, oddly jagged and lined by a long string of the reefs that took over from the sandbanks. The tide was slack just then, but it would soon go out and lay them bare. They could see the smooth swells of the sea breaking on the heads of the rocks and spreading out in long fringes of foam. From this point on to Claw Cape the beach was narrow, squeezed between the edge of the reefs and the edge of the forest.

So the going was about to get harder, because countless fallen rocks cluttered the shore. The granite wall, too, kept rising higher and higher, and of the trees that crowned it farther back they could see only the green tops, which not a breath of wind was stirring.

After half an hour's rest the colonists set off again, and their eyes did not leave a single spot of the reefs or the beach unexamined. Pencroff and Nab even ventured out among the rocks whenever something caught their eye. But wreckage there was none — they had been fooled by some odd shape in the rocks. They did see, though, that edible shellfish were plentiful on this beach. But it could not be put to good use until there was some link between the two banks of the Mercy, and until they had better means of carrying things.

So nothing that had to do with the supposed shipwreck appeared on this shore. And yet anything of any size — the hull of a ship, for instance — would have been visible by now, or its wreckage would have been carried ashore, as the chest had been, and the chest had been found less than twenty miles away. But there was nothing.

Toward three o'clock Cyrus Smith and his companions came to a narrow, well-sheltered cove with no stream flowing into it. It made a real little natural harbor, invisible from the open sea, and it was reached by a narrow channel that wound between the reefs.

At the back of this cove, some violent upheaval had torn open the rocky rim of the shore, and a cutting, hollowed out in a gentle slope, led up to the plateau above. That spot could not be more than ten miles from Claw Cape, and so it must lie four miles in a straight line from Prospect Plateau.

Gédéon Spilett suggested to his companions that they stop here. They agreed, because the walk had sharpened everyone's appetite, and though it was not yet dinnertime, nobody said no to a bite of venison to keep him going. This snack would let them hold out until supper at Granite House.

A few minutes later the colonists, seated at the foot of a magnificent clump of maritime pines, were devouring the provisions Nab had taken out of his knapsack.

The spot stood fifty to sixty feet above sea level. So the view from it reached a good way: passing over the last rocks of the cape, it ran on until it lost itself in Union Bay. But neither the islet nor Prospect Plateau could be seen, nor could they have been at that moment, because the rise of the ground and the screen of tall trees cut off the northern horizon abruptly.

Needless to say, wide as the stretch of sea was that the explorers could take in, and though the engineer's spyglass swept point by point around the whole circle where sky and water met, not a ship was sighted.

In the same way the spyglass was moved with the same care over the whole part of the coast that still remained to be explored, from the beach out to the reefs, and no wreckage appeared in the field of the instrument.

"Well," said Gédéon Spilett, "we'll have to make up our minds to it, and console ourselves with the thought that nobody's going to come and dispute our possession of Lincoln Island!"

"But what about that lead pellet?" said Harbert. "It wasn't imaginary, I suppose!"

"A thousand devils, no!" cried Pencroff, thinking of his missing molar.

"Then what are we to conclude?" asked the reporter.

"This," answered the engineer. "That three months ago at the most, a ship, willingly or not, put in here..."

"What! You'd accept, Cyrus, that it sank without leaving any trace?" cried the reporter.

"No, my dear Spilett. But notice this: if it's certain that a human being set foot on this island, it seems no less certain that he has left it now."

"Then if I understand you, Mr. Cyrus," said Harbert, "the ship has gone away again?..."

"Obviously."

"And we've lost a chance of getting home, and lost it for good?" said Nab.

"For good, I'm afraid."

"Well! Since the chance is lost, let's go," said Pencroff, who was already homesick for Granite House.

But he had barely stood up when Top's barking rang out loudly, and the dog came out of the woods holding in his mouth a scrap of cloth smeared with mud.

Nab pulled the scrap out of the dog's mouth. It was a piece of strong canvas.

Top kept barking, and by running back and forth he seemed to be inviting his master to follow him into the forest.

"There's something in there that might just explain my lead pellet!" cried Pencroff.

"A castaway!" answered Harbert.

"Wounded, maybe!" said Nab.

"Or dead!" answered the reporter.

And they all rushed after the dog, in among the tall pines that formed the first screen of the forest. Just in case, Cyrus Smith and his companions had their weapons ready.

They had to go a good way into the woods, but to their great disappointment they still saw no footprints. The brush and the creepers were untouched, and they even had to cut through them with the ax, as they had done in the densest depths of the forest. So it was hard to believe that any human creature had passed this way before them. And yet Top went back and forth, not like a dog searching at random but like a creature with a will of its own, following an idea.

After seven or eight minutes of walking, Top stopped. The colonists had come to a kind of clearing, ringed with tall trees. They looked all around them and saw nothing, either under the brush or between the tree trunks.

"Well, what is it, Top?" said Cyrus Smith.

Top barked harder than ever, jumping up at the foot of a gigantic pine.

All of a sudden Pencroff cried out:

"Ah! Good! Ah! Perfect!"

"What is it?" asked Gédéon Spilett.

"We've been looking for wreckage on the sea or on land!"

"Well?"

"Well, it's in the air!"

And the sailor pointed to a sort of great whitish rag caught at the top of the pine. Top had brought back a piece of it that had fallen to the ground.

"But that's not wreckage!" cried Gédéon Spilett.

"Beg your pardon, it is!" answered Pencroff.

"What? It's...?"

"It's all that's left of our airship — our balloon, run aground up there at the top of that tree!"

Pencroff was not mistaken, and he let out a magnificent hurrah, adding:

"Now there's good cloth! There's enough to keep us in linen for years! Enough to make handkerchiefs and shirts! Eh, Mr. Spilett, what do you say to an island where shirts grow on trees?"

It really was a lucky thing for the colonists of Lincoln Island that the balloon, after its last leap through the air, had come down again on the island, and that they had now had the luck to find it. Either they would keep the envelope as it was, if they ever wanted to try another escape through the air, or they would put to good use those several hundred yards of fine-quality cotton cloth, once the varnish had been taken off it. As you can easily imagine, everyone shared Pencroff's joy, and shared it heartily.

But the envelope had to be taken down from the tree it was hanging in and put somewhere safe, and that was no small job. Nab, Harbert and the sailor climbed to the top of the tree, and it took wonders of skill to free the enormous, empty balloon.

The operation lasted nearly two hours. And at the end of it, not only the envelope, with its valve, its springs and its brass fittings, but also the net — that is, a great quantity of ropes and cords — and the ring and the balloon's anchor were all on the ground. Apart from the tear, the envelope was in good condition; only the neck at its bottom had been ripped.

It was a fortune that had fallen from the sky.

"All the same, Mr. Cyrus," said the sailor, "if we ever decide to leave the island, it won't be by balloon, will it? Those airships don't go where you want them to, and we know something about that! Look here, if you take my advice, we'll build a good boat of twenty tons or so, and you'll let me cut a foresail and a jib out of this cloth. As for the rest, it'll do to clothe us!"

"We'll see, Pencroff," answered Cyrus Smith. "We'll see."

"Meanwhile we have to put all this somewhere safe," said Nab.

And indeed, there was no thinking of carrying this load of cloth, cords and ropes to Granite House, for it weighed a great deal. And until they had a proper vehicle to haul it in, it was important not to leave these riches any longer at the mercy of the first hurricane that came along. By pooling their efforts the colonists managed to drag the whole lot down to the shore, where they found a fairly large hollow in the rock that, thanks to the way it faced, neither wind nor rain nor sea could get into.

"We needed a cupboard, and we've got a cupboard," said Pencroff. "But since it doesn't lock, it would be wise to hide the opening. I don't say that because of thieves on two feet, but because of thieves on four!"

By six o'clock in the evening everything was stored away. They gave the little inlet that formed the cove the very fitting name of "Balloon Harbor," and then they took the road for Claw Cape again. Pencroff and the engineer talked over various projects that ought to be carried out as soon as possible. Before anything else they had to throw a bridge across the Mercy, so as to have an easy way through to the south of the island. Then a cart would come back for the balloon, because the canoe could never have carried it all. Then they would build a decked boat. Then Pencroff would rig her as a cutter, and they could set out on voyages of circumnavigation... around the island. Then, and so on.

Meanwhile night was coming on, and the sky was already dark when the colonists reached Jetsam Point, at the very spot where they had found the precious chest. But there, no more than anywhere else, was there anything to show that any shipwreck had taken place, and they had to come back to the conclusions Cyrus Smith had already put forward.

From Jetsam Point to Granite House there were still four miles to go, and they were quickly covered. But it was after midnight when the colonists, having followed the shore to the mouth of the Mercy, reached the first bend in the river.

There the riverbed was eighty feet wide, which was not easy to cross. But Pencroff had promised to overcome that difficulty, and now he was called on to make good.

It has to be admitted that the colonists were worn out. The stage had been long, and the episode of the balloon had done nothing to rest their legs and arms. So they were in a hurry to get back to Granite House to eat their supper and sleep, and if the bridge had been built, they would have been home in a quarter of an hour.

The night was very dark. So Pencroff got ready to keep his promise by making a sort of raft on which they could cross the Mercy. He and Nab, armed with axes, picked out two trees near the bank to make the raft from, and began chopping at them from the base.

Cyrus Smith and Gédéon Spilett sat on the bank, waiting for the moment when they could help their companions, while Harbert walked back and forth without straying very far.

All at once the boy, who had gone a little way up the river, came running back, and pointing upstream along the Mercy:

"What's that drifting down there?" he cried.

Pencroff stopped work and made out a moving object that showed dimly in the dark.

"A boat!" he said.

They all came closer and saw, to their utter surprise, a small craft following the current.

"Boat ahoy!" the sailor shouted, out of an old professional habit, without stopping to think that it might have been better to keep quiet.

No answer. The boat kept drifting, and it was no more than ten paces off when the sailor cried:

"Why, it's our canoe! It's broken its mooring line and come down with the current! I must say, it's turning up at just the right time!"

"Our canoe?..." murmured the engineer.

Pencroff was right. It really was the canoe, whose mooring line had broken, no doubt, and which was coming back all by itself from the sources of the Mercy! So it was important to catch it as it went by, before the river's swift current carried it out past the mouth. Nab and Pencroff did exactly that, deftly, with a long pole.

The canoe came in to the bank. The engineer, stepping into it first, took hold of the mooring line and made sure by feeling it that the line really had been worn through by rubbing against the rocks.

"Now that," the reporter said to him in a low voice, "is what you might call a circumstance..."

"A strange one!" answered Cyrus Smith.

Strange or not, it was a lucky one! Harbert, the reporter, Nab and Pencroff got in after him. They had no doubt that the line had simply worn through. But the most astonishing part of the business was really that the canoe had arrived at the very moment when the colonists were there to catch it as it went by — because a quarter of an hour later it would have been lost at sea.

If this had been the age of genies, the incident would have given them every right to think that the island was haunted by some supernatural being who had put his powers at the service of the castaways!

A few strokes of the paddle brought the colonists to the mouth of the Mercy. The canoe was hauled up the beach close to the Chimneys, and they all made for the ladder of Granite House.

But at that moment Top barked angrily, and Nab, who was feeling for the first rung, let out a cry...

The ladder was gone.
