Chapter 6: A New Servant

_Pencroff hails — A night in the Chimneys — Harbert's arrow — Cyrus Smith's plan — An unexpected solution — What had happened at Granite House — How a new servant entered the colonists' service_

Cyrus Smith had stopped short without a word. His companions searched in the darkness, both up the face of the cliff, in case the wind had shifted the ladder, and along the ground, in case it had come loose and fallen... But the ladder had completely disappeared. As for whether a gust had lifted it up to the first landing, halfway up the wall, there was no telling in that pitch-dark night.

"If this is a joke," cried Pencroff, "it's a bad one! To come home and find there's no staircase up to your bedroom — that's nothing for tired people to laugh at!"

Nab, for his part, was lost in exclamations!

"But there hasn't been any wind!" Harbert pointed out.

"I'm beginning to think there are some strange goings-on on Lincoln Island!" said Pencroff.

"Strange?" replied Gédéon Spilett. "Not at all, Pencroff. Nothing could be more natural. Somebody came while we were away, took possession of the place, and pulled up the ladder!"

"Somebody!" cried the sailor. "And who, then?..."

"Why, the hunter with the lead pellet," the reporter answered. "What good would he be if he didn't explain our misfortune?"

"Well, if there's somebody up there," said Pencroff with an oath, for he was beginning to lose patience, "I'm going to hail him, and he'd better answer!"

And in a voice like thunder, the sailor let out a long "Ahoy!" which the echoes threw back with force.

The colonists listened, and they thought they heard, somewhere up near Granite House, a kind of snickering whose source they could not make out. But no voice answered Pencroff's voice, and he repeated his vigorous call to no purpose.

There was truly enough here to astonish the most unconcerned men in the world, and the colonists could not be unconcerned men of that kind. In their situation every incident was serious, and certainly, in the seven months they had lived on the island, none had come along that was quite so surprising.

Be that as it may, forgetting how tired they were and gripped by the strangeness of the event, they stood at the foot of Granite House, not knowing what to think or what to do, asking one another questions that no one could answer, piling up theories each more impossible than the last. Nab was moaning, bitterly disappointed not to be able to get back into his kitchen — all the more because the provisions for the journey were used up and he had no way to replace them just then.

"My friends," Cyrus Smith said at last, "there's only one thing for us to do: wait for daylight, and then act according to circumstances. But to do our waiting, let's go to the Chimneys. There we'll have shelter, and if we can't have supper, at least we can sleep."

"But who's the cheeky fellow who played this trick on us?" Pencroff asked once again, unable to resign himself to the business.

Whoever the "cheeky fellow" might be, the only thing to do, as the engineer had said, was to go back to the Chimneys and wait there for day. Top, however, was ordered to stay under the windows of Granite House, and when Top was given an order, Top carried it out without any argument. So the good dog stayed at the foot of the wall while his master and his companions took refuge among the rocks.

To say that the colonists, worn out as they were, slept well on the sand of the Chimneys would be stretching the truth. Not only could they not help being very anxious to learn how serious this new incident was — whether it was the result of some accident whose natural causes would become plain by daylight, or, on the contrary, the work of a human being — but they were also very badly bedded down. In any case, one way or another, their home was occupied at this moment, and they could not get back into it.

And Granite House was more than their home; it was their storehouse. All the colony's equipment was there: weapons, instruments, tools, ammunition, food supplies, and so on. If all that were plundered, the colonists would have to start setting themselves up all over again, make their weapons and tools over again. A serious matter! So, giving in to their uneasiness, one or another of them kept going out every few minutes to see whether Top was standing a good watch. Cyrus Smith alone waited with his usual patience, though his stubborn reason was exasperated to find itself facing a fact that was utterly inexplicable, and he was indignant at the thought that around him, perhaps above him, some influence was at work to which he could not put a name. Gédéon Spilett entirely shared his view on this point, and the two of them talked it over several times, but in low voices — these inexplicable circumstances that defeated all their insight and all their experience. There was certainly a mystery on this island, and how were they to get to the bottom of it? Harbert, for his part, could not imagine what to think, and would have liked to question Cyrus Smith. As for Nab, he had ended by telling himself that none of this was his business, that it was his master's business, and if he had not been afraid of offending his companions, good Nab would have slept that night every bit as soundly as if he had been resting on his own bunk in Granite House!

Pencroff, finally, was the most furious of them all, and he was honestly and thoroughly angry.

"It's a prank," he kept saying, "a prank somebody's pulled on us! Well, I don't like pranks, I don't, and woe to the prankster if he falls into my hands!"

As soon as the first glimmer of day rose in the east, the colonists, suitably armed, went down to the shore at the edge of the reefs. Granite House faced the rising sun directly and would soon be lit up by the light of dawn, and in fact, before five o'clock, the windows, with their shutters closed, appeared through their curtains of leaves.

On that side everything was in order. But a cry burst from the colonists' chests when they saw that the door — which they had certainly shut before they left — stood wide open.

Someone had got into Granite House. There was no longer any doubt about it.

The upper ladder, which usually stretched from the landing to the door, was in its place. But the lower ladder had been pulled up and hauled all the way to the doorsill. It was more than obvious that the intruders had wanted to protect themselves against any surprise.

As for what kind of intruders they were and how many, there was no telling yet, since not one of them showed himself.

Pencroff hailed again.

No answer.

"The scoundrels!" cried the sailor. "Would you look at that — sleeping peacefully as if they owned the place! Ahoy there! Pirates, bandits, privateers, sons of John Bull!"

When Pencroff, as an American, had called somebody a "son of John Bull" — that is, an Englishman — he had climbed to the very summit of insult.

By now it was full day, and the front of Granite House lit up in the rays of the sun. But inside as well as out, everything was silent and calm.

The colonists had come to wondering whether Granite House was occupied or not. And yet the position of the ladder proved it plainly enough, and it was even certain that the occupants, whoever they might be, could not have got away! But how could they reach them?

Then Harbert had the idea of tying a cord to an arrow and shooting the arrow so that it would pass between the first rungs of the ladder, which were hanging over the doorsill. Then, by means of the cord, they could unroll the ladder down to the ground and restore communication between the ground and Granite House.

There was obviously nothing else to be done, and with a little skill the method ought to work. Very luckily, bows and arrows had been left in one of the passages of the Chimneys, where there were also a few dozen fathoms of light hibiscus cord. Pencroff unwound this cord and fastened the end of it to a well-feathered arrow. Then Harbert set the arrow to his bow and took aim, with extreme care, at the dangling end of the ladder.

Cyrus Smith, Gédéon Spilett, Pencroff and Nab had stepped back, so as to watch what would happen at the windows of Granite House. The reporter, his carbine at his shoulder, had the door in his sights.

The bow sprang, the arrow whistled off, pulling the cord after it, and passed between the last two rungs.

The operation had worked.

At once Harbert seized the end of the cord. But just as he gave it a jerk to bring the ladder tumbling down, an arm darted out between the wall and the door, snatched the ladder, and pulled it back inside Granite House.

"You triple scoundrel!" cried the sailor. "If a bullet's what would make you happy, you won't have long to wait!"

"But who is it?" asked Nab.

"Who? Didn't you recognize him?..."

"No."

"Why, it's a monkey, a macaque, a capuchin, a she-ape, an orang, a baboon, a gorilla, a marmoset! Our home's been invaded by monkeys, and they climbed up the ladder while we were gone!"

And at that very moment, as if to prove the sailor right, three or four of the four-handed creatures appeared at the windows, whose shutters they had pushed open, and greeted the rightful owners of the place with a thousand contortions and grimaces.

"I knew it was nothing but a prank!" cried Pencroff. "But here's one of the pranksters who's going to pay for the rest!"

The sailor raised his gun to his shoulder, took quick aim at one of the monkeys, and fired. They all vanished, except one, which was mortally hit and came hurtling down onto the beach.

This monkey, a tall one, belonged to the highest order of the four-handed animals; there was no mistaking it. Whether it was a chimpanzee, an orang, a gorilla or a gibbon, it ranked among the anthropoids, the apes so named for their resemblance to human beings. Besides, Harbert declared that it was an orangutan, and we know that the boy knew his zoology.

"What a magnificent animal!" cried Nab.

"As magnificent as you like!" Pencroff replied. "But I still don't see how we're going to get back into our house!"

"Harbert's a good shot," said the reporter, "and his bow is right here! Let him try again..."

"Huh! These monkeys are sly!" cried Pencroff. "They won't come back to the windows, and we won't be able to kill them, and when I think of the damage they can do in the rooms, in the storeroom..."

"Patience," Cyrus Smith answered. "These animals can't hold us off for long!"

"I won't be sure of that till they're on the ground," the sailor replied. "And to start with, Mr. Smith, do you know how many dozen of these pranksters there are up there?"

It would have been hard to answer Pencroff. And as for repeating the boy's attempt, that was not easy, because the bottom end of the ladder had been pulled back inside the door, and when they hauled on the cord again, the cord broke and the ladder did not come down.

The situation was truly awkward. Pencroff was raging. The business had a certain comic side, which he, for his part, did not find funny at all. Obviously the colonists would get back into their home in the end and drive out the intruders. But when, and how? That was what they could not have said.

Two hours went by, during which the monkeys took care not to show themselves. But they were still there, and three or four times a muzzle or a paw slipped out through the door or the windows and was greeted with gunfire.

"Let's hide," the engineer said then. "Perhaps the monkeys will think we've gone and show themselves again. But Spilett and Harbert should lie in wait behind the rocks and fire at anything that appears."

The engineer's orders were carried out. While the reporter and the boy, the two best marksmen in the colony, took up positions within easy range but out of the monkeys' sight, Nab, Pencroff and Cyrus Smith climbed to the plateau and made for the forest to kill some game, for it was time for the midday meal and there was nothing left in the way of food.

At the end of half an hour the hunters came back with a few rock pigeons, which were roasted after a fashion. Not one monkey had shown itself again.

Gédéon Spilett and Harbert went to take their share of the meal while Top kept watch under the windows. Then, after eating, they went back to their posts.

Two hours later the situation had still not changed in the least. The four-handed creatures gave no further sign of life, and you might have believed they had disappeared. But what seemed most likely was that, frightened by the death of one of their number and terrified by the gunshots, they were lying low at the back of the rooms of Granite House, or even in the storeroom. And when the colonists thought of the riches that storeroom held, the patience the engineer had urged on them so strongly ended by turning into violent irritation — and frankly, there was every reason for it.

"This is really too stupid," the reporter said at last, "and there's truly no reason for it ever to end!"

"We've got to make those rascals clear out, though!" cried Pencroff. "We'd get the better of them easily enough, even if there were twenty of them, but to do that we've got to fight them hand to hand! Look here! Isn't there any way at all of getting at them?"

"Yes," replied the engineer, through whose mind an idea had just flashed.

"One?" said Pencroff. "Well, then it's the right one, since there aren't any others! What is it?"

"Let's try to get down into Granite House through the lake's old spillway," the engineer replied.

"Oh, by a thousand thousand devils!" cried the sailor. "And I never thought of that!"

It was, in fact, the only way to get inside Granite House, fight the gang and throw it out. The mouth of the spillway, it is true, was closed by a wall of cemented stones, which would have to be sacrificed; but they would only have to build it again. Luckily, Cyrus Smith had not yet carried out his plan of hiding that opening by drowning it under the waters of the lake, because then the operation would have taken a good deal of time.

It was already past noon when the colonists, well armed and carrying picks and mattocks, left the Chimneys, passed under the windows of Granite House after ordering Top to stay at his post, and got ready to go up the left bank of the Mercy to reach Prospect Plateau.

But they had not gone fifty paces in that direction when they heard the dog barking furiously. It was like a desperate summons.

They stopped.

"Run!" said Pencroff.

And they all went tearing back down the bank as fast as their legs would carry them.

When they reached the bend, they saw that the situation had changed.

The monkeys, seized by a sudden fright from some unknown cause, were trying to escape. Two or three were running and leaping from one window to another with the agility of circus clowns. They were not even trying to put the ladder back, though it would have been easy for them to climb down by it; in their terror, perhaps, they had forgotten that way of clearing out. Soon five or six were in a position to be shot at, and the colonists, aiming at their leisure, fired. Some, wounded or killed, fell back into the rooms, shrieking shrilly. Others, flung outward, were smashed in their fall, and a few moments later it was reasonable to suppose there was not a single four-handed creature left alive in Granite House.

"Hurrah!" cried Pencroff. "Hurrah! Hurrah!"

"Not so many hurrahs!" said Gédéon Spilett.

"Why not? They're all dead," replied the sailor.

"Agreed, but that doesn't give us a way of getting back into our house."

"Let's go to the spillway!" retorted Pencroff.

"Of course," said the engineer. "And yet it would have been better..."

At that moment, as if in answer to Cyrus Smith's remark, they saw the ladder slide over the doorsill, then unroll and drop all the way to the ground.

"Well, a thousand pipes! That's a good one!" cried the sailor, looking at Cyrus Smith.

"Too good!" murmured the engineer, and he was the first to spring onto the ladder.

"Look out, Mr. Cyrus!" cried Pencroff. "If there are still some of those apes..."

"We shall see," the engineer replied without stopping.

All his companions followed him, and in a minute they had reached the doorsill.

They searched everywhere. There was no one in the rooms, and no one in the storeroom, which the gang of four-handed raiders had left untouched.

"Well, now, what about the ladder?" cried the sailor. "Who's the gentleman who sent it back down to us?"

But just then a shriek rang out, and a big ape that had taken refuge in the passage burst into the great hall with Nab after it.

"Ah, the bandit!" cried Pencroff.

And ax in hand, he was about to split the animal's head open, when Cyrus Smith stopped him and said:

"Spare him, Pencroff."

"Show mercy to this hairy rascal?"

"Yes! He's the one who threw us the ladder!"

And the engineer said it in so peculiar a voice that it would have been hard to tell whether he was speaking seriously or not.

Nevertheless they threw themselves on the ape, which put up a brave fight before it was brought down and tied up.

"Phew!" cried Pencroff. "And what are we going to do with him now?"

"Make him a servant!" Harbert answered.

And in saying so the boy was not altogether joking, for he knew how much use can be made of this intelligent race of four-handed animals.

The colonists then came up to the ape and looked him over closely. He did indeed belong to that species of anthropoid ape whose facial angle — the slope of the face from brow to jaw — is not much smaller than a human being's. He was an orang, and as such he had neither the ferocity of the baboon, nor the thoughtlessness of the macaque, nor the uncleanliness of the marmoset, nor the impatience of the Barbary ape, nor the bad instincts of the dog-faced monkey. It is to this family of anthropoids that so many traits belong which show in these animals an almost human intelligence. Employed in households, they can wait at table, clean the rooms, look after the clothes, black the boots, handle a knife, spoon and fork skillfully, and even drink wine... every bit as well as the best servant who ever walked on two legs without feathers. We know that the great naturalist Buffon owned one of these apes, which served him for a long time as a faithful and devoted servant.

The one who now lay tied up in the great hall of Granite House was a great big devil, six feet tall, his body admirably proportioned, his chest broad, his head of medium size, his facial angle reaching sixty-five degrees, his skull rounded, his nose prominent, his skin covered with smooth, soft, glossy hair — in short, a perfect specimen of the anthropoids. His eyes, a little smaller than human eyes, sparkled with intelligent liveliness; his white teeth gleamed under his mustache, and he wore a little curly beard the color of hazelnuts.

"A handsome fellow!" said Pencroff. "If only we knew his language, we could talk to him!"

"So, my master, it's serious?" said Nab. "We're going to take him on as a servant?"

"Yes, Nab," the engineer answered with a smile. "But don't be jealous!"

"And I hope he'll make an excellent servant," added Harbert. "He looks young, so his education will be easy, and we won't have to use force to tame him, or pull out his canine teeth, the way people do in such cases! He can't help but become attached to masters who are kind to him."

"And kind we'll be," replied Pencroff, who had forgotten all his grudge against "the pranksters."

Then, going up to the orang:

"Well, my boy," he asked him, "how are we doing?"

The orang answered with a little grunt that did not suggest too bad a temper.

"So we'd like to join the colony?" asked the sailor. "We're going to enter the service of Mr. Cyrus Smith?"

Another approving grunt from the ape.

"And we'll be content with our board for wages?"

A third grunt, in the affirmative.

"His conversation is a little monotonous," Gédéon Spilett observed.

"Good!" retorted Pencroff. "The best servants are the ones who talk the least. And besides — no wages! Do you hear, my boy? To start with, we won't give you any wages, but we'll double them later on, if we're pleased with you!"

That was how the colony gained a new member, who was to do it more than one good turn. As for what he should be called, the sailor asked that, in memory of another ape he had once known, he be named Jupiter — Jup for short.

And that is how, without further ceremony, Master Jup was installed in Granite House.
