Chapter 14: A Fire Lit in Time

_An inventory — The night — A few letters — The search goes on — Plants and animals — Harbert in great danger — On board — Departure — Bad weather — A flash of instinct — Lost at sea — A fire lit in time_

Pencroff, Harbert and Gédéon Spilett had stood there silent in the darkness.

Pencroff called out in a loud voice.

No answer came.

So the sailor struck his flint and steel and lit a twig. For a moment its light showed a small room that seemed to be entirely deserted. At the far end was a rough fireplace holding a few cold ashes and an armful of dry wood. Pencroff tossed the burning twig onto it; the wood crackled and threw out a bright glow.

Now the sailor and his two companions could make out an unmade bed whose blankets, damp and yellowed, proved that it had not been slept in for a long time; in one corner of the fireplace, two kettles covered with rust and an overturned cooking pot; a cupboard with a few half-moldy sailor's clothes in it; on the table, a pewter plate and fork and a Bible eaten away by damp; in a corner, some tools — a shovel, a mattock, a pickax — and two hunting guns, one of them broken; on a plank that served as a shelf, a keg of gunpowder still untouched, a keg of shot and several boxes of percussion caps. And all of it lay under a thick coat of dust that had perhaps been gathering for many long years.

"There's nobody here," said the reporter.

"Nobody!" answered Pencroff.

"Nobody has lived in this room for a long time," Harbert observed.

"Yes, a very long time!" answered the reporter.

"Mr. Spilett," Pencroff said then, "instead of going back on board, I think we'd do better to spend the night in this house."

"You're right, Pencroff," answered Gédéon Spilett, "and if the owner comes back — well! Maybe he won't mind finding the place taken!"

"He won't come back!" said the sailor, shaking his head.

"You think he's left the island?" asked the reporter.

"If he'd left the island, he'd have taken his weapons and his tools with him," answered Pencroff. "You know what castaways think those things are worth — they're the last scraps saved from the wreck. No! No!" the sailor repeated, in a voice full of conviction. "No! He hasn't left the island! If he'd escaped in a boat he built himself, he'd have been even less likely to leave behind things he couldn't live without! No — he's on the island!"

"Alive?..." asked Harbert.

"Alive or dead. But if he's dead, I don't suppose he buried himself," answered Pencroff, "so at the very least we'll find his remains!"

So it was agreed that they would spend the night in the abandoned house, and a supply of wood stacked in one corner would keep it warm enough. With the door shut, Pencroff, Harbert and Gédéon Spilett sat on a bench and stayed there, talking little but thinking a great deal. They were in a frame of mind to imagine anything and to expect anything, and they listened eagerly to every sound outside. If the door had suddenly opened and a man had stood before them, they would not have been very much surprised, in spite of everything about the place that spoke of long abandonment. Their hands were ready to clasp the hands of that man, that castaway, that unknown friend whom friends had come to find!

But no sound was heard, the door did not open, and the hours went by.

How long that night seemed to the sailor and his two companions! Only Harbert slept, for two hours, because at his age sleep is a necessity. All three of them were impatient to take up the previous day's exploration again and to search the islet down to its most hidden corners! Pencroff's conclusions were perfectly sound. Since the house was abandoned, and since the tools, the utensils and the weapons were still in it, it was almost certain that the man who had lived there had died. The right thing to do, then, was to look for his remains and at least give them a Christian burial.

Day came. Pencroff and his companions set about examining the house at once.

It had been built, truly, in a well-chosen spot, on the back slope of a little hill sheltered by five or six magnificent gum trees. In front of it, an ax had cleared a wide opening through the trees, so that the eye could travel out over the sea. A small lawn, surrounded by a wooden fence that was falling to pieces, led down to the shore, and on the left of it the mouth of the stream opened into the sea.

The house had been built of planks, and it was easy to see that those planks had come from the hull or the deck of a ship. So it was likely that a disabled vessel had been driven ashore on the island, that at least one man of her crew had been saved, and that this man, having tools at hand, had used the wreckage of the ship to build himself this dwelling.

That became plainer still when Gédéon Spilett, after walking all the way around the house, noticed on one of the planks — probably one of those that had formed the bulwarks of the wrecked ship — these letters, already half worn away:

    BR..TAN.A

"Britannia!" cried Pencroff, whom the reporter had called over. "That's a name plenty of ships have had, and I couldn't tell you whether this one was English or American!"

"It doesn't matter, Pencroff!"

"No, it doesn't matter," answered the sailor, "and the survivor of her crew, if he's still alive — we'll save him, whatever country he belongs to! But before we start exploring again, let's go back to the Bonadventure first!"

A kind of uneasiness about his boat had come over Pencroff. Suppose the islet was inhabited after all, and some inhabitant had taken possession of her... But he shrugged his shoulders at so unlikely an idea.

Still, the sailor was not sorry to go and have breakfast on board. The way was already marked out, and it was not long — barely a mile. So they set off again, searching the woods and thickets with their eyes as they went, while goats and pigs ran off through them by the hundreds.

Twenty minutes after leaving the house, Pencroff and his companions were back in sight of the eastern coast of the island and of the Bonadventure, held by her anchor, which had bitten deep into the sand.

Pencroff could not hold back a sigh of satisfaction. After all, that boat was his child, and it is a father's right to worry more often than he has reason to.

They went back on board and ate breakfast — a big enough one that they would not need dinner until very late. Then, the meal finished, the exploration began again and was carried out with the most painstaking care.

All things considered, it was very likely that the islet's one inhabitant had died. So it was a dead man, rather than a living one, whose traces Pencroff and his companions were trying to find! But their search was in vain. For half the day they combed the clumps of trees that covered the islet and found nothing. They had to admit at last that if the castaway was dead, no trace of his body was left now, and that some wild animal had no doubt devoured it down to the last bone.

"We'll leave tomorrow at daybreak," Pencroff said to his two companions. Around two o'clock in the afternoon the three of them had lain down in the shade of a clump of pines to rest for a few minutes.

"I think we can take the castaway's things with us without any qualms, can't we?" Harbert added.

"I think so too," answered Gédéon Spilett, "and these weapons and tools will round out the equipment of Granite House. Unless I'm mistaken, that's a sizable supply of powder and shot."

"Yes," answered Pencroff, "but let's not forget to catch a pair or two of these pigs. Lincoln Island hasn't got any..."

"Or to gather those seeds," Harbert added. "They'll give us every vegetable of the Old World and the New."

"Then perhaps it would be wise," said the reporter, "to stay one more day on Tabor Island, so we can collect everything that might be of use to us."

"No, Mr. Spilett," answered Pencroff, "and I'll ask you to leave first thing tomorrow, at daybreak. The wind looks to me as if it means to shift into the west, and after having a fair wind to come here, we'll have a fair wind to go home."

"Then let's not waste any time!" said Harbert, getting to his feet.

"Let's not waste any time," answered Pencroff. "You, Harbert, see to gathering those seeds — you know them better than we do. Meanwhile Mr. Spilett and I will go hunting the pigs, and even without Top, I'm pretty sure we'll manage to catch a few!"

So Harbert took the path that would lead him back toward the cultivated part of the islet, while the sailor and the reporter went straight into the forest.

A good many specimens of the pig family fled before them, and these remarkably nimble animals did not seem in any mood to let themselves be approached. Still, after half an hour's chase, the hunters had managed to seize a pair that had gone to ground in a dense thicket — when shouts rang out a few hundred paces to the north of the islet. Mixed with the shouts came horrible hoarse roars that had nothing human about them.

Pencroff and Gédéon Spilett straightened up, and the pigs took advantage of the movement to escape, just as the sailor was getting his ropes ready to tie them.

"That's Harbert's voice!" said the reporter.

"Run!" cried Pencroff.

And at once the sailor and Gédéon Spilett raced as fast as their legs would carry them toward the place the shouts were coming from.

They were right to hurry. At a turn in the path, near a clearing, they saw the boy thrown to the ground by a wild creature — a gigantic ape, no doubt — that was about to do him serious harm.

To hurl themselves on this monster, throw it down in its turn, tear Harbert away from it and then pin it firmly — for Pencroff and Gédéon Spilett it was the work of a moment. The sailor had the strength of a Hercules, and the reporter was very powerful too. In spite of the monster's struggles, it was tied up so securely that it could not make a single movement.

"You're not hurt, Harbert?" asked Gédéon Spilett.

"No! No!"

"Oh! If that ape had hurt you!..." cried Pencroff.

"But it isn't an ape!" answered Harbert.

At these words, Pencroff and Gédéon Spilett took a good look at the strange being lying on the ground.

Truly, it was no ape! It was a human creature — it was a man! But what a man! A wild man, in all the horror of the word, and all the more appalling because he seemed to have sunk to the very lowest depth of brutishness!

Bristling hair; an untrimmed beard hanging down to his chest; a body almost naked except for a rag of blanket around his loins; fierce eyes; enormous hands with immensely long nails; skin as dark as mahogany; feet so hardened they might have been made of horn — such was the wretched creature that, in spite of everything, they had to call a man! Yet one really had the right to wonder whether there was still a soul in that body, or whether nothing but the crude instinct of the brute had survived in him!

"Are you quite sure that's a man, or that it ever was one?" Pencroff asked the reporter.

"Sadly, there's no doubt of it," the reporter answered.

"Then could he be the castaway?" said Harbert.

"Yes," answered Gédéon Spilett, "but the poor wretch has nothing human left in him!"

The reporter was right. It was clear that if the castaway had ever been a civilized being, solitude had turned him into a wild man — and worse, perhaps, into a true man of the woods. Hoarse sounds came from his throat, through teeth as sharp as a meat-eater's, made now for grinding nothing but raw flesh. His memory must have deserted him long ago, no doubt, and for a long time too he had no longer known how to use his tools or his weapons. He no longer knew how to make a fire! It could be seen that he was quick and supple, but that all his physical powers had developed at the expense of his mind and his moral nature!

Gédéon Spilett spoke to him. He did not seem to understand, or even to hear... And yet, looking him straight in the eyes, the reporter thought he could see that his reason was not entirely extinguished.

Meanwhile the prisoner was not struggling, and he made no attempt to break his bonds. Was he crushed by the presence of these men who had once been his own kind? Had he found, in some corner of his brain, a fleeting memory that was drawing him back toward humanity? If he had been set free, would he have tried to run away, or would he have stayed? No one knows — they did not put it to the test. And after studying the wretched man with the closest attention, Gédéon Spilett spoke.

"Whoever he is," he said, "whoever he was and whatever he may become, it's our duty to take him back with us to Lincoln Island!"

"Yes! Yes!" answered Harbert. "And maybe, with care, we can wake some spark of intelligence in him again!"

"The soul doesn't die," said the reporter, "and it would be a great thing to rescue this creature of God from the brute he's become!"

Pencroff shook his head doubtfully.

"We have to try, at any rate," the reporter answered him. "Our humanity demands it."

It was indeed their duty as civilized beings and as Christians. All three of them understood it, and they knew very well that Cyrus Smith would approve of what they had done.

"Do we leave him tied up?" asked the sailor.

"Maybe he'd walk if we untied his feet?" said Harbert.

"Let's try," answered Pencroff.

The ropes that hobbled the prisoner's feet were undone, but his arms stayed tightly bound. He stood up by himself and showed no sign of wanting to run away. His dry eyes darted sharp looks at the three men walking beside him, and nothing suggested that he remembered being one of their kind, or at least having once been one. A continuous hissing came from his lips, and he looked fierce, but he made no attempt to resist.

On the reporter's advice, the unfortunate man was taken back to his house. Perhaps the sight of the things that had belonged to him would make some impression on him! Perhaps a single spark would be enough to rekindle his darkened mind, to relight his extinguished soul!

The house was not far away. In a few minutes they had all reached it. But there the prisoner recognized nothing, and he seemed to have lost all awareness of everything!

What could they conclude from the depth of brutishness this miserable being had fallen to, except that his imprisonment on the islet must go back a long way, and that he had come there in his right mind, and solitude had reduced him to this state?

Then the reporter had the idea that the sight of fire might have some effect on him. In an instant one of those fine bright blazes that draw even animals to them lit up the hearth.

At first the sight of the flames seemed to hold the poor man's attention. But soon he drew back, and the light died out of his blank gaze.

Clearly there was nothing to be done, for the moment at least, except take him on board the Bonadventure. That was done, and there he stayed, under Pencroff's guard.

Harbert and Gédéon Spilett went back onto the islet to finish their work, and a few hours later they returned to the shore carrying the utensils and the weapons, a harvest of vegetable seeds, a few head of game and two pairs of pigs. Everything was loaded aboard, and the Bonadventure stood ready to weigh anchor as soon as the next morning's tide began to run.

The prisoner had been put in the forward cabin, where he stayed calm and silent, deaf and dumb at once.

Pencroff offered him something to eat, but he pushed away the cooked meat they held out to him, which no doubt no longer suited him. And sure enough, when the sailor showed him one of the ducks Harbert had shot, he threw himself on it with the greed of an animal and devoured it.

"You think he'll come back from this?" said Pencroff, shaking his head.

"Maybe," answered the reporter. "It isn't impossible that our care will end up having some effect on him, because it was solitude that made him what he is, and from now on he'll never be alone again!"

"The poor man must have been like this for a long time!" said Harbert.

"Maybe," answered Gédéon Spilett.

"How old could he be?" asked the boy.

"That's hard to say," answered the reporter, "because you can't see his features under that thick beard covering his face. But he isn't young anymore, and I'd guess he must be at least fifty."

"Did you notice, Mr. Spilett, how deeply his eyes are sunk under his brows?" asked the boy.

"Yes, Harbert, but I'd add that they're more human than you'd be tempted to believe from the look of the rest of him."

"Well, we'll see," answered Pencroff, "and I'm curious to hear what Mr. Smith makes of our wild man. We went looking for a human being, and it's a monster we're bringing back! Well, you do what you can!"

The night went by. Whether the prisoner slept or not, no one knows, but in any case, although he had been untied, he did not stir. He was like those wild animals that are stunned by the first hours of captivity, and whose rage comes back to them later.

At daybreak the next day — October 15 — the change of weather Pencroff had foreseen had come. The wind had backed into the northwest, and it favored the Bonadventure's return. But at the same time it was freshening, and that was bound to make the sailing harder.

At five o'clock in the morning the anchor was weighed. Pencroff took a reef in his mainsail and set his course east-northeast, so as to head straight for Lincoln Island.

The first day of the crossing passed without incident. The prisoner had stayed quiet in the forward cabin, and since he had once been a sailor, the motion of the sea seemed to have a kind of healthy effect on him. Was some memory of his old trade coming back to him, then? In any case, he kept still, more astonished than downcast.

The next day — October 16 — the wind freshened a great deal and swung still farther toward the north, which meant it blew from a direction less favorable to the Bonadventure, which went leaping over the waves. Pencroff soon found himself sailing close-hauled, and without saying anything about it he began to grow uneasy at the state of the sea, which was breaking violently over his boat's bow. Certainly, if the wind did not change, it would take him longer to reach Lincoln Island than it had taken to get to Tabor Island.

And in fact, by the morning of the 17th, the Bonadventure had been under way for forty-eight hours, and there was nothing to show that she was anywhere near the island. Besides, it was impossible to work out the distance they had covered by dead reckoning, since both her heading and her speed had been far too irregular.

Twenty-four hours later there was still no land in sight. By then the wind was blowing dead against them and the sea was atrocious. They had to work the boat's sails quickly, for the seas were breaking clean over her; they had to take in reefs and keep changing tack, beating to windward in short runs. It even happened, during the day of the 18th, that the Bonadventure was completely buried by a wave, and if her passengers had not taken the precaution beforehand of lashing themselves to the deck, they would have been swept away.

On that occasion Pencroff and his companions, hard at work clearing the boat, received help they had never expected — from the prisoner. He sprang up through the hatch as if his sailor's instinct had taken over, and with a mighty blow of a spar he smashed through the bulwarks so that the water filling the deck could drain away faster. Then, once the boat was clear, he went back down to his cabin without having said a single word.

Pencroff, Gédéon Spilett and Harbert, utterly astounded, had let him do it.

Still, their situation was bad, and the sailor had reason to believe he was lost on that immense sea, with no chance of finding his way again!

The night of the 18th to the 19th was dark and cold. Around eleven o'clock, however, the wind died down, the swell dropped, and the Bonadventure, tossed about less, picked up speed. She had, in any case, behaved wonderfully in the heavy sea.

Neither Pencroff nor Gédéon Spilett nor Harbert thought of taking even an hour's sleep. They kept watch with the utmost care, for one of two things was true: either Lincoln Island could not be far off, and they would sight it at daybreak, or else the Bonadventure had been carried off by currents and had drifted to leeward, and then it would be almost impossible to correct her course.

Pencroff, worried to the last degree, still did not despair, for his spirit was made of well-tempered stuff. Sitting at the tiller, he stubbornly tried to pierce the thick darkness that surrounded him.

Around two o'clock in the morning, he suddenly stood up.

"A fire! A fire!" he shouted.

And sure enough, a bright light had appeared twenty miles to the northeast. Lincoln Island was there, and that light, plainly lit by Cyrus Smith, was showing them the way.

Pencroff, who had been steering much too far to the north, changed course and headed for the fire, which shone above the horizon like a star of the first magnitude.
