Chapter 16: Twelve Years on the Islet

_A mystery to clear up — The stranger's first words — Twelve years on the islet! — Confessions that slip out — The disappearance — Cyrus Smith's confidence — Building a mill — The first bread — An act of devotion — Honest hands!_

Yes! The poor wretch had wept! Some memory, no doubt, had passed through his mind, and, as Cyrus Smith put it, he had become a man again through his tears.

The colonists left him on the plateau for a while, and even moved a little way off, so that he would feel free. But he gave no thought at all to taking advantage of that freedom, and Cyrus Smith soon decided to bring him back to Granite House.

Two days after this scene, the stranger seemed to want to join little by little in the life they all shared. It was obvious that he heard and that he understood, but no less obvious that he was strangely stubborn about not speaking to the colonists. For one evening Pencroff, listening at the door of his room, heard these words escape his lips:

"No! Here! Me! Never!"

The sailor reported the words to his companions.

"There's some painful mystery here!" said Cyrus Smith.

The stranger had begun to use the farm tools, and he was working in the vegetable garden. When he stopped work, which happened often, he would stay as if withdrawn into himself; but on the engineer's advice the others respected the solitude he seemed to want to keep. If one of the colonists came near him, he drew back, and sobs heaved his chest, as if it were too full!

Was it remorse, then, that weighed on him so heavily? One might well think so, and one day Gédéon Spilett could not help making this remark:

"If he doesn't speak, I think it's because he would have things too serious to say!"

They had to be patient and wait.

A few days later, on November 3, the stranger was working on the plateau when he stopped and let his spade drop to the ground. Cyrus Smith, who was watching him from a short distance, saw tears running from his eyes once again. A kind of irresistible pity drew him over, and he touched the man's arm lightly.

"My friend?" he said.

The stranger's eyes tried to avoid his, and when Cyrus Smith tried to take his hand, he drew back sharply.

"My friend," said Cyrus Smith in a firmer voice, "look at me. I want you to!"

The stranger looked at the engineer and seemed to come under his power, like a mesmerized subject under the spell of his mesmerist. He wanted to run away. But then a kind of transformation came over his face. His eyes flashed like lightning. Words were struggling to break from his lips. He could not hold them back any longer!... At last he folded his arms, and then, in a hollow voice:

"Who are you?" he asked Cyrus Smith.

"Castaways like you," answered the engineer, who was deeply moved. "We've brought you here, among your fellow men."

"My fellow men!... I have none!"

"You're among friends..."

"Friends!... For me! Friends!" cried the stranger, hiding his head in his hands. "No... never... leave me alone! Leave me alone!"

Then he fled toward the side of the plateau that overlooked the sea, and there he stayed a long time without moving.

Cyrus Smith had rejoined his companions and was telling them what had just happened.

"Yes! There's a mystery in this man's life," said Gédéon Spilett, "and it seems the only road by which he has come back to humanity is remorse."

"I don't really know what kind of man we've brought back here," said the sailor. "He has secrets..."

"Which we'll respect," Cyrus Smith answered quickly. "If he has done some wrong, he has paid for it cruelly, and in our eyes he is forgiven."

For two hours the stranger stayed alone on the beach, plainly in the grip of memories that were bringing his whole past back to him — a dark past, no doubt — and the colonists, without letting him out of their sight, made no attempt to disturb his solitude.

After those two hours, however, he seemed to have come to a decision, and he came to find Cyrus Smith. His eyes were red from the tears he had shed, but he was no longer weeping. His whole face bore the mark of deep humility. He seemed fearful and ashamed, as though he were trying to make himself as small as possible, and his eyes stayed fixed on the ground.

"Sir," he said to Cyrus Smith, "you and your companions — are you English?"

"No," answered the engineer. "We're Americans."

"Ah!" said the stranger, and he murmured these words:

"I'd rather that!"

"And you, my friend?" asked the engineer.

"English," he answered hurriedly.

And as if those few words had cost him a great deal to say, he walked away from the shore and paced the beach from the waterfall to the mouth of the Mercy, in a state of extreme agitation.

Then, passing close to Harbert at one point, he stopped, and in a choked voice:

"What month?" he asked him.

"December," answered Harbert.

"What year?"

"1866."

"Twelve years! Twelve years!" he cried. Then he left the boy abruptly.

Harbert reported the questions and his answers to the colonists.

"That unhappy man," Gédéon Spilett observed, "had lost track of the months and the years!"

"Yes!" Harbert added. "And he had already been on the islet for twelve years when we found him there!"

"Twelve years!" answered Cyrus Smith. "Ah! Twelve years alone, after a life that was cursed, perhaps, could easily unsettle a man's reason!"

"I'm inclined to believe," Pencroff said then, "that this man didn't land on Tabor Island by shipwreck at all, but that he was left there as punishment for some crime."

"You must be right, Pencroff," replied the reporter, "and if that's so, it isn't impossible that the people who left him on the island will come back to fetch him one day!"

"And they won't find him anymore," said Harbert.

"But then," Pencroff went on, "we'd have to go back, and..."

"My friends," said Cyrus Smith, "let's not take up that question until we know where we stand. I believe this unhappy man has suffered, that he has paid hard for his wrongs, whatever they may be, and that the need to unburden himself is choking him. Let's not push him to tell us his story! He'll tell it to us, no doubt, and when we've heard it we'll see what course to take. Besides, only he can tell us whether he had something more than hope — whether he was certain of being taken home one day. But I doubt it!"

"And why?" asked the reporter.

"Because if he'd been sure of being rescued within a fixed time, he would have waited for the hour of his rescue and would not have thrown that document into the sea. No, it's more likely that he was condemned to die on that islet and was never to see his fellow men again!"

"But," the sailor observed, "there's one thing I can't explain."

"What's that?"

"If this man was abandoned on Tabor Island twelve years ago, we can easily suppose he'd already been for several years in the wild state we found him in!"

"That's likely," answered Cyrus Smith.

"So, as a consequence, it would be several years since he wrote that document!"

"No doubt... and yet the document looked as if it had been written recently!..."

"Besides, how can we believe that the bottle holding the document took several years to get from Tabor Island to Lincoln Island?"

"It isn't absolutely impossible," answered the reporter. "Couldn't it have been in the waters around the island for a long time already?"

"No," answered Pencroff, "because it was still floating. And we can't even suppose that after lying on the shore for some length of time it could have been carried off by the sea again, because it's all rocks along the south coast, and it would certainly have been smashed there!"

"That's true," answered Cyrus Smith, and he stood lost in thought.

"And then," the sailor added, "if the document was several years old, if it had been shut up in that bottle for several years, the damp would have spoiled it. But nothing of the kind — it was in a perfect state of preservation."

The sailor's observation was perfectly sound, and there was something incomprehensible here, for the document had seemed freshly written when the colonists found it in the bottle. What was more, it gave the position of Tabor Island precisely in latitude and longitude, and that implied that its author had a fairly thorough knowledge of hydrography — the science of charting the seas — which a simple sailor could not have had.

"Here again there is something inexplicable," said the engineer, "but let's not push our new companion to talk. When he wants to, my friends, we'll be ready to listen!"

During the days that followed, the stranger did not say a single word, and he did not once leave the bounds of the plateau. He worked the soil without losing an instant and without taking a moment's rest, but always apart from the others. At mealtimes he did not come up to Granite House, though he had been invited again and again, and he was content to eat a few raw vegetables. When night came he did not go back to the room that had been given to him, but stayed out there, under some clump of trees, or, when the weather was bad, huddled in some hollow in the rocks. He was still living, in other words, as he had in the days when the forests of Tabor Island were his only shelter. Since every effort to persuade him to change his way of life had failed, the colonists waited patiently. But the moment was finally coming when, driven by his conscience, irresistibly and almost against his will, he would let terrible confessions slip out.

On November 10, at about eight o'clock in the evening, just as darkness was beginning to fall, the stranger suddenly appeared in front of the colonists, who were gathered on the veranda. His eyes were shining strangely, and his whole person had taken on once more the wild look of the bad days.

Cyrus Smith and his companions were stunned to see that, in the grip of some terrible emotion, his teeth were chattering like a man in a fever. What was wrong with him? Was the sight of his fellow men unbearable to him? Had he had enough of this life among honest people? Was he homesick for his brutish state? They had to think so when they heard him pour out these broken sentences:

"Why am I here?... What right did you have to drag me away from my islet?... Can there be any bond between you and me?... Do you know who I am... what I've done... why I was out there... alone? And who told you I wasn't abandoned there... that I wasn't condemned to die there?... Do you know my past?... Do you know whether I haven't robbed, murdered... whether I'm not a wretch... a cursed creature... fit only to live like a wild beast... far from everyone... tell me... do you know?"

The colonists listened without interrupting the wretched man, from whom these half-confessions were escaping almost in spite of himself. Cyrus Smith tried to calm him by going up to him, but he drew back sharply.

"No! No!" he cried. "Just one word... Am I free?"

"You're free," answered the engineer.

"Then goodbye!" he cried, and he fled like a madman.

Nab, Pencroff and Harbert ran at once toward the edge of the woods... but they came back alone.

"We must let him go!" said Cyrus Smith.

"He'll never come back..." cried Pencroff.

"He'll come back," answered the engineer.

And many days went by after that; but Cyrus Smith — was it a kind of presentiment? — held stubbornly to the unshakable idea that the unhappy man would come back sooner or later.

"It's the last revolt of a rough nature," he would say, "one that remorse has touched, and that a new solitude would terrify."

Meanwhile work of every kind went on, both on Prospect Plateau and at the corral, where Cyrus Smith meant to build a farm. It goes without saying that the seeds Harbert had collected on Tabor Island had been carefully sown. The plateau was now one vast vegetable garden, well laid out and well tended, and it kept the colonists' arms busy. There was always work to do there. As the vegetables multiplied, the simple beds had had to be enlarged, and they were turning into real fields and taking the place of the meadows. But there was plenty of fodder in other parts of the island, and the onaggas need never fear being put on short rations. Besides, it was better to turn Prospect Plateau, defended by its deep belt of creeks, into a vegetable garden, and to move the meadows outside, since they had no need of protection against raids by the four-handed creatures and the four-footed ones.

On November 15 they brought in the third harvest. Here was a field that had grown in size in the eighteen months since the first grain of wheat was sown! The second crop, of six hundred thousand grains, yielded this time four thousand bushels — more than five hundred million grains! The colony was rich in wheat, for sowing ten bushels or so was enough to make sure of a harvest every year that would feed everyone, men and animals alike.

So the harvest was gathered in, and the last two weeks of November were given over to the work of breadmaking.

For they had the grain, but not the flour, and a mill had to be set up. Cyrus Smith could have used the second waterfall that poured down into the Mercy to drive his machinery, since the first was already busy working the hammers of the fulling mill. But after some discussion they decided to put up a simple windmill on the heights of Prospect Plateau. Building the one would be no harder than building the other, and they could be sure, besides, that there would be no lack of wind on that plateau, open as it was to the breezes off the sea.

"Not to mention," said Pencroff, "that a windmill will be more cheerful, and look fine in the landscape!"

So they set to work, choosing timber for the body of the mill and its machinery. Some big blocks of sandstone that lay at the north end of the lake could easily be made into millstones, and as for the sails, the inexhaustible envelope of the balloon would supply the canvas they needed.

Cyrus Smith drew up the plans, and they chose a site for the mill a little to the right of the poultry yard, near the lakeshore. The whole body of the mill was to rest on a pivot held in heavy timbers, so that it could turn, with all the machinery inside it, to face whichever way the wind asked.

The work went quickly. Nab and Pencroff had become very skillful carpenters and had only to follow the patterns the engineer gave them. And so a kind of cylindrical sentry box — a real pepper pot of a thing — topped with a pointed roof, soon rose on the chosen spot. The four frames that made up the sails had been firmly set into the windshaft — the main axle the sails turn — at a certain angle to it, and they were fastened with iron pins. As for the various parts of the machinery inside, they were made without any trouble: the casing to hold the two millstones, the stationary bedstone and the turning runner stone; the hopper, a sort of big square trough, wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, which would let the grain fall onto the stones; the rocking spout that regulates the flow of grain, which its endless tick-tack has earned the nickname of "the chatterbox"; and finally the bolter, which sifts the flour and separates the bran from it. The tools were good, and the work was not very hard, for when all is said and done the working parts of a mill are very simple. It was only a question of time.

Everyone had worked on building the mill, and on December 1 it was finished.

As always, Pencroff was delighted with his work, and he had no doubt the machine was perfect.

"Now for a good wind," he said, "and we'll grind our first harvest in fine style!"

"A good wind, by all means," answered the engineer, "but not too much wind, Pencroff."

"Bah! Our mill will only turn the faster!"

"There's no need for it to turn so fast," replied Cyrus Smith. "We know from experience that a mill does the most work when the number of turns its sails make in a minute is six times the number of feet the wind travels in a second. With an average breeze, which moves twenty-four feet a second, the sails will make sixteen turns a minute, and that's all we need."

"Just right!" cried Harbert. "There's a nice breeze blowing from the northeast that will suit us perfectly!"

There was no reason to put off opening the mill, for the colonists were eager to taste the first piece of bread on Lincoln Island. So that very morning two or three bushels of wheat were ground, and the next day at breakfast a magnificent loaf — a little heavy, perhaps, though it had been raised with brewer's yeast — stood on the table at Granite House. Everyone bit into it with a will, and with what pleasure, you can easily imagine!

Still the stranger had not reappeared. Several times Gédéon Spilett and Harbert had searched the forest around Granite House without meeting him or finding any trace of him. They were seriously worried by this long disappearance. Certainly the former wild man of Tabor Island would have no trouble living in the Far West forests, so full of game. But wasn't there reason to fear that he would fall back into his old habits, and that this freedom would rekindle his wild instincts? Cyrus Smith, however, by some kind of presentiment no doubt, still kept saying that the runaway would come back.

"Yes, he'll come back!" he repeated, with a confidence his companions could not share. "When this unhappy man was on Tabor Island, he knew he was alone! Here, he knows his fellow men are waiting for him! Since he has half told us about his past life, this poor penitent, he'll come back to tell all of it, and on that day he'll be one of us!"

Events were about to prove Cyrus Smith right.

On December 3, Harbert had left Prospect Plateau and gone fishing on the southern shore of the lake. He was unarmed. Until then there had never been any need for precautions, since dangerous animals did not show themselves in that part of the island.

Meanwhile Pencroff and Nab were working in the poultry yard, while Cyrus Smith and the reporter were busy at the Chimneys making soda, since the supply of soap had run out.

Suddenly shouts ring out:

"Help! Help me!"

Cyrus Smith and the reporter were too far away to hear them. Pencroff and Nab, leaving the poultry yard in all haste, had rushed toward the lake.

But before them the stranger, whose presence in that place no one could have suspected, was crossing Glycerin Creek, which separated the plateau from the forest, and leaping onto the opposite bank.

There Harbert stood face to face with a formidable jaguar, like the one that had been killed at Reptile End. Taken completely by surprise, he was standing with his back against a tree, while the animal, crouched and gathered, was about to spring... But the stranger, with no weapon but a knife, hurled himself at the fearsome beast, which turned on this new adversary.

The fight was short. The stranger had tremendous strength and skill. He had seized the jaguar by the throat with a hand as powerful as a pair of shears, not caring whether the beast's claws dug into his flesh, and with the other hand he drove his knife into its heart.

The jaguar fell. The stranger pushed it aside with his foot and was about to run off just as the colonists arrived at the scene of the fight, when Harbert clung to him and cried:

"No! No! You won't go away!"

Cyrus Smith went toward the stranger, whose brows drew together as he saw him approach. Blood was running down his shoulder under his torn jacket, but he paid no attention to it.

"My friend," Cyrus Smith said to him, "we have just come into a debt of gratitude to you. You risked your life to save our boy!"

"My life!" murmured the stranger. "What's it worth? Less than nothing!"

"Are you hurt?"

"It doesn't matter."

"Will you give me your hand?"

And as Harbert tried to take hold of that hand, which had just saved him, the stranger folded his arms, his chest swelled, his eyes clouded over, and he seemed about to flee. But making a violent effort over himself, he said abruptly:

"Who are you? And what do you claim to be to me?"

It was the colonists' story that he was asking for in this way, and for the first time. Perhaps, once that story was told, he would tell his own?

In a few words Cyrus Smith told him everything that had happened since they left Richmond: how they had pulled through, and what resources they now had at their disposal.

The stranger listened with the closest attention.

Then the engineer told him who they all were — Gédéon Spilett, Harbert, Pencroff, Nab, and himself — and he added that the greatest joy they had felt since they arrived on Lincoln Island was when they came back from the islet and could count one more companion among them.

At these words the man flushed, his head sank onto his chest, and his whole person showed how ashamed he was.

"And now that you know us," Cyrus Smith added, "will you give us your hand?"

"No," answered the stranger in a hollow voice. "No! You are honest men, you! And I!..."
