Section Three: How Ideas Link Up

Clearly there is some principle connecting the mind's different thoughts, so that when they present themselves to memory or imagination they introduce one another with a certain method and regularity. In our more serious thinking and talking this is obvious enough: any stray thought that breaks in on the regular chain of ideas is noticed at once and thrown out. And even in our wildest and most wandering daydreams — even in our dreams — we shall find, if we stop to consider, that the imagination was not running entirely at random, but that some connection was maintained among the ideas that followed one another. Take down the loosest and freest conversation and you will immediately see something linking it across all its turns. Or where that is missing, the person who snapped the thread could still tell you that a train of thought had been quietly running in his mind, leading him step by step away from the subject. And in different languages, even where we cannot suspect the slightest connection or contact between them, we find that the words for the most complex ideas still correspond fairly closely — which proves that the simple ideas making up the complex ones were bound together by some universal principle with the same hold on everybody.

That different ideas are connected is too obvious to be missed, but I cannot find that any philosopher has tried to list or classify all the principles of association, though the subject seems worth some curiosity. There appear to me to be only three ways ideas connect: by *Resemblance*, by *Contiguity* in time or place, and by *Cause or Effect*.

That these do connect ideas will hardly be doubted. A picture naturally leads our thoughts to what it is a picture of; mentioning one room in a building naturally starts a question about the others; and if we think of a wound we can scarcely help thinking of the pain that follows. But that the list is complete, and that there are no other principles of association, may be hard to prove to a reader's satisfaction, or even to one's own. All we can do in a case like this is run through a number of instances and examine carefully what binds the different thoughts together, never stopping until we have made the principle as general as it will go. The more instances we examine, and the more care we take, the more confident we shall be that the list we end up with is complete.
