Section Eight: Liberty and Necessity

(Part 2 of 3)

The philosopher, if he is consistent, must apply the same reasoning to the actions and choices of intelligent agents. The most irregular and unexpected decisions people make can often be accounted for by anyone who knows every detail of their character and situation. An obliging man gives a peevish answer — but he has toothache, or has not had his dinner. A dull fellow shows unusual liveliness in his bearing — but he has had a sudden piece of good luck. And even when an action cannot be specifically accounted for, either by the person himself or by anyone else, we know in general that human characters are to some degree inconstant and irregular. That is, in a way, the constant character of human nature, though it applies more particularly to certain people who have no fixed rule for their conduct and go on in a continuous course of caprice. The inner principles and motives may still be working uniformly despite these apparent irregularities, in the same way that winds, rain, clouds and the other variations of weather are supposed to be governed by steady principles, even though human ingenuity cannot easily find them out.

So it appears not only that the conjunction between motives and voluntary actions is as regular and uniform as that between cause and effect anywhere in nature, but also that this regular conjunction has been universally acknowledged and has never been disputed, in philosophy or in ordinary life. Now since it is from past experience that we draw all our inferences about the future, and since we conclude that objects we have always found joined together will always be joined, it may seem superfluous to prove that this experienced uniformity in human actions is a source from which we draw *inferences* about them. But to throw the argument into a greater variety of lights, we shall dwell on this second point briefly as well.

People in every society depend on one another so much that hardly any human action is entirely complete in itself, or is performed without some reference to the actions of others, which are needed to make it fully answer the agent's intention. The poorest craftsman working alone expects at least the protection of the magistrate to secure him the fruits of his labour. He also expects that when he takes his goods to market and offers them at a reasonable price he will find buyers, and will be able with the money to get others to supply him with what he needs to live on. As people widen their dealings and make their relations with others more complicated, their plans for life always take in a greater variety of voluntary actions by other people, which they expect — from the appropriate motives — to cooperate with their own. In all these conclusions they take their measure from past experience, exactly as in their reasoning about external objects, and firmly believe that men, like the elements, will go on behaving as they have always been found to behave. A manufacturer counts on his workers' labour to get a job done just as he counts on his tools, and would be equally surprised if his expectations were disappointed. In short, this inference from experience about the actions of others runs so deep in human life that no waking man is ever without it for a moment. Have we not reason, then, to say that everyone has always agreed on the doctrine of necessity as it has just been defined?

Nor have philosophers ever held a different opinion from everyone else on this point. Quite apart from the fact that almost every action of their lives assumes it, there are few of even the speculative branches of learning where it is not essential. What would become of *history*, if we could not depend on the historian's truthfulness according to the experience we have had of mankind? How could *politics* be a science, if laws and forms of government had no uniform influence on society? Where would the foundation of *morals* be, if particular characters had no definite power to produce particular feelings, and if those feelings had no constant effect on actions? And with what excuse could we bring our *criticism* to bear on any poet, if we could not pronounce the conduct and feelings of his characters natural or unnatural for such people in such circumstances? It seems almost impossible, then, to engage in science or action of any kind without acknowledging the doctrine of necessity, and this *inference* from motive to voluntary action, from character to conduct.

And indeed, when we consider how neatly *natural* and *moral* evidence link together into a single chain of argument, we shall have no hesitation in allowing that they are of the same nature and come from the same principles. A prisoner with neither money nor influence sees the impossibility of escape as clearly when he considers the obstinacy of his gaoler as when he considers the walls and bars around him; and in all his attempts at freedom he chooses to work on the stone and iron rather than on the inflexible nature of the man. The same prisoner, led to the scaffold, foresees his death as certainly from the steadiness and loyalty of his guards as from the working of the axe. His mind runs along a certain train of ideas: the soldiers' refusal to let him escape; the executioner's action; the separation of head from body; bleeding, convulsions, death. Here is a connected chain of natural causes and voluntary actions — and the mind feels no difference between them as it passes from one link to the next, nor is it any less certain of the future event than if it were joined to the objects present to memory and the senses by a train of causes cemented together by what we like to call *physical* necessity. The same experienced union has the same effect on the mind, whether the objects united are motives, will and actions, or shape and motion. We may change the names of things, but their nature, and the way they work on the understanding, never change.

If a man I know to be honest and well off, and live in close friendship with, were to come into my house where I am surrounded by my servants, I rest assured that he is not going to stab me before he leaves in order to steal my silver inkstand — and I suspect that event no more than I suspect the house itself, which is new and solidly built, of falling in. *But he might be seized by a sudden and unaccountable madness.* So might a sudden earthquake come and shake the house down about my ears. So I shall change the case. I shall say that I know with certainty he is not going to put his hand into the fire and hold it there until it burns away; and I think I can predict that event with the same assurance as I can predict that if he throws himself out of the window and meets no obstruction he will not remain suspended in the air. No suspicion of an unaccountable madness can give the least possibility to the first event, which runs so contrary to every known principle of human nature. A man who leaves his purse full of gold on the pavement at Charing Cross at midday may as well expect it to fly away like a feather as expect to find it untouched an hour later. More than half of all human reasoning consists of inferences of this kind, carrying greater or less degrees of certainty in proportion to our experience of how people usually behave in such situations.

I have often wondered what the reason could be that all mankind, though they have always without hesitation acknowledged the doctrine of necessity in the whole of their practice and reasoning, have nevertheless shown such reluctance to acknowledge it in words, and have in every age rather tended to profess the opposite. I think the matter can be accounted for as follows. If we examine what bodies do, and how effects are produced from their causes, we find that all our faculties can never carry us further in our knowledge of that relation than merely to observe that particular objects are *constantly conjoined*, and that the mind is carried by a *customary transition* from the appearance of one to the belief in the other. But although this conclusion about human ignorance is the result of the strictest examination of the subject, people still have a strong tendency to believe that they see further into the powers of nature, and perceive something like a necessary connection between cause and effect. Then, when they turn their reflections on the operations of their own minds and *feel* no such connection between motive and action, they are inclined to suppose there is a difference between effects produced by material force and effects arising from thought. But once we are convinced that we know nothing of causation of any kind beyond the *constant conjunction* of objects and the *inference* the mind consequently makes from one to the other — and once we find that these two circumstances are universally granted to occur in voluntary actions — we may be led more easily to admit the same necessity in all causes alike. And though this reasoning contradicts the systems of many philosophers by ascribing necessity to the will's decisions, we shall find on reflection that they disagree with it in words only, not in what they really think. Necessity, in the sense taken here, has never yet been rejected and, I think, never can be rejected by any philosopher. It might perhaps be claimed that the mind can perceive some further connection between cause and effect in the operations of matter, a connection absent from the voluntary actions of intelligent beings. Whether that is so can only appear on examination, and it is up to those philosophers to make good the claim, by defining or describing that necessity and pointing it out to us in the working of material causes.

It seems, indeed, that people begin this question of liberty and necessity at the wrong end when they open it by examining the faculties of the soul, the influence of the understanding and the operations of the will. Let them first take up a simpler question — the operations of body, of brute unintelligent matter — and see whether they can form any idea of causation and necessity there beyond a constant conjunction of objects and the mind's subsequent inference from one to the other. If these circumstances really are the whole of the necessity we conceive in matter, and if they are also universally acknowledged to occur in the operations of the mind, the dispute is over, or at least must be admitted to be merely verbal from that point on. But as long as we rashly suppose that we have some further idea of necessity in the workings of external objects, while at the same time finding nothing further in the voluntary actions of the mind, there is no possibility of bringing the question to any settled conclusion while we go on from so mistaken an assumption. The only way to undeceive ourselves is to climb higher: to examine how narrow the scope of science is when applied to material causes, and to convince ourselves that all we know of them is the constant conjunction and the inference already described. We may find it hard to be brought to set such narrow limits to human understanding — but we shall find no difficulty afterwards in applying the doctrine to the actions of the will. For since these plainly have a regular conjunction with motives and circumstances and characters, and since we always draw inferences from one to the other, we shall be obliged to acknowledge in words the necessity we have already acknowledged in every deliberation of our lives and every step of our conduct.

But to go on with this reconciling project on the question of liberty and necessity — the most contentious question in metaphysics, the most contentious science — it will not take many words to prove that all mankind have always agreed on the doctrine of liberty as well as on that of necessity, and that here too the whole dispute has been merely verbal. What is meant by liberty, when it is applied to voluntary actions? We surely cannot mean that actions have so little connection with motives, inclinations and circumstances that the one does not follow from the other with a certain uniformity, and that the one gives us no inference by which to conclude the other exists. For those are plain and acknowledged matters of fact. By liberty, then, we can only mean *a power of acting or not acting, according to the determinations of the will* — that is, if we choose to stay still, we may, and if we choose to move, we may. Now this conditional liberty is universally allowed to belong to everyone who is not a prisoner in chains. So here there is nothing to dispute.

Whatever definition we give of liberty, we should be careful to observe two requirements: *first*, that it be consistent with plain matter of fact, and *second*, that it be consistent with itself. If we observe these, and make our definition intelligible, I am persuaded that all mankind will be found to be of one opinion about it.

It is universally allowed that nothing exists without a cause of its existence, and that chance, strictly examined, is a merely negative word and does not mean any real power existing anywhere in nature. But it is claimed that some causes are necessary and some are not. Here, then, is the advantage of definitions. Let anyone *define* a cause without including a *necessary connection* with its effect as part of the definition, and let him show clearly where the idea expressed by that definition comes from — and I shall readily give up the whole controversy. But if the account given above is accepted, this must be quite impossible. If objects did not have a regular conjunction with one another, we should never have formed any notion of cause and effect; and it is this regular conjunction that produces the inference of the understanding, which is the only connection we can have any grasp of at all. Anyone attempting a definition of cause that leaves out these circumstances will be obliged to use either unintelligible terms or terms synonymous with the one he is trying to define. And if the definition above is admitted, then liberty — when it is opposed to necessity rather than to constraint — is the same thing as chance, which everybody allows does not exist.
