Section Ten: Miracles

(Part 1 of 2)

Part One

There is an argument in Dr. Tillotson's writings against the *real presence* which is as concise and elegant and strong as any argument could possibly be against a doctrine so little worth a serious refutation. It is acknowledged on all sides, says that learned prelate, that the authority of scripture and of tradition alike rests merely on the testimony of the apostles, who were eyewitnesses to the miracles by which our Saviour proved his divine mission. Our evidence for the truth of the *Christian* religion, then, is weaker than the evidence of our own senses — because even in the first authors of our religion it was no stronger, and it must obviously weaken as it passes from them to their disciples; nor can anyone place as much confidence in their testimony as in what his senses directly show him. But weaker evidence can never overthrow stronger. So even if the doctrine of the real presence were revealed in scripture as plainly as you like, it would be directly contrary to the rules of sound reasoning to assent to it. It contradicts the senses, while the scripture and tradition it is supposed to rest on carry less evidence than the senses do — considered, that is, merely as external evidence, and not brought home to each person's heart by the immediate operation of the Holy Spirit.

Nothing is so convenient as a decisive argument of this kind, which must at least *silence* the most arrogant bigotry and free us from its impertinent demands. I flatter myself that I have found an argument of a similar sort which, if it is sound, will be an everlasting check among the wise and learned to superstitious delusion of every kind, and consequently will be useful as long as the world lasts. For that long, I imagine, accounts of miracles and marvels will go on being found in every history, sacred and profane.

Though experience is our only guide in reasoning about matters of fact, it must be admitted that this guide is not entirely infallible and in some cases is apt to mislead us. A man in our climate who expected better weather in any week of June than in one of December would be reasoning soundly and in accordance with experience — though he may certainly turn out, in the event, to be wrong. Notice, however, that in such a case he would have no cause to complain of experience, because experience usually warns us of the uncertainty in advance, through the contrariety of events that careful observation reveals. Not all effects follow from their supposed causes with the same certainty. Some events are found in every country and every age to have been constantly joined together; others are found to be more variable and to disappoint our expectations sometimes. So in our reasoning about matters of fact there are all imaginable degrees of assurance, from the highest certainty down to the feeblest kind of moral evidence.

A wise man, therefore, proportions his belief to the evidence. Where a conclusion rests on infallible experience, he expects the event with the highest degree of assurance and treats his past experience as a full *proof* that the event will happen again. In other cases he proceeds more cautiously. He weighs the opposing experiments; he considers which side has the greater number behind it; he leans that way, with doubt and hesitation; and when he finally settles his judgement, the evidence amounts to no more than what we properly call *probability*. All probability, then, assumes an opposition of experiments and observations, where one side is found to outweigh the other and to produce a degree of evidence proportioned to the difference. A hundred instances on one side and fifty on the other give us only a doubtful expectation; whereas a hundred uniform experiments with only one contradicting them reasonably produce a fairly strong assurance. In every case we have to balance the opposing experiments where they conflict, and subtract the smaller number from the greater, to find the exact force of the stronger evidence.

To apply these principles to a particular case. There is no kind of reasoning more common, more useful, or more necessary to human life than the kind derived from the testimony of other people and the reports of eyewitnesses. One might perhaps deny that this kind of reasoning is founded on cause and effect. I shall not argue about a word. It is enough to observe that our assurance in any argument of this kind comes from nothing but our observation of how truthful human testimony generally is, and how far facts usually conform to what witnesses report. Since it is a general maxim that no objects have any discoverable connection with one another, and that all the inferences we can draw from one to another rest merely on our experience of their constant conjunction, plainly we ought not to make an exception in favour of human testimony, whose connection with any event seems in itself no more necessary than any other. If memory were not tenacious to a certain degree; if people were not generally inclined towards truth and possessed of some principle of honesty; if they were not sensitive to shame when caught in a lie — if experience had not shown these to be qualities inherent in human nature, we should never place the least confidence in human testimony. A man who is delirious, or notorious for lying and villainy, carries no authority with us at all.

And since the evidence derived from witnesses rests on past experience, it varies with that experience, and counts as either a *proof* or a *probability* according as the conjunction between a particular kind of report and a particular kind of fact has been found constant or variable. There are a number of circumstances to be taken into account in judgements of this kind, and the ultimate standard by which we settle any dispute about them always comes from experience and observation. Where the experience is not entirely uniform on one side, it brings with it an unavoidable conflict in our judgements, and the same mutual destruction of argument as in every other kind of evidence. We often hesitate over other people's reports. We balance the opposing circumstances that cause the doubt, and when we find a superiority on one side we lean that way — but still with a reduction of assurance in proportion to the force of what opposes it.

In the present case this conflict of evidence may come from several different sources: from contrary testimony; from the character or the number of the witnesses; from the manner in which they deliver their testimony; or from all of these together. We become suspicious of an alleged fact when the witnesses contradict each other; when they are few, or of doubtful character; when they have an interest in what they assert; when they give their testimony hesitantly, or on the contrary with too violent an insistence. There are many other particulars of the same kind that may weaken or destroy the force of any argument from human testimony.

Suppose, for instance, that the fact the testimony is trying to establish is of an extraordinary and marvellous kind. In that case the evidence resulting from the testimony is diminished, more or less in proportion to how unusual the fact is. The reason we place any credit in witnesses and historians is not that we perceive any *connection* in advance between testimony and reality, but that we are used to finding the two agree. But when the fact attested is one that has seldom come under our observation, we have a contest between two opposite experiences, of which the one destroys the other as far as its force goes, and the stronger can only act on the mind with the force that remains. The very same principle of experience that gives us a certain degree of assurance in the testimony of witnesses also gives us, in this case, another degree of assurance against the fact they are trying to establish — and from that contradiction there necessarily arises a counterpoise, and a mutual destruction of belief.

"I should not believe such a story even if Cato told it to me" was a proverbial saying in Rome, even during that philosophical patriot's lifetime. The incredibility of a fact, it was allowed, might undermine even so great an authority.

The Indian prince who refused to believe the first accounts of the effects of frost was reasoning soundly, and it naturally took very strong testimony to make him assent to facts arising from a state of nature he was unfamiliar with, and bearing so little analogy to the events he had constant and uniform experience of. They were not contrary to his experience, but they were not in keeping with it either.

But to raise the probability against the testimony of witnesses further, let us suppose that the fact they assert, instead of being merely marvellous, is genuinely miraculous; and suppose too that the testimony taken by itself amounts to a complete proof. In that case there is proof against proof, of which the stronger must prevail — but still with its force reduced in proportion to that of its opponent.

A miracle is a violation of the laws of nature; and since a firm and unalterable experience has established those laws, the proof against a miracle, from the very nature of the fact, is as complete as any argument from experience can possibly be. Why is it more than probable that all men must die; that lead cannot remain suspended in the air by itself; that fire consumes wood and is put out by water — unless it is that these events are found to agree with the laws of nature, and that preventing them would require a violation of those laws, in other words a miracle? Nothing counts as a miracle if it ever happens in the common course of nature. It is no miracle that a man apparently in good health should die suddenly, because that kind of death, though more unusual than others, has often been observed to happen. But it is a miracle that a dead man should come back to life, because that has never been observed in any age or country. There must therefore be a uniform experience against every miraculous event, or the event would not deserve the name. And since a uniform experience amounts to a proof, we have here a direct and full *proof*, from the nature of the fact, against the existence of any miracle — and such a proof cannot be destroyed, nor the miracle made credible, except by an opposite and stronger proof.

The plain consequence is this, and it is a general maxim worth our attention: "That no testimony is sufficient to establish a miracle, unless the testimony be of such a kind that its falsehood would be more miraculous than the fact which it endeavours to establish; and even in that case there is a mutual destruction of arguments, and the superior only gives us an assurance suitable to that degree of force which remains after deducting the inferior." When somebody tells me he has seen a dead man restored to life, I immediately consider whether it is more probable that this person is deceiving or is deceived, or that the thing he reports really happened. I weigh the one miracle against the other, and according to which I find the greater, I give my decision — and I always reject the greater miracle. Only if the falsehood of his testimony would be more miraculous than the event he relates, and not before, can he claim to command my belief.

Part Two

In the reasoning so far we have supposed that the testimony a miracle rests on might possibly amount to a complete proof, and that the falsehood of that testimony would be a real marvel. But it is easy to show that we have been far too generous in the concession, and that no miraculous event has ever been established on evidence so full.

For *first*, there is not to be found in all of history a single miracle attested by a sufficient number of men of such unquestioned good sense, education and learning as to secure us against any delusion on their part; of such undoubted integrity as to put them beyond all suspicion of any design to deceive others; of such credit and reputation in the eyes of the world as to have a great deal to lose if they were caught in a falsehood; and at the same time attesting facts performed so publicly, and in so celebrated a part of the world, as to make detection unavoidable. All these circumstances are needed to give us full assurance in human testimony.

*Second*, there is a principle in human nature which, strictly examined, will be found to weaken enormously the assurance we might get from human testimony about any marvel. The maxim we usually go by in our reasoning is that objects we have no experience of resemble those we have; that what we have found most usual is always most probable; and that where arguments conflict we should prefer the one founded on the greatest number of past observations. But though we readily reject a fact that is unusual and incredible in an ordinary degree by following this rule, the mind does not always keep to it when we go further: when something utterly absurd and miraculous is asserted, the mind is if anything readier to admit it, on account of the very circumstance that ought to destroy its authority. The passions of *surprise* and *wonder* aroused by miracles are agreeable emotions, and so give us a perceptible leaning towards belief in the events that produce them. This goes so far that even people who cannot enjoy the pleasure directly, and cannot believe the miraculous events they are told about, still love to share in the satisfaction at second hand, and take pride and delight in arousing the wonder of others.

With what greediness are the miraculous accounts of travellers taken in — their descriptions of sea and land monsters, their tales of wonderful adventures, strange men and outlandish manners! But when the spirit of religion joins the love of wonder, there is an end of common sense, and human testimony in those circumstances loses all claim to authority. A religious man may be an enthusiast and imagine he sees what is not there; he may know his story is false and yet persist in it, with the best intentions in the world, for the sake of promoting so holy a cause; or even where there is no such delusion, vanity under so strong a temptation works on him more powerfully than on anyone else in any other circumstances — and self-interest just as forcibly. His hearers may not have, and usually do not have, judgement enough to sift his evidence; what judgement they have they renounce on principle in these lofty and mysterious matters; and if they were ever so willing to use it, passion and a heated imagination would upset the regularity of its working. Their credulity increases his impudence, and his impudence overpowers their credulity.

Eloquence at its highest pitch leaves little room for reason or reflection: addressing itself entirely to the fancy and the affections, it captivates willing hearers and overcomes their understanding. Happily it seldom reaches that pitch. But what a Cicero or a Demosthenes could scarcely manage with a Roman or Athenian audience, every *Capuchin*, every travelling or settled preacher can achieve over most of mankind, and to a greater degree, simply by touching such coarse passions.

The many instances of forged miracles and prophecies and supernatural events which in every age have either been exposed by contrary evidence or have exposed themselves by their own absurdity, sufficiently prove how strongly people incline towards the extraordinary, and ought reasonably to breed a suspicion of all reports of this kind. This is our natural way of thinking even about the most ordinary and credible events. For instance: no kind of report starts so easily or spreads so quickly, especially in country places and provincial towns, as reports about marriages — so much so that two young people of equal rank never see each other twice without the whole neighbourhood immediately marrying them off. The pleasure of telling such an interesting piece of news, of passing it on and of being the first to report it, is what spreads the information. And this is so well known that no sensible man pays attention to such reports until he finds them confirmed by stronger evidence. Do not the same passions, and others stronger still, incline most of mankind to believe and repeat all religious miracles with the greatest vehemence and assurance?

*Third*, it creates a strong presumption against all supernatural and miraculous reports that they are found chiefly among ignorant and barbarous nations; or that if a civilised people has ever admitted any of them, that people will be found to have received them from ignorant and barbarous ancestors, who passed them on with the inviolable sanction and authority that always attends a received opinion. When we read the earliest histories of any nation, we are apt to imagine ourselves carried into some new world where the whole frame of nature is out of joint, and every element behaves differently from the way it behaves now. Battles, revolutions, plague, famine and death are never the effect of the natural causes we experience. Marvels, omens, oracles and judgements quite obscure the few natural events mixed in among them. But since these grow thinner on every page as we advance nearer to enlightened ages, we soon learn that there is nothing mysterious or supernatural in the case, and that it all comes from the usual human leaning towards the marvellous — an inclination which may be checked from time to time by good sense and learning, but can never be thoroughly rooted out of human nature.

"It is strange," a judicious reader is apt to say on reading these wonderful historians, "that such prodigious events never happen in our own day." But it is nothing strange, I hope, that men should lie in every age. You have surely seen instances enough of that frailty. You have heard many such marvellous reports started yourself, which — being treated with scorn by everyone wise and judicious — were at last abandoned even by ordinary people. Be assured that the famous lies which have spread and flourished to such a monstrous height began in just the same way; but being sown in more suitable soil, they shot up at last into marvels almost equal to the ones they describe.

It was a shrewd policy in that false prophet Alexander — now forgotten, though once so famous — to set the first scene of his impostures in Paphlagonia, where, as Lucian tells us, the people were extremely ignorant and stupid and ready to swallow the grossest delusion. People at a distance, weak enough to think the matter worth enquiring into at all, have no way of getting better information. The stories reach them magnified by a hundred additional details. Fools are industrious in spreading the imposture, while the wise and learned are generally content to laugh at its absurdity without informing themselves of the particular facts by which it could be specifically refuted. And so the impostor just mentioned was able to proceed from his ignorant Paphlagonians to enlisting followers even among the Greek philosophers, and among men of the most eminent rank in Rome; he even engaged the attention of that wise emperor Marcus Aurelius, far enough to make him entrust the success of a military expedition to his lying prophecies.

The advantages of starting an imposture among an ignorant people are so great that even if the delusion is too gross to take in most of them — *which is sometimes, though seldom, the case* — it still has a much better chance of succeeding in remote countries than if the first scene had been set in a city famous for arts and knowledge. The most ignorant and barbarous of these barbarians carry the report abroad. None of their countrymen has a wide correspondence, or credit and authority enough to contradict the delusion and beat it down. Human inclination towards the marvellous has every opportunity to display itself. And so a story universally laughed out of court where it started will pass for certain a thousand miles away. Had Alexander settled in Athens, the philosophers of that renowned market of learning would immediately have spread their opinion of the matter through the whole Roman empire; and being supported by such great authority and set out with all the force of reason and eloquence, it would have opened the eyes of mankind entirely. It is true that Lucian, passing through Paphlagonia by chance, had the opportunity of performing this good office. But much as it is to be wished, it does not always happen that every Alexander meets his Lucian, ready to expose and detect his impostures.
