Section Eleven: A Particular Providence and a Future State

(Part 1 of 2)

I was recently in conversation with a friend who loves sceptical paradoxes. He put forward a good many principles I cannot approve of at all; but since they seem curious, and bear some relation to the chain of reasoning running through this enquiry, I shall set them down here from memory as accurately as I can, and submit them to the reader's judgement.

Our conversation began with my admiring the remarkable good fortune of philosophy. Since philosophy needs complete liberty above every other privilege, and flourishes chiefly on the free clash of opinions, it was lucky to be born in an age and country of freedom and toleration, and never to have been cramped, even in its most extravagant principles, by any creed or penal statute. Apart from the banishment of Protagoras and the death of Socrates — and the second of those was partly for other reasons — there is scarcely an instance in ancient history of the bigoted jealousy the present age is so infested with. Epicurus lived at Athens to a great age in peace and quiet. Epicureans were even admitted to the priesthood and allowed to officiate at the altar in the most sacred rites of the established religion. And the wisest of the Roman emperors handed out public pensions and salaries equally to professors of every philosophical sect. How necessary that sort of treatment was to philosophy in her early youth is easy to see if we reflect that even now, when she may be supposed hardier and more robust, she bears with great difficulty the harsh winds of slander and persecution that blow on her.

You admire as the special good fortune of philosophy, says my friend, what really follows from the natural course of things and is unavoidable in every age and nation. This stubborn bigotry you complain of as so fatal to philosophy is really her own child, who — after allying himself with superstition — separates himself entirely from his parent's interest and becomes her bitterest enemy and persecutor. Speculative religious dogmas, the present occasion of such furious dispute, could not possibly have been conceived or accepted in the early ages of the world, when mankind, being entirely illiterate, formed an idea of religion suited to their weak grasp, and made up their sacred doctrines chiefly of the sort of tales that are objects of traditional belief rather than of argument. So once the first alarm was over, raised by the new paradoxes of the philosophers, those teachers seem ever afterwards throughout antiquity to have lived in great harmony with the established superstition, and to have divided mankind fairly between them: philosophy claiming the learned and wise, superstition keeping the common and unlettered.

It seems, then, said I, that you leave politics out of the question entirely, and never suppose that a wise magistrate can be justly wary of certain doctrines of philosophy — those of Epicurus, for instance, which by denying a divine existence, and consequently a providence and a future state, seem largely to loosen the ties of morality, and may for that reason be thought dangerous to the peace of civil society.

I know, he replied, that in fact these persecutions have never in any age proceeded from calm reason, or from experience of philosophy's harmful consequences, but have arisen entirely from passion and prejudice. But what if I went further and asserted that if Epicurus had been accused before the people by any of the *sycophants* or informers of the day, he could easily have defended himself, and proved his philosophical principles as wholesome as those of the opponents who were so eager to expose him to public hatred?

I wish, said I, you would try your eloquence on so extraordinary a topic, and make a speech for Epicurus that would satisfy — not the mob of Athens, if you will allow that ancient and polished city to have contained a mob, but the more philosophical part of his audience, the part that could be supposed capable of following his arguments.

That would not be difficult on those terms, he replied. If you like, I shall suppose myself Epicurus for a moment, and let you stand for the Athenian people, and deliver you such a speech as will fill the whole voting urn with white beans and leave not a single black one to gratify the malice of my adversaries.

Very well. Please proceed on those suppositions.

I come here, Athenians, to justify before your assembly what I have maintained in my school; and I find myself charged by furious antagonists instead of reasoning with calm and dispassionate enquirers. Your deliberations, which by rights should be directed to questions of public good, are being diverted into speculative philosophy, and these magnificent but perhaps fruitless enquiries are taking the place of your more ordinary but more useful business. So far as it lies with me, I shall prevent this abuse. We shall not dispute here about the origin and government of worlds. We shall only ask how far such questions concern the public interest. And if I can persuade you that they are entirely irrelevant to the peace of society and the security of government, I hope you will send us straight back to our schools, to examine at leisure the most sublime but also the most speculative question in all philosophy.

The religious philosophers, not satisfied with the tradition of your forefathers and the doctrine of your priests — in which I willingly acquiesce — indulge a rash curiosity in seeing how far they can establish religion on the principles of reason; and so they arouse, rather than satisfy, the doubts that naturally arise from a searching enquiry. They paint in the most magnificent colours the order, beauty and wise arrangement of the universe, and then ask whether so glorious a display of intelligence could have come from a chance collision of atoms, or whether accident could produce what the greatest genius can never sufficiently admire. I shall not examine the soundness of this argument. I shall allow it to be as solid as my accusers could wish. It is enough if I can prove, from that very reasoning, that the question is entirely speculative, and that when in my philosophical enquiries I deny a providence and a future state, I am not undermining the foundations of society but advancing principles which my accusers themselves, arguing consistently from their own premises, must allow to be sound.

You, then, who accuse me, have acknowledged that the chief or only argument for a divine existence — which I have never questioned — is drawn from the order of nature, where there appear such marks of intelligence and design that you think it extravagant to assign as its cause either chance or the blind force of matter. You allow that this is an argument from effects to causes. From the order of the work, you infer that there must have been planning and forethought in the workman. If you cannot make that out, you allow that your conclusion fails; and you do not claim to establish the conclusion any more widely than the phenomena of nature will justify. These are your own concessions. I ask you to mark the consequences.

When we infer a particular cause from an effect, we must proportion the one to the other, and can never be allowed to attribute to the cause any qualities beyond what are exactly sufficient to produce the effect. A ten-ounce weight raised in a scale may prove that the counterbalancing weight exceeds ten ounces, but can never give any reason to think it exceeds a hundred. If the cause assigned to an effect is not enough to produce it, we must either reject that cause or add to it whatever will bring it into proportion with the effect. But if we attribute further qualities to it, or claim it capable of producing other effects, we are merely indulging in conjecture, and arbitrarily supposing qualities and powers without reason or warrant.

The same rule holds whether the cause assigned is brute unconscious matter or a rational intelligent being. If the cause is known only through the effect, we ought never to attribute to it any qualities beyond what are precisely needed to produce that effect; nor can we by any rules of sound reasoning turn back from the cause and infer other effects from it, beyond the ones by which alone it is known to us. Nobody could tell, merely from seeing one of Zeuxis's paintings, that he was also a sculptor or an architect, and no less skilful in stone and marble than in colours. The talents and taste displayed in the particular work in front of us — those we may safely conclude the workman possessed. The cause must be proportioned to the effect; and if we proportion it exactly, we shall never find in it any qualities that point further, or allow any inference about some other design. Such qualities would have to be something beyond what is merely needed to produce the effect we are examining.

Granting, then, that the gods are the authors of the existence and order of the universe, it follows that they possess exactly that degree of power, intelligence and benevolence which appears in their workmanship — but nothing further can ever be proved, unless we call in exaggeration and flattery to make up for the shortfall in argument. So far as traces of any attribute appear at present, so far we may conclude that attribute exists. Supposing further attributes is mere hypothesis; and still more so is supposing that in distant regions of space or periods of time there has been or will be a more magnificent display of these attributes, and a scheme of administration better suited to such imaginary virtues. We can never be allowed to climb from the universe, the effect, up to Jupiter, the cause, and then climb down again to infer some new effect from that cause — as if the present effects alone were not entirely worthy of the glorious attributes we ascribe to that deity. Since our knowledge of the cause comes solely from the effect, the two must be exactly fitted to each other, and the one can never point to anything beyond, or be the foundation of any new conclusion.

You find certain phenomena in nature. You look for a cause, an author. You imagine you have found him. Then you become so enamoured of this offspring of your own brain that you cannot believe he would not produce something greater and more perfect than the present state of things, which is so full of evil and disorder. You forget that this supreme intelligence and benevolence is entirely imaginary, or at least has no foundation in reason, and that you have no grounds for attributing to him any qualities but the ones you can see he has actually exerted in what he has made. So let your gods, philosophers, be suited to the present appearance of nature — and do not presume to alter that appearance by arbitrary suppositions, in order to fit it to the attributes you are so fond of ascribing to your deities.

When priests and poets, backed by your authority, Athenians, talk of a golden or silver age preceding the present state of vice and misery, I listen with attention and reverence. But when philosophers, who claim to disregard authority and cultivate reason, deliver the same discourse, I confess I do not pay them the same submissive deference. I ask: who carried them up into the heavens, who admitted them to the councils of the gods, who opened the book of fate to them, that they should so rashly assert that their deities have carried out, or will carry out, any purpose beyond what has actually appeared? If they tell me they climbed by the gradual ascent of reason, drawing inferences from effects to causes, I still insist that they helped reason's ascent along with the wings of imagination — otherwise they could not have switched the direction of their inference like this and argued from causes to effects, assuming that a more perfect production than the present world would better suit such perfect beings as the gods, and forgetting that they have no reason to ascribe to those beings any perfection that cannot be found in the present world.

Hence all the fruitless industry spent on explaining away the ugly appearances of nature and saving the honour of the gods, while we are obliged to acknowledge the reality of the evil and disorder the world so abounds in. The obstinate and intractable qualities of matter, we are told, or the need to observe general laws, or some such reason, is the sole thing that restrained the power and benevolence of Jupiter and obliged him to create mankind and every sentient creature so imperfect and so unhappy. So those attributes, it seems, are taken for granted beforehand, in their fullest extent. And on that assumption I grant that such conjectures may perhaps pass as plausible solutions to the ugly phenomena. But still I ask: why take the attributes for granted? Why attribute to the cause any qualities but the ones that actually appear in the effect? Why torture your brain justifying the course of nature on assumptions which, for all you know, may be entirely imaginary, and of which no trace at all is to be found in the course of nature?

The religious hypothesis, then, must be regarded only as a particular way of accounting for the visible phenomena of the universe; and no sound reasoner will ever presume to infer a single new fact from it, or alter or add to the phenomena in any particular. If you think the appearance of things proves such causes, you are entitled to draw a conclusion about the existence of those causes. On subjects so complicated and lofty, everyone should be allowed the liberty of conjecture and argument. But there you ought to stop. If you turn round and, arguing from your inferred causes, conclude that some other fact has existed or will exist in the course of nature which would display those attributes more fully, then I must warn you that you have abandoned the method of reasoning proper to this subject, and have certainly added something to the attributes of the cause beyond what appears in the effect — otherwise you could never, with any sense or propriety, add anything to the effect in order to make it more worthy of the cause.

Where, then, is the odiousness of the doctrine I teach in my school — or rather, that I examine in my gardens? Or what is there in this whole question that touches in the least on the security of good morals or the peace and order of society?

I deny a providence, you say, and a supreme governor of the world, who directs the course of events and punishes the wicked with disgrace and disappointment while rewarding the virtuous with honour and success in all they undertake. But surely I do not deny the course of events itself, which lies open to everyone's inspection. I acknowledge that in the present order of things, virtue brings more peace of mind than vice and meets with a warmer reception from the world. I am aware that on the past experience of mankind, friendship is the chief joy of human life and moderation the only source of tranquillity. I never hesitate between the virtuous and the vicious course of life, but am well aware that to a well-disposed mind every advantage lies on the side of the first. And what more can you say, granting all your suppositions and reasonings? You tell me, certainly, that this arrangement of things proceeds from intelligence and design. But whatever it proceeds from, the arrangement itself — on which our happiness or misery, and consequently our conduct in life, depend — is still the same. It is still as open to me as to you to regulate my behaviour by my experience of past events. And if you maintain that, since a divine providence and a supreme distributive justice in the universe are admitted, I ought to expect some more particular reward of the good and punishment of the bad beyond the ordinary course of events, I find here the very fallacy I have already been trying to expose. You persist in imagining that if we grant the divine existence you argue for so earnestly, you may safely infer consequences from it, and add something to the experienced order of nature by arguing from the attributes you ascribe to your gods. You seem to forget that all your reasoning on this subject can only run from effects to causes, and that every argument running from causes to effects must necessarily be a gross fallacy — since it is impossible for you to know anything of the cause except what you have already, not inferred but fully discovered, in the effect.
