Section Eleven: A Particular Providence and a Future State

(Part 2 of 2)

But what must a philosopher think of those empty reasoners who, instead of treating the present scene of things as the sole object of their attention, so far reverse the whole course of nature as to make this life a mere passage to something further — a porch leading to a greater and quite different building, a prologue serving only to introduce the play and give it more grace? Where do you suppose such philosophers get their idea of the gods? From their own fancy, surely. For if they got it from the present phenomena, it would never point to anything beyond them, but would have to be exactly fitted to them. That the divinity may *possibly* have attributes we have never seen exerted, and may be governed by principles of action we cannot see satisfied — all this will be freely granted. But it remains mere *possibility* and hypothesis. We can never have reason to *infer* any attribute in him, or any principle of action, except so far as we know it to have been exerted and satisfied.

*Are there any marks of a distributive justice in the world?* If you answer yes, I conclude that since justice does exert itself here, it is satisfied. If you answer no, I conclude that you have no reason to attribute justice, in our sense of the word, to the gods at all. And if you take a middle course and say that the justice of the gods exerts itself at present in part but not to its full extent, I answer that you have no reason to give it any particular extent, but only as far as you see it exert itself *at present*.

So I bring the dispute to a short issue with my opponents, Athenians. The course of nature lies open to my contemplation as much as to theirs. The experienced train of events is the great standard by which we all regulate our conduct. Nothing else can be appealed to in the field or in the senate. Nothing else ought ever to be heard of in the school or the study. Our limited understanding tries in vain to break through boundaries too narrow for our fond imagination. When we argue from the course of nature and infer a particular intelligent cause, which first bestowed order on the universe and still preserves it, we are adopting a principle that is both uncertain and useless. Uncertain, because the subject lies entirely beyond the reach of human experience. Useless, because our knowledge of this cause being derived entirely from the course of nature, we can never by the rules of sound reasoning come back from the cause with any new inference, or set up any new principles of conduct by making additions to the ordinary experienced course of nature.

I observe, said I, finding he had finished his speech, that you do not neglect the tricks of the old demagogues; and having been kind enough to make me stand for the people, you work your way into my favour by adopting principles you know I have always had a particular attachment to. But even granting you experience as the only standard of our judgement on this and every other question of fact — which I do think it ought to be — I have no doubt that it is possible, from that very experience you appeal to, to refute the reasoning you have put into the mouth of Epicurus. If you saw a half-finished building, surrounded by heaps of brick and stone and mortar and all the tools of masonry, could you not *infer* from the effect that it was a work of design? And could you not turn back from that inferred cause to infer new additions to the effect, and conclude that the building would soon be finished and receive all the further improvements art could give it? If you saw the print of a single human foot on the seashore, you would conclude that a man had passed that way, and that he had also left the print of the other foot, though the rolling sand or the water had wiped it out. Why then do you refuse to allow the same method of reasoning about the order of nature? Regard the world and the present life as merely an unfinished building, from which you can infer a superior intelligence; and arguing from that superior intelligence, which can leave nothing imperfect, why may you not infer a more finished plan, which will reach its completion at some distant point of space or time? Are these two methods of reasoning not exactly alike? And on what pretext can you accept the one while rejecting the other?

The infinite difference between the two subjects, he replied, is foundation enough for the difference in my conclusions. In works of *human* skill and contrivance it is legitimate to move from the effect to the cause, and then back from the cause to form new inferences about the effect, and to consider the changes it has probably undergone or may still undergo. But what is the foundation of that method of reasoning? Plainly this: that man is a being we know by experience, whose motives and designs we are acquainted with, and whose projects and inclinations hang together in a certain way, according to the laws nature has established for governing such a creature. So when we find that some work has come from human skill and industry, since we are acquainted with the animal from other sources, we can draw a hundred inferences about what may be expected of him — and all those inferences will be founded on experience and observation. But if we knew man only from the single work in front of us, it would be impossible to argue this way, because our knowledge of every quality we ascribe to him would in that case come from the product itself, so that it could not possibly point to anything beyond, or be the foundation of any new inference. The print of a foot in the sand, taken alone, can only prove that there was some shape fitted to it that made it; but the print of a human foot also proves, from our other experience, that there was probably another foot which left its impression too, though time or accident has effaced it. Here we do climb from the effect to the cause and then descend again from the cause to infer alterations in the effect — but this is not a continuation of the same simple chain of reasoning. We are bringing in a hundred other experiences and observations about the *usual* shape and limbs of that species of animal, and without them the argument would have to be counted a fallacy.

It is not the same with our reasoning from the works of nature. God is known to us only through what he has produced, and is a single being in the universe, not included in any species or genus from whose experienced attributes we could infer by analogy any attribute in him. Since the universe shows wisdom and goodness, we infer wisdom and goodness. Since it shows a particular degree of these perfections, we infer a particular degree of them, precisely matched to the effect we are examining. But further attributes, or further degrees of the same attributes, we can never be authorised to infer by any rules of sound reasoning. And without some such licence of supposition it is impossible for us to argue from the cause, or to infer any change in the effect beyond what has come directly under our observation. A greater good produced by this Being would still only prove a greater degree of goodness; a more impartial distribution of rewards and punishments would only follow from a greater regard for justice. Every supposed addition to the works of nature makes an addition to the attributes of the Author of nature — and consequently, being entirely unsupported by any argument, can never be admitted as anything but conjecture.

The great source of our error on this subject, and of the unbounded licence of conjecture we indulge in, is that we tacitly put ourselves in the place of the Supreme Being, and conclude that on every occasion he will behave as we ourselves in his situation would have thought reasonable. But quite apart from the fact that the ordinary course of nature may convince us that almost everything is regulated by principles very different from ours — quite apart from that, it must plainly be contrary to all rules of analogy to reason from the intentions of men to those of a Being so different and so much superior. In human nature there is a certain experienced coherence of designs and inclinations, so that when some fact has revealed one intention of a man's, it can often be reasonable to infer another from experience, and to draw a long chain of conclusions about his past or future conduct. But this method of reasoning can never apply to a Being so remote and incomprehensible, who bears far less analogy to any other being in the universe than the sun does to a wax candle, and who reveals himself only in a few faint traces, beyond which we have no authority to ascribe him any attribute at all. What we imagine to be a superior perfection may really be a defect. And even if it were a perfection beyond question, ascribing it to the Supreme Being where it does not appear to have been fully exerted in his works smacks more of flattery than of sound philosophy. So all the philosophy in the world, and all the religion — which is only a kind of philosophy — will never be able to carry us beyond the usual course of experience, or give us measures of conduct different from the ones that reflection on ordinary life supplies. No new fact can ever be inferred from the religious hypothesis; no event foreseen or foretold; no reward or punishment expected or dreaded, beyond what is already known from practice and observation. So my defence of Epicurus still stands, and the political interests of society have no connection with philosophical disputes about metaphysics and religion.

There is still one point, I replied, that you seem to have overlooked. Even granting your premises, I must deny your conclusion. You conclude that religious doctrines *can* have no influence on life because they *ought* to have none — never considering that people do not reason the way you do, but draw many consequences from a belief in a divine existence, and suppose that God will inflict punishments on vice and bestow rewards on virtue beyond what appears in the ordinary course of nature. Whether their reasoning is sound or not makes no difference. Its influence on their life and conduct is the same either way. And those who try to rid them of such prejudices may for all I know be good reasoners, but I cannot allow them to be good citizens, since they release men from one restraint on their passions, and make breaking the laws of society easier and safer in that one respect.

After all, I may perhaps agree with your general conclusion in favour of liberty, though on different premises from the ones you try to found it on. I think the state ought to tolerate every principle of philosophy; and there is no instance of any government suffering in its political interests through such indulgence. There is no enthusiasm among philosophers; their doctrines are not very alluring to the people; and no restraint can be put on their reasoning that would not be dangerous to the sciences, and even to the state, by opening the way for persecution on points in which most people are far more deeply concerned.

But there is one difficulty about your main topic, I went on, which I shall simply put to you without pressing it, for fear of leading us into reasoning of too delicate a kind. In a word: I much doubt whether it is possible for a cause to be known only by its effect, as you have supposed throughout, or to be of so singular a nature that it has no parallel and no resemblance to any other cause or object that has ever come under our observation. It is only when two *species* of object are found to be constantly conjoined that we can infer the one from the other; and if an effect were presented that was entirely singular, and could not be brought under any known *species*, I do not see that we could form any conjecture at all about its cause. If experience and observation and analogy really are the only guides we can reasonably follow in inferences of this kind, then both the effect and the cause must bear some resemblance to other effects and causes we know, and have found joined together in many instances. I leave you to work out the consequences of this principle for yourself. I shall only observe that since the opponents of Epicurus always take the universe — an effect quite singular and unparalleled — to be proof of a God, a cause no less singular and unparalleled, your reasoning on that supposition seems at the least to deserve our attention. There is, I admit, some difficulty about how we can ever return from the cause to the effect, and by reasoning from our ideas of the first infer any alteration in the second, or any addition to it.
