Section Twelve: The Academic, or Sceptical, Philosophy

(Part 1 of 2)

Part One

No subject has produced a greater quantity of philosophical reasoning than the existence of God and the refutation of the fallacies of *Atheists* — and yet the most religious philosophers still dispute whether any man could be blind enough to be a speculative atheist. How are we to reconcile these contradictions? The knights errant who wandered about ridding the world of dragons and giants never entertained the slightest doubt that those monsters existed.

The *Sceptic* is another enemy of religion who naturally provokes the indignation of every divine and every graver philosopher — though it is certain that nobody has ever met such an absurd creature, or talked with a man who had no opinion or principle at all on any subject of action or speculation. This raises a very natural question: what is meant by a sceptic? And how far is it possible to push these philosophical principles of doubt?

There is a kind of scepticism *antecedent* to all study and philosophy, much recommended by Descartes and others as a sovereign preservative against error and hasty judgement. It urges a universal doubt, not only of all our former opinions and principles but of our very faculties — whose reliability, they say, we must establish by a chain of reasoning deduced from some original principle that could not possibly be deceptive. But there is no such original principle with any privilege over others that are self-evident and convincing; and even if there were, we could not advance a single step beyond it except by using the very faculties we are supposed to distrust already. So Cartesian doubt, if any human creature could ever actually attain it — which plainly nobody can — would be entirely incurable, and no reasoning could ever bring us to a state of conviction about anything.

It must be admitted, however, that this kind of scepticism, in a more moderate form, can be understood in a very reasonable sense, and is a necessary preparation for the study of philosophy: it preserves a proper impartiality in our judgements and weans the mind from the prejudices we may have absorbed from our education or from rash opinion. To begin with clear and self-evident principles, to advance by cautious and sure steps, to review our conclusions frequently and examine all their consequences carefully — these are the only methods by which we can ever hope to reach truth and attain any stability in our conclusions, even though by these means our systems will grow both slowly and not far.

There is another kind of scepticism, *consequent* to science and enquiry, arising when men suppose they have discovered either that their mental faculties are entirely unreliable, or that they are unfit to reach any settled conclusion on the curious subjects of speculation they are usually employed on. Even our senses are brought into dispute by a certain sort of philosopher, and the maxims of ordinary life are subjected to the same doubt as the deepest conclusions of metaphysics and theology. Since these paradoxical doctrines — if they can be called doctrines — are to be met with in some philosophers, and refutations of them in several, they naturally rouse our curiosity about the arguments they may rest on.

I need not dwell on the more familiar objections the sceptics of every age have raised against the evidence of the *senses*: those drawn from the imperfection and unreliability of our organs on countless occasions, the bent appearance of an oar in water, the different look of objects at different distances, the double image produced by pressing one eye, and many other appearances of the kind. These sceptical points are enough only to prove that the senses are not to be relied on implicitly by themselves, and that we must correct their evidence by reason, and by considerations drawn from the nature of the medium, the distance of the object, and the condition of the organ, in order to make them, within their own sphere, proper *criteria* of truth and falsehood. There are other, deeper arguments against the senses that do not admit of so easy a solution.

It seems clear that men are carried by a natural instinct to put their faith in their senses, and that without any reasoning — almost before we can use reason at all — we always suppose an external universe which does not depend on our perceiving it, and would exist even if we and every sentient creature were annihilated. Animals are governed by the same opinion, and keep this belief in external objects in all their thoughts and actions.

It also seems clear that when men follow this blind and powerful instinct of nature, they always take the very images presented by the senses to be the external objects themselves, and never suspect that the first are nothing but representations of the second. This table, which we see to be white and feel to be hard, is believed to exist independently of our perceiving it, and to be something outside the mind that perceives it. Our presence does not confer being on it; our absence does not annihilate it. It keeps its existence uniform and entire, regardless of the situation of the intelligent beings who perceive it.

But this universal and primary opinion of all mankind is soon destroyed by the slightest philosophy, which teaches us that nothing can ever be present to the mind but an image or perception, and that the senses are only the entrances through which these images are conveyed, without being able to produce any direct commerce between the mind and the object. The table we see seems to shrink as we move away from it — but the real table, which exists independently of us, undergoes no change; so it was nothing but its image that was present to the mind. These are the obvious dictates of reason, and no reflecting person has ever doubted that the existences we have in view when we say *this house* and *that tree* are nothing but perceptions in the mind, fleeting copies of other existences that remain uniform and independent.

So reasoning forces us to contradict the primary instincts of nature and adopt a new system regarding the evidence of the senses. But here philosophy finds herself extremely embarrassed when she tries to justify this new system and answer the objections of the sceptics. She can no longer plead the infallible and irresistible instinct of nature, for that led us to a quite different system, one now admitted to be unreliable and even mistaken. And to justify this supposed philosophical system by a chain of clear and convincing argument, or even by anything that looks like an argument, exceeds all human capacity.

By what argument can it be proved that the mind's perceptions must be caused by external objects entirely different from them, though resembling them, if that is even possible — and could not arise either from the energy of the mind itself, or from the suggestion of some invisible and unknown spirit, or from some cause still more unknown to us? It is acknowledged that in fact many of these perceptions do not arise from anything external, as in dreams and madness and other illnesses. And nothing could be more inexplicable than the way a body could act on a mind so as to convey an image of itself to a substance supposed to be of so different and even contrary a nature.

It is a question of fact whether the perceptions of the senses are produced by external objects resembling them. How is this question to be settled? By experience, surely, as all other questions of the kind are. But here experience is, and must be, entirely silent. The mind never has anything present to it but the perceptions, and cannot possibly get any experience of their connection with objects. So the supposition of such a connection has no foundation in reasoning at all.

To fall back on the truthfulness of the supreme Being in order to prove the truthfulness of our senses is surely a very unexpected detour. If his truthfulness were involved in the matter at all, our senses would be entirely infallible, since it is not possible for him ever to deceive. Not to mention that once the external world has been called into question, we shall be at a loss to find any arguments by which to prove the existence of that Being, or any of his attributes.

This, then, is a subject on which the deeper and more philosophical sceptics will always triumph, when they set out to introduce a universal doubt into every field of human knowledge. Do you follow the instincts of nature, they may say, in trusting the evidence of the senses? But those instincts lead you to believe that the perception, the sensible image, is itself the external object. Do you disown that principle in order to embrace the more rational opinion that perceptions are only representations of something external? Then you have departed from your natural inclinations and your most obvious feelings — and still cannot satisfy your reason, which can never find any convincing argument from experience to prove that perceptions are connected with any external object at all.

There is another sceptical point of the same kind, drawn from the deepest philosophy, which might deserve our attention if it were worth diving so deep to find arguments that serve so little serious purpose. It is universally granted by modern enquirers that all the perceptible qualities of objects — hard, soft, hot, cold, white, black and the rest — are merely secondary, and do not exist in the objects themselves but are perceptions of the mind, with no external original that they represent. If this is granted for the secondary qualities, it must follow for the supposed primary qualities of extension and solidity too; the latter have no better claim to the name than the former. The idea of extension is acquired entirely from sight and touch; and if all the qualities perceived by the senses are in the mind and not in the object, the same conclusion must reach the idea of extension, which depends wholly on those sensible ideas. Nothing can save us from this conclusion except asserting that the ideas of primary qualities are reached by *Abstraction* — an opinion which, examined closely, turns out to be unintelligible and even absurd. An extension that is neither tangible nor visible cannot possibly be conceived; and a tangible or visible extension that is neither hard nor soft, black nor white, is equally beyond human conception. Let anyone try to conceive a triangle in general, which is neither *Isosceles* nor *Scalene* and has no particular length or proportion of sides, and he will soon see the absurdity of all the scholastic notions about abstraction and general ideas.

So the first philosophical objection to the evidence of the senses, and to belief in external existence, is that such a belief, if it rests on natural instinct, is contrary to reason, and if it is referred to reason, is contrary to natural instinct — while carrying no rational evidence with it that would convince an impartial enquirer. The second objection goes further and presents the belief as contrary to reason outright, at least if it is a principle of reason that all sensible qualities are in the mind and not in the object. Strip matter of all its intelligible qualities, primary and secondary alike, and you virtually annihilate it, leaving only a certain unknown, inexplicable *something* as the cause of our perceptions — a notion so imperfect that no sceptic will think it worth arguing against.

Part Two

It may look like a very extravagant attempt for the sceptics to try to destroy *reason* by argument and reasoning; yet that is the grand aim of all their enquiries. They try to find objections both to our abstract reasonings and to those concerning matter of fact.

The chief objection to all *abstract* reasoning comes from the ideas of space and time — ideas which in ordinary life, viewed carelessly, are perfectly clear, but which under the scrutiny of the deeper sciences (and they are the chief object of those sciences) yield principles that seem full of absurdity and contradiction. No priestly *dogma*, invented on purpose to tame the rebellious reason of mankind, ever shocked common sense more than the doctrine of the infinite divisibility of extension, with all its consequences, as they are pompously set out by every geometer and metaphysician with a kind of triumph. A real quantity infinitely smaller than any finite quantity, containing quantities infinitely smaller than itself, and so on for ever: this is a structure so bold and prodigious that it is too heavy for any supposed demonstration to hold up, because it shocks the clearest and most natural principles of human reason. But what makes the matter more extraordinary is that these seemingly absurd opinions are supported by the clearest and most natural chain of reasoning, and it is not possible for us to allow the premises without admitting the consequences. Nothing could be more convincing than all the conclusions about the properties of circles and triangles — and yet once those are accepted, how can we deny that the angle of contact between a circle and its tangent is infinitely smaller than any angle made by straight lines; that as you increase the diameter of the circle without limit, this angle of contact grows smaller without limit; and that the angle of contact between other curves and their tangents may be infinitely smaller still than any circle's, and so on for ever? The demonstration of these principles seems as unexceptionable as the one proving that the three angles of a triangle equal two right angles, though the latter opinion is natural and easy and the former is big with contradiction. Reason here seems thrown into a kind of amazement and suspense which, without any sceptic's prompting, gives her a distrust of herself and of the ground she stands on. She sees a full light illuminating certain places — but that light borders on the profoundest darkness, and between the two she is so dazzled and confounded that she can scarcely pronounce with certainty on anything at all.
