page: 4

Let the learners, or the class under their teacher, therefore, in the first place go carefully once through the First Part of the book, or at least through the first two chapters, verifying the examples and illustrations given, as far as possible, with their own eyes, and searching for other examples in the plants and flowers around them. Then they may begin to study plants by the Flora, or Second Part of the book, according to the directions given in the last section of Chapter IV. Whenever they meet with a word which they do not remember or clearly understand, they will look it out in the Index, and refer back to the place in the first part of the book where it is used and fully explained. Remember that every one has to creep before he can walk, and to walk before he can run. Only begin at the beginning; take pains to understand things as you go on, and cultivate the habits of accuracy and nice discrimination which this study is eminently adapted to inspire. Then each step will render the next one easy; you will soon make more rapid progress; will be able to ascertain with facility the names and the structure of almost all common plants; and will gradually recognize the various and interesting relationships which bind the members of the vegetable creation together in natural families, — showing them to be parts of one system; varied expressions, as it were, of the thoughts of their Divine Author; planned in reference to one another; and evidently intended to enlarge and enlighten our minds, as well as to gratify our senses, and nourish, clothe, warm, and shelter our bodies. So the study of Botany — the most fascinating branch of Natural History, especially for the young — becomes more and more interesting the more we learn of it, and affords a constant and unalloyed intellectual gratification.

When young students have thoroughly mastered this little book, they will be well prepared to continue the study in the *Lessons in Botany and Vegetable Physiology*, and in the *Manual of the Botany of the Northern United States*, by the same author.

The illustrations are referred to throughout by numbers, with "Fig." prefixed. The numbers occasionally introduced, within parenthesis-marks, and without any prefix, (as on p. 25, line 1, and p. 36, line 9,) are references to former paragraphs, where the subject, or the word used, has already been explained.

⁂ The illustrations on the first page represent: — Fig. 1. Our commonest wild species of true Lily, viz. the Canada Lily. Fig. 2. The Chalcedonian Lily, a native of Palestine, with scarlet flowers, supposed to be "The Lily of the Field" to which our Saviour referred in the Sermon on the Mount Fig. 3. Lilies of the Valley, not true Lilies, but belonging to the Lily Family.
