page: 13

31. The root keeps on growing under ground, and sending off more and more small branches or *rootlets*, each one adding something to the amount of absorbing surface in contact with the moist soil. The little stem likewise lengthens upwards, and the pair of leaves on its summit grow larger. But these soon get their full growth; and we do not yet see, perhaps, where more are to come from. But now a little bud, called the *Plumule*, appears on the top of the stem (Fig. 22), just between the stalks of the two seed-leaves; it enlarges and unfolds into a leaf; this soon is raised upon a new piece of stem, which carries up the leaf, just as the pair of seed-leaves were raised by the lengthening of the radicle or first joint of stem in the seed. Then another leaf appears on the summit of this joint of stem, and is raised upon its own joint of stem, and so on. Fig. 23 shows the same plant as Fig. 22 (leaving out the root and the lower part of the stem), at a later stage; *c*, *c*, are the seed-leaves; *l* is the next leaf, which came from the plumule of Fig. 22, now well raised on the second joint of stem; and *l′* is the next, still very small and just unfolding. And so the plant grows on, the whole summer long, producing leaf after leaf, one by one, and raising each on its own joint of stem, arising from the summit of the next below; — as we see in Fig. 4, at the beginning of the chapter, where many joints of stem have grown in this way (the first with a pair of leaves, the rest with one apiece), and still there are some unfolding ones at the slender young summit.

[Figure 23]

32. How the Seedling is nourished at the Beginning. *Growth* requires *food*, in plants as well as in animals. To grow into a plant, the embryo in a seed must be fed with vegetable matter, or with something out of which vegetable matter can be made. When a plant has established itself, — that is, has sent down its roots into the soil, and spread out some leaves in the air, — it is then able to change mineral matter (viz. earth, air, and water) which it takes in, into vegetable matter, and so to live and grow independently. But at the beginning, before its organs are developed and established in their proper places, the forming plant must be supplied by ready-made vegetable matter, furnished by the mother plant. On this supply the embryo germinating from the seed feeds and grows, — just as the new-
