page: 22

+ Pea (Fig. 42), and of all such plants, is *dicotylédonous*, that is, has a pair of cotyledons, or seed-leaves, which is what the word means. Therefore all such plants are called ^^Dicotyledonous Plants^^.

49. Pine-trees, and plants like them, generally have more than two cotyledons, in a circle; so their embryo is said to be *polycotylédonous;* meaning "with several or many cotyledons." Fig. 49 is a magnified view of a Pine-seed, divided lengthwise, and showing the long and straight embryo lying in the middle of the albumen. The slender lower part is the radicle or stemlet; the upper part is a cluster of cotyledons or seed-leaves, in a close bundle; three of them can be seen as it lies, and there are as many more behind. Fig. 50 is this embryo as it comes up from the seed, its cotyledons (six in number) expanding at once into a circle of slender, needle-shaped leaves.

[Figure 49]

[Figure 50]

50. It is a pity these three words are so long; for the pupil should fix them thoroughly in his memory; because these differences in the embryo, or plantlet in the seed, run through the whole life of the plant, and show themselves in many other differences which very strikingly distinguish one class of plants from another. Let it be remembered, therefore, that

*Monocotyledonous Plants*, or *Monocotyledons*, are those which have only one cotyledon or seed-leaf to their embryo.

*Dicotyledonous Plants*, or *Dicotyledons*, are those which have a pair of cotyledons or seed-leaves to their embryo.

*Polycotyledonous Plants*, or *Polycotyledons*, are those which have more than one pair of cotyledons or seed-leaves to their embryo.

Analysis of the Section.

24. Flowers produce Fruit; this, the Seed; of this the essential part is the Embryo which grows. 25. It is alive; but lies dormant awhile. How long seeds may live.

26. Germination, the beginning of growth; what is needful for it. 27. What takes place, illustrated from the Morning-Glory. 28. How the stemlet grows by lengthening, and carries up the seed-leaves: how the root is formed and grows downwards. 29. Instinct of each part to turn in its proper direction; and why. 30. The little seedling a complete plant in miniature; its parts. 31. How it goes on to grow: growth of the root; rootlets; of the stem. The Plumule or Bud. Development of the stem piece by piece, each with its leaf.

32. How the seedling is nourished at the beginning. Growth requires food. 33. How this is supplied by a deposit in the seed; Albumen. 34. It is kept in a solid form until the embryo starts, and is
