page: 24

+ of the preceding one. There are old trees even, which consist of a simple, unbranched stem. Palm-trees, such as our Southern Palmetto (Fig. 79) are of this kind. But more commonly, as stems grow they multiply themselves by forming

[Figure 51]

53. Branches, or *side-shoots.* These are formed both by roots and by stems. Roots generally branch much sooner than stems do. See Fig. 4, 20, 30, &c.

54. Roots send off their branches from any part of the main root, or start from any part of a stem lying on or in the soil; and they have no particular arrangement.

55. But the branches of stems spring only from particular places, and are arranged on a regular plan. They arise from the *Axil* of a leaf and nowhere else, except in some few peculiar cases. The *axil* (from a Latin word meaning the armpit) of a leaf is the hollow or angle, on the upper side, where the leaf is attached to the stem. As branches come only from the axils of leaves, and as leaves have a perfectly regular and uniform arrangement in each particular plant, the places where branches will appear are fixed beforehand by the places of the leaves, and they must follow their arrangement. In the axils, commonly one in each, branches first appear in the form of

56. Buds. A *Bud* is an undeveloped stem or branch. If large enough to have its parts distinguishable, these are seen to be undeveloped or forming leaves; and large buds which are to stand over winter are generally covered with protecting scales, — a kind of dry, diminished leaves.

57. Terminal Bud. So the *plumule* or first shoot of the embryo (see Fig. 22, &c.) is a bud. But this first bud makes the main stem, and its growth, week after week, or year after year, carries on the main stem. Palms (as Fig. 79) grow in this way, by this bud only. Being always on the end of the stem, that is, terminating the stem, it is called the *Terminal Bud.*

58. Axillary Buds. But the buds which are to form branches appear on the sides of the stem; and since they are situated in the axils of the leaves, as just ex-
