page: 33

+ long preceding labor. Not only was the tender verdure which, after a few spring showers and sunny days, is so suddenly spread out over field and forest, all prepared beforehand, — most of the leaves, even, made the summer before, and snugly packed away in winter-buds, — but the nourishment which enables them to unfold and grow so fast was also prepared for this purpose by the foliage of the year before, and laid up until it was wanted. The grain grows with vigor, because fed with the richest products of the mother plant, the results of a former year's vegetation. The Lily-blossom develops in all its glory without toil of its own, because all its materials were gathered from the earth and the air long before, by the roots and the leaves, manufactured by the latter into vegetable matter, and this stored up for a year or two under ground in the bottoms of the leaves (as starch, jelly, sugar, &c.), and in many cases actually made into blossoms in the dark earth, where the flower-buds lie slumbering in the protecting bulb through the cold winter, and in summer promptly unfold in beauty for our delight.

Analysis of the Section.

51. The seedling is a complete plant on the simplest scale; in growth it merely increases its parts, and multiplies them in number, as fast as it makes materials for growth. 52. Simple stems, how formed and carried up, piece by piece. 53. Branches: 54. of Roots, how they differ from those, 55. of Stems. Where these arise from; in what form they appear. 56. Buds, what they are. 57. Terminal Bud, what it makes. 58. Axillary Buds; why so named; what they make. 59. How branches are arranged, and what their arrangement depends upon: alternate; opposite. 60. The spray and buds of shrubs and trees in winter; Leaf-scars. 61. Why branches are not as regular and as many as the buds or leaves.

62, 63. The Duration and Character of Plants as affecting the way they grow. 64. Herbs. 65. Shrubs. 66. Trees. 67. Herbs are annuals, biennials, or perennials.

68. Annuals; their mode of life; character of their roots, intended only for absorbing; duration, &c.

69. Biennials; how defined; examples. 70. Character of their roots, and illustrations of their mode of life; the first year, food made and stored up; the second year, food expended, for what purpose. 71. How biennials may sometimes be made perennial, and annuals biennial. 72. The store of food may be kept in the leaves, or in the stems above ground; Cabbage, &c.

73. Perennials; what they are; mode of life of perennial herbs from year to year; accumulation of food in roots. 74. Accumulation of food in under-ground branches; Tubers, as of Ground Artichoke. 75. Potato illustrated. 76. Accumulation in whole stems or branches under ground; Rootstocks. 77. Accumulation of food in leaves, above ground, as in Houseleek; or in the bottoms of leaves, usually under ground; Bulbs; as of Lily, and, 78. of Onion.

79. Food, how stored up in shrubs and trees, and for what purpose; used in leafing and blossoming in spring. 80. A lesson taught by vegetation.
