page: 40

+ rests on the soil; as in the Houseleek (Fig. 65), where one plant will soon produce a cluster of young plants or offsets all around it.

103. A Rootstock is any kind of horizontal stem or branch growing under ground. Slender rootstocks occur in the subterranean part of the suckers of Roses, of Peppermint, or of Canada Thistle, and of Quick-Grass or Couch-Grass (Fig. 75), which spreads so widely, and becomes so troublesome to farmers. They are well distinguished from roots by the leaves which they bear at every joint, in the form of scales, and by the buds which they produce, one in the axil of each scale. These buds, which are very tenacious of life, are what renders the plant so exceedingly difficult to destroy. For ploughing and hoeing only cut up the rootstock into pieces, each with a tuft of roots ready formed and with a bud to each joint, all the more ready to grow for the division. So that the attempt to destroy Quick-Grass by cutting it up by the roots (as these shoots are called), unless the pieces are carefully

[Figure 75]

+ taken out of the soil, is apt to produce many active plants in place of one.

104. Thickened or fleshy rootstocks, such as those of Solomon's Seal (Fig. 63) and Iris (Fig. 64), have already been illustrated (76).

105. A Tuber is a rootstock thickened at the end, as already explained in the Potato and Ground Artichoke (74, 75, Fig. 59, 60). The eyes of a tuber are lively buds, well supplied with nourishment for their growth.

106. A Corm or Solid Bulb, as of Gladiolus and Crocus (Fig. 76), is a sort of rounded tuber. If well covered with thick scales it would become

[Figure 76]

107. A Bulb. This is a (mostly subterranean) stem, so short as to be only a flat plate, producing roots from its lower surface and above covered with thickened scales, — as was fully explained in the last section (77).

108. Bulbs are *scaly*, as in the Lily (Fig. 66), when the scales are narrow; or *coated*, as an onion, when the scales enwrap each other, and form coats.
