page: 57

+ erally remains quiet, as it would have done on the parent bough, until the next spring, when it grows just as if it belonged there.

159. The object of all these ways of artificial propagation from buds is to preserve and to multiply choice varieties of a species which would not be perpetuated from seed. For as the fruit of all the natural branches is alike, so it remains essentially unaltered when borne by branches which are made to grow as artificial branches of another plant, or to take root in the ground as a separate plant. The seeds of an apple or other fruit cannot be depended upon to reproduce the very same sort of apple, — that is, an apple of the very same flavor or goodness. The seeds will always reproduce the same *species*, but not the *individual peculiarities.* These are perpetuated in propagation from buds. This kind of propagation is therefore very important to the cultivator. It takes place naturally in many plants,

160. By Stolons, Offsets, Runners, or Suckers, in ways which have already been described (99 to 103, and Fig. 74). These are all forms of natural layering, and they must have taught the gardener his art in this respect. For he merely imitates Nature, or rather sets her at work and hastens her operations. Also,

161. By Tubers (74, 75, Fig. 59, 60). These are under-ground branches with lively buds, well charged with prepared nourishment, rendering them more independent and surer to grow. Potatoes and Ground-Artichokes are familiar illustrations of the kind. They are propagated year after year by their buds, or eyes, being very seldom raised from the seed. Each annual crop of tubers is set free at maturity, by the death of all the rest of the plant.

162. By Corms, Bulbs, and Bulblets; as explained in paragraphs 77 and 106 to 109. Fig. 76 shows a corm or solid bulb of Crocus, which itself grew by feeding upon its parent, whose exhausted remains are seen underneath: it has already produced a crop of buds, to grow in their turn into another generation of corms, consuming their parent in the process. Bulbs produce a crop of new bulbs from buds in the axils of some of their scales. Tulips, Daffodils, and Garlics propagate very freely in this manner, not only keeping up the succession of generations, but multiplying greatly their numbers.

Analysis of the Section.

154. Plants multiply as well as grow. 155. In two ways; all plants by seeds, many by buds. 156. Most kinds may be propagated by buds artificially. 157. By Layers and Slips or Cuttings. 158. By Grafting or Budding. 159. Object gained by this mode of propagation. 160. It takes place naturally, by Stolons, Offsets, &c. 161. By Tubers. 162. By Corms, Bulbs, and Bulblets.
