page: 65

+ which sinks into the pistil, somewhat as a root grows down into the ground, and reaches an ovule in the ovary, causing it in some unknown way to develop an embryo, and thereby become a seed.

197. As to the *Pistil*, we have also learned that it consists of three parts, the *Ovary*, the *Style*, and the *Stigma* (16); that the style is not always present, being only a stalk or support for the stigma. But the two other parts are essential, — the *Stigma* to receive the pollen, and the *Ovary* to contain the ovules, or bodies which are to become seeds. Fig. 156 represents a pistil of Stonecrop, magnified; its stigma (known by the naked roughish surface) at the tip of the style; the style gradually enlarging downwards into the ovary. Here the ovary is cut in two, to show some of the ovules inside. And Fig. 157 shows one of the ovules, or future seeds, still more magnified.

[Figure 156]

[Figure 157]

198. Nature of the Flower. In the mind of a botanist, who looks at the philosophy of the thing,

*A flower answers to a sort of branch.* True, a flower does not bear much resemblance to a common branch; but we have seen (90-109) what remarkable forms and appearances branches, and the leaves they bear, occasionally take. Flowers come from buds just as branches do, and spring from just the same places that branches do (169). In fact, a flower is a branch intended for a peculiar purpose. While a branch with ordinary leaves is intended for growing, and for collecting from the air and preparing or digesting food, — and while such peculiar branches as tubers, bulbs, &c. are for holding prepared food for future use, — a blossom is a very short and a special sort of branch, intended for the production of seed. If the whole flower answers to a branch, then it follows that (excepting the receptacle, which is a continuation of the flower-stalk) —

*The parts of the flower answer to leaves.* This is plainly so with the sepals and the petals, which are commonly called the leaves of the blossom. The sepals or calyx-leaves are commonly green and leaf-like, or partly so. And the petals or corolla-leaves are leaves in shape, only more delicate in texture and in color. In many blossoms, and very plainly in a White Water-Lily, the calyx-leaves run into
