page: 66

+ corolla-leaves, and the inner corolla-leaves change gradually into stamens, — showing that even stamens answer to leaves.

198ᵃ. How a stamen answers to a leaf, according to the botanist's idea, Fig. 158 is intended to show. The filament or stalk of the stamen answers to the footstalk of a leaf; and the anther answers to the blade. The lower part of the figure represents a short filament, bearing an anther which has its upper half cut away; and the summit of a leaf is placed above it. Fig. 159 is the whole stamen of a Lily put beside it for comparison. If the whole anther corresponds with the blade of a leaf, then its two cells, or halves, answer to the halves of the blade, one on each side of the midrib; the continuation of the filament, which connects the two cells (called the *connective*), answers to the midrib; and the anther generally opens along what answer to the margins of a leaf.

[Figure 158]

[Figure 159]

199. It is easy to see how a simple pistil answers to a leaf. A simple pistil, like one of those of the Stonecrop (Fig. 154, 156) is regarded by the botanist as if it were made by the folding up inwards of the blade of a leaf, (that is, of what would have been a leaf on any branch of the common kind,) so that the margins come together and join, making a hollow closed bag, which is the ovary; a tapering summit forms the style, and some part of the margins of the leaf in this, destitute of skin, becomes the stigma. To understand this better, compare Fig. 160, representing a leaf rolled up in this way, with Fig. 156, and with Fig. 161, which are pistils, cut in two, that the interior of the ovary may be seen. It is here plain that the ovules or seeds are attached to what answers to the united margins of the leaf. The particular part or line, or whatever it may be, that the ovules or seeds are attached to, is called the *Placenta.*

[Figure 160]

[Figure 161]

200. Varieties or Sorts of Flowers. Now that we have learned how greatly roots, stems, and leaves vary in their forms and appearances, we should expect flowers to exhibit great variety in different species. In fact, each class and each family of plants has its flowers upon a plan of its own. But if students understand the *general plan of flowers*, as seen in the
