page: 67

+ Morning-Glory, the Lily (Fig. 1-12), and the Stonecrop (191), they will soon learn to understand it in any or all of its diverse forms. The principal varieties or special forms that occur among common plants will be described under the families, in the *Flora* which makes the Second Part of this book. There students will learn them in the easiest way, as they happen to meet with them in collecting and analyzing plants. Here we will only notice the leading *Kinds of Variation* in flowers, at the same time explaining some of the terms which are used in describing them.

201. Flowers consist of sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils. There may be few or many of each of these in any particular flower; these parts may be all separate, as they are in the Stonecrop; or they may be grown together, in every degree and in every conceivable way; or any one or more of the parts may be left out, as it were, or wanting altogether in a particular flower. And the parts of the same sort may be all alike, or some may be larger or smaller than the rest, or differently shaped. So that flowers may be classified into several sorts, of which the following are the principal.

[Figure 162]

202. A Complete Flower is one which has all the four parts, namely, calyx, corolla, stamens, and pistils. This is the case in all the flowers we have yet taken for examples; also in Trillium (Fig. 138, reduced in size, and here in Fig. 162, with the blossom of the size of life, and spread open flat).

203. A Perfect Flower is one which has both stamens and pistils. A complete flower is of course a perfect one; but many flowers are perfect and not complete; as in Fig. 163, 164.

[Figure 163]

204. An Incomplete Flower is one which wants at least one of the four kinds of organs. This may happen in various ways. It may be

*Apetalous*; that is, having no petals. This is the case in Anemony (Fig. 163), and Marsh-Marigold. For these have only one row of flower-leaves, and that is a calyx. The petals which are here wanting appear
