page: 81

244. Aggregated Fruits are close clusters of simple fruits all of the same flower. The raspberry and the blackberry are good examples. In these, each grain is a *drupelet* or stone-fruit, like a cherry or peach on a very small scale.

245. Accessory Fruits are those in which the flesh or conspicuous part belongs to some accessory (i. e. added or altered) part, separate from the seed-vessel. So that what we eat as the fruit is not the fruit at all in a strict botanical sense, but a calyx, receptacle, or something else which surrounds or accompanies it. Our common checkerberry is a simple illustration. Here the so-called berry is a free or separate calyx, which after flowering becomes thick and fleshy, and encloses the true seed-vessel, as a small pod within. Fig. 218 shows the young pod, partly covered by the loose calyx. Fig. 219 is the ripe checkerberry, cut through the middle lengthwise, the calyx now thick, juicy, and eatable, and enlarged so as to enclose the small, dry pod.

[Figure 218]

[Figure 219]

246. A *Rose-hip* (Fig. 220) is a kind of accessory fruit, looking like a pear or a haw. But it consists of the tube of the calyx, lined by a hollow receptacle, which bears the real fruits, or seed-vessels, in the form of bony akenes. Fig. 221, a rose-hip when in flower, cut through lengthwise, shows the whole plan of it: the pistils are seen attached to the sides of the urn-shaped receptacle, and their styles, tipped with the stigmas, project a little from the cavity, near the stamens, which are borne on the rim of the deep cup.

[Figure 220]

[Figure 221]

247. A *Strawberry* is an accessory fruit of a different shape. Fig. 222 is a forming one, at flowering time, divided lengthwise: below is a part of the calyx; above this, a large oval or conical receptacle, its whole surface covered with little pistils. In ripening this grows vastly larger, and becomes juicy and delicious. So that, in fact, what is called a berry is only the receptacle of the flower, or the end of the flower-stalk, grown very large and juicy, and not a seed-vessel at all, but bearing plenty of one-seeded dry seed-vessels (akenes, 229), so small that they are mistaken for seeds.

[Figure 222]
