page: 82

248. Multiple Fruits are masses of simple or accessory fruits belonging to different flowers, all compacted together. *Mulberries* (Fig. 223) are of this sort. They look like blackberries, but each grain belongs to a separate flower; and the eatable pulp is not even the seed-vessel of that, but is a loose calyx grown pulpy, just like that of Checkerberry, and surrounding an akene, which is generally taken for a seed. The pine-apple is much like a mulberry on a large scale. A fig is a multiple fruit, being a hollow flower-stalk grown pulpy, the inside lined by a great number of minute flowers.

[Figure 223]

249. So, under the name of fruit very different things are eaten. In figs it is a hollow flower-stalk; in pine-apples and mulberries, clusters of flower-leaves, as well as the stalk they cover; in strawberries, the receptacle of a flower; in blackberries, the same, though smaller, and a cluster of little stone-fruits that cover it; in raspberries, the little stone-fruits in a cluster, without the receptacle. In checkerberries, quinces, and (as to all but the core) apples and pears, we eat a fleshy enlarged calyx; in peaches and other stone-fruits, the outer part of a seed-vessel; in grapes, gooseberries, blueberries, and cranberries, the whole seed-vessel, grown rich and pulpy.

[Figure 224]

250. The Cone of Pine (Fig. 224) and the like is a sort of multiple fruit. Each scale is a whole pistillate flower, consisting of an open pistil leaf, ripened, and bearing on its upper face one or two naked seeds, — as explained at the end of the last section (218, 219). Fig. 225 shows the upper side of one of the thick scales taken off, bearing one seed; the other, removed, is shown, with its wing, in Fig. 226.

[Figure 225]

[Figure 226]

§ 2. *Seeds.*

252. A Seed is an ovule fertilized and matured, and with a germ or embryo formed in it.

253. In the account of the growth of plants from the seed, at the beginning of the book (Chapter I. Section I.), seeds have already been considered sufficiently
