page: none

CHAPTER III.

WHY PLANTS GROW, WHAT THEY ARE MADE FOR, AND WHAT THEY DO

261. We have now become acquainted with all the organs of plants, both those concerned in their life and growth, or *vegetation*, and those concerned in multiplying their numbers, that is, in *reproduction.* The first being the root, stem, and leaves; the second, the flowers (essentially the stamens and pistils), with their result, fruit and seed. We have learned, also, how plants grow from the seed, produce part after part, branch after branch, and leaf after leaf, and at length blossom and go to seed. We see that plants, with their organs, that is, *instruments*, are a kind of living machines at work; and it is now time to ask, *How they operate*, *What they bring to pass*, and *What is the object or the result* of their doings. Such questions as these, young people, with their curiosity awakened, would be likely to ask, and they ought to be answered. To understand these things completely, one must know something of chemistry and vegetable anatomy,⁎ — which we do not propose here to teach. But a general account of the matter may be given in a simple way, which shall be perfectly intelligible, and may give a clear idea of the purpose which plants were created to fulfil in the world, and how they do it. Let us begin by considering

262. The Plant in Action. Take any living plant, — it matters not what one, — and consider what it is doing. For greater simplicity, take some young plant or seedling, where vegetation goes on just as in a full-grown herb or tree, only on a smaller scale. The plant is

263. Absorbing, or drawing in what it lives upon, from the soil and the air. This is moisture, air, and other matters which the rain, as it soaks into the ground, may have dissolved on its way to the roots. It is by the roots, lodged in the damp soil, that most of the moisture which plants feed upon is taken in, and with this they always get some earthy matter. This earthy matter makes the ashes which are left after burning a piece of wood, a leaf, or any part of a plant. Moisture is

Footnote: ⁎ After studying this chapter, the pupil will be ready to learn more of the subject in the *Lessons in Botany and Vegetable Physiology.* Lessons 22, 23, 24, and 25 treat of Vegetable Anatomy; and Lesson 26, of the Plant doing its work.
