page: 87

+ or cells divided off by whole partitions; and to rise an inch the sap generally has to pass through several hundred such partitions. When there is much wood, the sap rises mostly through that. Now the fibres and the vessels of the wood are tubes, most of them several times longer than wide; but their ends do not open into each other; a closed partition divides each cavity from the next, which the sap has to get through some way or other. How it gets through so readily, we do not altogether know; but there is no doubt about the fact.

268. Carried into the leaves, and distributed through their broad surface, the crude sap is exposed to the light and air. A large part of it is water; and each drop of this serves to bring up a minute portion of earthy matter, which it dissolved out of the soil. Most of the water, no longer wanted, is evaporated from the leaves by the warmth of the sun, and *exhaled*; that is, it escapes in vapor into the air, mostly through the breathing-pores (264). What remains, the plant is at the same time

269. Digesting or Assimilating. Assimilating is the proper word. To assimilate is to make similar, or to turn into its own substance. This is just what plants do in their leaves. They change into vegetable matter that which was mineral matter (air, earth, or water) before. This they do only in the leaves, or other green parts, and in these only when they are exposed to the light of day, that is, to the influence of the sun. We see, therefore, why plants are so dependent on the light. They cannot grow without it, except so far as they are fed by vegetable matter prepared beforehand; — as the seedling is fed at the beginning, by vegetable matter of the parent plant stored up in the seed (Chap. II. Sect. II.); and potato-shoots, by that provided in the tuber or potato (74, 75), &c. This enables them to begin their growth in the dark. But the inheritance only serves to set up the young plants; when they have exhausted it, they have to work for themselves, to take in air and water, and a little earth, and *assimilate* it, — i. e. make vegetable matter of it, — in their leaves or other green parts, with the help of sunshine. This they do throughout the whole growing season.

270. The new-made vegetable matter is dissolved in the water or the sap in the leaf, and forms a thin mucilage. This is prepared or *Elaborated Sap*, fit to be used in growth; for it contains the same material as that which the plant itself is built of. It is to the plant just what the prepared clay is to the earthen vessel, or to the bricks of which the house is built. It has only to be conveyed where it is wanted and used for growing.
