page: 89

+ circulation of the two kinds of sap; and no crude sap exists separately in any part of the plant. Even in the root, where it enters, this mingles at once with some elaborated sap already there, and as it rises through the stem they mix more and more. But whatever is not assimilated must be, before the plant can use it; that which has been assimilated, can be used wherever it may be.

274. The elaborated sap, like the crude, is contained in the cavities, cells, or short closed tubes which make up the fabric of the plant, and circulates or passes from one to another through the partitions. How it passes through, and what attracts it where it is wanted, we do not very well know. And what we do know could not be well explained to the young beginner, for whom this book is written. The same may be said about

275. Growth. Growth is the increase of a living thing in size and substance. In plants it is done by the increase in the number of the *cells* (or cavities divided off by partitions) which make up the fabric, and by the increase of each in size to a certain extent. That is, growth is the building-up of the plant, or of additions to it, out of vegetable matter. And this vegetable matter was made in the leaves (either of the same plant or of its parent), out of mineral matter drawn from the earth and the air, — was mostly made of air and water. For the earthy part which is left behind when we burn a plant (and so turn all the vegetable matter back into air and vapor of water again) forms only a very small part of its bulk.

276. If the pupil would learn more particularly how growth takes place, and how plants change mineral into vegetable matter, they must study three or four lessons of the Lessons in Botany already referred to. But our short and simple account of the plant in action, i. e. *vegetating*, is sufficient for answering the main question, viz.: —

277. What Plants do. *Vegetation* consists essentially of two things, namely, *assimilation* and *growth.* In assimilation plants are changing mineral matter — air, water, and a little earth — into vegetable matter; and in growth this vegetable matter is wrought into all manner of beautiful and useful forms. This is the work which the vast variety and infinite number of plants over all the earth are busily engaged in. It is *their peculiar work*; for only plants can live upon (or assimilate) mineral matter; they only have the power of changing air, water, and earth into organic matter.

278. What is the effect of this action of plants, especially upon the air we breathe? And what becomes of all the vast amount of vegetable matter which
