page: 100

+ microscope, however necessary for studying vegetable anatomy, is of no use for our common botanical purposes, which require no high magnifying. A pocket magnifying-glass, held in the hand, is all that is absolutely necessary.

321. Lessons in examining Plants. How a pupil, or a class, is to proceed in examining any plant by our *Popular Flora*, for the purpose of finding out its class, its order or family, and then its genus and species, — that is, its name, — we will show by a few plain examples.

322. Technical words or terms are used all along, which you may not remember the meaning of, as defined in the first part of the book; and some of them may not have been mentioned or explained there. Whenever you come to a word which you do not *perfectly understand*, turn at once to the Index and Dictionary, beginning on page 217, and look it out. There you will find it explained, or will be referred to the page of the book where the term is explained or illustrated. Turn back to the place, and read what is said about it. Do not attempt to proceed faster than you understand things. But by looking out and understanding the words as you meet with them, the principal terms used in botanical descriptions (here made as simple as possible) will soon be familiar, and your subsequent progress will be all the more rapid for the pains taken in the earlier steps.

323. For the first example we will take a Buttercup or Crowfoot, such as may anywhere be met with in spring and early summer. With specimens in hand, turn to page 105. You ask in the first place, —

Does the plant belong to the *First Series*, that of Phænogamous or Flowering Plants? Certainly; for it bears flowers, with stamens and pistils. (The Second Series, that of Flowerless Plants (p. 97), consisting of Ferns, Mosses, &c., we do not meddle with in this book, they requiring too much magnifying, and being too difficult for the young beginner.) Next you ask, —

To which class does it belong? The differences between the two classes are mentioned on page 97, and the characteristics of Class I. are illustrated on page 105. As the stem is hollow, it may not be easy to see that it has a delicate ring of wood under the bark and outside of the pith (as in Fig. 230); but this may be perceived in a cross slice under the microscope. And even if we had ripe seeds, a microscope and some skill in dissection would be required to take out the minute embryo, and see that it has a pair of cotyledons. But we may tell the class by the two other points, viz. by the leaves, and by the number of parts to the blossom. The leaves are plainly netted-veined, and the parts of the flower, that is, the sepals
