page: 104

+ cut." This brings you to the name of the genus, — in Latin or scientific form, *Caltha*; in English, ^^Marsh-Marigold^^. Being the only species, we need go no farther with it.

325. On reflection and comparison, you will perceive the family likeness between the Marsh-Marigold and the Crowfoot, different as they are in some particulars; and between these and the Globe-flower, the Gold-thread, the Anemony, and even the Larkspur and Aconite, when you have studied these plants. But the family likeness is not quite so strong at first view in this family as it is in most others.

326. Another example we will take from the plant figured on p. 5 and the following pages (Fig. 4–19), a very common ornamental twiner about houses, flowering all through the summer. Begin, as before, on p. 105. You perceive at once that the plant belongs to Class I.; for it has netted-veined leaves, the parts of the flower are in fives, and the embryo (which is easily extracted from the fresh seed, Fig. 16–19) has a pair of seed-leaves. There is a regular pistil, and the seeds in a pod; so the plant belongs to Subclass I. There is both calyx and corolla, the latter of one piece; so the plant belongs to the Monopetalous division, p. 109. The corolla is borne on the receptacle below the ovary; so you pass to the head B. The stamens are just as many as the lobes, or rather here the plaits, of the corolla; so you pass No. 1, and take No. 2. The stamens stand before the plaits, so that they would be alternate with the divisions of the corolla, if it were not that the five petals it consists of are united to the very top; so you take the second of the two lines commencing with the word "Stamens." These are "inserted on the corolla," and are entirely separate and "free from the stigma"; so you take the fourth line of those in the next rank. There is a style (p. 110); so the plant falls under the second of the two lines of the next rank. The ovary and pod have 3 cells; so it falls under the third of the lines beginning with the word "Ovary." The stamens are 5, and the pod few-seeded (2 seeds in each cell); so it falls under the third of the lines beginning with "Stamens." The plant twines, and the seeds are large; so you are brought to the name of the family, the ^^Convolvulus Family^^, and are referred to p. 184. Read over the marks of the family, and then search for the genus in the key or arrangement; and you will find that the name of the genus is, in scientific language, *Ipomœa*, in popular English, ^^Morning-Glory^^.

327. One more example, to show how plants are to be studied by the Flora, will be sufficient. Take the Lily of the Valley (Fig. 3 on p. 1), which in this country adorns almost every flower-garden.
