page: 104¹

328. With plants in hand, turn to p. 105, and compare with the distinguishing marks of Class I. A slice across the stem shows no ring of wood around a pith. The leaves are not netted-veined. The parts of the flower are not in fives or fours, but in sixes, that is, twice threes. So the plant does not agree with Class I. in any respect. Turn therefore to Class II., on p. 203. Examining slices of the stem with a magnifying-glass, you may find threads of wood interspersed in the cellular part or pith. The leaves are parallel-veined (Fig. 502, 503). The flowers have their parts in threes or twice threes; i. e. the cup of the blossom has six lobes, and there are six stamens; and, although there is only one pistil, the stigma is three-lobed and the ovary has three cells, showing that it is composed of three pistils grown into one. So, without looking for the embryo in a ripe seed, which is not often to be had, you are sure the plant belongs to Class II. ^^Endogens^^ or ^^Monocotyledons^^.

329. To find out the family or order the plant belongs to, try the Key. There are three divisions of the class. First, the *Spadiceous*, which has the flowers sessile on a spadix or fleshy axis. Not so with the plant in hand, which has drooping blossoms in a slender raceme. Pass on, therefore, to the second or *Petaloideous* division. In this the flowers are not on a spadix, nor enclosed in chaffy bracts or glumes, and they have a calyx and corolla, or a perianth colored like a corolla. Our plant belongs to this division. The first line under it reads: "Perianth free from the ovary"; this is the case in our plant. Proceed to the next rank: "Of 3 green or greenish sepals and 3 distinct and colored petals." Not so in our plant; so we pass to the corresponding line: "Of 6 petal-like leaves in two ranks, or 6-lobed and all colored alike." Here our plant belongs. Proceed to the two lines under this, beginning with the word "Stamens." Our flowers have six stamens; so we take the second line of the pair. Pass to the two lines of the next rank, beginning with "Anthers." These in our plant are turned inwards: so we take the second line of the pair, and are led to the Lily Family, p. 209. Turn to that page: read over the marks of the family, and go on to ascertain the genus. Having few seeds or ovules in the ovary, small flowers, and running rootstocks, we find our plant to agree with the first line of the key to the genera of the Lily Family. The simple and naked scape or flower-stalk from the ground, &c. accords with the third line of the next rank; and the flowers in a raceme answer to the first of the two lines under that. And this brings us to the name of the genus, viz. in Latin form, *Convallaria*; in English, ^^Lily of the Valley^^, — the only species of the genus.
