Act One, Scene Two
(Part 1 of 2)

"The rule of many is not good. Let there be one ruler, one king." — Homer, Iliad, II. 204

[MINOS sleeping. To him enters the PHANTASM OF EUCLID. Minos opens his eyes and regards him with a blank and stony gaze, without betraying the slightest surprise or even interest.]

§ 1. A Priori Reasons for Retaining Euclid's Manual

Euclid. Now, what is it you really require in a Manual of Geometry?

Minos. Excuse me — but, with all respect to a shade whose name I have reverenced from early boyhood, is that not rather an abrupt way of starting a conversation? Remember, we are twenty centuries apart in history, and consequently have never had a personal interview until now. Surely a few preliminary remarks —

Euclid. Centuries are long, my good sir, but my time tonight is short, and I never was a man of many words. So kindly waive all ceremony and answer my question.

Minos. Well, so far as I can answer a question that comes on me so suddenly, I should say: a book that will exercise the learner in habits of clear, definite conception, and enable him to test the logical value of a scientific argument.

Euclid. You do not require, then, a complete repertory of Geometrical truth?

Minos. Certainly not. It is the energeia rather than the ergon — the activity rather than the finished product — that we need here.

Euclid. And yet many of my Modern Rivals have tried to improve on me in just that way, by filling up what they took to be my omissions.

Minos. I doubt whether they are much nearer to completeness themselves.

Euclid. I doubt it too. I think it is a friend of yours who has amused himself by tabulating the various Theorems that might be stated on the single subject of Pairs of Lines. How many did he make them out to be?

Minos. About two hundred and fifty, I believe.

Euclid. At that rate there would probably be, within the limits of my First Book alone, about how many?

Minos. A thousand, at least.

Euclid. What a popular school-book it will be! How boys will bless the name of the writer who first brings out the complete thousand!

Minos. I think your Manual is quite long enough already for all possible purposes of teaching. It is not in the region of new matter that you need fear your Modern Rivals. It is in quality, not in quantity, that they claim to supersede you. Your methods of proof, so they assert, are antiquated, and worthless compared with the new lights.

Euclid. It is to that very point that I now propose to address myself; and since we are to discuss the matter mainly with reference to the wants of beginners, we may as well limit ourselves to the subject-matter of Books I and II.

Minos. I am quite of that opinion.

Euclid. The first point to settle is this. For purposes of teaching and examining, do you want one fixed logical sequence of Propositions? Or would you allow conflicting sequences, so that one candidate in an examination might use X to prove Y, and another use Y to prove X — or even that the same candidate might offer both proofs, and so argue in a circle?

Minos. A very eminent Modern Rival of yours, Mr. Wilson, seems to think no such fixed sequence is really necessary. He says, in his Preface, page 10: "Geometry when treated as a science, treated inartificially, falls into a certain order from which there can be no very wide departure; and the manuals of Geometry will not differ from one another nearly so widely as the manuals of algebra or chemistry; yet it is not difficult to examine in algebra and chemistry."

Euclid. Books may differ very "widely" without differing in logical sequence — which is the only kind of difference that could bring two text-books into such hopeless collision that one or the other would have to be abandoned.

Let me give you a few instances of conflicting logical sequences in Geometry. Legendre proves my Proposition 5 by Proposition 8, 18 by 19, 19 by 20, 27 by 28, and 29 by 32. Cuthbertson proves 37 by 41. Reynolds proves 5 by 20. When Mr. Wilson has produced similarly conflicting sequences in the manuals of algebra or chemistry, we may compare the subjects. Until then, his remark is quite irrelevant to the question.

Minos. I do not think he will be able to. Indeed there are very few logical chains at all in those subjects — most of the Propositions being proved from first principles. I may grant at once that it is essential to have one definite logical sequence, however many manuals we use. To quote another of your Rivals, Mr. Cuthbertson (Preface, page viii): "enormous inconvenience would arise in conducting examinations with no recognised sequence of Propositions." This applies, however, only to logical sequences — such as your Propositions 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, which form a continuous chain. There are many Propositions whose place in a manual would be partly arbitrary. Your Proposition 8, for instance, is not wanted until we come to Proposition 48, so it might occupy any position in between without any risk of circular argument.

Euclid. Now, in order to secure this uniform logical sequence, we should need to know, of any particular Proposition, which other Propositions were its logical descendants — so that we might avoid using any of them in proving it?

Minos. Exactly so.

Euclid. We might of course give that information by attaching to each enunciation a list of references to its logical descendants; but that would be a very cumbrous plan. A better way would be to give them in the form of a genealogy. That would be very bulky if the enunciations themselves were put in, so it would be desirable to have numbers to stand for them. In that case, supposing my logical sequence adopted, the genealogy would look like this. (See the Frontispiece.)

Minos. Would it not be enough to publish an arranged list — all the better if it were numbered too — and to lay down that no Proposition might be used to prove any of its predecessors?

Euclid. That would hamper the writers of manuals a great deal more than the genealogy would. Suppose, for instance, that you adopted in your list the order of the Theorems in my First Book, and that a writer wished to prove Proposition 8 by Proposition 47. That would not interfere with my logical sequence at all, and yet your list would bar him from doing it.

Minos. But we might place 8 immediately before 48, and then he would be free to do as you suggest.

Euclid. And suppose some other writer wished to prove 24 by 8?

Minos. I see now that any single list must necessarily prevent many possible arrangements which would not conflict with the agreed logical sequence. And yet this is exactly what the Committee of the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching have approved — "a standard sequence for examination purposes" — and what the Association have published in their Syllabus of Plane Geometry.

Euclid. I think they have overlooked the fact that they are enacting many more sequences, as binding on writers, than the one logical sequence they wish to secure. Their "standard sequence" would be fitly replaced by a standard genealogy. But in any case we are agreed that it is desirable to have, besides a standard logical sequence, a standard list of enunciations, numbered for reference?

Minos. We are.

Euclid. The next point to settle is what sequence and numbering to adopt. You will allow, I think, that there are strong a priori reasons for keeping my numbers. The Propositions have been known by those numbers for two thousand years. They have been referred to, probably, by hundreds of writers — in many cases by the numbers only, without the enunciations — and some of them, I. 5 and I. 47 for instance, "the Asses' Bridge" and "the Windmill", are now historical characters, and their nicknames are as familiar as household words.

Minos. Even if no better sequence than yours could be found, it might still be urged that a new set of numbers must be adopted, in order to bring in, at their proper places, certain important Theorems added to the subject since your time.

Euclid. That want, if it were shown to exist, could I think be easily met without discarding my system of numbers. If you wished, for instance, to insert two new Propositions between I. 13 and I. 14, it would be far less inconvenient to call them 13B and 13C than to abandon the old numbers.

Minos. I give up the objection.

Euclid. You will allow, then, that my sequence and system of numbers should not be abandoned without good cause?

Minos. Oh, certainly. And the onus probandi lies clearly on your Modern Rivals, and not on you.

Euclid. Unless, then, it should appear that one of my Modern Rivals — whose logical sequence is incompatible with mine — is so decidedly better in his treatment of really important topics as to make it worth suffering all the inconvenience of a change of numbers, you would not recognise his demand to supersede my Manual?

Minos. On that point let me quote Mr. Wilson again. In his Preface, page 15, he says: "In a few years I hope that our leading mathematicians will have published, perhaps in concert, one or more text-books of Geometry, not inferior, to say the least, to those of France, and that they will supersede Euclid by the sheer force of superior merit."

Euclid. And I should be quite content to be so superseded. "A fair field and no favour" is all I ask.

§ 2. Method of Procedure in Examining Modern Rivals

Minos. You wish me, then, to compare your book with those of your Modern Rivals?

Euclid. Yes. But in doing it I must beg you to bear in mind that a Modern Rival will not have proved his case if he succeeds only in showing

(1) that certain Propositions might with advantage be left out — for a teacher would be free to do that, so long as he left the logical sequence complete; or

(2) that certain proofs might with advantage be exchanged for others — for these might be put in as "alternative proofs"; or

(3) that certain new Propositions are desirable — for these too might be inserted, without altering the numbering of the existing ones.

All these matters will need full consideration later, if you decide that my Manual ought to be kept; but they are not the evidence on which that decision should rest.

Minos. That, I think, you have proved satisfactorily. But what would you consider sufficient grounds for abandoning your Manual in favour of another?

Euclid. Many grave charges have been brought against my Manual, but of them all there are only two which I regard as crucial here. The first concerns my arrangement of Problems and Theorems; the second, my treatment of Parallels.

If it be agreed that Problems and Theorems ought to be treated separately, my system of numbering must of course be abandoned, and no reason will remain why my Manual should be retained as a whole — which is the only point I am concerned with. That question you can settle on its own merits, without examining any of the new Manuals.

If, again, it be agreed that in treating Parallels some other method, essentially different from mine, ought to be adopted, then I feel that after so vital a change — involving, as no doubt it would, the abandonment of my sequence and numbering — the remainder of my Manual would not be worth fighting for, though parts of it might be taken into the new one. To settle that question you must, of course, examine the new methods one by one.

Minos. You would not even ask to have your Manual kept as an alternative to the new one?

Euclid. No. For I think it essential, for purposes of teaching, that on this vital topic one uniform method should be adopted, and that it should be the best possible — it being almost inconceivable that two methods of treating it should be equally good. An alternative proof of a minor Proposition may fairly be put in now and then, as about equal in merit to the standard proof, and may make a desirable variety; but on this one vital point it seems essential that nothing but the best proof in existence should be offered to the limited capacity of a learner. Into empty veins nothing should be committed but what is mild.

Minos. I agree that we ought to have one system only, and that the best, for treating the subject of Parallels. But would you have me limit my examination of your Modern Rivals to this single topic?

Euclid. No. There are several other matters of such importance, and admitting of so much variety of treatment, that it would be well to examine any method of dealing with them which differs much from mine — not with a view to putting the new Manual in place of mine, but in order to make such changes in my proofs as may seem desirable. There are other matters again, where changes have been suggested, which you ought to consider, but on general grounds rather than by examining particular writers.

Let me set out what I conceive should be the subjects of your enquiry, in order of importance.

(1) The combination, or separation, of Problems and Theorems.

(2) The treatment of Pairs of Lines, especially Parallels, for which various new methods have been proposed. These may be classified as involving —

(α) Infinite series: suggested by Legendre.
(β) Angles made with transversals: Cooley.
(γ) Equidistance: Cuthbertson.
(δ) Revolving Lines: Henrici.
(ε) Direction: Wilson, Pierce, Willock.
(ζ) The substitution of "Playfair's Axiom" for my Axiom 12.

If your decision on these two crucial questions is given in my favour, we may take it as settled, I think, that my Manual ought to be kept as a whole; how far it should be modified to suit modern requirements will be matter for further consideration.

(3) The principle of superposition.

(4) The use of diagonals in Book II.

These two are general questions, and will not need the examination of particular authors.

Besides this, so that your enquiry into the claims of my Modern Rivals may be as complete as possible, it will be well to review them one by one, with reference to their treatment of matters not already discussed, especially:

(5) Right Lines.
(6) Angles, including right angles.
(7) Propositions of mine omitted.
(8) Propositions of mine treated by a new method.
(9) New Propositions.
(10) And you may as well conclude in each case with a general survey of the book, as to style and so on.

The following may be taken as a fairly complete catalogue of the books to be examined:

	1. Legendre. | 8. Chauvenet.
	2. Cooley. | 9. Loomis.
	3. Cuthbertson. | 10. Morell.
	4. Henrici. | 11. Reynolds.
	5. Wilson. | 12. Wright.
	6. Pierce. | 13. Wilson's "Syllabus"-Manual.
	7. Willock. |

You should also examine the Syllabus published by the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching, on which the last-named Manual is based. Not that it can be considered a Rival — in fact it is not a text-book at all, but a mere list of enunciations — but because, first, it comes with an array of imposing names to recommend it; and secondly, it discards my system of numbers, so that its adoption as a standard for examinations would seriously interfere with keeping my Manual as the standard text-book.

Now of these questions I shall be most happy to discuss the general ones with you — I mean questions 1, 2 (ζ), 3 and 4 — before we end this interview. But when it comes to criticising particular authors, I must leave you to yourself, to deal with them as best you can.

Minos. It will be weary work to do it all alone. And I suppose you cannot, even with your supernatural powers, fetch me the authors themselves?

Euclid. I dare not. The living human race is so strangely prejudiced. There is nothing men object to so emphatically as being transferred by ghosts from place to place. I cannot say they are consistent about it: they are for ever "raising" or "laying" us poor ghosts — we cannot even haunt a garret without having the parish at our heels, bent on making us change our quarters. Whereas if I were to venture to move one single small boy — say to lift him by the hair of his head over only two or three houses, and set him down safe and sound in a neighbour's garden — why, I give you my word, it would be the talk of the town for the next month!

Minos. I can well believe it. But what can you do for me? Are their Doppelgänger available?

Euclid. I fear not. The best thing I can do is to send you the Phantasm of a German Professor, a great friend of mine. He has read all books, and is ready to defend any thesis, true or untrue.

Minos. A charming companion! And his name?

Euclid. Phantasms have no names — only numbers. You may call him "Herr Niemand", or, if you prefer it, "Number one hundred and twenty-three million four hundred and fifty-six thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine."

Minos. For constant use, I prefer "Herr Niemand". Let us now consider the question of separating Problems and Theorems.

§ 3. The Combination, or Separation, of Problems and Theorems

Euclid. I shall be glad to hear first the reasons given for separating them, and will then tell you my reasons for mixing them.

Minos. I understand that the Committee of the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching, in their Report on the Syllabus of the Association, consider the separation "equivalent to the assertion of the principle that, while Problems are from their very nature dependent for the form, and even the possibility, of their solution on the arbitrary limitation of the instruments allowed to be used, Theorems, being truths involving no arbitrary element, ought to be exhibited in a form and sequence independent of such limitations." They add, however, that "it is probable that most teachers would prefer to introduce Problems, not as a separate section of Geometry, but rather in connection with the Theorems with which they are essentially related."

Euclid. It seems rather a strange proposal, to print the Propositions in one order and read them in another. But a stronger objection is that several of the Problems are Theorems as well — I. 46, for instance.

Minos. How is that a Theorem?

Euclid. It proves that there is such a thing as a Square. The definition, of course, does not assert real existence; it is merely provisional. Now if you leave out I. 46, what right would you have in I. 47 to say "draw a Square"? How would you know it to be possible?

Minos. We could easily deduce that from I. 34.

Euclid. No doubt a Theorem might be brought in for the purpose; but it would be very like the Problem. You would have to say "if a figure were drawn under such and such conditions, it would be a Square." Is it not quite as simple to draw it?

Then again take I. 31, where it is required to draw a Parallel. Although it has been proved in I. 27 that such things as parallel Lines exist, that does not tell us that for every Line, and for every point outside that Line, there exists a real Line parallel to the given Line and passing through the given point. And that is a fact essential to the proof of I. 32.

Minos. I must allow that I. 31 and I. 46 have a good claim to be kept where they are; and if two are to be kept, we may as well keep all.

Euclid. Another argument for keeping the Problems where they are is the importance of leaving the numbering unchanged — a matter we have already discussed.

But perhaps the strongest argument is that it saves you from "hypothetical constructions", the danger of which has been so clearly pointed out by Mr. Todhunter (see pp. 222, 241).

Minos. I think you have proved your case very satisfactorily. The next subject is the treatment of Pairs of Lines. Would it not be well, before entering on that enquiry, to tabulate the Propositions that have been stated about them, whether as Axioms or as Theorems?

Euclid. That will be an excellent plan. It will both give you a clear view of the field of your enquiry, and let you recognise at once any doubtful Axioms you may meet with.

Minos. Will you favour me, then, with your views on the matter?

Euclid. Willingly. It is a subject which, I need hardly say, I considered very carefully before deciding what Definitions and Axioms to adopt.

§ 4. Syllabus of Propositions Relating to Pairs of Lines

Let us begin with the simplest possible case: a Pair of infinite Lines which have two common points, and which therefore coincide wholly. Let us consider how such a Pair may be defined, and what other properties it has.

After that we will take a Pair of Lines which have a common point and a separate point — "a separate point" being one that lies on one of the Lines but not on the other — and which therefore have no other common point; and we will treat it in the same way.

And in the third place we will take a Pair of Lines which have no common point.

And let us understand by "the distance between two points" the length of the right Line joining them; and by "the distance of a point from a Line" the length of the perpendicular drawn from the point to the Line.

Now the properties of a Pair of Lines may be ranged under four headings:

(1) as to common or separate points;
(2) as to the angles made with transversals;
(3) as to the equidistance, or otherwise, of points on the one from the other;
(4) as to direction.

We might distinguish the first two classes I have mentioned as "coincident" and "intersecting", and those names would serve well enough if we were going to consider only infinite Lines. But since all the relations of infinite Lines, as to angles made with transversals, equidistance of points, and direction, are equally true of finite portions of them, it will be well to use names that include those too. The names I would suggest are "coincidental", "intersectional" and "separational".

By "coincidental Lines", then, I shall mean Lines which either coincide or would do so if produced; by "intersectional Lines" I shall mean Lines which either intersect or would do so if produced; and by "separational Lines", Lines which have no common point, however far produced.

In the same way, when I speak of "Lines having a common point", or of "Lines having two common points", I shall mean Lines which either have such points or would have them if produced.

It will also save time and trouble to agree on a certain conventional phrase about transversals.

It admits of easy proof that if a Pair of Lines make, with a certain transversal, either (a) a pair of alternate angles equal, or (b) an exterior angle equal to the interior opposite angle on the same side of the transversal, or (c) a pair of interior angles on the same side of the transversal supplementary — then they will make, with that same transversal, (d) each pair of alternate angles equal, and (e) every exterior angle equal to the interior opposite angle on the same side of the transversal, and (f) each pair of interior angles on the same side of the transversal supplementary.

You will accept that as a simple Theorem, though with a somewhat lengthy enunciation?

Minos. Certainly.

Euclid. The phrase I propose is this. When I speak of a Pair of Lines as "equally inclined to" a transversal, I wish it to be understood that they fulfil some one of the three conditions (a), (b), (c), and therefore all three of (d), (e), (f).

Minos. A most convenient abridgment.

Euclid. Similarly, it admits of easy proof that if a Pair of Lines make, with a certain transversal, either (a) a pair of alternate angles unequal, or (b) an exterior angle unequal to the interior opposite angle on the same side of the transversal, or (c) a pair of interior angles on the same side of the transversal not supplementary — then they will make, with that same transversal, (d) each pair of alternate angles unequal, and (e) every exterior angle unequal to the interior opposite angle on the same side of the transversal, and (f) each pair of interior angles on the same side of the transversal not supplementary.

And when I speak of a Pair of Lines as "unequally inclined to" a transversal, I wish it to be understood that they fulfil some one of the three conditions (a), (b), (c), and therefore all three of (d), (e), (f).

Minos. Very well.

Euclid. Now the Propositions relating to Pairs of Lines may be divided into two classes: the first covering the ground occupied by my Axiom 10 ("two straight Lines cannot enclose a space") and my Propositions I. 16, 17, 27, 28, 31; the second that occupied by my Axiom 12 and Propositions I. 29, 30, 32. Those in the first class are logical deductions from Axioms that have never been disputed. The second class has furnished, through all ages, a battlefield for rival mathematicians. That some one of the Propositions in this class must be assumed as an Axiom is agreed on all hands; and each combatant in turn proclaims his own special favourite to be the one axiomatic truth of the series, insisting that all the rest ought to be proved as Theorems.

Let us now consider the properties of Pairs of Lines.

Such Pairs may be arranged in three distinct classes. I will take them separately, and for each class enumerate first the "subjects" and secondly the "predicates" of Propositions concerning it.

Minos. Let us make sure we understand each other about those two words. I presume a "subject" will include just so much property as is needed to indicate the Pair of Lines referred to — that is, to serve as a sufficient Definition for them?

Euclid. Exactly so. Now, if we are told that a certain Pair of Lines fulfil some one of the following conditions:

(1) they have two common points; or
(2) they have a common point, and are equally inclined to a certain transversal; or
(3) they have a common point, and one of them has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the other; or
(4) they have a common point and identical directions;

we may conclude that they fulfil all the following conditions:

(1) they are coincidental;
(2) they are equally inclined to any transversal;
(3) they are equidistantial — that is, any two points on one are equidistant from the other;
(4) they have identical directions.

Minos. You mean, by "conclude", that we may prove our conclusion?

Euclid. Yes, wherever proof is needed. Conclusions (1) and (4) need none, and are usually stated as Axioms.

Minos. In subject (4), instead of "identical directions", why not say "the same direction"?

Euclid. Because I want to keep clearly in view that there are two Lines.

Minos. In predicate (2) you speak of "any transversal"; a little while ago you spoke of "every exterior angle". Do you make a distinction between "any" and "every"?

Euclid. Where the things spoken of are limited in number, I use "every"; where infinite, I use "any", in order to bring the idea within the grasp of our finite intellects. For instance, you may talk of "every grain of sand in the world": there are, no doubt, what country folk would call "a good few" of them, but still the number is limited, and the mind can just grasp the idea. But if you tell me that "every cubic inch of Space contains eight cubic half-inches", my mind is unable to form a distinct conception of the subject of your Proposition. You would convey the same truth, in a form I could grasp, by saying "any cubic inch".

Minos. The angles made with the transversal are a little bewildering when the Pair of Lines shrinks, as it does in this case, into one Line. For instance, what becomes of the pair of interior angles on the same side of the transversal?

Euclid. A diagram would make it clear.

[Figure 1: Coincidental Lines: AB and CD are the same Line, labelled twice, and the transversal EF crosses them at G and H — which are the same point, labelled twice.]

By examining the second figure — in which, as you see, there are three points with double names — we find that the alternate angles AGF, EHD, have become vertical angles; that the exterior and interior opposite angles EGB, EHD, have become the same angle; and that the two interior angles BGF, DHE, have become adjacent angles.

Minos. That is quite clear.

Euclid. Let us go on to the second class of Pairs of Lines.

If we are told that a certain Pair of Lines fulfil some one of the following conditions:

(1) they have a common point and a separate point; or
(2) they have a common point, and are unequally inclined to a certain transversal; or
(3) they have a common point, and one of them has two points not equidistant from the other; or
(4) they have a common point but not coincidental directions;

we may conclude that they fulfil all the following conditions:

(1) they are separational;
(2) they are unequally inclined to any transversal;
(3) any two points on one, which are on the same side of the other, are not equidistant from it;
(4) a point may be found on each whose distance from the other exceeds any assigned length;
(5) they have different directions.

And thirdly, if we are told that a certain Pair of Lines fulfil some one of the following conditions:

(1) they have a separate point, and are equally inclined to a certain transversal; or
(2) they have a separate point, and one of them has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the other;

we may conclude that they are separational.

Minos. Why not use your own word "parallel"?

Euclid. Because that word is not used uniformly, by modern writers, in one and the same sense. I would advise you, in discussing the works of my Modern Rivals, to disallow the word "parallel" altogether, and to oblige each writer to adopt a word that expresses his own definition.

Minos. When you speak of two points on one Line, which are on the same side of the other, being equidistant from it, do you include the case of their lying on the other Line?

Euclid. Certainly. You may take them as lying on either side you like, and at zero distances. The only case excluded is where both points are outside the other Line, and on opposite sides of it.

Minos. I understand you.

Euclid. We shall find the Table of Propositions which I now lay before you very convenient to refer to. I have placed contranominal Propositions — that is, Propositions of the form "All X is Y", "All not-Y is not-X" — in the same section.

Table I

Containing twenty Propositions, of which some are undisputed Axioms and the rest real and valid Theorems, deducible from undisputed Axioms.

[N.B. Those marked * have been proposed as Axioms.]

* 1. A Pair of Lines which have two common points are coincidental.

or

* Two Lines cannot enclose a space. [Euclid, Axiom.]

2. (a) A Pair of Lines which have a separate point have not two common points.

(b) A Pair of Lines which have a common point and a separate point are intersectional.

3. If there be given a Line and a point, it is possible to draw a Line, through the given point, intersectional with the given Line.

4. A Pair of intersectional Lines are unequally inclined to any transversal.

Cor. 1. In either pair of alternate angles, that which is on the side of the transversal remote from the point of intersection is the greater. [I. 16.]

Cor. 2. Every exterior angle which is on the side of the transversal next to the point of intersection is greater than the interior opposite angle on the same side. [I. 16.]

Cor. 3. The pair of interior angles which are on the side of the transversal next to the point of intersection are together less than two right angles. [I. 17.]

5. A Pair of Lines which have a common point and are equally inclined to a certain transversal are coincidental.

6. A Pair of Lines which have a separate point and are equally inclined to a certain transversal are separational. [I. 27, 28.]

7. If there be given a Line and a point outside it, it is possible to draw a Line, through the given point, separational from the given Line. [I. 31.]

8. A Pair of intersectional Lines are such that any two points on one, which are on the same side of the other, are not equidistant from it.

Cor. That which is the more remote from the point of intersection has the greater distance.

9. A Pair of Lines which have a common point, and of which one has two points on the same side of and equidistant from the other, are coincidental.
