Act One, Scene Two
(Part 2 of 2)

10. A Pair of Lines which have a separate point, and of which one has two points on the same side of and equidistant from the other, are separational.

11. Each of a Pair of intersectional Lines has, in each portion of it, a point whose distance from the other exceeds any given length.

or

A Pair of intersectional Lines diverge without limit.

12. A Pair of Lines which have two common points have identical directions.

* 13. (a) A Pair of Lines which have different directions have not two common points.

(b) A Pair of Lines which have a common point and different directions are intersectional.

* 14. A Pair of intersectional Lines have different directions.

* 15. A Pair of Lines which have a common point and identical directions are coincidental.

* 16. If there be given a Line and a point outside it, it is possible to draw a Line, through the given point, having a direction different from that of the given Line.

17. A Line which has a point in common with one of two coincidental Lines has a point in common with the other also.

18. A Line which has a point in common with one of two separational Lines has a point separate from the other.

* 19. A Line which has a point in common with one of two separational Lines, and also a point in common with the other, is intersectional with both.

* 20. If there be three Lines: the first a right Line; the second, not assumed to be right, having a point separate from the first and being equidistantial from it; the third a right Line intersecting the first and diverging from it without limit on the side next to the second — then the third is intersectional with the second.

Minos. I see that 2 (a) is the contranominal of 1. But where does 2 (b) come from?

Euclid. It is got from 2 (a) by adding to each term the property "having a common point" — just as if we were to deduce, from "all men are mortal", that "all fat men are fat mortals".

Minos. You mean 5 to be contranominal to 4, I suppose. But "coincidental" is not equivalent to "non-intersectional".

Euclid. True; but I have added a new condition to the subject, namely "which have a common point". Non-intersectional Lines which have a common point are coincidental — just as, in the next Proposition, non-intersectional Lines which have a separate point are separational.

Minos. 20 is rather a difficult enunciation to grasp.

Euclid. A diagram will make it clear. As a matter of fact the second Line would be a right Line; but as we have no right at present to assume this, I have drawn it as a wavy line.

Minos. I can suggest two Contranominals which you have left out. One, deducible from 13 (b): "Two Lines which are not intersectional and which have different directions have no common point — that is, are separational." The other, deducible from 15: "Two Lines which have a separate point and identical directions have no common point — that is, are separational."

Euclid. They are valid deductions; but in neither case do we know the subject to be real.

Minos. The "contranominality" — if such a fearful word be allowable — of 17, 18 and 19 seems obscure.

Euclid. I will do what I can to make it less so.

Let us name the three Lines A, B, C.

Then 17 may be read: "A Line (C) which has a point in common with one (A) of two coincidental Lines (A, B) has a point in common with the other (B) also."

From this we may deduce two Contranominals.

The first is: "If A, C have a common point, and B, C are separational, then A, B have a separate point." That is, "a Line (A) which has a point in common with one (C) of two separational Lines (B, C) has a point separate from the other (B)" — and so we get 18.

The other Contranominal is: "If A, C have a common point, and A, B have a common point, and B, C are separational, then A, B are intersectional." That is, "a Line (A) which has a point in common with one (C) of two separational Lines (B, C), and also a point in common with the other (B), is intersectional with that other (B)." But we may evidently interchange B and C without interfering with the argument, and so prove that A is also intersectional with C. Hence A is intersectional with both — and so we get 19.

Minos. That is quite clear.

Euclid. We will now go a little further into the subject of separational Lines, on which Table I has furnished us with only three Propositions. There are, however, many others concerning them which are fully admitted to be true, though no one of them has yet been proved from undisputed Axioms. And we shall find that they are so related to one another that if any one be granted as an Axiom all the rest may be proved, but that unless some one be so granted, none can be proved. Two thousand years of controversy have not yet settled the knotty question which of them, if any, may be taken as axiomatic.

If we are told that a certain Pair of Lines fulfil some one of the following conditions:

(1) they are separational; or
(2) they have a separate point and are equally inclined to a certain transversal; or
(3) they have a separate point, and one of them has two points on the same side of and equidistant from the other;

we may prove — though not without the help of some disputed Axiom — that they fulfil both the following conditions:

(1) they are equally inclined to any transversal;
(2) they are equidistantial from each other.

These Propositions, with the addition of my own I. 30 and I. 32 and certain others, I will now arrange in a tabular form, placing Contranominals in the same section.

Table II

Containing eighteen Propositions, of which no one is an undisputed Axiom, but all are real and valid Theorems, which, though not deducible from undisputed Axioms, are such that if any one be admitted as an Axiom the rest can be proved.

[N.B. Those marked * have been, or parts of them have been, proposed as Axioms.]

1. A Pair of separational Lines are equally inclined to any transversal. [I. 29.]

* 2. A Pair of Lines which are unequally inclined to a certain transversal are intersectional. [Euclid, Axiom.]

3. Through a given Point, outside a given Line, a Line may be drawn such that the two Lines are equally inclined to any transversal.

4. A Pair of Lines which are equally inclined to a certain transversal are so to any transversal.

5. A Pair of Lines which are unequally inclined to a certain transversal are so to any transversal.

6. A Pair of separational Lines are equidistantial from each other.

7. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and not equidistant from, the other, are intersectional.

* 8. Through a given point, outside a given Line, a Line may be drawn such that the two Lines are equidistantial from each other.

9. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of and equidistant from the other, are equally inclined to any transversal.

10. A Pair of Lines which are unequally inclined to a certain transversal are such that any two points on one, which are on the same side of the other, are not equidistant from it.

11. A Pair of Lines which are equally inclined to a certain transversal are equidistantial from each other.

12. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and not equidistant from, the other, are unequally inclined to any transversal.

13. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of and equidistant from the other, are equidistantial from each other.

14. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and not equidistant from, the other, are such that any two points on one, which are on the same side of the other, are not equidistant from it.

15. (a) A Pair of Lines which are separational from a third Line are not intersectional with each other.

(b) A Pair of Lines which have a common point and are separational from a third Line are coincidental with each other.

or

If there be given a Line and a point outside it, only one Line can be drawn, through the given point, separational from the given Line.

(c) A Pair of Lines which have a separate point and are separational from a third Line are separational from each other. [I. 30.]

* 16. (a) A Pair of intersectional Lines cannot both be separational from the same Line.

(b) A Line which is intersectional with one of two separational Lines is intersectional with the other also.

* 17. A Line cannot recede from and then approach another; nor can one approach and then recede from another while on the same side of it.

18. (a) If a side of a Triangle be produced, the exterior angle is equal to the two interior opposite angles together. [I. 32.]

(b) The angles of a Triangle are together equal to two right angles. [I. 32.]

You will find it convenient to have the Propositions that have been proposed as Axioms repeated in a Table by themselves.

Table III

Containing five Propositions, taken from Table II, which have been proposed as Axioms.

Euclid's Axiom

A Pair of Lines which have a separate point, and make with a certain transversal two interior angles on one side of it together less than two right angles, are intersectional on that side.

[This is one case of II. 2, with an additional statement as to the side of the transversal on which the Lines will meet.]

T. Simpson's Axiom

A Pair of Lines which have a separate point, and of which one has two points on the same side of, and not equidistant from, the other, are intersectional.

[This is II. 7.]

Clavius's Axiom

Through a given Point, outside a given Line, a Line may be drawn equidistantial from the given Line.

[This is part of II. 8.]

Playfair's Axiom

A Pair of intersectional Lines cannot both be separational from the same Line.

[This is II. 16 (a).]

R. Simpson's Axiom

A Line cannot recede from and then approach another; nor can one approach and then recede from another while on the same side of it.

[This is II. 17.]

Minos. In the predicate of 2, what right have you to say "are intersectional"? The true contradictory of "separational" would be "have a common point".

Euclid. True; but we may assume as an Axiom that "a Pair of coincidental Lines are equally inclined to any transversal." This, combined with 1, gives "a Pair of non-intersectional Lines are equally inclined to any transversal", whose Contranominal is 2.

Similarly we may combine with 6 the Axiom "a Pair of coincidental Lines are equidistantial from each other", and so get a Theorem whose Contranominal is 7.

Minos. In classing 15 (a), (b) and (c) under one number, you mean, I suppose, that they are so related that if any one of them be granted the others may be deduced?

Euclid. Certainly.

Minos. I see that if (a) be given, (b) may be deduced by simply adding "having a common point" to subject and predicate. And I see that (b) and (c) are Contranominals, so that if either be given the other follows. But I do not see how, if (b) only were given, you would prove (a).

Euclid. You can prove (c) from it, as you say; and then, from (b) and (c) combined, you can prove (a) thus.

Any Pair of Lines which are separational from a third Line must belong to one or both of the two classes "having a common point" and "having a separate point". Hence if we take these two classes together we include any Pair that can be proposed. So we get the Theorem: "Any Pair of Lines which are separational from a third Line are either coincidental or separational" — the predicate of which is equivalent to "are not intersectional".

Minos. I see. And how are 16 (a) and 16 (b) related to 15?

Euclid. Each of them is a Contranominal of 15 (a); and they are also contranominal to each other.

Minos. I should like to see that drawn out.

Euclid. Let A, B, C be three Lines. Then 16 (a) may be written: "A Pair of Lines (A, B) which are separational from a third Line (C) are not intersectional with each other."

This yields three Contranominals. The first is: "If A, B are intersectional, it cannot be true that B, C are separational and also A, C" — that is, "a Pair of intersectional Lines (A, B) cannot both be separational from a third Line (C)". The second is: "If B, C are separational and A, B intersectional, then A, C are not separational" — that is, "a Line (A) which is intersectional with one (B) of two separational Lines (B, C) is not separational from the other (C)". And the third proves a similar Theorem for B.

Minos. Yes, but your conclusion now is "A is not separational from C", whereas 16 (b) says "is intersectional".

Euclid. That is so. But since A is intersectional with a Line (B) which is separational from C, it is axiomatic that it has a point separate from C, and so cannot be coincidental with it. Hence its being "not separational from C" proves that it must be intersectional with it.

Minos. I suppose I must take it on trust that any one of these eighteen is a sufficient logical basis for the other seventeen. I can hardly ask you to go through 306 demonstrations!

Euclid. I can do it with eleven. You will grant me, I think, that when two Propositions are contranominal, so that each can be proved from the other, I may select either of the two for my series of proofs, and need not include both?

Minos. Certainly.

Euclid. Here are the proofs, which you can read afterwards at your leisure. (See Appendix III.)

§ 5. Playfair's Axiom

Euclid. The next general question to be discussed is the proposed substitution of Playfair's Axiom for mine. As to mine, I am quite ready to admit that it is not axiomatic until Proposition 17 has been proved. What is an Axiom at one stage of our knowledge is often anything but an Axiom at an earlier stage.

Minos. The great question is whether it is axiomatic then.

Euclid. I am quite aware of that; and it is because this is not only the great question of the whole First Book, but also the crucial test by which my method, compared with those of my Modern Rivals, must stand or fall, that I beg your patience in speaking of a matter which cannot possibly be dismissed in a few words.

Minos. Pray speak at whatever length you think necessary on so vital a point.

Euclid. Let me remark in the first place — it is a minor matter, but it must come in somewhere, and I do not want to break the thread of my argument — that we need, in any complete geometrical treatise, some practical geometrical test by which we can prove that two given finite Lines will meet if produced. My Axiom serves this purpose. It is a secondary purpose, true; but it is incumbent on anyone who proposes to do away with my Axiom to provide some sufficient substitute.

Minos. I admit all that.

Euclid. Now, if the test I propose — that the two Lines make with a certain transversal two interior angles on the same side of it together less than two right angles — be objected to as not simple enough, the question arises: what simpler test can be proposed?

Minos. The supporters of Playfair's Axiom would of course reply, "that one of the two Lines should cut a Line known to be parallel to the other."

Euclid. Assuming that what is needed is a distinct conception of the geometrical relationship of the two Lines whose future meeting we are asked to believe in — which picture, do you think, is the more likely to yield us such a conception? Two finite Lines, both cut by a transversal, and having a known angular relation to that transversal and so to each other? Or two Lines "known to be parallel", that is, two Lines of whose geometrical relationship, so far as our field of vision extends, we know absolutely nothing, but can only say that in the far-away region of infinity they do not meet?

Minos. In clearness of conception your picture seems to have the advantage. In fact, I could form no mental picture at all of the relative position of two finite Lines if all I knew about them was that they never meet however far produced; and it would be equally impossible to picture the position, relative to the other, of a Line crossing one of them. But though your picture may be easier to conceive, I doubt whether it is easy enough to make an axiom.

Euclid. Taken by itself it may be, as you say, not entirely axiomatic. But I think I can put before you a few considerations which will make it more acceptable.

Minos. They will be well worth having. An absolute proof of it, from first principles, would be received — I can assure you — with absolute rapture, being a will-o'-the-wisp that mathematicians have been chasing from your age down to our own.

Euclid. I know it. But I cannot help you. Some mysterious flaw lies at the root of the subject. Probabilities are all I have to offer you.

Now suppose you were assured, of two finite Lines placed before you, that when produced in a certain direction one of them approached the other — that is, contained two points of which the second was nearer to the other Line than the first. Would you not think it probable, if not absolutely certain, that they would meet at last?

Minos. Making use — as I suppose you will allow me to do — of my knowledge of the properties of asymptotes, I should say No. The mere fact of approach, granted of two Lines, does not secure a future meeting.

Euclid. But if you look into the depths of your own consciousness — assuming such depths to exist — you will find, I believe, an eternal distinction maintained in this respect between straight and curved Lines: so that Lines of the one kind must, if they approach, ultimately meet, whereas those of the other kind need not.

Minos. I will grant it provisionally, if only to know what you are going to deduce from it.

Euclid. I will now ask you to consider this diagram.

[Figure p82]

Suppose it given that the Lines BD, CE make with BC two angles together less than two right angles. My object is to show that probably — if not certainly — they will meet if produced towards D, E.

Let BF be so drawn that the angles FBC, BCE may be together equal to two right angles.

Now if any point in BD be nearer to CE than B is, what is required is proved, since BD approaches CE.

But if this be not so, then F (which is obviously further from CE than some point in BD is) must also be further from CE than B is; that is, FB must approach EC; that is, FB and EC must ultimately meet below BC, and so form a Triangle whose angles at B and C will be (by my Proposition 17) less than two right angles. Hence the angles FBC, BCE must be greater than two right angles, since the four angles are (by my Proposition 13) equal to four right angles. But this is absurd, since they were made equal to two right angles.

Hence D is nearer to CE than B is; that is, BD approaches CE, and so will meet it if produced.

Minos. You have certainly made your Axiom a little more axiomatic. It is, I presume, an afterthought of yours; otherwise you would have made your Axiom deal with approaching Lines, and would then have proved your present Axiom as a Theorem.

Euclid. Excuse me. Whatever the habits of modern geometricians may be, in our day we always investigated a subject down to the very roots. No "afterthought" was possible. You of the nineteenth century may "look before and after" if it so please you, so long as we have liberty to look at what is at our feet; you may "sigh for what is not", and welcome, so long as we may chuckle at what is!

Minos. Flippancy will not serve your turn. If you have no better reason than that —

Euclid. I have a better reason. How could I have dealt with approaching Lines without first strictly defining "the distance of a point from a Line"?

Minos. Nohow, I grant you.

Euclid. Which would have entailed a definition of "the distance of a point from a point" — that is, the length of the shortest path by which the one can pass to the other — which again would have entailed the comparison of all possible paths — which again would have entailed the estimation of the lengths of curved Lines — which again —

Minos. This is uncanny! It is whichcraft!

Euclid. (preserves a disgusted silence)

Minos. I beg your pardon. I grant that you have made out a very good case for your own Axiom, and but a bad one for Playfair's.

Euclid. I will make it worse yet before I have done. My next remark will be best explained with the help of a diagram.

[Figure p84]

Let AB and CD make, with EF, the two interior angles BEF, EFD together less than two right angles. Now if through E we draw the Line GH such that the angles HEF, EFD may be together equal to two right angles, it is easy to show (by Proposition 28) that GH and CD are separational.

Minos. Certainly.

Euclid. We see, then, that any Lines which have the property — let us call it α — of making with a certain transversal two interior angles together less than two right angles, have also the property (let us call it β) that one of them intersects a Line which is separational from the other.

Minos. I grant it.

Euclid. Now suppose you decline to grant my 12th Axiom, but are ready to grant Playfair's — that two intersectional Lines cannot both be separational from the same Line. Then you have in fact granted my Axiom.

Minos. Be good enough to prove that.

Euclid. Lines which have property α have property β. Lines which have property β meet if produced; for if not, there would be two Lines both separational from the same Line, which is absurd. Hence Lines which have property α meet if produced.

Minos. I see now that those who grant Playfair's Axiom have no right to object to yours; and yours is certainly the simpler.

Euclid. To make assurance doubly sure, let me give you two additional reasons for preferring my Axiom.

In the first place, Playfair's Axiom — or rather the Contranominal of it which I have been using, that "a Line which intersects one of two separational Lines will also meet the other" — does not tell us which way we are to expect the Lines to meet. And that is a very important matter in constructing a diagram.

Minos. We might get round that objection by rewording it thus: "If a Line intersect one of two separational Lines, that portion of it which falls between them will, if produced, meet the other."

Euclid. We might; and therefore I lay little stress on that objection.

Euclid. In the second place, Playfair's Axiom asserts more than mine does, and all the additional assertion is superfluous, and a needless strain on the faith of the learner.

Minos. I do not see that in the least.

Euclid. It is rather an obscure point, but I think I can make it clear. We know that all Pairs of Lines which have property α have also property β; but we do not know as yet — not until we have proved I. 29 — that all which have property β have also property α.

Minos. That is so.

Euclid. Then, for anything we know to the contrary, class β may be larger than class α. Hence, if you assert anything of class β, the logical effect is more extensive than if you assert it of class α; for you assert it not only of that portion of class β which is known to be included in class α, but also of the unknown — but possibly existing — portion which is not so included.

Minos. I see that now, and consider it a real and very strong reason for preferring your axiom.

But so far you have only answered Playfair. What do you say to the objection raised by Mr. Potts? "A stronger objection appears to be that the converse of it forms Euclid I. 17; for both the assumed Axiom and its converse should be so obvious as not to require formal demonstration."

Euclid. Why, I say that I deny the general law he lays down. (It is of course the technical converse he means, not the logical one. "All X is Y" has for its technical converse "All Y is X"; for its logical converse, "Some Y is X".) Let him try his law on the Axiom "All right angles are equal", and its technical converse "All equal angles are right"!

Minos. I withdraw the objection.

§ 6. The Principle of Superposition

Minos. The next subject is the principle of superposition. You use it twice only, in Propositions 4 and 8, in the First Book; but the modern fancy is to use it on every possible occasion. The Syllabus indicates, to use the words of the Committee, "the free use of this principle as desirable in many cases where Euclid prefers to keep it out of sight."

Euclid. Give me an instance of this modern method.

Minos. It is proposed to prove I. 5 by taking up the isosceles Triangle, turning it over, and then laying it down again upon itself.

Euclid. Surely that has too much of the Irish Bull about it — and reminds one a little too vividly of the man who walked down his own throat — to deserve a place in a strictly philosophical treatise?

Minos. I suppose its defenders would say that it is conceived to leave a trace of itself behind, and that the reversed Triangle is laid down upon the trace so left.

Euclid. That is in fact the same thing as conceiving that there are two coincident Triangles, and that one of them is taken up, turned over, and laid down upon the other. And what does their subsequent coincidence prove? Merely this: that the right-hand angle of the first is equal to the left-hand angle of the second, and vice versa. To make the proof complete, it is necessary to point out that, owing to the original coincidence of the Triangles, this same "left-hand angle of the second" is also equal to the left-hand angle of the first — and then, and not till then, we may conclude that the base angles of the first Triangle are equal. That is the full argument, strictly drawn out. Modern books on Geometry often attain their much-vaunted brevity by the dangerous process of leaving out links in the chain; and some of the new proofs, which at first sight seem shorter than mine, are really longer when fully stated. In this particular case I think you will allow that I had good reason for not adopting the method of superposition?

Minos. You had indeed.

Euclid. Mind, I do not object to that proof if it is appended to mine as an alternative. It will do very well for more advanced students. But for beginners I think it much clearer to have two non-isosceles Triangles to deal with.

Minos. But your objection to laying a Triangle down upon itself does not apply to such a case as I. 24.

Euclid. It does not. Let us discuss that case too. The Moderns would, I suppose, take up the Triangle ABC and apply it to DEF so that AB should coincide with DE?

Minos. Yes.

Euclid. Well, that would oblige you to say "and join C, in its new position, to E and F." The words "in its new position" would be necessary, because you would now have two points in your diagram both called C. And you would also be obliged to give the points D and E additional names, namely A and B. All of which would be very confusing for a beginner. You will allow, I think, that I was right here in constructing a new Triangle instead of transferring the old one?

Minos. Cuthbertson evades that difficulty by renaming the point C and calling it G.

Euclid. And do the points A and B take their names with them?

Minos. No. They adopt the names D and E.

Euclid. It is very like making a new Triangle!

Minos. It is indeed. I think you have quite disposed of the claims of superposition. The only remaining subject for discussion is the omission of the diagonals in Book II.

§ 7. The Omission of Diagonals in Euclid II

Euclid. Let us test it on my II. 4. We will go through my proof of it, and then the proof given by some writer who ignores the diagonal, supplying if necessary any of those gaps in argument which my Modern Rivals so often indulge in, and which give their proofs a delusive air of neatness and brevity.

"If a Line be divided into any two parts, the square of the whole Line is equal to the squares of the two parts together with twice their rectangle."

[Figure p89]

Let AB be divided at C. It is to be proved that the square of AB is equal to the squares of AC, CB, together with twice the rectangle of AC, CB.

On AB describe the Square ABED; join BD; from C draw CF parallel to AD or BE, cutting BD at G; and through G draw HK parallel to AB or DE.

	Since BD cuts the Parallels AD, CF,
	∴ exterior angle CGB = interior opposite angle ADB. [I. 29]
	Also, since AD = AB,
	∴ angle ADB = angle ABD; [I. 5]
	∴ angle CGB = angle ABD, that is, angle CBG;
	∴ CG = CB. [I. 6]
	But BK = CG, and GK = CB; [I. 34]
	∴ CK is equilateral.
	Also, since angle CBK is right,
	∴ CK is rectangular; [I. 46, Cor.]
	∴ CK is a Square.
	Similarly HF is a Square, and = the square of AC, for HG = AC. [I. 34]
	Also, since AG, GE are equal, being complements, [I. 43]
	∴ AG + GE = twice AG
	           = twice the rectangle of AC, CB.
	But these four figures make up AE.
	Therefore the square of AB, etc. Q.E.D.'

That is just 128 words, counting from 'On AB describe' down to the words 'rectangle of AC, CB'. What author shall we turn to for a rival proof?

Minos. I think Wilson will be best.

Euclid. Very well. Do the best you can for him. You may use all my references if you like, and if you can do so legitimately.

Minos. 'Describe the Square ABED on AB. Through C draw CF parallel to AD, meeting DE in F —'

Euclid. You must insert 'or BE' to make the comparison fair.

Minos. Certainly. I will mark the necessary insertions by parentheses. 'Through C draw CF parallel to AD (or BE), meeting DE in F.'

Euclid. You may omit those four words, as they do not occur in my proof.

Minos. Very well. 'Cut off (from CF) CG = CB. Through G draw HK parallel to AB (or DE). It is easily shown that CK, HF are the squares of CB, AC; and that AG, GE are each of them the rectangle of AC, CB.'

Euclid. We can't admit 'it is easily shown'! He is bound to give the proof.

Minos. I will do it for him as briefly as I can. 'Since CG = CB, and BK = CG, and GK = CB, ∴ CK is equilateral. It is also rectangular, since angle CBK is right. ∴ CK is a Square.' I'm afraid I mustn't say 'Similarly HF is a Square'?

Euclid. Certainly not: it requires a different proof.

Minos. 'Because CF = AD = AB, and CG, CB, parts of them, are equal, ∴ the remainder GF = the remainder AC, = HG. But HD = GF, and DF = HG; ∴ HF is equilateral. It is also rectangular, since angle HDF is right. ∴ HF is a Square, and = the square of AC. Also AG is the rectangle of AC, CB.' I fear I can't assume GE to be equal to AG?

Euclid. I fear I cannot permit you to assume the truth of my I. 43.

Minos. 'Also GE is the rectangle of AC, CB, since GF = AC, and GK = CB. ∴ AG and GE = twice the rectangle of AC, CB.'

Euclid. That will do. How many words do you make it?

Minos. 145.

Euclid. Then the omission of the diagonal, instead of shortening the proof, has really lengthened it by seventeen words! Well! Has it any advantage in the way of neatness to atone for its greater length?

Minos. Certainly not. It is quite unsymmetrical. I very much prefer your method of appealing to the beautiful Theorem of the equality of complements.

Euclid. Then that concludes our present interview: we will meet again when you have reviewed my Modern Rivals one by one. If you had any slow music handy, I would vanish to it: as it is —

(Vanishes without slow music.)
