Act Two, Scene Two: Legendre

Legendre

"Fine by degrees, and beautifully less."

Niemand. I lay before you Éléments de Géométrie, by Monsieur A. M. Legendre, the fourteenth edition, 1860.

Minos. Let me begin by asking you — since I regard you and your client as one in this matter — how you define a straight Line.

Niemand. As "the shortest path from one point to another."

Minos. That does not seem to me to capture the primary idea which the word "straight" raises in the mind. Is not the natural process of thought to grasp first the notion of "a straight Line", and then to realise the fact that it is the shortest path between two points?

Niemand. That may be the natural process; but surely you will allow our Definition to be a legitimate one?

Minos. I think not — and I have the great authority of Kant on my side. In his Critique of Pure Reason he says (I quote from Meiklejohn's translation, in Bohn's Philosophical Library, pp. 9, 10): "Mathematical judgments are always synthetical... 'A straight Line between two points is the shortest' is a synthetical Proposition. For my conception of straight contains no notion of quantity, but is merely qualitative. The conception of the shortest is therefore wholly an addition, and by no analysis can it be extracted from our conception of a straight Line."

That may fairly be taken as a denial that the Axiom is fit to stand as a Definition. For all Definitions ought to be the expressions of analytical, not of synthetical, judgments: their predicates ought not to introduce anything that is not already contained in the idea corresponding to the subject. So if the idea of "shortest distance" cannot be got at by merely analysing the conception represented by "straight Line", the Axiom ought not to be used as a Definition.

Niemand. We are not particular whether it be taken as a Definition or as an Axiom: either will answer our purpose.

Minos. Then let us at least banish it from the definitions. And now for its claim to be regarded as an Axiom. It involves the assertion that a straight Line is shorter than any curved Line between the two points. Now the length of a curved Line is altogether too difficult a subject for a beginner to have to consider; and it is moreover unnecessary that he should consider it at all, at least in the earlier parts of Geometry. All he really needs is to grasp the fact that it is shorter than any broken Line made up of straight Lines.

Niemand. That is true.

Minos. And all cases of broken Lines may be deduced from their simplest case, which is Euclid's I. 20.

Niemand. Well, we will abate our claim, and simply ask to have I. 20 granted us as an Axiom.

Minos. But it can be proved from your own Axioms; and it is a generally admitted principle that, at least in dealing with beginners, we ought not to take as axiomatic any Theorem which can be proved from the Axioms we already have.

Niemand. For beginners we must admit that Euclid's way of treating this point is the best. But you will allow ours to be a legitimate and elegant method for the advanced student?

Minos. Most certainly. The whole of your beautiful treatise is admirably fitted for advanced students: it is only from the beginner's point of view that I venture to criticise it at all.

Your treatment of angles and right angles does not, I think, differ much from Euclid's?

Niemand. Not much. We prove, instead of assuming, that all right angles are equal, deducing it from the Axiom that two right Lines cannot enclose a space.

Minos. I think some such proof a desirable addition.

I will now ask you how you prove Euclid I. 29.

Niemand. What preliminary Propositions will you grant us as proved?

Minos. Euclid's series consists of Axiom 12 and Propositions 4, 5, 7, 8, 13, 15, 16, 27, 28. I will grant you as much of that series as you have proved by methods not radically different from his.

Niemand. That is, you grant us Propositions 4, 13 and 15. Proposition 16 is not in our treatise. The next we require is Proposition 6.

Minos. That you may take as proved.

Niemand. And next to that, Proposition 20: that we assume as an Axiom, and from it, with the help of Proposition 6, we deduce Proposition 19.

Minos. For our present purpose you may take Proposition 19 as proved.

Niemand. From Propositions 13 and 19 we deduce Proposition 32; and from that, Axiom 12; from which Proposition 29 follows at once.

Minos. Your proof of Proposition 32 is long, but beautiful. I need not, however, go into a discussion of its merits. It is enough to say that what we want is a proof suited to the capacities of beginners, and that this Theorem of yours (Proposition xix, at p. 20) contains an infinite series of Triangles, an infinite series of angles whose terms continually decrease so as to become ultimately less than any assigned angle, and magnitudes which vanish simultaneously. These considerations seem to me to settle the question. I fear that your proof of this Theorem, though a model of elegance and clarity as a study for the advanced student, is wholly unsuited to the needs of a beginner.

Niemand. That we are not prepared to dispute.

Minos. It seems superfluous, after saying this, to ask what test for the meeting of Lines you have provided; but we may as well have it stated, to complete the enquiry.

Niemand. We give Euclid's 12th Axiom, which we prove from Proposition 32, using the principle of Euclid X. 1 (second part), that "if the greater of two unequal magnitudes be bisected, and if its half be bisected, and so on, a magnitude will at length be reached less than the lesser of the two magnitudes."

Minos. That again is a mode of proof entirely unsuited to beginners.

The general style of your admirable treatise I shall not attempt to discuss: it is one I would far rather take as a model to imitate than as a subject to criticise.

I can only repeat, in conclusion, what I have already said — that your book, though well suited for advanced students, is not so for beginners.

Niemand. At this rate we shall make short work of the twelve Modern Rivals!
