Act Two, Scene Six: Wilson, Pierce and Willock
(Part 1 of 3)

§ 1. Wilson

"There is moreover a logic besides that of mere reasoning."

Wilson, Preface, p. xiii.

Niemand. You have made but short work of four of the five methods of treating Parallels.

Minos. We shall have all the more time to give to the somewhat intricate subject of Direction.

Niemand. I lay on the table Elementary Geometry, by J. M. Wilson, M.A., late Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, late Mathematical Master of Rugby School, now Head Master of Clifton College. The second edition, 1869. And I warn you to be careful how you criticise it, as it is already adopted in several schools.

Minos. Tant pis pour les écoles. So you and your client deliberately propose to supersede Euclid as a text-book?

Niemand. "I am of opinion that the time is come for making an effort to supplant Euclid in our schools and universities." (Pref. p. xiv.)

Minos. It will be necessary, considering how great a change you are advocating, to examine your book very minutely and critically.

Niemand. With all my heart. I hope you will show, in your review, "the spirit without the prejudices of a geometrician." (Pref. p. xv.)

Minos. We will begin with the Right Line. And first, let me ask, how do you define it?

Niemand. As "a Line which has the same direction at all parts of its length." (p. 3.)

Minos. You do not, I think, make any practical use of that as a test, any more than Euclid does of the property of lying evenly as to points on it?

Niemand. No, we do not.

Minos. You construct and test it as in Euclid, I believe? And you have his Axiom that "two straight Lines cannot enclose a space"?

Niemand. Yes, but we extend it. Euclid asserts, in effect, that two Lines which coincide in two points coincide between those points; we say they "coincide wholly", which includes coincidence beyond those points.

Minos. Euclid tacitly assumes that.

Niemand. Yes, but he has not expressed it.

Minos. I think the addition a good one. Have you any other Axioms about it?

Niemand. Yes: "that a straight Line marks the shortest distance between any two of its points." (p. 5, Ax. 1.)

Minos. That I have already fully discussed in reviewing Monsieur Legendre's book, in Act Two, Scene Two.

Niemand. We have also "A Line may be conceived as transferred from any position to any other position, its magnitude being unaltered." (p. 5, Ax. 3.)

Minos. True of any geometrical magnitude, but hardly worth stating, I think. I have now to ask you how you define an Angle.

Niemand. "Two straight Lines that meet one another form an angle at the point where they meet." (p. 5.)

Minos. Do you mean that they form it at the point and nowhere else?

Niemand. I suppose so.

Minos. I fear you allow your angle no magnitude, if you limit its existence to so small a locality!

Niemand. Well, we don't mean "nowhere else".

Minos. (meditatively) You mean "at the point — and somewhere else". Where else, if you please?

Niemand. We mean — we don't quite know why we put in the words at all. Let us say "Two straight Lines that meet one another form an angle."

Minos. Very well. It hardly tells us what an angle is, and so far it is inferior to Euclid's Definition; but it may pass. Do you put any limit to the size of an angle?

Niemand. We have not named any, but the largest here treated of is what we call "one revolution".

Minos. You admit reentrant angles, then?

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. Then your Definition only states half the truth: you should have said "form two angles."

Niemand. That would be true, no doubt.

Minos. But this extension of limit will require several modifications in Euclid's language. For instance, what is your Definition of an obtuse angle?

Niemand reads.

P. 8, Def. 13. "An obtuse angle is one which is greater than a right angle."

Minos. So you tumble headlong into the very first pitfall you come across! Why, that includes such angles as 180° and 360°. You would teach your pupil, I suppose, that one portion of a straight Line makes an obtuse angle with the other, and that every straight Line has an obtuse angle at each end of it!

Niemand. It is an oversight — of course we ought to have added "but less than two right angles."

Minos. A very palpable oversight. I fear we shall find more as we go on. What Axioms have you about angles?

Niemand reads. P. 5, Ax. 4. "An angle may be conceived as transferred to any other position, its magnitude being unaltered."

Minos. Hardly worth stating. Proceed.

Niemand reads.

P. 5, Ax. 5. "Angles are equal when they could be placed on one another so that their vertices would coincide in position, and their arms in direction."

Minos. "Placed on one another"! Did you ever see the child's game where a pile of four hands is made on the table, and each player tries to have a hand at the top of the pile?

Niemand. I know the game.

Minos. Well, did you ever see both players succeed at once?

Niemand. No.

Minos. Whenever that feat is achieved, you may then expect to be able to place two angles "on one another"! You have hardly, I think, grasped the physical fact that, when one of two things is on the other, the second is underneath the first. But perhaps I am hypercritical. Let us try an example of your Axiom: let us place an angle of 90° on one of 270°. I think I could get the vertices and arms to coincide in the way you describe.

Niemand. But the one angle would not be on the other; one would extend round one-fourth of the circle, and the other round the remaining three-fourths.

Minos. Then, after all, the angle is a mysterious entity, which extends from one of the Lines to the other? That is much the same as Euclid's Definition. Let us now take your definition of a Right Angle.

Niemand. We first define "one revolution", which is the angle described by a Line revolving, about one extremity, round into its original position.

Minos. That is clear enough.

Niemand. We then say (p. 7, Def. 9) "When it coincides with what was initially its continuation, it has described half a revolution, and the angle it has then described is called a straight angle."

Minos. How do you know that it has described half a revolution?

Niemand. Well, it is not difficult to prove. Let that portion of the Plane through which it has revolved be rolled over, using as an axis the arm (in its initial position) and its continuation, until it falls upon the other portion of the Plane. The two angular magnitudes will now together make up "one revolution": therefore each is "half a revolution".

Minos. A proof, I grant; but you are very sanguine if you expect beginners in the subject to supply it for themselves.

Niemand. It is an omission, we admit.

Minos. And then "a straight angle"! "Straight" is necessarily unbending, while "angle" is from ἄγκος, a bend or hook: so that your phrase is exactly equivalent to "an unbending bend"! In the Bairnslea Foaks' Almanack I once read of "a mad chap" who spent six weeks "a-trying to maak a straat hook" — but he failed. He ought to have studied your book. Have you Euclid's Axiom "all right angles are equal"?

Niemand. We deduce it from "all straight angles are equal", and that we prove by applying one straight angle to another.

Minos. That is all very well, though I cannot think "straight angles" a valuable contribution to the subject. I will now ask you to state your method of treating Pairs of Lines, as far as your proof of Euclid I. 32.

Niemand. To do that we shall of course require parallel Lines; and, as our definition of them is "Lines having the same direction", we must begin by discussing direction.

Minos. Undoubtedly. How do you define direction?

Niemand. Well, we have not attempted that. The idea seemed to us too elementary for definition. But let me read you what we have said about it.

P. 1, Def. 2. "A geometrical Line has position, and length, and at every point of it it has direction..."

P. 3, Def. 4. "A straight Line is a Line which has the same direction at all parts of its length. It has also the opposite direction... A straight Line may be conceived as generated by a point moving always in the same direction."

I will next quote what we have said about two Lines having "the same direction" and "different directions".

Minos. We will take that presently: I have a good deal to say first as to what you have read. I gather that you consider direction to be a property of a geometrical entity, but not itself an entity?

Niemand. Just so.

Minos. And you ascribe this property to a Line, and also to the motion of a point?

Niemand. We do.

Minos. For simplicity's sake we will omit all notice of curved Lines and the like, and will confine ourselves to straight Lines and rectilinear motion, so that in future, when I use the word "Line", I shall mean "straight Line". Now may we not give a notion of "direction" by saying — that a moving point must move in a certain direction; that, if two points, starting from a state of coincidence, move along two equal straight Lines which do not coincide (so that their movements are alike in point of departure and in magnitude), that quality of each movement which makes it differ from the other is its direction; and similarly that, if two equal straight Lines are terminated at the same point but do not coincide, that quality of each which makes it differ from the other is its direction from the common point?

Niemand. It is all very true; but you are using "straight Line" to help you in defining "direction". We, on the contrary, consider "direction" as the more elementary idea of the two, and use it in defining "straight Line". But we clearly agree as to the meanings of both expressions.

Minos. I am satisfied with that admission. Now as to the phrase "the same direction", which you have used in reference to a single Line and the motion of a single point. May we not say that portions of the same Line have "the same direction" as one another? And that, if a point moves along a Line without turning back, its motion at one instant is in "the same direction" as its motion at another instant?

Niemand. Yes. That expresses our meaning in other language.

Minos. I have altered the language in order to bring out clearly the fact that, in using the phrase "the same direction", we are really contemplating two Lines, or two motions. We have now got — considering "straight Line" as an understood phrase — accurate geometrical Definitions of at least two uses of the phrase. And to these we may add a third, namely that two coincident Lines have "the same direction".

Niemand. Certainly, for they are one and the same Line.

Minos. And you intend, I suppose, to use the word "different" as equivalent to "not-same".

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. So that if we have, for instance, two equal Lines terminated at the same point but not coinciding, we say that they have "different directions"?

Niemand. Yes, with one exception. If they are portions of one and the same infinite Line, we say that they have "opposite directions". Remember that we said, of a Line, "it has also the opposite direction."

Minos. You did so; but since "same" and "different" are contradictory epithets, they must together comprise the whole genus of "pairs of directions". Under which heading will you put "opposite directions"?

Niemand. No doubt, strictly speaking, "opposite directions" are a particular kind of "different directions". But we shall have endless confusion if we include them in that class. We wish to avoid the use of the word "opposite" altogether, and to mean, by "different directions", all kinds of directions that are not the same, with the exception of "opposite".

Minos. It is a most desirable arrangement; but you have not clearly stated it in your book. Tell me whether you agree in this statement of the matter. Every Line has a pair of directions, opposite to each other. And if two Lines be said to have "the same direction", we must understand "the same pair of directions"; and if they be said to have "different directions", we must understand "different pairs of directions". And even this is not enough. For suppose I draw, on the map of England, a straight Line joining London and York. I may say "This Line has a pair of directions, the first being 'London-to-York' and the second 'York-to-London'." I will now place another Line upon this, and its pair of directions shall be, first "York-to-London" and second "London-to-York". Then it has a different first-direction from the former Line, and also a different second-direction: that is, it has a "different pair of directions". Clearly this is not intended; but in order to exclude such a possibility we must extend yet further the meaning of the phrase, and, if two Lines be said to have "the same direction", we must understand "pairs of directions which can be arranged so as to be the same"; and if they be said to have "different directions", we must understand "pairs of directions which cannot be arranged so as to be the same".

Niemand. Yes, that expresses our meaning.

Minos. You must admit, I think, that your theory of direction involves a good deal of obscurity at the very outset. However, we have cleared it up, and will not use the word "opposite" again. Tell me now whether you accept this as a correct Definition of the phrases "the same direction" and "different directions", when used of a Pair of infinite Lines which have a common point:

If two infinite Lines, having a common point, coincide, they have "the same direction"; if not, they have "different directions".

Niemand. We accept it.

Minos. And, since a finite Line has the same direction as the infinite Line of which it is a portion, we may generalise thus: "Coincidental Lines have the same direction. Non-coincidental Lines, which have a common point, have different directions."

But it must be carefully borne in mind that we have as yet no geometrical meaning for these phrases, unless when applied to two Lines which have a common point.

Niemand. Allow me to remark that what you call "coincidental Lines" we call "the same Line" or "parts of the same Line", and that what you call "non-coincidental Lines" we call "different Lines".

Minos. I understand you; but I cannot employ these terms, for two reasons: first, that your phrase "the same Line" loses sight of a fact I wish to keep in view, that we are considering a Pair of Lines; secondly, that your phrase "different Lines" might be used, with strict truth, of two different portions of the same infinite Line, so that it is not definite enough for my purpose.

Let us now proceed "to consider the relations of two or more straight Lines in one Plane in respect of direction."

And first let me ask which of the propositions of Table II you wish me to grant you as an axiom.

Niemand. (proudly) Not one of them! We have got a new patent process, the "direction" theory, which will dispense with them all.

Minos. I am very curious to hear how you do it.

Niemand reads.

P. 11, Ax. 6. "Two different Lines may have either the same or different directions."

Minos. That contains two assertions, which we will consider separately. First, you say that "two different Lines" — that is, "non-coincidental Lines", or "Lines having a separate point" — "may have the same direction". Now let us understand each other quite clearly. We will take a fixed Line to begin with, and a certain point on it. There is no doubt that we can draw, through that point, a second Line coinciding with the first; the direction of this Line will of course be "the same" as the direction of the first Line; and it is equally obvious that if we draw the second Line in any other direction, so as not to coincide with the first, its direction will not be "the same" as that of the first — that is, they will have "different" directions. If we want a geometrical definition of the assertion that this second Line has "the same direction" as the first Line, we may take the following: "having such a direction as will cause the Lines to be the same Line." If we want a geometrical construction for it, we may say "take any other point on the fixed Line; join the two points, and produce the Line so drawn at both ends"; this construction we know will produce a Line which will be "the same" as the first Line, and whose direction will therefore be "the same" as that of the first Line. If, in a certain diagram whose geometrical history we know, we want to test whether two Lines passing through a common point have, or have not, "the same direction", we have simply to take any other point on one of the Lines and observe whether the other Line does, or does not, pass through it. This relationship of direction, which you call "having the same direction", and I "having identical directions", we may express by the word "co-directional".

Niemand. All very true. My only puzzle is why you have explained it at such enormous length: my meerschaum has gone out while I have been listening to you!

Minos. Allow me to hand you a light. As to the "enormous length" of my explanation, we are in troubled waters, my friend! There are breakers ahead, and we cannot heave the lead too often.

Niemand. It is lead indeed!

Minos. Let us now return to our fixed Line; and this time we will take a point not on it, and through this point we will draw a second Line. You say that we can, if we choose, draw it in "the same direction" as that of the first Line?

Niemand. We do.

Minos. In that case let me remind you of the warning I gave you a few minutes ago, that we have no geometrical meaning for the phrase "the same direction" unless when used of Lines having a common point. What geometrical meaning do you attach to the phrase when used of other Lines?

Niemand. (after a pause) I fear we cannot give you a geometrical definition of it at present.

Minos. No? Can you construct such Lines?

Niemand. No; but really that is not necessary. We allow of "hypothetical constructions" nowadays.

Minos. Well then, can you test whether a given Pair of Lines have this property? I mean, if I give you a certain diagram, and tell you its geometrical history, can you pronounce, on a certain Pair of finite Lines which have no visible common point, as to whether they have this property?

Niemand. We cannot undertake it.

Minos. You ask me, then, to believe in the reality of a class of "Pairs of Lines" possessing a property which you can neither define, nor construct, nor test?

Niemand. We can do none of these things, we admit; but yet the class is not quite so indefinite as you think. We can give you a geometrical description of it.

Minos. I shall be delighted to hear it.

Niemand. We have agreed that a Pair of coincidental finite Lines have a certain relationship of direction, which we call "the same direction", and which you allow to be an intelligible geometrical relation?

Minos. Certainly.

Niemand. Well, all we assert of this new class is that their relationship of direction is identical with that which belongs to coincidental Lines.

Minos. It cannot be identical in all respects, for it certainly differs in this, that we cannot reach the conception of it by the same route. I can form a conception of "the same direction" when the phrase is used of two Lines which have a common point, but it is only by considering that one falls on the other — that they have all other points common — that they coincide. When you ask me to form a conception of this relationship of direction when asserted of other Lines, you know that none of these considerations will help me, and you do not furnish me with any substitutes for them. To me the relationship does not seem to be identical: I should prefer saying that separational Lines have "collateral", or "corresponding", or "separational" directions, to using the phrase "the same direction" over again. It is, of course, true that "collateral" directions produce the same results, as to angles made with a transversal, as "identical" directions; but this seems to me to be a Theorem, not an Axiom.

Niemand. You say that the relationship does not seem to you to be identical. I should like to know where you think you perceive any difference.

Minos. I will try to make my meaning clearer by an illustration.

Suppose that I and several companions are walking along a railway which will take us to a place we wish to visit. Some amuse themselves by walking on one of the rails, some on another; others wander along the line, crossing and recrossing. Now as we are all bound for the same place, we may say, roughly speaking, that we are all moving "in the same direction" — but that is speaking very roughly indeed. We make our language more exact if we exclude the wanderers, and say that those who are walking along the rails are so moving. But it seems to me that our phrase becomes still more exact if we limit it to those who are walking on one and the same rail.

As a second illustration, suppose two forces acting on a certain body, and let them be equal in amount and opposite in direction. Now, if they are acting along the same Line, we know that they neutralise each other and that the body remains at rest. But if one be shifted ever so little to one side, so that they act along parallel Lines, then, though still equal in amount and (according to the "direction" theory) opposite in direction, they no longer neutralise each other, but form a couple.

As a third illustration, take two points on a certain Plane. We may, first, draw a Line through them and cause them to move along that Line: they are then undoubtedly moving "in the same direction". We may, secondly, draw two Lines through them which meet, or at least would meet if produced, and cause them to move along those Lines: they are then undoubtedly moving "in different directions". We may, thirdly, draw two parallel Lines through them and cause them to move along those Lines. Surely this is a new relationship of motion, not absolutely identical with either of the former two? But if this new relationship be not absolutely identical with that named "in the same direction", it must belong to the class named "in different directions".

Still, though this new relationship of direction is not identical with the former in all respects, it is in some: only, to prove this, we must use some disputed Axiom, as it will take us into Table II. For instance, they are identical as to angles made with transversals; this fact is embodied in Table II. 4 — see Act One, Scene Two. Would you like to adopt that as your Axiom?

Niemand. No. We are trying to dispense with Table II altogether.

Minos. It is a vain attempt.

There is another remark I wish to make before considering your second assertion. In asserting that there is a real class of non-coincidental Lines that have "the same direction", are you not also asserting that there is a real class of Lines that have no common point? For, if they had a common point, they must have "different directions".

Niemand. I suppose we are.

Minos. We will then, if you please, credit you with an Axiom you have not expressed, namely "It is possible for two Lines to have no common point." And here I must express an opinion that this ought to be proved, not assumed. Euclid has proved it in I. 27, which rests on no disputed Axiom; and I think it may be recorded as a distinct defect in your treatise that you have assumed, as axiomatic, a truth which Euclid has proved.

My conclusion, as to this first assertion of yours, is that it is most decidedly not axiomatic.

Let us now consider your second assertion, that some non-coincidental Lines have "different directions". Here I must ask, as before, are you speaking of Lines which have a common point? If so, I am quite ready to grant the assertion.

Niemand. Not exactly. It is rather a difficult matter to explain. The Lines we refer to would, as a matter of fact, meet if produced, and yet we do not suppose that fact known in speaking of them. What we ask you to believe is that there is a real class of non-coincidental finite Lines, which we do not yet know to have a common point, but which have "different directions". We shall assert presently, in another Axiom, that such Lines will meet if produced; but we ask you to believe in their reality independently of that fact.

Minos. But the only geometrical meaning I know of, as yet, for the phrase "different directions" refers to Lines known to have a common point. What geometrical meaning do you attach to the phrase when used of other Lines?

Niemand. We cannot define it.

Minos. Nor construct it? Nor test it?

Niemand. No.

Minos. You ask me, then, to believe in the reality of two classes of "pairs of Lines", each possessing a property that you can neither define, nor construct, nor test?

Niemand. That is true. But surely you admit the reality of the second class? Why, intersectional Lines are a case in point.

Minos. Certainly. And so much I am willing to grant you. I allow that some non-coincidental Lines, namely intersectional Lines, have "different directions". But as to "the same direction", you have given me no reason whatever for believing that there are any non-coincidental Lines which possess that property.

Niemand. But surely there are two real distinct classes of non-coincidental Lines, "intersectional" and "separational"?

Minos. Yes. Thanks to Euclid I. 27, you may now assume the reality of both.

Niemand. And you will hardly assert that the relationship of direction which belongs to a Pair of intersectional Lines is identical with that which belongs to a Pair of separational Lines?

Minos. I do not assert it.

Niemand. And you allow that intersectional Lines have "different directions"?

Minos. Yes. Are you going to argue, from that, that separational Lines must have "the same direction"? Why may I not say that intersectional Lines have one kind of "different directions", and that separational Lines have another kind?

Niemand. But do you say it?

Minos. Certainly not. There is no evidence, at present, one way or the other. For anything we know, Pairs of separational Lines may always have "the same direction", or they may always have "different directions", or there may be Pairs of each kind. I fear I must decline to grant the first part of your Axiom altogether, and the second part in the sense of referring to Lines not known to have a common point. You may now proceed.

Niemand reads.

P. 11, Ax. 7. "Two different straight Lines which meet one another have different directions."

Minos. That I grant you, heartily. It is, in fact, a Definition for the phrase "different directions" when used of Lines which have a common point.

Niemand reads. P. 11, Ax. 8. "Two straight Lines which have different directions would meet if prolonged indefinitely."

Minos. Am I to understand that, if we have before us a Pair of finite Lines which are not known to have a common point, but of which we do know that they have different directions, you ask me to believe that they will meet if produced?

Niemand. That is our meaning.

Minos. We had better heave the lead once more, and return to our fixed Line, and a point not on it, through which we wish to draw a second Line. You ask me to grant that, if it be drawn so as to have a direction "different" from that of the first Line, it will meet it if prolonged indefinitely?

Niemand. That is our humble petition.

Minos. Will you be satisfied if I grant you that some Lines, so drawn, will meet the first Line? That I would grant you with pleasure. I could draw millions of Lines which would fulfil the conditions, by simply taking points at random on the given Line and joining them to the given point. Every Line so constructed would have a direction "different" from that of the given Line, and would also meet it.

Niemand. We will not be satisfied, even with millions! We ask you to grant that every Line drawn through the given point with a direction "different" from that of the given Line will meet the given Line: and we ask you to grant this independently of, and antecedently to, any other information about the Lines except the fact that they have "different" directions.

Minos. But what meaning am I to attach to the phrase "different directions" independently of, and antecedently to, the fact that they have a common point?
