A German Professor's Journey into Eldorado
(Part 3 of 3)

The next day, a Sunday, I used to look around San Jose, but I came back early in the afternoon so I'd have plenty of time to sleep and prepare for my lecture.

My next Sunday excursion was no less interesting. It took me to the seaside resorts of Monterey, Pacific Grove and Santa Cruz on the Pacific. I had once before gone far enough out from San Francisco to enjoy a full view of the great ocean, but now I had the chance to admire the rocky shores and the play of the waves over a wide stretch of coast. But far more than any of that, I was interested in a little house in Pacific Grove, where Professor Loeb has his laboratory.

What a difference there is between the giant works of industry and the workshops of science! What impressive colossi the ocean liners are! But once you've traveled on them a few times, it becomes clear that the ship's officers, the engineers and the sailors do the same job every day. In the passenger rooms the same people are always talking about the same things, stretching out in the same deck chairs, and tossing the same discs at the same targets on the upper deck. Enormous bulk, but not a single new idea! In science, too, a good deal has been achieved by sheer mass (we saw that at the Lick Observatory). But what is truly great (our Minister of Education mustn't hear this, of course) is always produced with the smallest means.

It must be grand to command millions for the good of a great people, or to win battles at the head of hundreds of thousands of men. But it seems to me even grander to discover truths, in the humblest of rooms with the humblest of equipment, that will still be the foundation of our knowledge when the memory of those battles can only be dug out of the history books with effort. What is left of the whole Greek and Roman world that is still fully alive today, and works on richer and stronger than ever? The fighters of Marathon were outdone at Vionville and Liaoyang. The people who read Homer or Sophocles for pleasure are dying out, but the Pythagorean theorem and the principle of Archimedes are truly immortal.

Those are my general views. How far they apply to Pacific Grove, only the future will show. The discovery made there put me in serious embarrassment years ago, when it was still brand new. I explained it with great enthusiasm at a social gathering, never suspecting that something so purely factual, with no aim at all of arousing sensual feelings and not even capable of it, could be indecent. Only the sudden, rather conspicuous departure of the lady sitting next to me made me suspect it. Later the same lady sang a very dubious song by Aletter. I couldn't help remarking that I was surprised people considered that decent and my subject indecent. "Well, your subject we don't understand," said the lady, and without thinking I answered, "But Aletter you do understand." That's one of our old hypocrisies, and now the temperance people want to add a new one. I'll have to wriggle a good deal to explain the object of Loeb's research without giving offense.

For a long time people believed that all the chemical compounds characteristic of living organisms, the so-called organic compounds, could only be produced by a special force, the vital force. Today we know that many organic compounds can be assembled from their chemical elements by ordinary chemical reactions, without a trace of vital force. But many still believe that life itself is something quite special, totally different from the chemical processes that accompany it, and that the special effects of life can never be brought about by anything lifeless. Loeb's research has by no means refuted this view, but it has once again put a new weight on the scale against it.

As is well known, there are animal species in which, under certain circumstances, the egg of the female can develop without any fertilization at all (parthenogenesis). Loeb worked with species where this never happens, sea urchins and starfish, and showed that the effects otherwise produced only by male sperm can be produced on their eggs by completely lifeless acids. Eggs exposed under the right conditions to carbonic acid, butyric acid or propyl acetic acid develop exactly like normally fertilized ones.

You can see how important the discovery is: a process that until now was regarded as the result of a special living activity can also be brought about by purely chemical reagents. And if the same holds not only for sea urchins but for higher creatures, all the way up to human beings, what social upheavals will follow! An emancipation of women such as today's women's-rights campaigners never dreamed of. Man simply becomes superfluous. A little bottle filled with skillfully mixed chemicals replaces him entirely. Heredity, too, can then be managed far more rationally than now, when it is subject to so many accidents. Before long we'll find out which mixture produces boys and which girls, and since the boys are perfectly superfluous, only a few specimens will be produced, for the zoological gardens. Then, of course, wine will be superfluous too.

From Pacific Grove I went on to the seaside resort of Santa Cruz, which is remarkable above all because a great many of the vacationers live not in houses but in canvas tents with little canvas windows, rented out like country cottages. Others live in small wooden houses built on boats, which can be rowed first here, then there, in the shallow bays and the rivers that flow into the sea.

In general, the smallness of the houses, almost all built of wood, is surprising everywhere. In Berkeley there are many houses that vividly remind me of the house of the woodcarving farmer near Graz, who had built and whittled it himself out of boards on his little plot of land.

Then I also went to see the so-called big trees, whose age is counted in thousands of years. They show you one trunk, no longer alive, in whose rings you can tell exactly how many thousands of years old it got. I've forgotten again.

The weekdays, apart from Saturday and Sunday, were given over to work, but by no means without amusement. There were many social gatherings, a few of them quite formal. Before one of them, my colleague, who was coming to pick me up, had warned me with true English thoroughness to put on evening dress. When he walked in, I called out to him: "Don't I look fine?" But no, oh dear! I had forgotten to polish my boots. My colleague knew what to do. He led me to a room in the basement, took off his coat, vest and cuffs, found the necessary supplies in a cupboard, and polished my boots himself with real virtuosity. Then he drank from the glass he'd earlier used to drip water onto the polish. How American!

Ladies were not missing from our social circle either. The wives of the Berkeley professors were joined by those of visitors, then the landlady with her charming daughters, one of whom sang delightfully, and other friends. In circumstances like these I often come down, and did come down then, with an illness I haven't yet listed: poetitis. Since I did it for the other illnesses, I'll try to give an idea of how bad it got, and I'll include one of its products here:

To My Wife.

	Shall I not chat with strange women, so far from home?
	Aren't they, of everything here, the most like you?
	Often I've kissed your picture on cardboard. Oh, forgive me
	If I've kissed your picture and found it in flesh and blood!
	Besides, I'm a theorist from my toes to the top of my head,
	So trust me: the kissing I did was theoretical only.

So forgiveness from all sides, and for the kissing too. It was nothing but a poetic necessity. I'd like to see the man who can finish a poem with nothing but walking together, conversation, tennis and music-making!

By the way, the women in California are strikingly big and strongly built, and since their growth of beard sometimes leaves nothing to be desired, I had to agree with a colleague who said: "Don't you find that the women in America have something masculine about them?" He didn't quite want to agree with me, though, when I replied: "And the men something feminine." That last part applies only to their lack of beards, incidentally. In strength of will, courage, enterprise and firmness of character, they stand their ground as men.

One of the things that broke up the weekdays was the visit of the American Secretary of War, who was passing through San Francisco on his way to the Philippines. Miss Roosevelt was said to be with him, but I never laid eyes on her. The Secretary of War attended a mass meeting in the great live-oak grove of the University of Berkeley. You should have heard the naive roughness, the go-getting spirit and the enthusiasm of the speeches! Just one sample. After a short speech, the mayor of Berkeley introduced the Secretary of War with these words: "This is Mr. Taft! A good Secretary of War, a good citizen, and in every respect a good old fellow." In English it sounds even more familiar: a good old fellow.

Yes, America will still accomplish great things. I believe in this people, even though I saw them at the one activity that suits them least, in the theoretical physics seminar, integrating and differentiating. They went at it about the way I do when I jump over ditches or run down hills, which you have to cross in such numbers on the grounds of Berkeley University.

At last the evening came when I listened for the last time to the monotonous singing of the bespectacled waitresses. When I had cut up my last omelette, my colleague next to me surveyed the number of pieces with a hawk's eye and said: "You've still got half a minute for each piece." Then the railroad grabbed me and tore me away, first to Portland (two nights on the train). Although there was an exposition to tempt me there, I went straight on to Livingston (two more nights in the car). The trip was wonderful, if only it could always have been daytime! The most magnificent sight is Mount Shasta with its high snow-covered head amid subtropical vegetation. I passed many a lake, ringed with mountains and wreathed in forest, next to which the lakes at Gmunden and the Attersee look insignificant. Here you don't see a single house on the shore, and I don't even know whether they all have names yet. About Yellowstone Park I'll say nothing. It's a wonder such as hardly exists anywhere else in the world. Read about it in Baedeker, or look at good pictures of it, or best of all, see it in person if you have enough time, money and good humor. But don't do it the way I did. Go at the beginning of June, when the heat isn't so great yet, and give it two weeks, or better a month, so you can look at everything at leisure and get from astonishment to actual enjoyment.

I had loaded myself with too much of a good thing. Now I was to spend four more nights on the railroad, and I was at the end of my capacity for enjoyment, just as I was at the end of my clean laundry. On top of that, the terrible heat. I always had a towel in my hand (American railroads give you as many as you like, luckily) to wipe off the sweat. Now I understand what a sweat cloth is. Besides, Americans love to seal their railroad cars hermetically, not from fear of drafts, which they don't know, but from fear of soot. The lovely observation cars right at the back, where there's less soot, don't exist on this line. Once I left the window open for a long while in my compartment, which was closer to the front, and got completely black.

Now my stomach catarrh came back, too. In the dining car you can get wine, but only reluctantly, and only after the meal, when most of the guests, especially the ladies, have already left. The first thing you get is a glass of ice water and a slip of paper on which you have to write down everything you want all at once. Then it takes an eternity for anyone even to pick up the slip, and you sit there, your palate dried out by the heat, always next to the ice water. I gave in to temptation (angels would have fallen) and drank the poison. Then suddenly I couldn't get any wine at all. It was explained like this: the whole state of North Dakota is abstinent, and while the train is going through it, no wine may be served. I protested: "What do I care about the state of North Dakota! All I want is to get to Vienna. Take me through the land where the pepper grows, for all I care!" "Oh, we grow plenty of pepper here," they answered. Damn it! Even our strongest curses are ruined here. In the end, for a tip, and a bigger one, and even more discreetly, I did get wine, but it had to be paid for under the table and couldn't appear on the bill of fare.

American railroad companies usually don't add a new car until the existing ones are full, and still the trains are enormously long. Each car has a name, like a ship, or you'd never find your way around at all. I rode in order in the cars Sant Jesabel, Pembina and Vernedal. They teem with people of every nationality and race, who in the great heat are often a bit casually dressed. One baby lay completely naked on the velvet armchair the whole time, and it reminded me of pictures of the Christ child, who of course never lay in a Pullman car. I wanted to tell the mother this as a compliment, but how ugly everything sounds in English: "az de tcheeld djeezus kryst!"

It's lucky I wasn't born an Englishman. I'd never have brought home a bride. You can imagine I was somewhat embarrassed when I proposed. "He looks as if he had to go into the lecture hall," says Mephistopheles. Yes, if only I'd had nothing more to face than the lecture hall, if nothing but Dame Physics and Metaphysica had stood in front of me! But in front of me stood a lovely young girl. The speech came hard. But when I got to the point, the wisdom and good taste of our ancestors came to my aid, who found for the highest of feelings the most beautiful-sounding word too, the word Liebe. As music rules the player at a Steinway grand, so now it was not I who ruled the language, but the language that swept me away, and I achieved a complete success. But if I'd had to say it in genuine English pronunciation, "Ei lowff ju," my chosen one would have run away like chickens from the wheezing breath of the goitrous Styrian who's calling them.

The whole colorful crowd of passengers has to be squeezed into beds in the evening. The arrangement of the American sleeping cars is as follows. A fairly narrow aisle runs through the middle of the whole car. On both sides are upholstered benches, each seating two people. Every passenger is assigned one of these benches. In the evening, the space above each pair of benches on the same side of the aisle, which always face one another, is turned into two beds, one above the other, closed off from the aisle by hanging curtains. The beds run lengthwise, parallel to the direction of travel. You can also have two beds, one above the other, to yourself (a whole compartment), but that costs double. Since you have no drawer, you have to pack your nightclothes, slippers and whatever else you need into your handbag, which the Black porter then puts in the bed. Then you have to undress behind the curtain, but stow your clothes and handbag in the bed itself, and then sleep without suffocating.

Each compartment has only one small opening to the outside, covered by a fine grille, and in hot weather it gets so stuffy that I slept in the costume of that baby, which also saved me the trouble of unpacking my laundry.

So as not to lose my watch, wallet, eyeglasses and so on, I put first my hat, and then all those little things inside it, in the wide-meshed net, the only storage place in the whole bed space. But when he made up the bed, the porter always hung the hat up out of reach, and it was funny how baffled he was that I needed my hat in bed.

The most critical time is the conversion of the benches into beds. You can't sit on the benches anymore, and the bed isn't ready yet. I flee to a washing room, but there one passenger is brushing clouds of dust out of his clothes, and another is splashing water in every direction as he washes. I try to reach the salon car, which many trains don't have anyway, but to get there I'd have to pass through the aisles of seven or eight cars, all closed off on both sides with bed curtains, and these are alive. From their hiding places, now an arm, now a foot, now something softer gives us a shove. On top of that you keep stumbling over the luggage sticking out at the bottom. At last I find room in a compartment that still has its benches intact. On the other side of the aisle there's already a bed whose curtain is in constant motion. There's something to that business about the Eternal Feminine. When I'm signing the students' record books in my Vienna lecture, I only ever see the students' hands, but I recognize every woman's hand immediately. So I was convinced that this curtain hid feminine limbs, and soon it opened, thanks to an incautious movement while undressing, and I saw that I was right.

I escaped many of the discomforts of the morning hours through my habit of getting up early. So I was alone while dressing and washing, and to those who crowded into the washing room later I called out the words from Mozart's Abduction that Bismarck had already quoted: "To outwit me, you'll have to get up early."

The heat and the soot, the stomach catarrh and the thirst had finally made me so tired of traveling that I not only gave up on the solar eclipse but even tried to catch the connection to the Kaiser Wilhelm II, which would bring me home fastest. But a telegraphers' strike had just broken out, and as a result we were six hours late. I flew into a rage over it. But you should see the phlegm of the Americans! They look at the person who's swearing almost with pity, as if to say, the poor man thinks that will help. In my case the conductor said curtly: "We don't want to risk a collision."

In Chicago I had only twelve minutes, and I still had to get from the Canal Street Union Station to the Nickel Plate station. Loaded with luggage, I hurried back and forth without a plan. Two people I had asked for directions hadn't answered. Then a young lady noticed this and asked me obligingly what I wanted. She couldn't give me any directions either, and maybe she didn't even understand my question, but she pointed out a policeman, whom, in my agitation, I hadn't noticed, big as he was. When I called out to her, not out of flattery but from the bottom of my heart, "You are an Angel," I saw only then that she was, feature for feature, the guardian angel from the pozzo di Verona. Could belief in guardian angels be more than a fairy tale? And how does a fairy-tale mood fit into the halls of the Canal Street Union Station in Chicago? So, away from the guardian angel to the guardian of the law, who quickly gave me the information I wanted, so that I still reached the other station in time.

In New York I had one more surprise. The beautiful pier that had led from the railroad to the ferry had burned down, and I had to stumble, still loaded with my luggage, over charred pieces of wood.

In spite of all the obstacles, I reached the Kaiser Wilhelm II in time. When I was aboard with all my luggage, big and small, how my heart leapt for joy!

	"Strike up the joyful songs,
	For the ship is now turned
	Toward the fatherly hearth,
	And we're headed home again!"

The return voyage was blessed with the loveliest weather. The good ship's food also restored my stomach completely. I didn't drink a drop of water, and not much beer either, but all the more noble Rüdesheimer. That works out nicely on a ship: if you wobble a little, everyone puts it down to the motion of the ship.

Now just the tiny train ride from Bremen to Vienna, a dashing drive in a Viennese fiacre, and I'm home. Yes, a journey like this has a lot that's interesting and grand. California is beautiful, Mount Shasta is magnificent, Yellowstone Park is marvelous. But by far the most beautiful part of the whole trip is the moment when you're home again.
