142. These Ionians to whom belongs the Panionion had the fortune to
build their cities in the most favourable position for climate and
seasons of any men whom we know: for neither the regions above Ionia nor
those below, neither those towards the East nor those towards the West,
146 produce the same results as Ionia itself, the regions in the one
direction being oppressed by cold and moisture, and those in the other
by heat and drought. And these do not use all the same speech, but have
four different variations of language. 147 First of their cities on the
side of the South lies Miletos, and next to it Myus and Priene. These
are settlements made in Caria, and speak the same language with one
another; and the following are in Lydia,—Ephesos, Colophon, Lebedos,
Teos, Clazomenai, Phocaia: these cities resemble not at all those
mentioned before in the speech which they use, but they agree one with
another. There remain besides three Ionian cities, of which two are
established in the islands of Samos and Chios, and one is built upon the
mainland, namely Erythrai: now the men of Chios and of Erythrai use the
same form of language, but the Samians have one for themselves alone.
Thus there result four separate forms of language.

143. Of these Ionians then those of Miletos were sheltered from danger,
since they had sworn an agreement; and those of them who lived in
islands had no cause for fear, for the Phenicians were not yet subjects
of the Persians and the Persians themselves were not sea-men. Now these
148 were parted off from the other Ionians for no other reason than
this:—The whole Hellenic nation was at that time weak, but of all its
races the Ionian was much the weakest and of least account: except
Athens, indeed, it had no considerable city. Now the other Ionians, and
among them the Athenians, avoided the name, not wishing to be called
Ionians, nay even now I perceive that the greater number of them are
ashamed of the name: but these twelve cities not only prided themselves
on the name but established a temple of their own, to which they gave
the name of Panionion, and they made resolution not to grant a share in
it to any other Ionians (nor indeed did any ask to share it except those
of Smyrna);

144, just as the Dorians of that district which is now called the Five
Cities 149 but was formerly called the Six Cities, 150 take care not
to admit any of the neighbouring Dorians to the temple of Triopion, and
even exclude from sharing in it those of their own body who commit any
offence as regards the temple. For example, in the games of the Triopian
Apollo they used formerly to set bronze tripods as prizes for the
victors, and the rule was that those who received them should not carry
them out of the temple but dedicate them then and there to the god.
There was a man then of Halicarnassos, whose name was Agasicles, who
being a victor paid no regard to this rule, but carried away the tripod
to his own house and hung it up there upon a nail. On this ground
the other five cities, Lindos, Ialysos and Cameiros, Cos and Cnidos,
excluded the sixth city Halicarnassos from sharing in the temple.

145. Upon these they laid this penalty: but as for the Ionians, I think
that the reason why they made of themselves twelve cities and would
not receive any more into their body, was because when they dwelt in
Peloponnesus there were of them twelve divisions, just as now there are
twelve divisions of the Achaians who drove the Ionians out: for first,
(beginning from the side of Sikyon) comes Pellene, then Aigeira and
Aigai, in which last is the river Crathis with a perpetual flow (whence
the river of the same name in Italy received its name), and Bura and
Helike, to which the Ionians fled for refuge when they were worsted by
the Achaians in fight, and Aigion and Rhypes and Patreis and Phareis
and Olenos, where is the great river Peiros, and Dyme and Tritaieis, of
which the last alone has an inland position. 151 These form now twelve
divisions of the Achaians, and in former times they were divisions of
the Ionians.

146. For this reason then the Ionians also made for themselves twelve
cities; for at any rate to say that these are any more Ionians than
the other Ionians, or have at all a nobler descent, is mere folly,
considering that a large part of them are Abantians from Euboea, who
have no share even in the name of Ionia, and Minyai of Orchomenos have
been mingled with them, and Cadmeians and Dryopians and Phokians who
seceded from their native State and Molossians and Pelasgians of Arcadia
and Dorians of Epidauros and many other races have been mingled with
them; and those of them who set forth to their settlements from the City
Hall of Athens and who esteem themselves the most noble by descent
of the Ionians, these, I say, brought no women with them to their
settlement, but took Carian women, whose parents they slew: and on
account of this slaughter these women laid down for themselves a rule,
imposing oaths on one another, and handed it on to their daughters, that
they should never eat with their husbands, nor should a wife call her
own husband by name, for this reason, because the Ionians had slain
their fathers and husbands and children and then having done this had
them to wife. This happened at Miletos.

147. Moreover some of them set Lykian kings over them, descendants of
Glaucos and Hippolochos, while others were ruled by Cauconians of Pylos,
descendants of Codros the son of Melanthos, and others again by princes
of the two races combined. Since however these hold on to the name more
than the other Ionians, let them be called, if they will, the Ionians of
truly pure descent; but in fact all are Ionians who have their descent
from Athens and who keep the feast of Apaturia; and this all keep except
the men of Ephesos and Colophon: for these alone of all the Ionians do
not keep the Apaturia, and that on the ground of some murder committed.

148. Now the Panionion is a sacred place on the north side of Mycale,
set apart by common agreement of the Ionians for Poseidon of Helike 152;
and this Mycale is a promontory of the mainland running out Westwards
towards Samos, where the Ionians gathering together from their cities
used to hold a festival which they called the Panionia. (And not only
the feasts of the Ionians but also those of all the Hellenes equally are
subject to this rule, that their names all end in the same letter, just
like the names of the Persians.) 153

These then are the Ionian cities:

149, and those of Aiolia are as follows:—Kyme, which is called
Phriconis, Larisai, Neon-teichos, Temnos, Killa, Notion, Aigiroëssa,
Pitane, Aigaiai, Myrina, Gryneia; these are the ancient cities of the
Aiolians, eleven in number, since one, Smyrna, was severed from them by
the Ionians; for these cities, that is those on the mainland, used also
formerly to be twelve in number. And these Aiolians had the fortune to
settle in a land which is more fertile than that of the Ionians but in
respect of climate less favoured. 154

150. Now the Aiolians lost Smyrna in the following manner:—certain men
of Colophon, who had been worsted in party strife and had been driven
from their native city, were received there for refuge: and after this
the Colophonian exiles watched for a time when the men of Smyrna were
celebrating a festival to Dionysos outside the walls, and then they
closed the gates against them and got possession of the city. After
this, when the whole body of Aiolians came to the rescue, they made an
agreement that the Ionians should give up the movable goods, and that
on this condition the Aiolians should abandon Smyrna. When the men of
Smyrna had done this, the remaining eleven cities divided them amongst
themselves and made them their own citizens.

151. These then are the Aiolian cities upon the mainland, with the
exception of those situated on Mount Ida, for these are separate from
the rest. And of those which are in the islands, there are five in
Lesbos, for the sixth which was situated in Lesbos, namely Arisba, was
enslaved by the men of Methymna, though its citizens were of the same
race as they; and in Tenedos there is one city, and another in what are
called the "Hundred Isles." Now the Lesbians and the men of Tenedos,
like those Ionians who dwelt in the islands, had no cause for fear; but
the remaining cities came to a common agreement to follow the Ionians
whithersoever they should lead.

152. Now when the messengers from the Ionians and Aiolians came to
Sparta (for this business was carried out with speed), they chose before
all others to speak for them the Phocaian, whose name was Pythermos. He
then put upon him a purple cloak, in order that as many as possible
of the Spartans might hear of it and come together, and having been
introduced before the assembly 155 he spoke at length, asking the
Spartans to help them. The Lacedemonians however would not listen to
him, but resolved on the contrary not to help the Ionians. So they
departed, and the Lacedemonians, having dismissed the messengers of the
Ionians, sent men notwithstanding in a ship of fifty oars, to find out,
as I imagine, about the affairs of Cyrus and about Ionia. These when
they came to Phocaia sent to Sardis the man of most repute among
them, whose name was Lacrines, to report to Cyrus the saying of the
Lacedemonians, bidding him do hurt to no city of the Hellas, since they
would not permit it.

153. When the herald had spoken thus, Cyrus is said to have asked those
of the Hellenes whom he had with him, what men the Lacedemonians were
and how many in number, that they made this proclamation to him; and
hearing their answer he said to the Spartan herald: "Never yet did I
fear men such as these, who have a place appointed in the midst of their
city where they gather together and deceive one another by false oaths:
and if I continue in good health, not the misfortunes of the Ionians
will be for them a subject of talk, but rather their own." These words
Cyrus threw out scornfully with reference to the Hellenes in general,
because they have got for themselves 156 markets and practise buying and
selling there; for the Persians themselves are not wont to use markets
nor have they any market-place at all. After this he entrusted Sardis to
Tabalos a Persian, and the gold both of Croesus and of the other Lydians
he gave to Pactyas a Lydian to take charge of, and himself marched
away to Agbatana, taking with him Croesus and making for the present no
account of the Ionians. For Babylon stood in his way still, as also the
Bactrian nation and the Sacans and the Egyptians; and against these he
meant to make expeditions himself, while sending some other commander
about the Ionians.

154. But when Cyrus had marched away from Sardis, Pactyas caused the
Lydians to revolt from Tabalos and from Cyrus. This man went down to the
sea, and having in his possession all the gold that there had been in
Sardis, he hired for himself mercenaries and persuaded the men of the
sea-coast to join his expedition. So he marched on Sardis and besieged
Tabalos, having shut himself up in the citadel.

155. Hearing this on his way, Cyrus said to Croesus as follows:
"Croesus, what end shall I find of these things which are coming to
pass? The Lydians will not cease as it seems, from giving trouble to
me and from having it themselves. I doubt me if it were not best 157 to
sell them all as slaves; for as it is, I see that I have done in like
manner as if one should slay the father and then spare his sons: just so
I took prisoner and am carrying away thee, who wert much more than the
father of the Lydians, while to the Lydians themselves I delivered up
their city; and can I feel surprise after this that they have revolted
from me?" Thus he said what was in his mind, but Croesus answered him as
follows, fearing lest he should destroy Sardis: "O king, that which thou
hast said is not without reason; but do not thou altogether give vent
to thy wrath, nor destroy an ancient city which is guiltless both of the
former things and also of those which have come to pass now: for as
to the former things it was I who did them and I bear the consequences
heaped upon my head; 158 and as for what is now being done, since the
wrongdoer is Pactyas to whom thou didst entrust the charge of Sardis,
let him pay the penalty. But the Lydians I pray thee pardon, and lay
upon them commands as follows, in order that they may not revolt nor
be a cause of danger to thee:—send to them and forbid them to possess
weapons of war, but bid them on the other hand put on tunics under their
outer garments and be shod with buskins, and proclaim to them that they
train their sons to play the lyre and the harp and to be retail-dealers;
and soon thou shalt see, O king, that they have become women instead of
men, so that there will be no fear that they will revolt from thee."

156. Croesus, I say, suggested to him this, perceiving that this was
better for the Lydians than to be reduced to slavery and sold; for he
knew that if he did not offer a sufficient reason, he would not persuade
Cyrus to change his mind, and he feared lest at some future time, if
they should escape the present danger, the Lydians might revolt from
the Persians and be destroyed. And Cyrus was greatly pleased with the
suggestion made and slackened from his wrath, saying that he agreed with
his advice. Then he called Mazares a Mede, and laid charge upon him to
proclaim to the Lydians that which Croesus suggested, and moreover to
sell into slavery all the rest who had joined with the Lydians in the
expedition to Sardis, and finally by all means to bring Pactyas himself
alive to Cyrus.

157. Having given this charge upon the road, he continued his march to
the native land of the Persians; but Pactyas hearing that an army was
approaching to fight against him was struck with fear and fled away
forthwith to Kyme. Then Mazares the Mede marched upon Sardis with a
certain portion of the army of Cyrus, and as he did not find Pactyas or
his followers any longer at Sardis, he first compelled the Lydians to
perform the commands of Cyrus, and by his commands the Lydians changed
the whole manner of their life. After this Mazares proceeded to send
messengers to Kyme bidding them give up Pactyas: and the men of Kyme
resolved to refer to the god at Branchidai the question what counsel
they should follow. For there was there an Oracle established of old
time, which all the Ionians and Aiolians were wont to consult; and this
place is in the territory of Miletos above the port of Panormos.

158. So the men of Kyme sent messengers to the Branchidai 159 to inquire
of the god, and they asked what course they should take about Pactyas so
as to do that which was pleasing to the gods. When they thus inquired,
the answer was given them that they should deliver up Pactyas to the
Persians: and the men of Kyme, having heard this answer reported, were
disposed to give him up. Then when the mass of the people were thus
disposed, Aristodicos the son of Heracleides, a man of repute among the
citizens, stopped the men of Kyme from doing so, having distrust of the
answer and thinking that those sent to inquire were not speaking the
truth; until at last other messengers were sent to the Oracle to ask a
second time about Pactyas, and of them Aristodicos was one.

159. When these came to Branchidai, Aristodicos stood forth from the
rest and consulted the Oracle, asking as follows: Lord, 160 there came
to us a suppliant for protection Pactyas the Lydian, flying from a
violent death at the hands of the Persians, and they demand him from us,
bidding the men of Kyme give him up. But we, though we fear the power of
the Persians, yet have not ventured up to this time to deliver to them
the suppliant, until thy counsel shall be clearly manifested to us,
saying which of the two things we ought to do." He thus inquired, but
the god again declared to them the same answer, bidding them deliver up
Pactyas to the Persians. Upon this Aristodicos with deliberate purpose
did as follows:—he went all round the temple destroying the nests of the
sparrows 161 and of all the other kinds of birds which had been hatched
on the temple: and while he was doing this, it is said that a voice came
from the inner shrine directed to Aristodicos and speaking thus: "Thou
most impious of men, why dost thou dare to do this? Dost thou carry
away by force from my temple the suppliants for my protection?" And
Aristodicos, it is said, not being at all at a loss replied to this:
"Lord, dost thou thus come to the assistance of thy suppliants, and yet
biddest the men of Kyme deliver up theirs?" and the god answered him
again thus: "Yea, I bid you do so, that ye may perish the more quickly
for your impiety; so that ye may not at any future time come to the
Oracle to ask about delivering up of suppliants."

160. When the men of Kyme heard this saying reported, not wishing either
to be destroyed by giving him up or to be besieged by keeping him with
them, they sent him away to Mytilene. Those of Mytilene however, when
Mazares sent messages to them, were preparing to deliver up Pactyas
for a price, but what the price was I cannot say for certain, since the
bargain was never completed; for the men of Kyme, when they learnt that
this was being done by the Mytilenians, sent a vessel to Lesbos and
conveyed away Pactyas to Chios. After this he was dragged forcibly from
the temple of Athene Poliuchos by the Chians and delivered up: and the
Chians delivered him up receiving Atarneus in , (now this Atarneus is a
region of Mysia 162 opposition Lesbos). So the Persians having received
Pactyas kept him under guard, meaning to produce him before Cyrus. And
a long time elapsed during which none of the Chians either used
barley-meal grown in this region of Atarneus, for pouring out in
sacrifice to any god, or baked cakes for offering of the corn which grew
there, but all the produce of this land was excluded from every kind of
sacred service.

161. The men of Chios had then delivered up Pactyas; and after this
Mazares made expedition against those who had joined in besieging
Tabalos: and first he reduced to slavery those of Priene, then he
overran the whole plain of the Maiander making spoil of it for his army,
and Magnesia in the same manner: and straightway after this he fell sick
and died.

162. After he was dead, Harpagos came down to take his place in command,
being also a Mede by race (this was the man whom the king of the Medes
Astyages feasted with the unlawful banquet, and who helped to give the
kingdom to Cyrus). This man, being appointed commander then by Cyrus,
came to Ionia and proceeded to take the cities by throwing up mounds
against them: for when he had enclosed any people within their walls,
then he threw up mounds against the walls and took their city by storm;
and the first city of Ionia upon which he made an attempt was Phocaia.

163. Now these Phocaians were the first of the Hellenes who made long
voyages, and these are they who discovered the Adriatic and Tyrsenia and
Iberia and Tartessos: and they made voyages not in round ships, but in
vessels of fifty oars. These came to Tartessos and became friends with
the king of the Tartessians whose name was Arganthonios: he was ruler
of the Tartessians for eighty years and lived in all one hundred and
twenty. With this man, I say, the Phocaians became so exceedingly
friendly, that first he bade them leave Ionia and dwell wherever they
desired in his own land; and as he did not prevail upon the Phocaians
to do this, afterwards, hearing from them of the Mede how his power was
increasing, he gave them money to build a wall about their city: and he
did this without sparing, for the circuit of the wall is many furlongs
163 in extent, and it is built all of large stones closely fitted
together.

164. The wall of the Phocaians was made in this manner: and Harpagos
having marched his army against them began to besiege them, at the same
time holding forth to them proposals and saying that it was enough to
satisfy him if the Phocaians were willing to throw down one battlement
of their wall and dedicate one single house. 164 But the Phocaians,
being very greatly grieved at the thought of subjection, said that they
wished to deliberate about the matter for one day and after that they
would give their answer; and they asked him to withdraw his army from
the wall while they were deliberating. Harpagos said that he knew very
well what they were meaning to do, nevertheless he was willing to allow
them to deliberate. So in the time that followed, when Harpagos
had withdrawn his army from the wall, the Phocaians drew down their
fifty-oared galleys to the sea, put into them their children and women
and all their movable goods, and besides them the images out of the
temples and the other votive offerings except such as were made of
bronze or stone or consisted of paintings, all the rest, I say, they
put into the ships, and having embarked themselves they sailed towards
Chios; and the Persians obtained possession of Phocaia, the city being
deserted of the inhabitants.

165. But as for the Phocaians, since the men of Chios would not sell
them at their request the islands called Oinussai, from the fear lest
these islands might be made a seat of trade and their island might be
shut out, therefore they set out for Kyrnos: 165 for in Kyrnos
twenty years before this they had established a city named Alalia, in
accordance with an oracle, (now Arganthonios by that time was dead). And
when they were setting out for Kyrnos they first sailed to Phocaia and
slaughtered the Persian garrison, to whose charge Harpagos had
delivered the city; then after they had achieved this they made solemn
imprecations on any one of them who should be left behind from their
voyage, and moreover they sank a mass of iron in the sea and swore that
not until that mass should appear again on the surface 166 would they to
Phocaia. However as they were setting forth to Kyrnos, more than half of
the citizens were seized with yearning and regret for their city and for
their native land, and they proved false to their oath and sailed back
to Phocaia. But those of them who kept the oath still, weighed anchor
from the islands of Oinussai and sailed.

166. When these came to Kyrnos, for five years they dwelt together with
those who had come thither before, and they founded temples there.
Then, since they plundered the property of all their neighbours,
the Tyrsenians and Carthaginians 167 made expedition against them by
agreement with one another, each with sixty ships. And the Phocaians
also manned their vessels, sixty in number, and came to meet the enemy
in that which is called the Sardinian sea: and when they encountered one
another in the sea-fight the Phocaians won a kind of Cadmean victory,
for forty of their ships were destroyed and the remaining twenty were
disabled, having had their prows bent aside. So they sailed in to Alalia
and took up their children and their women and their other possessions
as much as their ships proved capable of carrying, and then they left
Kyrnos behind them and sailed to Rhegion.

167. But as for the crews of the ships that were destroyed, the
Carthaginians and Tyrsenians obtained much the greater number of them,
168 and these they brought to land and killed by stoning. After this the
men of Agylla found that everything which passed by the spot where the
Phocaians were laid after being stoned, became either distorted, or
crippled, or paralysed, both small cattle and beasts of burden and
human creatures: so the men of Agylla sent to Delphi desiring to purge
themselves of the offence; and the Pythian prophetess bade them do that
which the men of Agylla still continue to perform, that is to say, they
make great sacrifices in honour of the dead, and hold at the place a
contest of athletics and horse-racing. These then of the Phocaians had
the fate which I have said; but those of them who took refuge at Rhegion
started from thence and took possession of that city in the land of
Oinotria which now is called Hyele. This they founded having learnt from
a man of Poseidonia that the Pythian prophetess by her answer meant
them to found a temple to Kyrnos, who was a hero, and not to found a
settlement in the island of Kyrnos. 169

168. About Phocaia in Ionia it happened thus, and nearly the same thing
also was done by the men of Teos: for as soon as Harpagos took their
wall with a mound, they embarked in their ships and sailed straightway
for Thrace; and there they founded the city of Abdera, which before
them Timesios of Clazomenai founded and had no profit therefrom, but
was driven out by the Thracians; and now he is honoured as a hero by the
Teïans in Abdera.

169. These alone of all the Ionians left their native cities because
they would not endure subjection: but the other Ionians except the
Milesians did indeed contend in arms with Harpagos like those who left
their homes, and proved themselves brave men, fighting each for his own
native city; but when they were defeated and captured they remained all
in their own place and performed that which was laid upon them: but the
Milesians, as I have also said before, had made a sworn agreement with
Cyrus himself and kept still. Thus for the second time Ionia had been
reduced to subjection. And when Harpagos had conquered the Ionians on
the mainland, then the Ionians who dwelt in the islands, being struck
with fear by these things, gave themselves over to Cyrus.

170. When the Ionians had been thus evilly entreated but were continuing
still to hold their gatherings as before at the Panionion, Bias a man
of Priene set forth to the Ionians, as I am informed, a most profitable
counsel, by following which they might have been the most prosperous
of all the Hellenes. He urged that the Ionians should set forth in one
common expedition and sail to Sardinia, and after that found a single
city for all the Ionians: and thus they would escape subjection and
would be prosperous, inhabiting the largest of all islands and being
rulers over others; whereas, if they remained in Ionia, he did not
perceive, he said, that freedom would any longer exist for them. This
was the counsel given by Bias of Priene after the Ionians had been
ruined; but a good counsel too was given before the ruin of Ionia
by Thales a man of Miletos, who was by descent of Phenician race. He
advised the Ionians to have one single seat of government, 170 and that
this should be at Teos (for Teos, he said, was in the centre of Ionia),
and that the other cities should be inhabited as before, but accounted
just as if they were demes.

These men 171 set forth to them counsels of the kind which I have said:

171. but Harpagos, after subduing Ionia, proceeded to march against the
Carians and Caunians and Lykians, taking also Ionians and Aiolians to
help him. Of these the Carians came to the mainland from the islands;
for being of old time subjects of Minos and being called Leleges, they
used to dwell in the islands, paying no tribute, so far back as I am
able to arrive by hearsay, but whenever Minos required it, they used
to supply his ships with seamen: and as Minos subdued much land and was
fortunate in his fighting, the Carian nation was of all nations by much
the most famous at that time together with him. And they produced three
inventions of which the Hellenes adopted the use; that is to say, the
Carians were those who first set the fashion of fastening crests on
helmets, and of making the devices which are put onto shields, and these
also were the first who made handles for their shields, whereas up to
that time all who were wont to use shields carried them without handles
and with leathern straps to guide them, having them hung about their
necks and their left shoulders. Then after the lapse of a long time the
Dorians and Ionians drove the Carians out of the islands, and so they
came to the mainland. With respect to the Carians the Cretans relate
that it happened thus; the Carians themselves however do not agree with
this account, but suppose that they are dwellers on the mainland from
the beginning, 172 and that they went always by the same name which they
have now: and they point as evidence of this to an ancient temple of
Carian Zeus at Mylasa, in which the Mysians and Lydians share as being
brother races of the Carians, for they say that Lydos and Mysos were
brothers of Car; these share in it, but those who being of another race
have come to speak the same language as the Carians, these have no share
in it.

172. It seems to me however that the Caunians are dwellers there from
the beginning, though they say themselves that they came from Crete: but
they have been assimilated to the Carian race in language, or else the
Carians to the Caunian race, I cannot with certainty determine which.
They have customs however in which they differ very much from all other
men as well as from the Carians; for example the fairest thing in their
estimation is to meet together in numbers for drinking, according to
equality of age or friendship, both men, women, and children; and again
when they had founded temples for foreign deities, afterwards they
changed their purpose and resolved to worship only their own native
gods, and the whole body of Caunian young men put on their armour and
made pursuit as far as the borders of the Calyndians, beating the air
with their spears; and they said that they were casting the foreign gods
out of the land. Such are the customs which these have.

173. The Lykians however have sprung originally from Crete (for in old
time the whole of Crete was possessed by Barbarians): and when the sons
of Europa, Sarpedon and Minos, came to be at variance in Crete about the
kingdom, Minos having got the better in the strife of parties drove
out both Sarpedon himself and those of his party: and they having been
expelled came to the land of Milyas in Asia, for the land which now the
Lykians inhabit was anciently called Milyas, and the Milyans were then
called Solymoi. Now while Sarpedon reigned over them, they were called
by the name which they had when they came thither, and by which the
Lykians are even now called by the neighbouring tribes, namely Termilai;
but when from Athens Lycos the son of Pandion came to the land of the
Termilai and to Sarpedon, he too having been driven out by his brother
namely Aigeus, then by the name taken from Lycos they were called after
a time Lykians. The customs which these have are partly Cretan and
partly Carian; but one custom they have which is peculiar to them, and
in which they agree with no other people, that is they call themselves
by their mothers and not by their fathers; and if one asks his neighbour
who he is, he will state his parentage on the mother's side and
enumerate his mother's female ascendants: and if a woman who is a
citizen marry a slave, the children are accounted to be of gentle birth;
but if a man who is a citizen, though he were the first man among them,
have a slave for wife or concubine, the children are without civil
rights.

174. Now the Carians were reduced to subjection by Harpagos without any
brilliant deed displayed either by the Carians themselves or by those
of the Hellenes who dwell in this land. Of these last there are besides
others the men of Cnidos, settlers from Lacedemon, whose land runs out
into the sea, 173 being in fact the region which is called Triopion,
beginning from the peninsula of Bybassos: and since all the land of
Cnidos except a small part is washed by the sea (for the part of it
which looks towards the North is bounded by the Gulf of Keramos, and
that which looks to the South by the sea off Syme and Rhodes), therefore
the men of Cnidos began to dig through this small part, which is about
five furlongs across, while Harpagos was subduing Ionia, desiring to
make their land an island: and within the isthmus all was theirs, 174
for where the territory of Cnidos ends in the direction of the mainland,
here is the isthmus which they were digging across. And while the
Cnidians were working at it with a great number of men, it was perceived
that the men who worked suffered injury much more than might have been
expected and in a more supernatural manner, both in other parts of their
bodies and especially in their eyes, when the rock was being broken
up; so they sent men to ask the Oracle at Delphi what the cause of
the difficulty was. And the Pythian prophetess, as the men of Cnidos
themselves report, gave them this reply in trimeter verse:—


 "Fence not the place with towers, nor dig the isthmus through;
  Zeus would have made your land an island, had he willed."

When the Pythian prophetess had given this oracle, the men of Cnidos
not only ceased from their digging but delivered themselves to Harpagos
without resistance, when he came against them with his army.

175. There were also the Pedasians, who dwelt in the inland country
above Halicarnassos; and among these, whenever anything hurtful is about
to happen either to themselves or to their neighbours, the priestess
of Athene has a great beard: this befell them three times. These of
all about Caria were the only men who held out for any time against
Harpagos, and they gave him trouble more than any other people, having
fortified a mountain called Lide.

176. After a time the Pedasians were conquered; and the Lykians, when
Harpagos marched his army into the plain of Xanthos, came out against
him 175 and fought, few against many, and displayed proofs of valour;
but being defeated and confined within their city, they gathered
together into the citadel their wives and their children, their property
and their servants, and after that they set fire to this citadel, so
that it was all in flames, and having done so and sworn terrible oaths
with one another, they went forth against the enemy 176 and were slain
in fight, that is to say all the men of Xanthos: and of the Xanthians
who now claim to be Lykians the greater number have come in from abroad,
except only eighty households; but these eighty households happened
at that time to be away from their native place, and so they escaped
destruction. Thus Harpagos obtained possession of Caunos, for the men of
Caunos imitated in most respects the behaviour of the Lykians.

177. So Harpagos was conquering the coast regions of Asia; and Cyrus
himself meanwhile was doing the same in the upper parts of it, subduing
every nation and passing over none. Now most of these actions I shall
pass over in silence, but the undertakings which gave him trouble more
than the rest and which are the most worthy of note, of these I shall
make mention.

178. Cyrus, so soon as he had made subject to himself all other parts
of the mainland, proceeded to attack the Assyrians. Now Assyria
has doubtless many other great cities, but the most famous and the
strongest, and the place where the seat of their monarchy had been
established after Nineveh was destroyed, was Babylon; which was a city
such as I shall say.—It lies in a great plain, and in size it is such
that each face measures one hundred and twenty furlongs, 177 the shape
of the whole being square; thus the furlongs of the circuit of the city
amount in all to four hundred and eighty. Such is the size of the city
of Babylon, and it had a magnificence greater than all other cities of
which we have knowledge. First there runs round it a trench deep and
broad and full of water; then a wall fifty royal cubits in thickness
and two hundred cubits in height: now the royal cubit is larger by three
fingers than the common cubit. 178

179. I must also tell in addition to this for what purpose the earth was
used, which was taken out of the trench, and in what manner the wall was
made. As they dug the trench they made the earth which was carried out
of the excavation into bricks, and having moulded enough bricks they
baked them in kilns; and then afterwards, using hot asphalt for mortar
and inserting reed mats at every thirty courses of brickwork, they built
up first the edges of the trench and then the wall itself in the same
manner: and at the top of the wall along the edges they built chambers
of one story facing one another; and between the rows of chambers they
left space to drive a four-horse chariot. In the circuit of the wall
there are set a hundred gates made of bronze throughout, and the
gate-posts and lintels likewise. Now there is another city distant from
Babylon a space of eight days' journey, of which the name is Is; and
there is a river there of no great size, and the name of the river is
also Is, and it sends its stream into the river Euphrates. This river Is
throws up together with its water lumps of asphalt in great abundance,
and thence was brought the asphalt for the wall of Babylon.

180. Babylon then was walled in this manner; and there are two divisions
of the city; for a river whose name is Euphrates parts it in the middle.
This flows from the land of the Armenians and is large and deep and
swift, and it flows out into the Erythraian sea. The wall then on each
side has its bends 179 carried down to the river, and from this point
the walls stretch along each bank of the stream in the form of a rampart
of baked bricks: and the city itself is full of houses of three and
four stories, and the roads by which it is cut up run in straight lines,
including the cross roads which lead to the river; and opposite to each
road there were set gates in the rampart which ran along the river, in
many in number as the ways, 180 and these also were of bronze and led
like the ways 181 to the river itself.

181. This wall then which I have mentioned is as it were a cuirass 182
for the town, and another wall runs round within it, not much weaker for
defence than the first but enclosing a smaller space. 183 And in each
division of the city was a building in the midst, in the one the king's
palace of great extent and strongly fortified round, and in the other
the temple of Zeus Belos with bronze gates, and this exists still up to
my time and measures two furlongs each way, 184 being of a square shape:
and in the midst of the temple 185 is built a solid tower measuring a
furlong both in length and in breadth, and on this tower another tower
has been erected, and another again upon this, and so on up to the
number of eight towers. An ascent to these has been built running
outside round about all the towers; and when one reaches about the
middle of the ascent one finds a stopping-place and seats to rest upon,
on which those who ascend sit down and rest: and on the top of the last
tower there is a large cell, 186 and in the cell a large couch is laid,
well covered, and by it is placed a golden table: and there is no image
there set up nor does any human being spend the night there except only
one woman of the natives of the place, whomsoever the god shall choose
from all the woman, as say the Chaldeans who are the priests of this
god.

182. These same men say also, but I do not believe them, that the god
himself comes often to the cell and rests upon the couch, as happens
likewise in the Egyptian Thebes according to the report of the
Egyptians, for there also a woman sleeps in the temple of the Theban
Zeus (and both these women are said to abstain from commerce with men),
and as happens also with the prophetess 187 of the god in Patara of
Lykia, whenever there is one, for there is not always an Oracle there,
but whenever there is one, then she is shut up during the nights in the
temple within the cell.

183. There is moreover in the temple at Babylon another cell below,
wherein is a great image of Zeus sitting, made of gold, and by it is
placed a large table of gold, and his footstool and seat are of gold
also; and, as the Chaldeans reported, the weight of the gold of which
these things are made is eight hundred talents. Outside this cell is
an altar of gold; and there is also another altar of great size, where
full-grown animals 188 are sacrificed, whereas on the golden altar it
is not lawful to sacrifice any but young sucklings only: and also on the
larger altar the Chaldeans offer one thousand talents of frankincense
every year at the time when they celebrate the feast in honour of this
god. There was moreover in these precincts still remaining at the time
of Cyrus, 189 a statue twelve cubits high, of gold and solid. This I
did not myself see, but that which is related by the Chaldeans I relate.
Against this statue Dareios the son of Hystaspes formed a design, but
he did not venture to take it: it was taken however by Xerxes the son of
Dareios, who also killed the priest when he forbade him to meddle with
the statue. This temple, then, is thus adorned with magnificence, and
there are also many private votive-offerings.

184. Of this Babylon, besides many other rulers, of whom I shall make
mention in the Assyrian history, and who added improvement to the walls
and temples, there were also two who were women. Of these, the one who
ruled first, named Semiramis, who lived five generations before the
other, produced banks of earth in the plain which are a sight worth
seeing; and before this the river used to flood like a sea over the
whole plain.

185. The queen who lived after her time, named Nitocris, was wiser than
she who had reigned before; and in the first place she left behind her
monuments which I shall tell of; then secondly, seeing that the monarchy
of the Medes was great and not apt to remain still, but that besides
other cities even Nineveh had been captured by it, she made provision
against it in so far as she was able. First, as regards the river
Euphrates which flows through the midst of their city, whereas before
this it flowed straight, she by digging channels above made it so
winding that it actually comes three times in its course to one of the
villages in Assyria; and the name of the village to which the Euphrates
comes is Ardericca; and at this day those who travel from this Sea of
ours to Babylon, in their voyage down the river Euphrates 18901 arrive
three times at this same village and on three separate days. This she
did thus; and she also piled up a mound along each bank of the river,
which is worthy to cause wonder for its size and height: and at a great
distance above Babylon, she dug a basin for a lake, which she caused to
extend along at a very small distance from the river, 190 excavating it
everywhere of such depth as to come to water, and making the extent such
that the circuit of it measured four hundred and twenty furlongs: and
the earth which was dug out of this excavation she used up by piling it
in mounds along the banks of the river: and when this had been dug by
her she brought stones and set them all round it as a facing wall. Both
these two things she did, that is she made the river to have a winding
course, and she made the place which was dug out all into a swamp, in
order that the river might run more slowly, having its force broken
by going round many bends, and that the voyages might be winding to
Babylon, and after the voyages there might succeed a long circuit of the
pool. These works she carried out in that part where the entrance to the
country was, and the shortest way to it from Media, so that the Medes
might not have dealings with her kingdom and learn of her affairs.

186. These defences she cast round her city from the depth; and she made
the following addition which was dependent upon them:—The city was in
two divisions, and the river occupied the space between; and in the
time of the former rulers, when any one wished to pass over from the
one division to the other, he had to pass over in a boat, and that, as I
imagine, was troublesome: she however made provision also for this; for
when she was digging the basin for the lake she left this other monument
of herself derived from the same work, that is, she caused stones to be
cut of very great length, and when the stones were prepared for her and
the place had been dug out, she turned aside the whole stream of the
river into the place which she had been digging; and while this was
being filled with water, the ancient bed of the river being dried up in
the meantime, she both built up with baked bricks after the same fashion
as the wall the edges of the river, where it flows through the city, and
the places of descent leading from the small gateways to the river; and
also about the middle of the city, as I judge, with the stones which
she had caused to be dug out she proceeded to build a bridge, binding
together the stones with iron and lead: and upon the top she laid
squared timbers across, to remain there while it was daytime, over which
the people of Babylon made the passage across; but at night they used to
take away these timbers for this reason, namely that they might not go
backwards and forwards by night and steal from one another: and when the
place dug out had been made into a lake full of water by the river, and
at the same time the bridge had been completed, then she conducted the
Euphrates back into its ancient channel from the lake, and so the
place dug out being made into a swamp was thought to have served a good
purpose, and there had been a bridge set up for the men of the city.

187. This same queen also contrived a snare of the following kind:—Over
that gate of the city through which the greatest number of people passed
she set up for herself a tomb above the very gate itself. And on the
tomb she engraved writing which said thus: "If any of the kings of
Babylon who come after me shall be in want of wealth, let him open my
tomb and take as much as he desires; but let him not open it for any
other cause, if he be not in want; for that will not be well." 191 This
tomb was undisturbed until the kingdom came to Dareios; but to Dareios
it seemed that it was a monstrous thing not to make any use of this
gate, and also, when there was money lying there, not to take it,
considering that the money itself invited him to do so. Now the reason
why he would not make any use of this gate was because the corpse would
have been above his head as he drove through. He then, I say, opened the
tomb and found not indeed money but the corpse, with writing which said
thus: "If thou hadst not been insatiable of wealth and basely covetous,
thou wouldest not have opened the resting-places of the dead."

188. This queen then is reported to have been such as I have described:
and it was the son of this woman, bearing the same name as his father,
Labynetos, and being ruler over the Assyrians, against whom Cyrus was
marching. Now the great king makes his marches not only well furnished
192 from home with provisions for his table and with cattle, but also
taking with him water from the river Choaspes, which flows by Susa, of
which alone and of no other river the king drinks: and of this water of
the Choaspes boiled, a very great number of waggons, four-wheeled
and drawn by mules, carry a supply in silver vessels, and go with him
wherever he may march at any time.

189. Now when Cyrus on his way towards Babylon arrived at the river
Gyndes,—of which river the springs are in the mountains of the
Matienians, and it flows through the Dardanians and runs into another
river, the Tigris, which flowing by the city of Opis runs out into the
Erythraian Sea,—when Cyrus, I say, was endeavouring to cross this river
Gyndes, which is a navigable stream, then one of his sacred white horses
in high spirit and wantonness went into the river and endeavoured to
cross, but the stream swept it under water and carried it off forthwith.
And Cyrus was greatly moved with anger against the river for having done
thus insolently, and he threatened to make it so feeble that for the
future even women could cross it easily without wetting the knee. So
after this threat he ceased from his march against Babylon and divided
his army into two parts; and having divided it he stretched lines and
marked out straight channels, 193 one hundred and eighty on each bank of
the Gyndes, directed every way, and having disposed his army along them
he commanded them to dig: so, as a great multitude was working, the work
was completed indeed, but they spent the whole summer season at this
spot working.

190. When Cyrus had taken vengeance on the river Gyndes by dividing it
into three hundred and sixty channels, and when the next spring was just
beginning, then at length he continued his advance upon Babylon: and
the men of Babylon had marched forth out of their city and were awaiting
him. So when in his advance he came near to the city, the Babylonians
joined battle with him, and having been worsted in the fight they were
shut up close within their city. But knowing well even before this that
Cyrus was not apt to remain still, and seeing him lay hands on every
nation equally, they had brought in provisions beforehand 194 for very
many years. So while these made no account of the siege, Cyrus was
in straits what to do, for much time went by and his affairs made no
progress onwards.

191. Therefore, whether it was some other man who suggested it to him
when he was in a strait what to do, or whether he of himself perceived
what he ought to do, he did as follows:—The main body of his army 195 he
posted at the place where the river runs into the city, and then again
behind the city he set others, where the river issues forth from the
city; and he proclaimed to his army that so soon as they should see that
the stream had become passable, they should enter by this way into the
city. Having thus set them in their places and in this manner exhorted
them he marched away himself with that part of his army which was not
fit for fighting: and when he came to the lake, Cyrus also did the same
things which the queen of the Babylonians had done as regards the river
and the lake; that is to say, he conducted the river by a channel into
the lake, which was at that time a swamp, and so made the former course
of the river passable by the sinking of the stream. When this had been
done in such a manner, the Persians who had been posted for this very
purpose entered by the bed of the river Euphrates into Babylon, the
stream having sunk so far that it reached about to the middle of a man's
thigh. Now if the Babylonians had had knowledge of it beforehand or had
perceived that which was being done by Cyrus, they would have allowed
196 the Persians to enter the city and then destroyed them miserably;
for if they had closed all the gates that led to the river and mounted
themselves upon the ramparts which were carried along the banks of the
stream, they would have caught them as it were in a fish-wheal: but as
it was, the Persians came upon them unexpectedly; and owing to the size
of the city (so it is said by those who dwell there) after those about
the extremities of the city had suffered capture, those Babylonians who
dwelt in the middle did not know that they had been captured; but
as they chanced to be holding a festival, they went on dancing and
rejoicing during this time until they learnt the truth only too well.

Babylon then had thus been taken for the first time:

192, and as to the resources of the Babylonians how great they are, I
shall show by many other proofs and among them also by this:—For the
support of the great king and his army, apart from the regular tribute
the whole land of which he is ruler has been distributed into portions.
Now whereas twelve months go to make up the year, for four of these he
has his support from the territory of Babylon, and for the remaining
eight months from the whole of the rest of Asia; thus the Assyrian
land is in regard to resources the third part of all Asia: and the
government, or satrapy as it is called by the Persians, of this
territory is of all the governments by far the best; seeing that when
Tritantaichmes son of Artabazos had this province from the king, there
came in to him every day an artab full of silver coin (now the artab
is a Persian measure and holds more than the medimnos of Attica 197 by
three Attic choinikes); and of horses he had in this province as his
private property, apart from the horses for use in war, eight hundred
stallions and sixteen thousand mares, for each of these stallions served
twenty mares: of Indian hounds moreover such a vast number were
kept that four large villages in the plain, being free from other
contributions, had been appointed to provide food for the hounds.

193. Such was the wealth which belonged to the ruler of Babylon. Now
the land of the Assyrians has but little rain; and this little gives
nourishment to the root of the corn, but the crop is ripened and the ear
comes on by the help of watering from the river, not as in Egypt by the
coming up of the river itself over the fields, but the crop is watered
by hand or with swing-buckets. For the whole Babylonian territory like
the Egyptian is cut up into channels, and the largest of the channels is
navigable for ships and runs in the direction of the sunrising in winter
from the Euphrates to another river, namely the Tigris, along the bank
of which lay the city of Nineveh. This territory is of all that we know
the best by far for producing corn: 198 as to trees, 199 it does
not even attempt to bear them, either fig or vine or olive, but for
producing corn it is so good that it s as much as two-hundred-fold
for the average, and when it bears at its best it produces
three-hundred-fold. The leaves of the wheat and barley there grow to
be full four fingers broad; and from millet and sesame seed how large
a tree grows, I know myself but shall not record, being well aware that
even what has already been said relating to the crops produced has been
enough to cause disbelief in those who have not visited the Babylonian
land. They use no oil of olives, but only that which they make of sesame
seed; and they have date-palms growing over all the plain, most of them
fruit-bearing, of which they make both solid food and wine and honey;
and to these they attend in the same manner as to fig-trees, and in
particular they take the fruit of those palms which the Hellenes call
male-palms, and tie them upon the date-bearing palms, so that their
gall-fly may enter into the date and ripen it and that the fruit of
the palm may not fall off: for the male-palm produces gall-flies in its
fruit just as the wild-fig does.

194. But the greatest marvel of all the things in the land after the
city itself, to my mind is this which I am about to tell: Their boats,
those I mean which go down the river to Babylon, are round and all of
leather: for they make ribs for them of willow which they cut in the
land of the Armenians who dwell above the Assyrians, and round these
they stretch hides which serve as a covering outside by way of hull, not
making broad the stern nor gathering in the prow to a point, but making
the boats round like a shield: and after that they stow the whole boat
with straw and suffer it to be carried down the stream full of cargo;
and for the most part these boats bring down casks of palm-wood 200
filled with wine. The boat is kept straight by two steering-oars and
two men standing upright, and the man inside pulls his oar while the man
outside pushes. 201 These vessels are made both of very large size and
also smaller, the largest of them having a burden of as much as five
thousand talents' weight; 202 and in each one there is a live ass, and
in those of larger size several. So when they have arrived at Babylon in
their voyage and have disposed of their cargo, they sell by auction the
ribs of the boat and all the straw, but they pack the hides upon their
asses and drive them off to Armenia: for up the stream of the river
it is not possible by any means to sail, owing to the swiftness of the
current; and for this reason they make their boats not of timber but
of hides. Then when they have come back to the land of the Armenians,
driving their asses with them, they make other boats in the same manner.

195. Such are their boats; and the following is the manner of dress
which they use, namely a linen tunic reaching to the feet, and over this
they put on another of wool, and then a white mantle thrown round, while
they have shoes of a native fashion rather like the Boeotian slippers.
They wear their hair long and bind their heads round with fillets, 203
and they are anointed over the whole of their body with perfumes. Each
man has a seal and a staff carved by hand, and on each staff is carved
either an apple or a rose or a lily or an eagle or some other device,
for it is not their custom to have a staff without a device upon it.

196. Such is the equipment of their bodies: and the customs which are
established among them are as follows, the wisest in our opinion being
this, which I am informed that the Enetoi in Illyria also have. In every
village once in each year it was done as follows:—When the maidens
204 grew to the age for marriage, they gathered these all together and
brought them in a body to one place, and round them stood a company of
men: and the crier caused each one severally to stand up, and proceeded
to sell them, first the most comely of all, and afterwards, when she had
been sold and had fetched a large sum of money, he would put up another
who was the most comely after her: and they were sold for marriage. Now
all the wealthy men of the Babylonians who were ready to marry vied with
one another in bidding for the most beautiful maidens; those however of
the common sort who were ready to marry did not require a fine form, but
they would accept money together with less comely maidens. For when the
crier had made an end of selling the most comely of the maidens, then
he would cause to stand up that one who was least shapely, or any one of
them who might be crippled in any way, and he would make proclamation
of her, asking who was willing for least gold to have her in marriage,
until she was assigned to him who was willing to accept least: and the
gold would be got from the sale of the comely maidens, and so those
of beautiful form provided dowries for those which were unshapely or
crippled; but to give in marriage one's own daughter to whomsoever each
man would, was not allowed, nor to carry off the maiden after buying her
without a surety; for it was necessary for the man to provide sureties
that he would marry her, before he took her away; and if they did not
agree well together, the law was laid down that he should pay back
the money. It was allowed also for any one who wished it to come from
another village and buy. This then was their most honourable custom; it
does not however still exist at the present time, but they have found
out of late another way, in order that the men may not ill-treat them or
take them to another city: 205 for since the time when being conquered
they were oppressed and ruined, each one of the common people when he is
in want of livelihood prostitutes his female children.

197. Next in wisdom to that, is this other custom which was established
206 among them:—they bear out the sick into the market-place; for of
physicians they make no use. So people come up to the sick man and give
advice about his disease, if any one himself has ever suffered anything
like that which the sick man has, or saw any other who had suffered
it; and coming near they advise and recommend those means by which they
themselves got rid of a like disease or seen some other get rid of it:
and to pass by the sick man in silence is not permitted to them, nor
until one has asked what disease he has.

198. They bury their dead in honey, and their modes of lamentation
are similar to those used in Egypt. And whenever a Babylonian man has
intercourse with his wife, he sits by incense offered, and his wife does
the same on the other side, and when it is morning they wash themselves,
both of them, for they will touch no vessel until they have washed
themselves: and the Arabians do likewise in this matter.

199. Now the most shameful of the customs of the Babylonians is as
follows: every woman of the country must sit down in the precincts 207
of Aphrodite once in her life and have commerce with a man who is a
stranger: and many women who do not deign to mingle with the rest,
because they are made arrogant by wealth, drive to the temple with pairs
of horses in covered carriages, and so take their place, and a large
number of attendants follow after them; but the greater number do
thus,—in the sacred enclosure of Aphrodite sit great numbers of women
with a wreath of cord about their heads; some come and others go; and
there are passages in straight lines going between the women in every
direction, 208 through which the strangers pass by and make their
choice. Here when a woman takes her seat she does not depart again to
her house until one of the strangers has thrown a silver coin into her
lap and has had commerce with her outside the temple, and after throwing
it he must say these words only: "I demand thee in the name of the
goddess Mylitta": 209 now Mylitta is the name given by the Assyrians to
Aphrodite: and the silver coin may be of any value; whatever it is she
will not refuse it, for that is not lawful for her, seeing that this
coin is made sacred by the act: and she follows the man who has first
thrown and does not reject any: and after that she departs to her house,
having acquitted herself of her duty to the goddess 210, nor will you
be able thenceforth to give any gift so great as to win her. So then as
many as have attained to beauty and stature 211 are speedily released,
but those of them who are unshapely remain there much time, not being
able to fulfil the law; for some of them remain even as much as three or
four years: and in some parts of Cyprus too there is a custom similar to
this.

200. These customs then are established among the Babylonians: and there
are of them three tribes 212 which eat nothing but fish only: and when
they have caught them and dried them in the sun they do thus,—they
throw them into brine, and then pound them with pestles and strain them
through muslin; and they have them for food either kneaded into a soft
cake, or baked like bread, according to their liking.

201. When this nation also had been subdued by Cyrus, he had a desire to
bring the Massagetai into subjection to himself. This nation is reputed
to be both great and warlike, and to dwell towards the East and the
sunrising, beyond the river Araxes and over against 213 the Issedonians:
and some also say that this nation is of Scythian race.

202. Now the Araxes is said by some to be larger and by others to be
smaller than the Ister: and they say that there are many islands in it
about equal in size to Lesbos, and in them people dwelling who feed in
the summer upon roots of all kinds which they dig up and certain fruits
from trees, which have been discovered by them for food, they store up,
it is said, in the season when they are ripe and feed upon them in the
winter. Moreover it is said that other trees have been discovered by
them which yield fruit of such a kind that when they have assembled
together in companies in the same place and lighted a fire, they sit
round in a circle and throw some of it into the fire, and they smell the
fruit which is thrown on, as it burns, and are intoxicated by the scent
as the Hellenes are with wine, and when more of the fruit is thrown on
they become more intoxicated, until at last they rise up to dance and
begin to sing. This is said to be their manner of living: and as to the
river Araxes, it flows from the land of the Matienians, whence flows the
Gyndes which Cyrus divided into the three hundred and sixty channels,
and it discharges itself by forty branches, of which all except one end
in swamps and shallow pools; and among them they say that men dwell who
feed on fish eaten raw, and who are wont to use as clothing the skins of
seals: but the one remaining branch of the Araxes flows with unimpeded
course into the Caspian Sea.

203. Now the Caspian Sea is apart by itself, not having connection with
the other Sea: for all that Sea which the Hellenes navigate, and the Sea
beyond the Pillars, which is called Atlantis, and the Erythraian Sea are
in fact all one, but the Caspian is separate and lies apart by itself.
In length it is a voyage of fifteen days if one uses oars, 214 and
in breadth, where it is broadest, a voyage of eight days. On the side
towards the West of this Sea the Caucasus runs along by it, which is of
all mountain-ranges both the greatest in extent and the loftiest: and
the Caucasus has many various races of men dwelling in it, living for
the most part on the wild produce of the forests; and among them
there are said to be trees which produce leaves of such a kind that by
pounding them and mixing water with them they paint figures upon their
garments, and the figures do not wash out, but grow old with the woollen
stuff as if they had been woven into it at the first: and men say that
the sexual intercourse of these people is open like that of cattle.

204. On the West then of this Sea which is called Caspian the Caucasus
is the boundary, while towards the East and the rising sun a plain
succeeds which is of limitless extent to the view. Of this great plain
then the Massagetai occupy a large part, against whom Cyrus had become
eager to march; for there were many strong reasons which incited him to
it and urged him onwards,—first the manner of his birth, that is to say
the opinion held of him that he was more than a mere mortal man,
and next the success which he had met with 215 in his wars, for
whithersoever Cyrus directed his march, it was impossible for that
nation to escape.

205. Now the ruler of the Massagetai was a woman, who was queen after
the death of her husband, and her name was Tomyris. To her Cyrus sent
and wooed her, pretending that he desired to have her for his wife:
but Tomyris understanding that he was wooing not herself but rather
the kingdom of the Massagetai, rejected his approaches: and Cyrus
after this, as he made no progress by craft, marched to the Araxes, and
proceeded to make an expedition openly against the Massagetai, forming
bridges of boats over the river for his army to cross, and building
towers upon the vessels which gave them passage across the river.

206. While he was busied about this labour, Tomyris sent a herald and
said thus: "O king of the Medes, cease to press forward the work which
thou art now pressing forward; for thou canst not tell whether these
things will be in the end for thy advantage or no; cease to do so, I
say, and be king over thine own people, and endure to see us ruling
those whom we rule. Since however I know that thou wilt not be willing
to receive this counsel, but dost choose anything rather than to be
at rest, therefore if thou art greatly anxious to make trial of the
Massagetai in fight, come now, leave that labour which thou hast in
yoking together the banks of the river, and cross over into our land,
when we have first withdrawn three days' journey from the river: or if
thou desirest rather to receive us into your land, do thou this same
thing thyself." Having heard this Cyrus called together the first men
among the Persians, and having gathered these together he laid the
matter before them for discussion, asking their advice as to which
of the two things he should do: and their opinions all agreed in one,
bidding him receive Tomyris and her army into his country.

207. But Croesus the Lydian, being present and finding fault with this
opinion, declared an opinion opposite to that which had been set forth,
saying as follows: "O king, I told thee in former time also, that since
Zeus had given me over to thee, I would avert according to my power
whatever occasion of falling I might see coming near thy house: and now
my sufferings, which have been bitter, 216 have proved to be lessons of
wisdom to me. If thou dost suppose that thou art immortal and that thou
dost command an army which is also immortal, it will be of no use for me
to declare to thee my judgment; but if thou hast perceived that thou art
a mortal man thyself and dost command others who are so likewise, then
learn this first, that for the affairs of men there is a revolving
wheel, and that this in its revolution suffers not the same persons
always to have good fortune. I therefore now have an opinion about the
matter laid before us, which is opposite to that of these men: for if we
shall consent to receive the enemy into our land, there is for thee this
danger in so doing:—if thou shalt be worsted thou wilt lose in addition
all thy realm, for it is evident that if the Massagetai are victors they
will not turn back and fly, but will march upon the provinces of thy
realm; and on the other hand if thou shalt be the victor, thou wilt not
be victor so fully as if thou shouldest overcome the Massagetai after
crossing over into their land and shouldest pursue them when they fled.
For against that which I said before I will set the same again here, and
say that thou, when thou hast conquered, wilt march straight against
the realm of Tomyris. Moreover besides that which has been said, it is
a disgrace and not to be endured that Cyrus the son of Cambyses should
yield to a woman and so withdraw from her land. Now therefore it seems
good to me that we should cross over and go forward from the crossing as
far as they go in their retreat, and endeavour to get the better of
them by doing as follows:—The Massagetai, as I am informed, are without
experience of Persian good things, and have never enjoyed any great
luxuries. Cut up therefore cattle without stint and dress the meat
and set out for these men a banquet in our camp: moreover also provide
without stint bowls of unmixed wine and provisions of every kind; and
having so done, leave behind the most worthless part of thy army and let
the rest begin to retreat from the camp towards the river: for if I
am not mistaken in my judgment, they when they see a quantity of good
things will fall to the feast, and after that it remains for us to
display great deeds."

208. These were the conflicting opinions; and Cyrus, letting go the
former opinion and choosing that of Croesus, gave notice to Tomyris to
retire, as he was intending to cross over to her. She then proceeded to
retire, as she had at first engaged to do, but Cyrus delivered Croesus
into the hands of his son Cambyses, to whom he meant to give the
kingdom, and gave him charge earnestly to honour him and to treat him
well, if the crossing over to go against the Massagetai should not be
prosperous. Having thus charged him and sent these away to the land of
the Persians, he crossed over the river both himself and his army.

209. And when he had passed over the Araxes, night having come on he saw
a vision in his sleep in the land of the Massagetai, as follows:—in his
sleep it seemed to Cyrus that he saw the eldest of the sons of Hystaspes
having upon his shoulders wings, and that with the one of these he
overshadowed Asia and with the other Europe. Now of Hystaspes the son
of Arsames, who was a man of the Achaimenid clan, the eldest son was
Dareios, who was then, I suppose, a youth of about twenty years of age,
and he had been left behind in the land of the Persians, for he was
not yet of full age to go out to the wars. So then when Cyrus awoke he
considered with himself concerning the vision: and as the vision seemed
to him to be of great import, he called Hystaspes, and having taken him
apart by himself he said: "Hystaspes, thy son has been found plotting
against me and against my throne: and how I know this for certain I will
declare to thee:—The gods have a care of me and show me beforehand all
the evils that threaten me. So in the night that is past while sleeping
I saw the eldest of thy sons having upon his shoulders wings, and with
the one of these he overshadowed Asia and with the other Europe. To
judge by this vision then, it cannot be but that he is plotting against
me. Do thou therefore go by the quickest way back to Persia and take
care that, when I thither after having subdued these regions, thou set
thy son before me to be examined."

210. Cyrus said thus supposing that Dareios was plotting against him;
but in fact the divine powers were showing him beforehand that he was
destined to find his end there and that his kingdom was coming about
to Dareios. To this then Hystaspes replied as follows: "O king, heaven
forbid 217 that there should be any man of Persian race who would plot
against thee, and if there be any, I pray that he perish as quickly as
may be; seeing that thou didst make the Persians to be free instead of
slaves, and to rule all nations instead of being ruled by others. And if
any vision announces to thee that my son is planning rebellion against
thee, I deliver him over to thee to do with him whatsoever thou wilt."

211. Hystaspes then, having made answer with these words and having
crossed over the Araxes, was going his way to the Persian land to keep
watch over his son Dareios for Cyrus; and Cyrus meanwhile went forward
and made a march of one day from the Araxes according to the suggestion
of Croesus. After this when Cyrus and the best part of the army 218 of
the Persians had marched back to the Araxes, and those who were unfit
for fighting had been left behind, then a third part of the army of
the Massagetai came to the attack and proceeded to slay, not without
resistance, 219 those who were left behind of the army of Cyrus; and
seeing the feast that was set forth, when they had overcome their
enemies they lay down and feasted, and being satiated with food and wine
they went to sleep. Then the Persians came upon them and slew many of
them, and took alive many more even than they slew, and among these the
son of the queen Tomyris, who was leading the army of the Massagetai;
and his name was Spargapises.

212. She then, when she heard that which had come to pass concerning the
army and also the things concerning her son, sent a herald to Cyrus and
said as follows: "Cyrus, insatiable of blood, be not elated with pride
by this which has come to pass, namely because with that fruit of the
vine, with which ye fill yourselves and become so mad that as the wine
descends into your bodies, evil words float up upon its stream,—because
setting a snare, I say, with such a drug as this thou didst overcome my
son, and not by valour in fight. Now therefore receive the word which
I utter, giving thee good advice:—Restore to me my son and depart from
this land without penalty, triumphant over a third part of the army of
the Massagetai: but if thou shalt not do so, I swear to thee by the Sun,
who is lord of the Massagetai, that surely I will give thee thy fill of
blood, insatiable as thou art."

213. When these words were reported to him Cyrus made no account of
them; and the son of the queen Tomyris, Spargapises, when the wine left
him and he learnt in what evil case he was, entreated Cyrus that he
might be loosed from his chains and gained his request, and then so
soon as he was loosed and had got power over his hands he put himself to
death.

214. He then ended his life in this manner; but Tomyris, as Cyrus did
not listen to her, gathered together all her power and joined battle
with Cyrus. This battle of all the battles fought by Barbarians I
judge to have been the fiercest, and I am informed that it happened
thus:—first, it is said, they stood apart and shot at one another, and
afterwards when their arrows were all shot away, they fell upon one
another and engaged in close combat with their spears and daggers; and
so they continued to be in conflict with one another for a long time,
and neither side would flee; but at last the Massagetai got the better
in the fight: and the greater part of the Persian army was destroyed
there on the spot, and Cyrus himself brought his life to an end there,
after he had reigned in all thirty years wanting one. Then Tomyris
filled a skin with human blood and had search made among the Persian
dead for the corpse of Cyrus: and when she found it, she let his head
down into the skin and doing outrage to the corpse she said at the
same time this: "Though I yet live and have overcome thee in fight,
nevertheless thou didst undo me by taking my son with craft: but I
according to my threat will give thee thy fill of blood." Now as regards
the end of the life of Cyrus there are many tales told, but this which I
have related is to my mind the most worthy of belief.

215. As to the Massagetai, they wear a dress which is similar to that of
the Scythians, and they have a manner of life which is also like theirs;
and there are of them horsemen and also men who do not ride on horses
(for they have both fashions), and moreover there are both archers
and spearmen, and their custom it is to carry battle-axes; 220 and for
everything they use either gold or bronze, for in all that has to do
with spear-points or arrow-heads or battle-axes they use bronze, but for
head-dresses and girdles and belts round the arm-pits 221 they employ
gold as ornament: and in like manner as regards their horses, they put
breast-plates of bronze about their chests, but on their bridles and
bits and cheek-pieces they employ gold. Iron however and silver they use
not at all, for they have them not in their land, but gold and bronze in
abundance.

216. These are the customs which they have:—Each marries a wife, but
they have their wives in common; for that which the Hellenes say that
the Scythians do, is not in fact done by the Scythians but by the
Massagetai, that is to say, whatever woman a man of the Massagetai may
desire he hangs up his quiver in front of the waggon and has commerce
with her freely. They have no precise limit of age laid down for their
life, but when a man becomes very old, his nearest of kin come together
and slaughter him solemnly 222 and cattle also with him; and then after
that they boil the flesh and banquet upon it. This is considered by them
the happiest lot; but him who has ended his life by disease they do not
eat, but cover him up in the earth, counting it a misfortune that he did
not attain to being slaughtered. They sow no crops but live on cattle
and on fish, which last they get in abundance from the river Araxes;
moreover they are drinkers of milk. Of gods they reverence the Sun
alone, and to him they sacrifice horses: and the rule 223 of the
sacrifice is this:—to the swiftest of the gods they assign the swiftest
of all mortal things.


