BOOK II. THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED EUTERPE


1. When Cyrus had brought his life to an end, Cambyses received the
royal power in succession, being the son of Cyrus and of Cassandane the
daughter of Pharnaspes, for whose death, which came about before his
own, Cyrus had made great mourning himself and also had proclaimed to
all those over whom he bore rule that they should make mourning for her:
Cambyses, I say, being the son of this woman and of Cyrus, regarded
the Ionians and Aiolians as slaves inherited from his father; and he
proceeded to march an army against Egypt, taking with him as helpers not
only the other nations of which he was the ruler, but also those of the
Hellenes over whom he had power besides.

2. Now the Egyptians, before the time when Psammetichos 1 became king
over them, were wont to suppose that they had come into being first of
all men; but since the time when Psammetichos having become king desired
to know what men had come into being first, they suppose that the
Phrygians came into being before themselves, but they themselves before
all other men. Now Psammetichos, when he was not able by inquiry to
find out any means of knowing who had come into being first of all men,
contrived a device of the following kind:—Taking two new-born children
belonging to persons of the common sort he gave them to a shepherd to
bring up at the place where his flocks were, with a manner of bringing
up such as I shall say, charging him namely that no man should utter any
word in their presence, and that they should be placed by themselves in
a room where none might come, and at the proper time he should bring to
them she-goats, and when he had satisfied them with milk he should do
for them whatever else was needed. These things Psammetichos did and
gave him this charge wishing to hear what word the children would let
break forth first, after they had ceased from wailings without sense.
And accordingly so it came to pass; for after a space of two years had
gone by, during which the shepherd went on acting so, at length, when
he opened the door and entered, both the children fell before him in
entreaty and uttered the word bekos, stretching forth their hands. At
first when he heard this the shepherd kept silence; but since this word
was often repeated, as he visited them constantly and attended to them,
at last he declared the matter to his master, and at his command he
brought the children before his face. Then Psammetichos having himself
also heard it, began to inquire about what nation of men named anything
bekos, and inquiring he found that the Phrygians had this name for
bread. In this manner and guided by an indication such as this, the
Egyptians were brought to allow that the Phrygians were a more ancient
people than themselves.

3. That so it came to pass I heard from the priests of that Hephaistos
who dwells at Memphis; 2 but the Hellenes relate, besides many other
idle tales, that Psammetichos cut out the tongues of certain women, and
then caused the children to live with these women.

With regard then to the rearing of the children they related so much as
I have said: and I heard also other things at Memphis when I had speech
with the priests of Hephaistos. Moreover I visited both Thebes and
Heliopolis 3 for this very cause, namely because I wished to know
whether the priests at these places would agree in their accounts with
those at Memphis; for the men of Heliopolis are said to be the most
learned in records of the Egyptians. Those of their narrations which I
heard with regard to the gods I am not earnest to relate in full, but
I shall name them only, 4 because I consider that all men are equally
ignorant of these matters: 5 and whatever things of them I may record, I
shall record only because I am compelled by the course of the story.

4. But as to those matters which concern men, the priests agreed with
one another in saying that the Egyptians were the first of all men on
earth to find out the course of the year, having divided the seasons
into twelve parts to make up the whole; and this they said they found
out from the stars: and they reckon to this extent more wisely than
the Hellenes, as it seems to me, inasmuch as the Hellenes throw in an
intercalated month every other year, to make the seasons right, whereas
the Egyptians, reckoning the twelve months at thirty days each, bring
in also every year five days beyond the number, and thus the circle of
their seasons is completed and comes round to the same point whence
it set out. They said moreover that the Egyptians were the first who
brought into use appellations for the twelve gods and the Hellenes took
up the use from them; and that they were the first who assigned altars
and images and temples to the gods, and who engraved figures on stones;
and with regard to the greater number of these things they showed me by
actual facts that they had happened so. They said also that the first
man 6 who became king of Egypt was Min; 7 and that in his time all Egypt
except the district of Thebes 8 was a swamp, and none of the regions
were then above water which now lie below the lake of Moiris, to which
lake it is a voyage of seven days up the river from the sea:

5, and I thought that they said well about the land; for it is manifest
in truth even to a person who has not heard it beforehand but has only
seen, at least if he have understanding, that the Egypt to which the
Hellenes come in ships is a land which has been won by the Egyptians as
an addition, and that it is a gift of the river: moreover the regions
which lie above this lake also for a distance of three days' sail, about
which they did not go on to say anything of this kind, are nevertheless
another instance of the same thing: for the nature of the land of Egypt
is as follows:—First when you are still approaching it in a ship and are
distant a day's run from the land, if you let down a sounding-line you
will bring up mud and will find yourself in eleven fathoms. This then so
far shows that there is a silting forward of the land.

6. Then secondly, as to Egypt itself, the extent of it along the sea is
sixty schoines, according to our definition of Egypt as extending from
the Gulf of Plinthine to the Serbonian lake, along which stretches Mount
Casion; from this lake then 9 the sixty schoines are reckoned: for those
of men who are poor in land have their country measured by fathoms,
those who are less poor by furlongs, those who have much land by
parasangs, and those who have land in very great abundance by schoines:
now the parasang is equal to thirty furlongs, and each schoine, which
is an Egyptian measure, is equal to sixty furlongs. So there would be
an extent of three thousand six hundred furlongs for the coast-land of
Egypt. 10

7. From thence and as far as Heliopolis inland Egypt is broad, and the
land is all flat and without springs of water 11 and formed of mud: and
the road as one goes inland from the sea to Heliopolis is about the
same in length as that which leads from the altar of the twelve gods at
Athens to Pisa and the temple of Olympian Zeus: reckoning up you would
find the difference very small by which these roads fail of being equal
in length, not more indeed than fifteen furlongs; for the road from
Athens to Pisa wants fifteen furlongs of being fifteen hundred, while
the road to Heliopolis from the sea reaches that number completely.

8. From Heliopolis however, as you go up, Egypt is narrow; for on the
one side a mountain-range belonging to Arabia stretches along by the
side of it, going in a direction from North towards the midday and the
South Wind, tending upwards without a break to that which is called the
Erythraian Sea, in which range are the stone-quarries which were used
in cutting stone for the pyramids at Memphis. On this side then the
mountain ends where I have said, and then takes a turn back; 12 and
where it is widest, as I was informed, it is a journey of two months
across from East to West; and the borders of it which turn towards the
East are said to produce frankincense. Such then is the nature of this
mountain-range; and on the side of Egypt towards Libya another range
extends, rocky and enveloped in sand: in this are the pyramids, and it
runs in the same direction as those parts of the Arabian mountains which
go towards the midday. So then, I say, from Heliopolis the land has no
longer a great extent so far as it belongs to Egypt, 13 and for about
four 14 days' sail up the river Egypt properly so called is narrow:
and the space between the mountain-ranges which have been mentioned is
plain-land, but where it is narrowest it did not seem to me to exceed
two hundred furlongs from the Arabian mountains to those which are
called the Libyan. After this again Egypt is broad.

9. Such is the nature of this land: and from Heliopolis to Thebes is
a voyage up the river of nine days, and the distance of the journey in
furlongs is four thousand eight hundred and sixty, the number of the
schoines being eighty-one. If these measures of Egypt in furlongs be put
together the result is as follows:—I have already before this shown
that the distance along the sea amounts to three thousand six hundred
furlongs, and I will now declare what the distance is inland from the
sea to Thebes, namely six thousand one hundred and twenty furlongs: and
again the distance from Thebes to the city called Elephantine is one
thousand eight hundred furlongs.

10. Of this land then, concerning which I have spoken, it seemed to
myself also, according as the priests said, that the greater part had
been won as an addition by the Egyptians; for it was evident to me that
the space between the aforesaid mountain-ranges, which lie above the
city of Memphis, once was a gulf of the sea, like the regions about
Ilion and Teuthrania and Ephesos and the plain of the Maiander, if it
be permitted to compare small things with great; and small these are in
comparison, for of the rivers which heaped up the soil in those regions
none is worthy to be compared in volume with a single one of the mouths
of the Nile, which has five mouths. 15 Moreover there are other rivers
also, not in size at all equal to the Nile, which have performed great
feats; of which I can mention the names of several, and especially the
Acheloös, which flowing through Acarnania and so issuing out into the
sea has already made half of the Echinades from islands into mainland.

11. Now there is in the land of Arabia, not far from Egypt, a gulf of
the sea running in from that which is called the Erythraian Sea, very
long and narrow, as I am about to tell. With respect to the length of
the voyage along it, one who set out from the innermost point to sail
out through it into the open sea, would spend forty days upon the
voyage, using oars; 16 and with respect to breadth, where the gulf is
broadest it is half a day's sail across: and there is in it an ebb and
flow of tide every day. Just such another gulf I suppose that Egypt was,
and that the one ran in towards Ethiopia from the Northern Sea, and the
other, the Arabian, of which I am about to speak, 17 tended from the
South towards Syria, the gulfs boring in so as almost to meet at their
extreme points, and passing by one another with but a small space left
between. If then the stream of the Nile should turn aside into this
Arabian gulf, what would hinder that gulf from being filled up with silt
as the river continued to flow, at all events within a period of twenty
thousand years? indeed for my part I am of opinion that it would be
filled up even within ten thousand years. How, then, in 18 all the time
that has elapsed before I came into being should not a gulf be filled up
even of much greater size than this by a river so great and so active?

12. As regards Egypt then, I both believe those who say that things
are so, and for myself also I am strongly of opinion that they are so;
because I have observed that Egypt runs out into the sea further than
the adjoining land, and that shells are found upon the mountains of it,
and an efflorescence of salt forms upon the surface, so that even
the pyramids are being eaten away by it, and moreover that of all the
mountains of Egypt, the range which lies above Memphis is the only one
which has sand: besides which I notice that Egypt resembles neither the
land of Arabia, which borders upon it, nor Libya, nor yet Syria (for
they are Syrians who dwell in the parts of Arabia lying along the sea),
but that it has soil which is black and easily breaks up, 19 seeing that
it is in truth mud and silt brought down from Ethiopia by the river: but
the soil of Libya, we know, is reddish in colour and rather sandy, while
that of Arabia and Syria is somewhat clayey and rocky. 1901

13. The priests also gave me a strong proof concerning this land as
follows, namely that in the reign of king Moiris, whenever the river
reached a height of at least eight cubits 20 it watered Egypt below
Memphis; and not yet nine hundred years had gone by since the death of
Moiris, when I heard these things from the priests: now however, unless
the river rises to sixteen cubits, or fifteen at the least, it does not
go over the land. I think too that those Egyptians who dwell below the
lake of Moiris and especially in that region which is called the Delta,
if that land continues to grow in height according to this proportion
and to increase similarly in extent, 21 will suffer for all remaining
time, from the Nile not overflowing their land, that same thing which
they themselves said that the Hellenes would at some time suffer: for
hearing that the whole land of the Hellenes has rain and is not watered
by rivers as theirs is, they said that the Hellenes would at some time
be disappointed of a great hope and would suffer the ills of famine.
This saying means that if the god 22 shall not send them rain, but shall
allow drought to prevail for a long time, the Hellenes will be destroyed
by hunger; for they have in fact no other supply of water to save them
except from Zeus alone.

14. This has been rightly said by the Egyptians with reference to
the Hellenes: but now let me tell how matters are with the Egyptians
themselves in their turn. If, in accordance with what I before said,
their land below Memphis (for this is that which is increasing) shall
continue to increase in height according to the same proportion as in
past time, assuredly those Egyptians who dwell here will suffer famine,
if their land shall not have rain nor the river be able to go over their
fields. It is certain however that now they gather in fruit from the
earth with less labour than any other men and also with less than the
other Egyptians; for they have no labour in breaking up furrows with a
plough nor in hoeing nor in any other of those labours which other men
have about a crop; but when the river has come up of itself and watered
their fields and after watering has left them again, then each man sows
his own field and turns into it swine, and when he has trodden the
seed into the ground by means of the swine, after that he waits for the
harvest; and when he has threshed the corn by means of the swine, then
he gathers it in.

15. If we desire to follow the opinions of the Ionians as regards Egypt,
who say that the Delta alone is Egypt, reckoning its sea-coast to be
from the watch-tower called of Perseus to the fish-curing houses of
Pelusion, a distance of forty schoines, and counting it to extend inland
as far as the city of Kercasoros, where the Nile divides and runs to
Pelusion and Canobos, while as for the rest of Egypt, they assign it
partly to Libya and partly to Arabia,—if, I say, we should follow this
account, we should thereby declare that in former times the Egyptians
had no land to live in; for, as we have seen, their Delta at any rate
is alluvial, and has appeared (so to speak) lately, as the Egyptians
themselves say and as my opinion is. If then at the first there was no
land for them to live in, why did they waste their labour to prove that
they had come into being before all other men? They needed not to have
made trial of the children to see what language they would first utter.
However I am not of opinion that the Egyptians came into being at the
same time as that which is called by the Ionians the Delta, but that
they existed always ever since the human race came into being, and that
as their land advanced forwards, many of them were left in their first
abodes and many came down gradually to the lower parts. At least it is
certain that in old times Thebes had the name of Egypt, and of this 23
the circumference measures six thousand one hundred and twenty furlongs.

16. If then we judge aright of these matters, the opinion of the Ionians
about Egypt is not sound: but if the judgment of the Ionians is right, I
declare that neither the Hellenes nor the Ionians themselves know how
to reckon since they say that the whole earth is made up of three
divisions, Europe, Asia, and Libya: for they ought to count in addition
to these the Delta of Egypt, since it belongs neither to Asia nor to
Libya; for at least it cannot be the river Nile by this reckoning which
divides Asia from Libya, 24 but the Nile is cleft at the point of this
Delta so as to flow round it, and the result is that this land would
come between Asia and Libya. 25

17. We dismiss then the opinion of the Ionians, and express a judgment
of our own in this matter also, that Egypt is all that land which is
inhabited by Egyptians, just as Kilikia is that which is inhabited by
Kilikians and Assyria that which is inhabited by Assyrians, and we
know of no boundary properly speaking between Asia and Libya except
the borders of Egypt. If however we shall adopt the opinion which is
commonly held by the Hellenes, we shall suppose that the whole of Egypt,
beginning from the Cataract 26 and the city of Elephantine, is divided
into two parts and that it thus partakes of both the names, since one
side will thus belong to Libya and the other to Asia; for the Nile from
the Cataract onwards flows to the sea cutting Egypt through the midst;
and as far as the city of Kercasoros the Nile flows in one single
stream, but from this city onwards it is parted into three ways; and
one, which is called the Pelusian mouth, turns towards the East; the
second of the ways goes towards the West, and this is called the Canobic
mouth; but that one of the ways which is straight runs thus,—when the
river in its course downwards comes to the point of the Delta, then it
cuts the Delta through the midst and so issues out to the sea. In this
we have 27 a portion of the water of the river which is not the smallest
nor the least famous, and it is called the Sebennytic mouth. There are
also two other mouths which part off from the Sebennytic and go to
the sea, and these are called, one the Saïtic, the other the Mendesian
mouth. The Bolbitinitic and Bucolic mouths, on the other hand, are not
natural but made by digging.

18. Moreover also the answer given by the Oracle of Ammon bears witness
in support of my opinion that Egypt is of the extent which I declare it
to be in my account; and of this answer I heard after I had formed my
own opinion about Egypt. For those of the city of Marea and of Apis,
dwelling in the parts of Egypt which border on Libya, being of opinion
themselves that they were Libyans and not Egyptians, and also being
burdened by the rules of religious service, because they desired not to
be debarred from the use of cows' flesh, sent to Ammon saying that they
had nought in common with the Egyptians, for they dwelt outside the
Delta and agreed with them in nothing; and they said they desired that
it might be lawful for them to eat everything without distinction. The
god however did not permit them to do so, but said that that land which
was Egypt which the Nile came over and watered, and that those were
Egyptians who dwelling below the city of Elephantine drank of that
river. Thus it was answered to them by the Oracle about this:

19, and the Nile, when it is in flood, goes over not only the Delta
but also of the land which is called Libyan and of that which is called
Arabian sometimes as much as two days' journey on each side, and at
times even more than this or at times less.

As regards the nature of the river, neither from the priests nor
yet from any other man was I able to obtain any knowledge: and I was
desirous especially to learn from them about these matters, namely
why the Nile comes down increasing in volume from the summer solstice
onwards for a hundred days, and then, when it has reached the number of
these days, turns and goes back, failing in its stream, so that through
the whole winter season it continues to be low, and until the summer
solstice returns. Of none of these things was I able to receive any
account from the Egyptians, when I inquired of them what power the Nile
has whereby it is of a nature opposite to that of other rivers. And
I made inquiry, desiring to know both this which I say and also why,
unlike all other rivers, it does not give rise to any breezes blowing
from it.

20. However some of the Hellenes who desired to gain distinction for
cleverness have given an account of this water in three different ways:
two of these I do not think it worth while even to speak of except only
to indicate their nature; of which the one says that the Etesian Winds
are the cause that makes the river rise, by preventing the Nile from
flowing out into the sea. But often the Etesian Winds fail and yet the
Nile does the same work as it is wont to do; and moreover, if these were
the cause, all the other rivers also which flow in a direction opposed
to the Etesian Winds ought to have been affected in the same way as the
Nile, and even more, in as much as they are smaller and present to them
a feebler flow of stream: but there are many of these rivers in Syria
and many also in Libya, and they are affected in no such manner as the
Nile.

21. The second way shows more ignorance than that which has been
mentioned, and it is more marvellous to tell; 28 for it says that the
river produces these effects because it flows from the Ocean, and that
the Ocean flows round the whole earth.

22. The third of the ways is much the most specious, but nevertheless it
is the most mistaken of all: for indeed this way has no more truth in
it than the rest, alleging as it does that the Nile flows from melting
snow; whereas it flows out of Libya through the midst of the Ethiopians,
and so comes out into Egypt. How then should it flow from snow, when it
flows from the hottest parts to those which are cooler? And indeed most
of the facts are such as to convince a man (one at least who is capable
of reasoning about such matters), that it is not at all likely that it
flows from snow. 29 The first and greatest evidence is afforded by the
winds, which blow hot from these regions; the second is that the land
is rainless always and without frost, whereas after snow has fallen rain
must necessarily come within five days, so that if it snowed in those
parts rain would fall there; the third evidence is afforded by the
people dwelling there, who are of a black colour by reason of the
burning heat. Moreover kites and swallows remain there through the year
and do not leave the land; and cranes flying from the cold weather which
comes on in the region of Scythia come regularly to these parts for
wintering: if then it snowed ever so little in that land through which
the Nile flows and in which it has its rise, none of these things would
take place, as necessity compels us to admit.

23. As for him who talked about the Ocean, he carried his tale into the
region of the unknown, and so he need not be refuted; 30 since I for my
part know of no river Ocean existing, but I think that Homer or one of
the poets who were before him invented the name and introduced it into
his verse.

24. If however after I have found fault with the opinions proposed, I
am bound to declare an opinion of my own about the matters which are in
doubt, I will tell what to my mind is the reason why the Nile increases
in the summer. In the winter season the Sun, being driven away from
his former path through the heaven 31 by the stormy winds, comes to the
upper parts of Libya. If one would set forth the matter in the shortest
way, all has now been said; for whatever region this god approaches most
and stands directly above, this it may reasonably be supposed is most in
want of water, and its native streams of rivers are dried up most.

25. However, to set it forth at greater length, thus it is:—the Sun
passing in his course by the upper parts of Libya, does thus, that is to
say, since at all times the air in those parts is clear and the country
is warm, because there are no cold winds, 32 in passing through it the
Sun does just as he was wont to do in the summer, when going through the
midst of the heaven, that is he draws to himself the water, and having
drawn it he drives it away to the upper parts of the country, and the
winds take it up and scattering it abroad melt it into rain; so it is
natural that the winds which blow from this region, namely the South
and South-west Winds, should be much the most rainy of all the winds. I
think however that the Sun does not send away from himself all the water
of the Nile of each year, but that he also lets some remain behind with
himself. Then when the winter becomes milder, the Sun returns back again
to the midst of the heaven, and from that time onwards he draws equally
from all rivers; but in the meanwhile they flow in large volume, since
water of rain mingles with them in great quantity, because their country
receives rain then and is filled with torrent streams. In summer however
they are weak, since not only the showers of rain fail then, but also
they are drawn by the Sun. The Nile however, alone of all rivers, not
having rain and being drawn by the Sun, naturally flows during this time
of winter in much less than its proper volume, that is much less than in
summer; 33 for then it is drawn equally with all the other waters, but
in winter it bears the burden alone. Thus I suppose the Sun to be the
cause of these things.

26. He is also the cause in my opinion that the air in these parts is
dry, since he makes it so by scorching up his path through the heaven:
34 thus summer prevails always in the upper parts of Libya. If however
the station of the seasons had been changed, and where now in the heaven
are placed the North Wind and winter, there was the station of the South
Wind and of the midday, and where now is placed the South Wind, there
was the North, if this had been so, the Sun being driven from the midst
of the heaven by the winter and the North Wind would go to the upper
parts of Europe, just as now he comes to the upper parts of Libya, and
passing in his course throughout the whole of Europe I suppose that he
would do to the Ister that which he now works upon the Nile.

27. As to the breeze, why none blows from the river, my opinion is that
from very hot places it is not natural that anything should blow, and
that a breeze is wont to blow from something cold.

28. Let these matters then be as they are and as they were at the first:
but as to the sources of the Nile, not one either of the Egyptians or of
the Libyans or of the Hellenes, who came to speech with me, professed to
know anything, except the scribe of the sacred treasury of Athene at the
city of Saïs in Egypt. To me however this man seemed not to be speaking
seriously when he said that he had certain knowledge of it; and he said
as follows, namely that there were two mountains of which the tops ran
up to a sharp point, situated between the city of Syene, which is in
the district of Thebes, and Elephantine, and the names of the mountains
were, of the one Crophi and of the other Mophi. From the middle between
these two mountains flowed (he said) the sources of the Nile, which were
fathomless in depth, and half of the water flowed to Egypt and towards
the North Wind, the other half to Ethiopia and the South Wind. As for
the fathomless depth of the source, he said that Psammetichos king of
Egypt came to a trial of this matter; for he had a rope twisted of many
thousands of fathoms and let it down in this place, and it found no
bottom. By this the scribe (if this which he told me was really as he
said) gave me to understand 35 that there were certain strong eddies
there and a backward flow, and that since the water dashed against the
mountains, therefore the sounding-line could not come to any bottom when
it was let down.

29. From no other person was I able to learn anything about this matter;
but for the rest I learnt so much as here follows by the most diligent
inquiry; 36 for I went myself as an eye-witness as far as the city of
Elephantine and from that point onwards I gathered knowledge by report.
From the city of Elephantine as one goes up the river there is country
which slopes steeply; so that here one must attach ropes to the vessel
on both sides, as one fastens an ox, and so make one's way onward;
and if the rope break, the vessel is gone at once, carried away by the
violence of the stream. Through this country it is a voyage of about
four days in length, and in this part the Nile is winding like the river
Maiander, and the distance amounts to twelve schoines, which one must
traverse in this manner. Then you will come to a level plain, in which
the Nile flows round an island named Tachompso. (Now in the regions
above Elephantine there dwell Ethiopians at once succeeding, who also
occupy half of the island, 37 and Egyptians the other half.) Adjoining
this island there is a great lake, round which dwell Ethiopian nomad
tribes; and when you have sailed through this you will come to the
stream of the Nile again, which flows into this lake. After this you
will disembark and make a journey by land of forty days; for in the Nile
sharp rocks stand forth out of the water, and there are many reefs, by
which it is not possible for a vessel to pass. Then after having passed
through this country in the forty days which I have said, you will
embark again in another vessel and sail for twelve days; and after this
you will come to a great city called Meroe. This city is said to be
the mother-city of all the other Ethiopians: and they who dwell in it
reverence of the gods Zeus and Dionysos alone, and these they greatly
honour; and they have an Oracle of Zeus established, and make warlike
marches whensoever this god commands them by prophesyings and to
whatsoever place he commands.

30. Sailing from this city you will come to the "Deserters" in another
period of time equal to that in which you came from Elephantine to the
mother-city of the Ethiopians. Now the name of these "Deserters" is
Asmach, and this word signifies, when translated into the tongue of the
Hellenes, "those who stand on the left hand of the king." These were two
hundred and forty thousand Egyptians of the warrior class, who revolted
and went over to the Ethiopians for the following cause:—In the reign of
Psammetichos garrisons were set, one towards the Ethiopians at the city
of Elephantine, another towards the Arabians and Assyrians at Daphnai
of Pelusion, and another towards Libya at Marea: and even in my own
time the garrisons of the Persians too are ordered in the same manner as
these were in the reign of Psammetichos, for both at Elephantine and at
Daphnai the Persians have outposts. The Egyptians then of whom I speak
had served as outposts for three years and no one relieved them from
their guard; accordingly they took counsel together, and adopting a
common plan they all in a body revolted from Psammetichos and set out
for Ethiopia. Hearing this Psammetichos set forth in pursuit, and when
he came up with them he entreated them much and endeavoured to persuade
them not to desert the gods of their country and their children and
wives: upon which it is said that one of them pointed to his privy
member and said that wherever this was, there would they have both
children and wives. When these came to Ethiopia they gave themselves
over to the king of the Ethiopians; and he rewarded them as
follows:—there were certain of the Ethiopians who had come to be at
variance with him; and he bade them drive these out and dwell in their
land. So since these men settled in the land of the Ethiopians, the
Ethiopians have come to be of milder manners, from having learnt the
customs of the Egyptians.

31. The Nile then, besides that part of its course which is in Egypt,
is known as far as a four months' journey by river and land: for that is
the number of months which are found by reckoning to be spent in going
from Elephantine to these "Deserters": and the river runs from the West
and the setting of the sun. But what comes after that no one can clearly
say; for this land is desert by reason of the burning heat.

32. Thus much however I heard from men of Kyrene, who told me that they
had been to the Oracle of Ammon, and had come to speech with Etearchos
king of the Ammonians: and it happened that after speaking of other
matters they fell to discourse about the Nile and how no one knew the
sources of it; and Etearchos said that once there had come to him men of
the Nasamonians (this is a Libyan race which dwells in the Syrtis,
and also in the land to the East of the Syrtis reaching to no great
distance), and when the Nasamonians came and were asked by him whether
they were able to tell him anything more than he knew about the desert
parts of Libya, they said that there had been among them certain sons of
chief men, who were of unruly disposition; and these when they grew up
to be men had devised various other extravagant things and also they
had told off by lot five of themselves to go to see the desert parts
of Libya and to try whether they could discover more than those who had
previously explored furthest: for in those parts of Libya which are by
the Northern Sea, beginning from Egypt and going as far as the headland
of Soloeis, which is the extreme point of Libya, Libyans (and of them
many races) extend along the whole coast, except so much as the Hellenes
and Phenicians hold; but in the upper parts, which lie above the
sea-coast and above those people whose land comes down to the sea, Libya
is full of wild beasts; and in the parts above the land of wild beasts
it is full of sand, terribly waterless and utterly desert. These young
men then (said they), being sent out by their companions well furnished
with supplies of water and provisions, went first through the inhabited
country, and after they had passed through this they came to the country
of wild beasts, and after this they passed through the desert, making
their journey towards the West Wind; and having passed through a great
tract of sand in many days, they saw at last trees growing in a level
place; and having come up to them, they were beginning to pluck the
fruit which was upon the trees: but as they began to pluck it, there
came upon them small men, of less stature than men of the common size,
and these seized them and carried them away; and neither could the
Nasamonians understand anything of their speech nor could those who were
carrying them off understand anything of the speech of the Nasamonians:
and they led them (so it was said) through very great swamps, and after
passing through these they came to a city in which all the men were in
size like those who carried them off and in colour of skin black; and
by the city ran a great river, which ran from the West towards the
sunrising, and in it were seen crocodiles.

33. Of the account given by Etearchos the Ammonian let so much suffice
as is here said, except that, as the men of Kyrene told me, he alleged
that the Nasamonians returned safe home, and that the people to whom
they had come were all wizards. Now this river which ran by the city,
Etearchos conjectured to be the Nile, and moreover reason compels us to
think so; for the Nile flows from Libya and cuts Libya through in the
midst, and as I conjecture, judging of what is not known by that which
is evident to the view, it starts at a distance from its mouth equal to
that of the Ister: for the river Ister begins from the Keltoi and the
city of Pyrene and so runs that it divides Europe in the midst (now
the Keltoi are outside the Pillars of Heracles and border upon the
Kynesians, who dwell furthest towards the sunset of all those who have
their dwelling in Europe); and the Ister ends, having its course through
the whole of Europe, by flowing into the Euxine Sea at the place where
the Milesians have their settlement of Istria.

34. Now the Ister, since it flows through land which is inhabited, is
known by the reports of many; but of the sources of the Nile no one
can give an account, for the part of Libya through which it flows is
uninhabited and desert. About its course however so much as it was
possible to learn by the most diligent inquiry has been told; and it
runs out into Egypt. Now Egypt lies nearly opposite to the mountain
districts of Kilikia; and from thence to Sinope, which lies upon the
Euxine Sea, is a journey in the same straight line of five days for
a man without encumbrance; 3701 and Sinope lies opposite to the place
where the Ister runs out into the sea: thus I think that the Nile passes
through the whole of Libya and is of equal measure with the Ister.

Of the Nile then let so much suffice as has been said.

35. Of Egypt however I shall make my report at length, because it has
wonders more in number than any other land, and works too it has to show
as much as any land, which are beyond expression great: for this reason
then more shall be said concerning it.

The Egyptians in agreement with their climate, which is unlike any
other, and with the river, which shows a nature different from all other
rivers, established for themselves manners and customs in a way opposite
to other men in almost all matters: for among them the women frequent
the market and carry on trade, while the men remain at home and weave;
and whereas others weave pushing the woof upwards, the Egyptians push
it downwards: the men carry their burdens upon their heads and the
women upon their shoulders: the women make water standing up and the
men crouching down: they ease themselves in their houses and they eat
without in the streets, alleging as reason for this that it is right
to do secretly the things that are unseemly though necessary, but those
which are not unseemly, in public: no woman is a minister either of male
or female divinity, but men of all, both male and female: to support
their parents the sons are in no way compelled, if they do not desire
to do so, but the daughters are forced to do so, be they never so
unwilling.

36. The priests of the gods in other lands wear long hair, but in Egypt
they shave their heads: among other men the custom is that in mourning
those whom the matter concerns most nearly have their hair cut short,
but the Egyptians, when deaths occur, let their hair grow long, both
that on the head and that on the chin, having before been close shaven:
other men have their daily living separated from beasts, but the
Egyptians have theirs together with beasts: other men live on wheat and
barley, but to any one of the Egyptians who makes his living on these it
is a great reproach; they make their bread of maize, 38 which some call
spelt; 39 they knead dough with their feet and clay with their hands,
with which also they gather up dung: and whereas other men, except
such as have learnt otherwise from the Egyptians, have their members as
nature made them, the Egyptians practise circumcision: as to garments,
the men wear two each and the women but one: and whereas others make
fast the rings and ropes of the sails outside the ship, the Egyptians
do this inside: finally in the writing of characters and reckoning with
pebbles, while the Hellenes carry the hand from the left to the right,
the Egyptians do this from the right to the left; and doing so they say
that they do it themselves rightwise and the Hellenes leftwise: and they
use two kinds of characters for writing, of which the one kind is called
sacred and the other common. 40

37. They are religious excessively beyond all other men, and with regard
to this they have customs as follows:—they drink from cups of bronze and
rinse them out every day, and not some only do this but all: they wear
garments of linen always newly washed, and this they make a special
point of practice: they circumcise themselves for the sake of
cleanliness, preferring to be clean rather than comely. The priests
shave themselves all over their body every other day, so that no lice or
any other foul thing may come to be upon them when they minister to
the gods; and the priests wear garments of linen only and sandals of
papyrus, and any other garment they may not take nor other sandals;
these wash themselves in cold water twice in the day and twice again
in the night; and other religious services they perform (one may almost
say) of infinite number. 41 They enjoy also good things not a few, for
they do not consume or spend anything of their own substance, but there
is sacred bread baked for them and they have each great quantity of
flesh of oxen and geese coming in to them each day, and also wine of
grapes is given to them; but it is not permitted to them to taste of
fish: beans moreover the Egyptians do not at all sow in their land, and
those which grow they neither eat raw nor boil for food; nay the priests
do not endure even to look upon them, thinking this to be an unclean
kind of pulse: and there is not one priest only for each of the gods but
many, and of them one is chief-priest, and whenever a priest dies his
son is appointed to his place.

38. The males of the ox kind they consider to belong to Epaphos, and
on account of him they test them in the following manner:—If the priest
sees one single black hair upon the beast he counts it not clean for
sacrifice; and one of the priests who is appointed for the purpose makes
investigation of these matters, both when the beast is standing upright
and when it is lying on its back, drawing out its tongue moreover, to
see if it is clean in respect of the appointed signs, which I shall tell
of in another part of the history: 42 he looks also at the hairs of the
tail to see if it has them growing in the natural manner: and if it
be clean in respect of all these things, he marks it with a piece of
papyrus, rolling this round the horns, and then when he has plastered
sealing-earth over it he sets upon it the seal of his signet-ring, and
after that they take the animal away. But for one who sacrifices a beast
not sealed the penalty appointed is death.

39. In this way then the beast is tested; and their appointed manner of
sacrifice is as follows:—they lead the sealed beast to the altar where
they happen to be sacrificing and then kindle a fire: after that, having
poured libations of wine over the altar so that it runs down upon the
victim and having called upon the god, they cut its throat, and having
cut its throat they sever the head from the body. The body then of the
beast they flay, but upon the head 43 they make many imprecations first,
and then they who have a market and Hellenes sojourning among them for
trade, these carry it to the market-place and sell it, while they who
have no Hellenes among them cast it away into the river: and this is the
form of imprecation which they utter upon the heads, praying that if any
evil be about to befall either themselves who are offering sacrifice or
the land of Egypt in general, it may come rather upon this head. Now
as regards the heads of the beasts which are sacrificed and the pouring
over them of the wine, all the Egyptians have the same customs equally
for all their sacrifices; and by reason of this custom none of the
Egyptians eat of the head either of this or of any other kind of animal:

40, but the manner of disembowelling the victims and of burning them is
appointed among them differently for different sacrifices; I shall
speak however of the sacrifices to that goddess whom they regard as the
greatest of all, and to whom they celebrate the greatest feast.—When
they have flayed the bullock and made imprecation, they take out the
whole of its lower entrails but leave in the body the upper entrails and
the fat; and they sever from it the legs and the end of the loin and the
shoulders and the neck: and this done, they fill the rest of the body of
the animal with consecrated 44 loaves and honey and raisins and figs and
frankincense and myrrh and every other kind of spices, and having filled
it with these they offer it, pouring over it great abundance of oil.
They make their sacrifice after fasting, and while the offerings are
being burnt, they all beat themselves for mourning, and when they have
finished beating themselves they set forth as a feast that which they
left unburnt of the sacrifice.

41. The clean males then of the ox kind, both full-grown animals and
calves, are sacrificed by all the Egyptians; the females however they
may not sacrifice, but these are sacred to Isis; for the figure of Isis
is in the form of a woman with cow's horns, just as the Hellenes present
Io in pictures, and all the Egyptians without distinction reverence cows
far more than any other kind of cattle; for which reason neither man nor
woman of Egyptian race would kiss a man who is a Hellene on the mouth,
nor will they use a knife or roasting-spits or a caldron belonging to
a Hellene, nor taste of the flesh even of a clean animal if it has been
cut with the knife of a Hellene. And the cattle of this kind which die
they bury in the following manner:—the females they cast into the river,
but the males they bury, each people in the suburb of their town, with
one of the horns, or sometimes both, protruding to mark the place; and
when the bodies have rotted away and the appointed time comes on, then
to each city comes a boat 45 from that which is called the island of
Prosopitis (this is in the Delta, and the extent of its circuit is nine
schoines). In this island of Prosopitis is situated, besides many other
cities, that one from which the boats come to take up the bones of the
oxen, and the name of the city is Atarbechis, and in it there is set
up a holy temple of Aphrodite. From this city many go abroad in various
directions, some to one city and others to another, and when they have
dug up the bones of the oxen they carry them off, and coming together
they bury them in one single place. In the same manner as they bury the
oxen they bury also their other cattle when they die; for about them
also they have the same law laid down, and these also they abstain from
killing.

42. Now all who have a temple set up to the Theban Zeus or who are of
the district of Thebes, these, I say, all sacrifice goats and abstain
from sheep: for not all the Egyptians equally reverence the same gods,
except only Isis and Osiris (who they say is Dionysos), these they all
reverence alike: but they who have a temple of Mendes or belong to the
Mendesian district, these abstain from goats and sacrifice sheep. Now
the men of Thebes and those who after their example abstain from sheep,
say that this custom was established among them for the cause which
follows:—Heracles (they say) had an earnest desire to see Zeus, and Zeus
did not desire to be seen of him; and at last when Heracles was urgent
in entreaty Zeus contrived this device, that is to say, he flayed a ram
and held in front of him the head of the ram which he had cut off, and
he put on over him the fleece and then showed himself to him. Hence
the Egyptians make the image of Zeus into the face of a ram; and the
Ammonians do so also after their example, being settlers both from
the Egyptians and from the Ethiopians, and using a language which is a
medley of both tongues: and in my opinion it is from this god that the
Ammonians took the name which they have, for the Egyptians call Zeus
Amun. The Thebans then do not sacrifice rams but hold them sacred for
this reason; on one day however in the year, on the feast of Zeus, they
cut up in the same manner and flay one single ram and cover with its
skin the image of Zeus, and then they bring up to it another image
of Heracles. This done, all who are in the temple beat themselves in
lamentation for the ram, and then they bury it in a sacred tomb.

43. About Heracles I heard the account given that he was of the number
of the twelve gods; but of the other Heracles whom the Hellenes know I
was not able to hear in any part of Egypt: and moreover to prove that
the Egyptians did not take the name of Heracles from the Hellenes, but
rather the Hellenes from the Egyptians,—that is to say those of the
Hellenes who gave the name Heracles to the son of Amphitryon,—of that, I
say, besides many other evidences there is chiefly this, namely that the
parents of this Heracles, Amphitryon and Alcmene, were both of Egypt by
descent, 46 and also that the Egyptians say that they do not know
the names either of Poseidon or of the Dioscuroi, nor have these been
accepted by them as gods among the other gods; whereas if they had
received from the Hellenes the name of any divinity, they would
naturally have preserved the memory of these most of all, assuming that
in those times as now some of the Hellenes were wont to make voyages
4601 and were sea-faring folk, as I suppose and as my judgment compels
me to think; so that the Egyptians would have learnt the names of these
gods even more than that of Heracles. In fact however Heracles is a
very ancient Egyptian god; and (as they say themselves) it is seventeen
thousand years to the beginning of the reign of Amasis from the time
when the twelve gods, of whom they count that Heracles is one, were
begotten of the eight gods.

44. I moreover, desiring to know something certain of these matters so
far as might be, made a voyage also to Tyre of Phenicia, hearing that
in that place there was a holy temple of Heracles; and I saw that it
was richly furnished with many votive offerings besides, and especially
there were in it two pillars, 47 the one of pure gold and the other of
an emerald stone of such size as to shine by night: 48 and having come
to speech with the priests of the god, I asked them how long time it
was since their temple had been set up: and these also I found to be
at variance with the Hellenes, for they said that at the same time when
Tyre was founded, the temple of the god also had been set up, and that
it was a period of two thousand three hundred years since their people
began to dwell at Tyre. I saw also at Tyre another temple of Heracles,
with the surname Thasian; and I came to Thasos also and there I found a
temple of Heracles set up by the Phenicians, who had sailed out to seek
for Europa and had colonised Thasos; and these things happened full five
generations of men before Heracles the son of Amphitryon was born in
Hellas. So then my inquiries show clearly that Heracles is an ancient
god, and those of the Hellenes seem to me to act most rightly who have
two temples of Heracles set up, and who sacrifice to the one as an
immortal god and with the title Olympian, and make offerings of the dead
49 to the other as a hero.

45. Moreover, besides many other stories which the Hellenes tell without
due consideration, this tale is especially foolish which they tell about
Heracles, namely that when he came to Egypt, the Egyptians put on him
wreaths and led him forth in procession to sacrifice him to Zeus; and he
for some time kept quiet, but when they were beginning the sacrifice of
him at the altar, he betook himself to prowess and slew them all. I for
my part am of opinion that the Hellenes when they tell this tale are
altogether without knowledge of the nature and customs of the Egyptians;
for how should they for whom it is not lawful to sacrifice even beasts,
except swine 50 and the males of oxen and calves (such of them as are
clean) and geese, how should these sacrifice human beings? Besides this,
how is it in nature possible that Heracles, being one person only and
moreover a man (as they assert), should slay many myriads? Having said
so much of these matters, we pray that we may have grace from both the
gods and the heroes for our speech.

