46. Now the reason why those of the Egyptians whom I have mentioned do
not sacrifice goats, female or male, is this:—the Mendesians count Pan
to be one of the eight gods (now these eight gods they say came into
being before the twelve gods), and the painters and image-makers
represent in painting and in sculpture the figure of Pan, just as the
Hellenes do, with goat's face and legs, not supposing him to be really
like this but to resemble the other gods; the cause however why they
represent him in this form I prefer not to say. The Mendesians then
reverence all goats and the males more than the females (and the
goatherds too have greater honour than other herdsmen), but of the goats
one especially is reverenced, and when he dies there is great mourning
in all the Mendesian district: and both the goat and Pan are called in
the Egyptian tongue Mendes. Moreover in my lifetime there happened in
that district this marvel, that is to say a he-goat had intercourse with
a woman publicly, and this was so done that all men might have evidence
of it.

47. The pig is accounted by the Egyptians an abominable animal; and
first, if any of them in passing by touch a pig, he goes into the river
and dips himself forthwith in the water together with his garments; and
then too swineherds, though they be native Egyptians, unlike all others
do not enter any of the temples in Egypt, nor is anyone willing to give
his daughter in marriage to one of them or to take a wife from among
them; but the swineherds both give in marriage to one another and take
from one another. Now to the other gods the Egyptians do not think it
right to sacrifice swine; but to the Moon and to Dionysos alone at the
same time and on the same full-moon they sacrifice swine, and then eat
their flesh: and as to the reason why, when they abominate swine at all
their other feasts, they sacrifice them at this, there is a story told
by the Egyptians; and this story I know, but it is not a seemly one for
me to tell. Now the sacrifice of the swine to the Moon is performed as
follows:—when the priest has slain the victim, he puts together the end
of the tail and the spleen and the caul, and covers them up with the
whole of the fat of the animal which is about the paunch, and then he
offers them with fire; and the rest of the flesh they eat on that day of
full moon upon which they have held the sacrifice, but on any day after
this they will not taste of it: the poor however among them by reason of
the scantiness of their means shape pigs of dough and having baked them
they offer these as a sacrifice.

48. Then for Dionysos on the eve of the festival each one kills a pig by
cutting its throat before his own doors, and after that he gives the pig
to the swineherd who sold it to him, to carry away again; and the rest
of the feast of Dionysos is celebrated by the Egyptians in the same
way as by the Hellenes in almost all things except choral dances, but
instead of the phallos they have invented another contrivance, namely
figures of about a cubit in height worked by strings, which women carry
about the villages, with the privy member made to move and not much
less in size than the rest of the body: and a flute goes before and they
follow singing the praises of Dionysos. As to the reason why the figure
has this member larger than is natural and moves it, though it moves no
other part of the body, about this there is a sacred story told.

49. Now I think that Melampus the son of Amytheon was not without
knowledge of these rites of sacrifice, but was acquainted with them: for
Melampus is he who first set forth to the Hellenes the name of Dionysos
and the manner of sacrifice and the procession of the phallos. Strictly
speaking indeed, he when he made it known did not take in the whole, but
those wise men who came after him made it known more at large. Melampus
then is he who taught of the phallos which is carried in procession for
Dionysos, and from him the Hellenes learnt to do that which they do. I
say then that Melampus being a man of ability contrived for himself an
art of divination, and having learnt from Egypt he taught the Hellenes
many things, and among them those that concern Dionysos, making changes
in some few points of them: for I shall not say that that which is done
in worship of the god in Egypt came accidentally to be the same with
that which is done among the Hellenes, for then these rites would have
been in character with the Hellenic worship and not lately brought in;
nor certainly shall I say that the Egyptians took from the Hellenes
either this or any other customary observance: but I think it most
probable that Melampus learnt the matters concerning Dionysos from
Cadmos the Tyrian and from those who came with him from Phenicia to the
land which we now call Boeotia.

50. Moreover the naming 51 of almost all the gods has come to Hellas
from Egypt: for that it has come from the Barbarians I find by inquiry
is true, and I am of opinion that most probably it has come from Egypt,
because, except in the case of Poseidon and the Dioscuroi (in accordance
with that which I have said before), and also of Hera and Hestia and
Themis and the Charites and Nereïds, the Egyptians have had the names
of all the other gods in their country for all time. What I say here
is that which the Egyptians think themselves: but as for the gods whose
names they profess that they do not know, these I think received their
naming from the Pelasgians, except Poseidon; but about this god the
Hellenes learnt from the Libyans, for no people except the Libyans have
had the name of Poseidon from the first and have paid honour to this
god always. Nor, it may be added, have the Egyptians any custom of
worshipping heroes.

51. These observances then, and others besides these which I shall
mention, the Hellenes have adopted from the Egyptians; but to make, as
they do, the images of Hermes with the phallos they have learnt not from
the Egyptians but from the Pelasgians, the custom having been received
by the Athenians first of all the Hellenes and from these by the rest;
for just at the time when the Athenians were beginning to rank among the
Hellenes, the Pelasgians became dwellers with them in their land, and
from this very cause it was that they began to be counted as Hellenes.
Whosoever has been initiated in the mysteries of the Cabeiroi, which the
Samothrakians perform having received them from the Pelasgians, that
man knows the meaning of my speech; for these very Pelasgians who
became dwellers with the Athenians used to dwell before that time in
Samothrake, and from them the Samothrakians received their mysteries. So
then the Athenians were the first of the Hellenes who made the images
of Hermes with the phallos, having learnt from the Pelasgians; and
the Pelasgians told a sacred story about it, which is set forth in the
mysteries in Samothrake.

52. Now the Pelasgians formerly were wont to make all their sacrifices
calling upon the gods in prayer, as I know from that which I heard at
Dodona, but they gave no title or name to any of them, for they had
not yet heard any, but they called them gods ({theous}) from some such
notion as this, that they had set ({thentes}) in order all things and
so had the distribution of everything. Afterwards, when much time
had elapsed, they learnt from Egypt the names of the gods, all except
Dionysos, for his name they learnt long afterwards; and after a time
the Pelasgians consulted the Oracle at Dodona about the names, for this
prophetic seat is accounted to be the most ancient of the Oracles which
are among the Hellenes, and at that time it was the only one. So when
the Pelasgians asked the Oracle at Dodona whether they should adopt the
names which had come from the Barbarians, the Oracle in reply bade them
make use of the names. From this time they sacrificed using the names of
the gods, and from the Pelasgians the Hellenes afterwards received them:

53, but whence the several gods had their birth, or whether they all
were from the beginning, and of what form they are, they did not learn
till yesterday, as it were, or the day before: for Hesiod and Homer I
suppose were four hundred years before my time and not more, and these
are they who made a theogony for the Hellenes and gave the titles to
the gods and distributed to them honours and arts, and set forth their
forms: but the poets who are said to have been before these men were
really in my opinion after them. Of these things the first are said by
the priestesses of Dodona, and the latter things, those namely which
have regard to Hesiod and Homer, by myself.

54. As regards the Oracles both that among the Hellenes and that in
Libya, the Egyptians tell the following tale. The priests of the Theban
Zeus told me that two women in the service of the temple had been
carried away from Thebes by Phenicians, and that they had heard that one
of them had been sold to go into Libya and the other to the Hellenes;
and these women, they said, were they who first founded the prophetic
seats among the nations which have been named: and when I inquired
whence they knew so perfectly of this tale which they told, they said
in reply that a great search had been made by the priests after these
women, and that they had not been able to find them, but they had heard
afterwards this tale about them which they were telling.

55. This I heard from the priests at Thebes, and what follows is said by
the prophetesses 52 of Dodona. They say that two black doves flew from
Thebes to Egypt, and came one of them to Libya and the other to their
land. And this latter settled upon an oak-tree 53 and spoke with human
voice, saying that it was necessary that a prophetic seat of Zeus should
be established in that place; and they supposed that that was of the
gods which was announced to them, and made one accordingly: and the dove
which went away to the Libyans, they say, bade the Libyans to make an
Oracle of Ammon; and this also is of Zeus. The priestesses of Dodona
told me these things, of whom the eldest was named Promeneia, the next
after her Timarete, and the youngest Nicandra; and the other people of
Dodona who were engaged about the temple gave accounts agreeing with
theirs.

56. I however have an opinion about the matter as follows:—If the
Phenicians did in truth carry away the consecrated women and sold one of
them into Libya and the other into Hellas, I suppose that in the country
now called Hellas, which was formerly called Pelasgia, this woman was
sold into the land of the Thesprotians; and then being a slave there she
set up a sanctuary of Zeus under a real oak-tree; 54 as indeed it was
natural that being an attendant of the sanctuary of Zeus at Thebes, she
should there, in the place to which she had come, have a memory of him;
and after this, when she got understanding of the Hellenic tongue, she
established an Oracle, and she reported, I suppose, that her sister had
been sold in Libya by the same Phenicians by whom she herself had been
sold.

57. Moreover, I think that the women were called doves by the people of
Dodona for the reason that they were Barbarians and because it seemed to
them that they uttered voice like birds; but after a time (they say) the
dove spoke with human voice, that is when the woman began to speak so
that they could understand; but so long as she spoke a Barbarian tongue
she seemed to them to be uttering voice like a bird: for had it been
really a dove, how could it speak with human voice? And in saying that
the dove was black, they indicate that the woman was Egyptian. The
ways of delivering oracles too at Thebes in Egypt and at Dodona closely
resemble one another, as it happens, and also the method of divination
by victims has come from Egypt.

58. Moreover, it is true also that the Egyptians were the first of men
who made solemn assemblies 55 and processions and approaches to the
temples, 56 and from them the Hellenes have learnt them, and my evidence
for this is that the Egyptian celebrations of these have been held from
a very ancient time, whereas the Hellenic were introduced 57 but lately.

59. The Egyptians hold their solemn assemblies not once in the year but
often, especially and with the greatest zeal and devotion 58 at the
city of Bubastis for Artemis, and next at Busiris for Isis; for in this
last-named city there is a very great temple of Isis, and this city
stands in the middle of the Delta of Egypt; now Isis is in the tongue of
the Hellenes Demeter: thirdly, they have a solemn assembly at the city
of Saïs for Athene, fourthly at Heliopolis for the Sun (Helios), fifthly
at the city of Buto in honour of Leto, and sixthly at the city of
Papremis for Ares.

60. Now, when they are coming to the city of Bubastis they do as
follows:—they sail men and women together, and a great multitude of each
sex in every boat; and some of the women have rattles and rattle with
them, while some of the men play the flute during the whole time of the
voyage, and the rest, both women and men, sing and clap their hands; and
when as they sail they come opposite to any city on the way they bring
the boat to land, and some of the women continue to do as I have said,
others cry aloud and jeer at the women in that city, some dance, and
some stand up and pull up their garments. This they do by every city
along the river-bank; and when they come to Bubastis they hold festival
celebrating great sacrifices, and more wine of grapes is consumed upon
that festival than during the whole of the rest of the year. To this
place (so say the natives) they come together year by year 59 even to
the number of seventy myriads 5901 of men and women, besides children.

61. Thus it is done here; and how they celebrate the festival in honour
of Isis at the city of Busiris has been told by me before: 60 for, as I
said, they beat themselves in mourning after the sacrifice, all of them
both men and women, very many myriads of people; but for whom they beat
themselves it is not permitted to me by religion to say: and so many as
there are of the Carians dwelling in Egypt do this even more than the
Egyptians themselves, inasmuch as they cut their foreheads also with
knives; and by this it is manifested that they are strangers and not
Egyptians.

62. At the times when they gather together at the city of Saïs for their
sacrifices, on a certain night 61 they all kindle lamps many in number
in the open air round about the houses; now the lamps are saucers full
of salt and oil mixed, and the wick floats by itself on the surface, and
this burns during the whole night; and to the festival is given the name
Lychnocaia (the lighting of the lamps). Moreover those of the Egyptians
who have not come to this solemn assembly observe the night of the
festival and themselves also light lamps all of them, and thus not in
Saïs alone are they lighted, but over all Egypt: and as to the reason
why light and honour are allotted to this night, 62 about this there is
a sacred story told.

63. To Heliopolis and Buto they go year by year and do sacrifice only:
but at Papremis they do sacrifice and worship as elsewhere, and besides
that, when the sun begins to go down, while some few of the priests are
occupied with the image of the god, the greater number of them stand in
the entrance of the temple with wooden clubs, and other persons to the
number of more than a thousand men with purpose to perform a vow, these
also having all of them staves of wood, stand in a body opposite to
those: and the image, which is in a small shrine of wood covered over
with gold, they take out on the day before to another sacred building.
The few then who have been left about the image, draw a wain with four
wheels, which bears the shrine and the image that is within the shrine,
and the other priests standing in the gateway try to prevent it from
entering, and the men who are under a vow come to the assistance of the
god and strike them, while the others defend themselves. 63 Then there
comes to be a hard fight with staves, and they break one another's
heads, and I am of opinion that many even die of the wounds they
receive; the Egyptians however told me that no one died. This solemn
assembly the people of the place say that they established for the
following reason:—the mother of Ares, they say, used to dwell in this
temple, and Ares, having been brought up away from her, when he grew
up came thither desiring to visit his mother, and the attendants of his
mother's temple, not having seen him before, did not permit him to pass
in, but kept him away; and he brought men to help him from another city
and handled roughly the attendants of the temple, and entered to visit
his mother. Hence, they say, this exchange of blows has become the
custom in honour of Ares upon his festival.

64. The Egyptians were the first who made it a point of religion not to
lie with women in temples, nor to enter into temples after going away
from women without first bathing: for almost all other men except the
Egyptians and the Hellenes lie with women in temples and enter into a
temple after going away from women without bathing, since they hold that
there is no difference in this respect between men and beasts: for
they say that they see beasts and the various kinds of birds coupling
together both in the temples and in the sacred enclosures of the gods;
if then this were not pleasing to the god, the beasts would not do so.

65. Thus do these defend that which they do, which by me is disallowed:
but the Egyptians are excessively careful in their observances, both
in other matters which concern the sacred rites and also in those which
follow:—Egypt, though it borders upon Libya, 6301 does not very much
abound in wild animals, but such as they have are one and all accounted
by them sacred, some of them living with men and others not. But if I
should say for what reasons the sacred animals have been thus dedicated,
I should fall into discourse of matters pertaining to the gods, of
which I most desire not to speak; and what I have actually said touching
slightly upon them, I said because I was constrained by necessity.
About these animals there is a custom of this kind:—persons have been
appointed of the Egyptians, both men and women, to provide the food for
each kind of beast separately, and their office goes down from father
to son; and those who dwell in the various cities perform vows to
them thus, that is, when they make a vow to the god to whom the animal
belongs, they shave the head of their children either the whole or
the half or the third part of it, and then set the hair in the balance
against silver, and whatever it weighs, this the man gives to the person
who provides for the animals, and she cuts up fish of equal value and
gives it for food to the animals. Thus food for their support has been
appointed: and if any one kill any of these animals, the penalty, if he
do it with his own will, is death, and if against his will, such penalty
as the priests may appoint: but whosoever shall kill an ibis or a hawk,
whether it be with his will or against his will, must die.

66. Of the animals that live with men there are great numbers, and would
be many more but for the accidents which befall the cats. For when the
females have produced young they are no longer in the habit of going
to the males, and these seeking to be united with them are not able. To
this end then they contrive as follows,—they either take away by force
or remove secretly the young from the females and kill them (but after
killing they do not eat them), and the females being deprived of their
young and desiring more, therefore come to the males, for it is a
creature that is fond of its young. Moreover when a fire occurs, the
cats seem to be divinely possessed; 64 for while the Egyptians stand at
intervals and look after the cats, not taking any care to extinguish the
fire, the cats slipping through or leaping over the men, jump into the
fire; and when this happens, great mourning comes upon the Egyptians.
And in whatever houses a cat has died by a natural death, all those who
dwell in this house shave their eyebrows only, but those in whose houses
a dog has died shave their whole body and also their head.

67. The cats when they are dead are carried away to sacred buildings in
the city of Bubastis, where after being embalmed they are buried; but
the dogs they bury each people in their own city in sacred tombs;
and the ichneumons are buried just in the same way as the dogs. The
shrew-mice however and the hawks they carry away to the city of Buto,
and the ibises to Hermopolis; 65 the bears (which are not commonly seen)
and the wolves, not much larger in size than foxes, they bury on the
spot where they are found lying.

68. Of the crocodile the nature is as follows:—during the four most
wintry months this creature eats nothing: she has four feet and is an
animal belonging to the land and the water both; for she produces and
hatches eggs on the land, and the most part of the day she remains upon
dry land, but the whole of the night in the river, for the water in
truth is warmer than the unclouded open air and the dew. Of all the
mortal creatures of which we have knowledge this grows to the greatest
bulk from the smallest beginning; for the eggs which she produces are
not much larger than those of geese and the newly-hatched young one
is in proportion to the egg, but as he grows he becomes as much as
seventeen cubits long and sometimes yet larger. He has eyes like those
of a pig and teeth large and tusky, in proportion to the size of his
body; but unlike all other beasts he grows no tongue, neither does he
move his lower jaw, but brings the upper jaw towards the lower, being
in this too unlike all other beasts. He has moreover strong claws and a
scaly hide upon his back which cannot be pierced; and he is blind in the
water, but in the air he is of very keen sight. Since he has his living
in the water he keeps his mouth all full within of leeches; and whereas
all other birds and beasts fly from him, the trochilus is a creature
which is at peace with him, seeing that from her he receives benefit;
for the crocodile having come out of the water to the land and then
having opened his mouth (this he is wont to do generally towards the
West Wind), the trochilus upon that enters into his mouth and swallows
down the leeches, and he being benefited is pleased and does no harm to
the trochilus.

69. Now for some of the Egyptians the crocodiles are sacred animals, and
for others not so, but they treat them on the contrary as enemies: those
however who dwell about Thebes and about the lake of Moiris hold them
to be most sacred, and each of these two peoples keeps one crocodile
selected from the whole number, which has been trained to tameness, and
they put hanging ornaments of molten stone and of gold into the ears
of these and anklets round the front feet, and they give them food
appointed and victims of sacrifices and treat them as well as possible
while they live, and after they are dead they bury them in sacred tombs,
embalming them: but those who dwell about the city of Elephantine even
eat them, not holding them to be sacred. They are called not crocodiles
but champsai, and the Ionians gave them the name of crocodile, comparing
their form to that of the crocodiles (lizards) which appear in their
country in the stone walls.

70. There are many ways in use of catching them and of various kinds: I
shall describe that which to me seems the most worthy of being told. A
man puts the back of a pig upon a hook as bait, and lets it go into the
middle of the river, while he himself upon the bank of the river has
a young live pig, which he beats; and the crocodile hearing its cries
makes for the direction of the sound, and when he finds the pig's back
he swallows it down: then they pull, and when he is drawn out to land,
first of all the hunter forthwith plasters up his eyes with mud, and
having so done he very easily gets the mastery of him, but if he does
not do so he has much trouble.

71. The river-horse is sacred in the district of Papremis, but for the
other Egyptians he is not sacred; and this is the appearance which he
presents: he is four-footed, cloven-hoofed like an ox, 66 flat-nosed,
with a mane like a horse and showing teeth like tusks, with a tail and
voice like a horse, and in size as large as the largest ox; and his hide
is so exceedingly thick that when it has been dried shafts of javelins
are made of it.

72. There are moreover otters in the river, which they consider to be
sacred; and of fish also they esteem that which is called the lepidotos
to be sacred, and also the eel; and these they say are sacred to the
Nile: and of birds the fox-goose.

73. There is also another sacred bird called the phoenix which I did
not myself see except in painting, for in truth he comes to them very
rarely, at intervals, as the people of Heliopolis say, of five hundred
years; and these say that he comes regularly when his father dies; and
if he be like the painting, he is of this size and nature, that is to
say, some of his feathers are of gold colour and others red, and in
outline and size he is as nearly as possible like an eagle. This bird
they say (but I cannot believe the story) contrives as follows:—setting
forth from Arabia he conveys his father, they say, to the temple of the
Sun (Helios) plastered up in myrrh, and buries him in the temple of the
Sun; and he conveys him thus:—he forms first an egg of myrrh as large as
he is able to carry, and then he makes trial of carrying it, and when he
has made trial sufficiently, then he hollows out the egg and places his
father within it and plasters over with other myrrh that part of the egg
where he hollowed it out to put his father in, and when his father is
laid in it, it proves (they say) to be of the same weight as it was;
and after he has plastered it up, he conveys the whole to Egypt to the
temple of the Sun. Thus they say that this bird does.

74. There are also about Thebes sacred serpents, not at all harmful to
men, which are small in size and have two horns growing from the top of
the head: these they bury when they die in the temple of Zeus, for to
this god they say that they are sacred.

75. There is a region moreover in Arabia, situated nearly over against
the city of Buto, to which place I came to inquire about the winged
serpents: and when I came thither I saw bones of serpents and spines in
quantity so great that it is impossible to make report of the number,
and there were heaps of spines, some heaps large and others less large
and others smaller still than these, and these heaps were many in
number. This region in which the spines are scattered upon the ground
is of the nature of an entrance from a narrow mountain pass to a great
plain, which plain adjoins the plain of Egypt; and the story goes that
at the beginning of spring winged serpents from Arabia fly towards
Egypt, and the birds called ibises meet them at the entrance to this
country and do not suffer the serpents to go by but kill them. On
account of this deed it is (say the Arabians) that the ibis has come to
be greatly honoured by the Egyptians, and the Egyptians also agree that
it is for this reason that they honour these birds.

76. The outward form of the ibis is this:—it is a deep black all over,
and has legs like those of a crane and a very curved beak, and in size
it is about equal to a rail: this is the appearance of the black kind
which fight with the serpents, but of those which most crowd round men's
feet (for there are two several kinds of ibises) the head is bare and
also the whole of the throat, and it is white in feathering except the
head and neck and the extremities of the wings and the rump (in all
these parts of which I have spoken it is a deep black), while in legs
and in the form of the head it resembles the other. As for the serpent
its form is like that of the watersnake; and it has wings not feathered
but most nearly resembling the wings of the bat. Let so much suffice as
has been said now concerning sacred animals.

77. Of the Egyptians themselves, those who dwell in the part of Egypt
which is sown for crops 67 practise memory more than any other men and
are the most learned in history by far of all those of whom I have had
experience: and their manner of life is as follows:—For three successive
days in each month they purge, hunting after health with emetics and
clysters, and they think that all the diseases which exist are produced
in men by the food on which they live; for the Egyptians are from other
causes also the most healthy of all men next after the Libyans (in my
opinion on account of the seasons, because the seasons do not change,
for by the changes of things generally, and especially of the seasons,
diseases are most apt to be produced in men), and as to their diet, it
is as follows:—they eat bread, making loaves of maize, which they call
kyllestis, and they use habitually a wine made out of barley, for vines
they have not in their land. Of their fish some they dry in the sun and
then eat them without cooking, others they eat cured in brine. Of birds
they eat quails and ducks and small birds without cooking, after first
curing them; and everything else which they have belonging to the
class of birds or fishes, except such as have been set apart by them as
sacred, they eat roasted or boiled.

78. In the entertainments of the rich among them, when they have
finished eating, a man bears round a wooden figure of a dead body in a
coffin, made as like the reality as may be both by painting and carving,
and measuring about a cubit or two cubits each way; 68 and this he shows
to each of those who are drinking together, saying: "When thou lookest
upon this, drink and be merry, for thou shalt be such as this when thou
art dead." Thus they do at their carousals.

79. The customs which they practise are derived from their fathers and
they do not acquire others in addition; but besides other customary
things among them which are worthy of mention, they have one song, 6801
that of Linos, the same who is sung of both in Phenicia and in Cyprus
and elsewhere, having however a name different according to the various
nations. This song agrees exactly with that which the Hellenes sing
calling on the name of Linos, 69 so that besides many other things
about which I wonder among those matters which concern Egypt, I wonder
especially about this, namely whence they got the song of Linos. 70 It
is evident however that they have sung this song from immemorial time,
and in the Egyptian tongue Linos is called Maneros. The Egyptians told
me that he was the only son of him who first became king of Egypt, and
that he died before his time and was honoured with these lamentations by
the Egyptians, and that this was their first and only song.

80. In another respect the Egyptians are in agreement with some of the
Hellenes, namely with the Lacedemonians, but not with the rest, that is
to say, the younger of them when they meet the elder give way and move
out of the path, and when their elders approach they rise out of their
seat. In this which follows however they are not in agreement with any
of the Hellenes,—instead of addressing one another in the roads they do
reverence, lowering their hand down to their knee.

81. They wear tunics of linen about their legs with fringes, which they
call calasiris; above these they have garments of white wool thrown
over: woollen garments however are not taken into the temples, nor are
they buried with them, for this is not permitted by religion. In these
points they are in agreement with the observances called Orphic and
Bacchic (which are really Egyptian), 71 and also with those of the
Pythagoreans, for one who takes part in these mysteries is also
forbidden by religious rule to be buried in woollen garments; and about
this there is a sacred story told.

82. Besides these things the Egyptians have found out also to what god
each month and each day belongs, and what fortunes a man will meet with
who is born on any particular day, and how he will die, and what kind
of a man he will be: and these inventions were taken up by those of the
Hellenes who occupied themselves about poesy. Portents too have been
found out by them more than by all other men besides; for when a portent
has happened, they observe and write down the event which comes of it,
and if ever afterwards anything resembling this happens, they believe
that the event which comes of it will be similar.

83. Their divination is ordered thus:—the art is assigned not to any
man, but to certain of the gods, for there are in their land Oracles of
Heracles, of Apollo, of Athene, of Artemis, of Ares, and of Zeus, and
moreover that which they hold most in honour of all, namely the Oracle
of Leto which is in the city of Buto. The manner of divination however
is not yet established among them according to the same fashion
everywhere, but is different in different places.

84. The art of medicine among them is distributed thus:—each physician
is a physician of one disease and of no more; and the whole country is
full of physicians, for some profess themselves to be physicians of the
eyes, others of the head, others of the teeth, others of the affections
of the stomach, and others of the more obscure ailments.

85. Their fashions of mourning and of burial are these:—Whenever any
household has lost a man who is of any regard amongst them, the whole
number of women of that house forthwith plaster over their heads or even
their faces with mud. Then leaving the corpse within the house they go
themselves to and fro about the city and beat themselves, with their
garments bound up by a girdle 72 and their breasts exposed, and with
them go all the women who are related to the dead man, and on the other
side the men beat themselves, they too having their garments bound up by
a girdle; and when they have done this, they then convey the body to the
embalming.

86. In this occupation certain persons employ themselves regularly and
inherit this as a craft. These, whenever a corpse is conveyed to them,
show to those who brought it wooden models of corpses made like reality
by painting, and the best of the ways of embalming they say is that of
him whose name I think it impiety to mention when speaking of a matter
of such a kind; 73 the second which they show is less good than this and
also less expensive; and the third is the least expensive of all. Having
told them about this, they inquire of them in which way they desire the
corpse of their friend to be prepared. Then they after they have agreed
for a certain price depart out of the way, and the others being left
behind in the buildings embalm according to the best of these ways
thus:—First with a crooked iron tool they draw out the brain through the
nostrils, extracting it partly thus and partly by pouring in drugs; and
after this with a sharp stone of Ethiopia they make a cut along the side
and take out the whole contents of the belly, and when they have cleared
out the cavity and cleansed it with palm-wine they cleanse it again with
spices pounded up: then they fill the belly with pure myrrh pounded
up and with cassia and other spices except frankincense, and sew it
together again. Having so done they keep it for embalming covered up
in natron for seventy days, but for a longer time than this it is not
permitted to embalm it; and when the seventy days are past, they wash
the corpse and roll its whole body up in fine linen 74 cut into bands,
smearing these beneath with gum, 75 which the Egyptians use generally
instead of glue. Then the kinsfolk receive it from them and have a
wooden figure made in the shape of a man, and when they have had this
made they enclose the corpse, and having shut it up within, they store
it then in a sepulchral chamber, setting it to stand upright against the
wall.

87. Thus they deal with the corpses which are prepared in the most
costly way; but for those who desire the middle way and wish to avoid
great cost they prepare the corpse as follows:—having filled their
syringes with the oil which is got from cedar-wood, with this they
forthwith fill the belly of the corpse, and this they do without having
either cut it open or taken out the bowels, but they inject the oil by
the breech, and having stopped the drench from returning back they keep
it then the appointed number of days for embalming, and on the last
of the days they let the cedar oil come out from the belly, which they
before put in; and it has such power that it brings out with it the
bowels and interior organs of the body dissolved; and the natron
dissolves the flesh, so that there is left of the corpse only the skin
and the bones. When they have done this they give back the corpse at
once in that condition without working upon it any more.

88. The third kind of embalming, by which are prepared the bodies of
those who have less means, is as follows:—they cleanse out the belly
with a purge and then keep the body for embalming during the seventy
days, and at once after that they give it back to the bringers to carry
away.

89. The wives of men of rank when they die are not given at once to be
embalmed, nor such women as are very beautiful or of greater regard
than others, but on the third or fourth day after their death (and
not before) they are delivered to the embalmers. They do so about this
matter in order that the embalmers may not abuse their women, for they
say that one of them was taken once doing so to the corpse of a woman
lately dead, and his fellow-craftsman gave information.

90. Whenever any one, either of the Egyptians themselves or of
strangers, is found to have been carried off by a crocodile or brought
to his death by the river itself, the people of any city by which he may
have been cast up on land must embalm him and lay him out in the fairest
way they can and bury him in a sacred burial-place, nor may any of his
relations or friends besides touch him, but the priests of the Nile
themselves handle the corpse and bury it as that of one who was
something more than man.

91. Hellenic usages they will by no means follow, and to speak generally
they follow those of no other men whatever. This rule is observed by
most of the Egyptians; but there is a large city named Chemmis in the
Theban district near Neapolis, and in this city there is a temple of
Perseus the son of Danae which is of a square shape, and round it grow
date-palms: the gateway of the temple is built of stone and of very
great size, and at the entrance of it stand two great statues of stone.
Within this enclosure is a temple-house 76 and in it stands an image
of Perseus. These people of Chemmis say that Perseus is wont often to
appear in their land and often within the temple, and that a sandal
which has been worn by him is found sometimes, being in length two
cubits, and whenever this appears all Egypt prospers. This they say, and
they do in honour of Perseus after Hellenic fashion thus,—they hold an
athletic contest, which includes the whole list of games, and they offer
in prizes cattle and cloaks and skins: and when I inquired why to them
alone Perseus was wont to appear, and wherefore they were separated from
all the other Egyptians in that they held an athletic contest, they said
that Perseus had been born of their city, for Danaos and Lynkeus were
men of Chemmis and had sailed to Hellas, and from them they traced a
descent and came down to Perseus: and they told me that he had come to
Egypt for the reason which the Hellenes also say, namely to bring from
Libya the Gorgon's head, and had then visited them also and recognised
all his kinsfolk, and they said that he had well learnt the name of
Chemmis before he came to Egypt, since he had heard it from his mother,
and that they celebrated an athletic contest for him by his own command.

92. All these are customs practised by the Egyptians who dwell above the
fens: and those who are settled in the fen-land have the same customs
for the most part as the other Egyptians, both in other matters and also
in that they live each with one wife only, as do the Hellenes; but for
economy in respect of food they have invented these things besides:—when
the river has become full and the plains have been flooded, there grow
in the water great numbers of lilies, which the Egyptians call lotos;
these they cut with a sickle and dry in the sun, and then they pound
that which grows in the middle of the lotos and which is like the head
of a poppy, and they make of it loaves baked with fire. The root also
of this lotos is edible and has a rather sweet taste: 77 it is round
in shape and about the size of an apple. There are other lilies too, in
flower resembling roses, which also grow in the river, and from them the
fruit is produced in a separate vessel springing from the root by the
side of the plant itself, and very nearly resembles a wasp's comb:
in this there grow edible seeds in great numbers of the size of an
olive-stone, and they are eaten either fresh 78 or dried. Besides this
they pull up from the fens the papyrus which grows every year, and the
upper parts of it they cut off and turn to other uses, but that which is
left below for about a cubit in length they eat or sell: and those who
desire to have the papyrus at its very best bake it in an oven heated
red-hot, and then eat it. Some too of these people live on fish alone,
which they dry in the sun after having caught them and taken out the
entrails, and then when they are dry, they use them for food.

93. Fish which swim in shoals are not much produced in the rivers, but
are bred in the lakes, and they do as follows:—When there comes upon
them the desire to breed, they swim out in shoals towards the sea; and
the males lead the way shedding forth their milt as they go, while the
females, coming after and swallowing it up, from it become impregnated:
and when they have become full of young in the sea they swim up back
again, each shoal to its own haunts. The same however no longer lead the
way as before, but the lead comes now to the females, and they leading
the way in shoals do just as the males did, that is to say they shed
forth their eggs by a few grains at a time, 79 and the males coming
after swallow them up. Now these grains are fish, and from the grains
which survive and are not swallowed, the fish grow which afterwards are
bred up. Now those of the fish which are caught as they swim out to sea
are found to be rubbed on the left side of the head, but those which are
caught as they swim up again are rubbed on the right side. This happens
to them because as they swim down to the sea they keep close to the land
on the left side of the river, and again as they swim up they keep to
the same side, approaching and touching the bank as much as they can,
for fear doubtless of straying from their course by reason of the
stream. When the Nile begins to swell, the hollow places of the land
and the depressions by the side of the river first begin to fill, as the
water soaks through from the river, and so soon as they become full of
water, at once they are all filled with little fishes; and whence
these are in all likelihood produced, I think that I perceive. In the
preceding year, when the Nile goes down, the fish first lay eggs in the
mud and then retire with the last of the retreating waters; and when
the time comes round again, and the water once more comes over the land,
from these eggs forthwith are produced the fishes of which I speak.

94. Thus it is as regards the fish. And for anointing those of the
Egyptians who dwell in the fens use oil from the castor-berry, 80 which
oil the Egyptians call kiki, and thus they do:—they sow along the banks
of the rivers and pools these plants, which in a wild form grow of
themselves in the land of the Hellenes; these are sown in Egypt and
produce berries in great quantity but of an evil smell; and when they
have gathered these, some cut them up and press the oil from them,
others again roast them first and then boil them down and collect that
which runs away from them. The oil is fat and not less suitable for
burning than olive-oil, but it gives forth a disagreeable smell.

95. Against the gnats, which are very abundant, they have contrived as
follows:—those who dwell above the fen-land are helped by the towers, to
which they ascend when they go to rest; for the gnats by reason of the
winds are not able to fly up high: but those who dwell in the fen-land
have contrived another way instead of the towers, and this is it:—every
man of them has got a casting net, with which by day he catches fish,
but in the night he uses it for this purpose, that is to say he puts the
casting-net round about the bed in which he sleeps, and then creeps in
under it and goes to sleep: and the gnats, if he sleeps rolled up in a
garment or a linen sheet, bite through these, but through the net they
do not even attempt to bite.

96. Their boats with which they carry cargoes are made of the thorny
acacia, of which the form is very like that of the Kyrenian lotos, and
that which exudes from it is gum. From this tree they cut pieces of wood
about two cubits in length and arrange them like bricks, fastening
the boat together by running a great number of long bolts through the
two-cubit pieces; and when they have thus fastened the boat together,
they lay cross-pieces 81 over the top, using no ribs for the sides; and
within they caulk the seams with papyrus. They make one steering-oar for
it, which is passed through the bottom of the boat; and they have a mast
of acacia and sails of papyrus. These boats cannot sail up the river
unless there be a very fresh wind blowing, but are towed from the shore:
down-stream however they travel as follows:—they have a door-shaped
crate made of tamarisk wood and reed mats sewn together, and also a
stone of about two talents weight bored with a hole; and of these the
boatman lets the crate float on in front of the boat, fastened with a
rope, and the stone drag behind by another rope. The crate then, as the
force of the stream presses upon it, goes on swiftly and draws on the
baris (for so these boats are called), while the stone dragging after it
behind and sunk deep in the water keeps its course straight. These boats
they have in great numbers and some of them carry many thousands of
talents' burden.

97. When the Nile comes over the land, the cities alone are seen rising
above the water, resembling more nearly than anything else the islands
in the Egean sea; for the rest of Egypt becomes a sea and the cities
alone rise above water. Accordingly, whenever this happens, they pass
by water not now by the channels of the river but over the midst of
the plain: for example, as one sails up from Naucratis to Memphis the
passage is then close by the pyramids, whereas the usual passage is not
the same even here, 82 but goes by the point of the Delta and the city
of Kercasoros; while if you sail over the plain to Naucratis from the
sea and from Canobos, you will go by Anthylla and the city called after
Archander.

98. Of these Anthylla is a city of note and is especially assigned to
the wife of him who reigns over Egypt, to supply her with sandals, (this
is the case since the time when Egypt came to be under the Persians):
the other city seems to me to have its name from Archander the
son-in-law of Danaos, who was the son of Phthios, the son of Achaios;
for it is called the City of Archander. There might indeed be another
Archander, but in any case the name is not Egyptian.

99. Hitherto my own observation and judgment and inquiry are the
vouchers for that which I have said; but from this point onwards I am
about to tell the history of Egypt according to that which I heard, to
which will be added also something of that which I have myself seen.

Of Min, who first became king of Egypt, the priests said that on the
one hand he banked off the site of Memphis from the river: for the whole
stream of the river used to flow along by the sandy mountain-range on
the side of Libya, but Min formed by embankments that bend of the river
which lies to the South about a hundred furlongs above Memphis, and thus
he dried up the old stream and conducted the river so that it flowed in
the middle between the mountains: and even now this bend of the Nile is
by the Persians kept under very careful watch, that it may flow in the
channel to which it is confined, 83 and the bank is repaired every year;
for if the river should break through and overflow in this direction,
Memphis would be in danger of being overwhelmed by flood. When this Min,
who first became king, had made into dry land the part which was dammed
off, on the one hand, I say, he founded in it that city which is now
called Memphis; for Memphis too is in the narrow part of Egypt; 84
and outside the city he dug round it on the North and West a lake
communicating with the river, for the side towards the East is barred by
the Nile itself. Then secondly he established in the city the temple of
Hephaistos a great work and most worthy of mention.

100. After this man the priests enumerated to me from a papyrus roll
the names of other kings, three hundred and thirty in number; and in all
these generations of men eighteen were Ethiopians, one was a woman, a
native Egyptian, and the rest were men and of Egyptian race: and the
name of the woman who reigned was the same as that of the Babylonian
queen, namely Nitocris. Of her they said that desiring to take vengeance
for her brother, whom the Egyptians had slain when he was their king and
then, after having slain him, had given his kingdom to her,—desiring,
I say, to take vengeance for him, she destroyed by craft many of the
Egyptians. For she caused to be constructed a very large chamber under
ground, and making as though she would handsel it but in her mind
devising other things, she invited those of the Egyptians whom she knew
to have had most part in the murder, and gave a great banquet. Then
while they were feasting, she let in the river upon them by a secret
conduit of large size. Of her they told no more than this, except that,
when this had been accomplished, she threw herself into a room full of
embers, in order that she might escape vengeance.

101. As for the other kings, they could tell me of no great works which
had been produced by them, and they said that they had no renown 85
except only the last of them, Moris: he (they said) produced as a
memorial of himself the gateway of the temple of Hephaistos which is
turned towards the North Wind, and dug a lake, about which I shall set
forth afterwards how many furlongs of circuit it has, and in it built
pyramids of the size which I shall mention at the same time when I speak
of the lake itself. He, they said, produced these works, but of the rest
none produced any.

102. Therefore passing these by I shall make mention of the king who
came after these, whose name was Sesostris. He (the priests said) first
of all set out with ships of war from the Arabian gulf and subdued those
who dwelt by the shores of the Erythraian Sea, until as he sailed he
came to a sea which could no further be navigated by reason of shoals:
then secondly, after he had returned to Egypt, according to the report
of the priests he took a great army 86 and marched over the continent,
subduing every nation which stood in his way: and those of them whom he
found valiant and fighting desperately for their freedom, in their lands
he set up pillars which told by inscriptions his own name and the name
of his country, and how he had subdued them by his power; but as to
those of whose cities he obtained possession without fighting or with
ease, on their pillars he inscribed words after the same tenor as he did
for the nations which had shown themselves courageous, and in addition
he drew upon them the hidden parts of a woman, desiring to signify by
this that the people were cowards and effeminate.

103. Thus doing he traversed the continent, until at last he passed over
to Europe from Asia and subdued the Scythians and also the Thracians.
These, I am of opinion, were the furthest 87 people to which the
Egyptian army came, for in their country the pillars are found to have
been set up, but in the land beyond this they are no longer found. From
this point he turned and began to go back; and when he came to the river
Phasis, what happened then I cannot say for certain, whether the king
Sesostris himself divided off a certain portion of his army and left the
men there as settlers in the land, or whether some of his soldiers were
wearied by his distant marches and remained by the river Phasis.

