104. For the people of Colchis are evidently Egyptian, and this I
perceived for myself before I heard it from others. So when I had
come to consider the matter I asked them both; and the Colchians had
remembrance of the Egyptians more than the Egyptians of the Colchians;
but the Egyptians said they believed that the Colchians were a portion
of the army of Sesostris. That this was so I conjectured myself not
only because they are dark-skinned and have curly hair (this of itself
amounts to nothing, for there are other races which are so), but also
still more because the Colchians, Egyptians, and Ethiopians alone of
all the races of men have practised circumcision from the first. The
Phenicians and the Syrians 88 who dwell in Palestine confess themselves
that they have learnt it from the Egyptians, and the Syrians 89 about
the river Thermodon and the river Parthenios, and the Macronians, who
are their neighbours, say that they have learnt it lately from the
Colchians. These are the only races of men who practise circumcision,
and these evidently practise it in the same manner as the Egyptians. Of
the Egyptians themselves however and the Ethiopians, I am not able to
say which learnt from the other, for undoubtedly it is a most ancient
custom; but that the other nations learnt it by intercourse with the
Egyptians, this among others is to me a strong proof, namely that those
of the Phenicians who have intercourse with Hellas cease to follow the
example of the Egyptians in this matter, and do not circumcise their
children.

105. Now let me tell another thing about the Colchians to show how they
resemble the Egyptians:—they alone work flax in the same fashion as the
Egyptians, 90 and the two nations are like one another in their whole
manner of living and also in their language: now the linen of Colchis
is called by the Hellenes Sardonic, whereas that from Egypt is called
Egyptian.

106. The pillars which Sesostris of Egypt set up in the various
countries are for the most part no longer to be seen extant; but in
Syria Palestine I myself saw them existing with the inscription upon
them which I have mentioned and the emblem. Moreover in Ionia there are
two figures of this man carved upon rocks, one on the road by which one
goes from the land of Ephesos to Phocaia, and the other on the road from
Sardis to Smyrna. In each place there is a figure of a man cut in the
rock, of four cubits and a span in height, holding in his right hand a
spear and in his left a bow and arrows, and the other equipment which he
has is similar to this, for it is both Egyptian and Ethiopian: and from
the one shoulder to the other across the breast runs an inscription
carved in sacred Egyptian characters, saying thus, "This land with my
shoulders I won for myself." But who he is and from whence, he does not
declare in these places, though in other places he has declared this.
Some of those who have seen these carvings conjecture that the figure is
that of Memnon, but herein they are very far from the truth.

107. As this Egyptian Sesostris was returning and bringing back many
men of the nations whose lands he had subdued, when he came (said the
priests) to Daphnai in the district of Pelusion on his journey home, his
brother to whom Sesostris had entrusted the charge of Egypt invited him
and with him his sons to a feast; and then he piled the house round
with brushwood and set it on fire: and Sesostris when he discovered this
forthwith took counsel with his wife, for he was bringing with him (they
said) his wife also; and she counselled him to lay out upon the pyre two
of his sons, which were six in number, and so to make a bridge over
the burning mass, and that they passing over their bodies should thus
escape. This, they said, Sesostris did, and two of his sons were burnt
to death in this manner, but the rest got away safe with their father.

108. Then Sesostris, having returned to Egypt and having taken vengeance
on his brother, employed the multitude which he had brought in of those
whose lands he had subdued, as follows:—these were they who drew the
stones which in the reign of this king were brought to the temple of
Hephaistos, being of very great size; and also these were compelled to
dig all the channels which now are in Egypt; and thus (having no such
purpose) they caused Egypt, which before was all fit for riding and
driving, to be no longer fit for this from thenceforth: for from that
time forward Egypt, though it is plain land, has become all unfit for
riding and driving, and the cause has been these channels, which are
many and run in all directions. But the reason why the king cut up
the land was this, namely because those of the Egyptians who had their
cities not on the river but in the middle of the country, being in want
of water when the river went down from them, found their drink brackish
because they had it from wells.

109. For this reason Egypt was cut up; and they said that this king
distributed the land to all the Egyptians, giving an equal square
portion to each man, and from this he made his revenue, having appointed
them to pay a certain rent every year: and if the river should take away
anything from any man's portion, he would come to the king and declare
that which had happened, and the king used to send men to examine and to
find out by measurement how much less the piece of land had become, in
order that for the future the man might pay less, in proportion to the
rent appointed: and I think that thus the art of geometry was found out
and afterwards came into Hellas also. For as touching the sun-dial 91
and the gnomon 92 and the twelve divisions of the day, they were learnt
by the Hellenes from the Babylonians.

110. He moreover alone of all the Egyptian kings had rule over Ethiopia;
and he left as memorials of himself in front of the temple of Hephaistos
two stone statues of thirty cubits each, representing himself and his
wife, and others of twenty cubits each representing his four sons: and
long afterwards the priest of Hephaistos refused to permit Dareios the
Persian to set up a statue of himself in front of them, saying that
deeds had not been done by him equal to those which were done by
Sesostris the Egyptian; for Sesostris had subdued other nations besides,
not fewer than he, and also the Scythians; but Dareios had not been able
to conquer the Scythians: wherefore it was not just that he should set
up a statue in front of those which Sesostris had dedicated, if he did
not surpass him in his deeds. Which speech, they say, Dareios took in
good part.

111. Now after Sesostris had brought his life to an end, his son Pheros,
they told me, received in succession the kingdom, and he made no warlike
expedition, and moreover it chanced to him to become blind by reason of
the following accident:—when the river had come down in flood rising to
a height of eighteen cubits, higher than ever before that time, and had
gone over the fields, a wind fell upon it and the river became agitated
by waves: and this king (they say) moved by presumptuous folly took
a spear and cast it into the midst of the eddies of the stream; and
immediately upon this he had a disease of the eyes and was by it made
blind. For ten years then he was blind, and in the eleventh year there
came to him an oracle from the city of Buto saying that the time of his
punishment had expired, and that he should see again if he washed his
eyes with the water of a woman who had accompanied with her own husband
only and had not knowledge of other men: and first he made trial of his
own wife, and then, as he continued blind, he went on to try all the
women in turn; and when he had at last regained his sight he gathered
together all the women of whom he had made trial, excepting her by
whose means he had regained his sight, to one city which now is named
Erythrabolos, 93 and having gathered them to this he consumed them all
by fire, as well as the city itself; but as for her by whose means he
had regained his sight, he had her himself to wife. Then after he had
escaped the malady of his eyes he dedicated offerings at each one of the
temples which were of renown, and especially (to mention only that which
is most worthy of mention) he dedicated at the temple of the Sun works
which are worth seeing, namely two obelisks of stone, each of a single
block, measuring in length a hundred cubits each one and in breadth
eight cubits.

112. After him, they said, there succeeded to the throne a man of
Memphis, whose name in the tongue of the Hellenes was Proteus; for whom
there is now a sacred enclosure at Memphis, very fair and well ordered,
lying on that side of the temple of Hephaistos which faces the North
Wind. Round about this enclosure dwell Phenicians of Tyre, and this
whole region is called the Camp of the Tyrians. 94 Within the enclosure
of Proteus there is a temple called the temple of the "foreign
Aphrodite," which temple I conjecture to be one of Helen the daughter of
Tyndareus, not only because I have heard the tale how Helen dwelt with
Proteus, but also especially because it is called by the name of the
"foreign Aphrodite," for the other temples of Aphrodite which there are
have none of them the addition of the word "foreign" to the name.

113. And the priests told me, when I inquired, that the things
concerning Helen happened thus:—Alexander having carried off Helen was
sailing away from Sparta to his own land, and when he had come to the
Egean Sea contrary winds drove him from his course to the Sea of Egypt;
and after that, since the blasts did not cease to blow, he came to Egypt
itself, and in Egypt to that which is now named the Canobic mouth of the
Nile and to Taricheiai. Now there was upon the shore, as still there is
now, a temple of Heracles, in which if any man's slave take refuge and
have the sacred marks set upon him, giving himself over to the god, it
is not lawful to lay hands upon him; and this custom has continued
still unchanged from the beginning down to my own time. Accordingly the
attendants of Alexander, having heard of the custom which existed about
the temple, ran away from him, and sitting down as suppliants of the
god, accused Alexander, because they desired to do him hurt, telling
the whole tale how things were about Helen and about the wrong done to
Menelaos; and this accusation they made not only to the priests but also
to the warden of this river-mouth, whose name was Thonis.

114. Thonis then having heard their tale sent forthwith a message to
Proteus at Memphis, which said as follows: "There hath come a stranger,
a Teucrian by race, who hath done in Hellas an unholy deed; for he hath
deceived the wife of his own host, and is come hither bringing with him
this woman herself and very much wealth, having been carried out of
his way by winds to thy land. 95 Shall we then allow him to sail out
unharmed, or shall we first take away from him that which he brought
with him?" In reply to this Proteus sent back a messenger who said thus:
"Seize this man, whosoever he may be, who has done impiety to his own
host, and bring him away into my presence, that I may know what he will
find to say."

115. Hearing this, Thonis seized Alexander and detained his ships, and
after that he brought the man himself up to Memphis and with him Helen
and the wealth he had, and also in addition to them the suppliants. So
when all had been conveyed up thither, Proteus began to ask Alexander
who he was and from whence he was voyaging; and he both recounted to
him his descent and told him the name of his native land, and moreover
related of his voyage, from whence he was sailing. After this Proteus
asked him whence he had taken Helen; and when Alexander went astray in
his account and did not speak the truth, those who had become suppliants
convicted him of falsehood, relating in full the whole tale of the wrong
done. At length Proteus declared to them this sentence, saying, "Were
it not that I count it a matter of great moment not to slay any of those
strangers who being driven from their course by winds have come to my
land hitherto, I should have taken vengeance on thee on behalf of the
man of Hellas, seeing that thou, most base of men, having received from
him hospitality, didst work against him a most impious deed. For thou
didst go in to the wife of thine own host; and even this was not enough
for thee, but thou didst stir her up with desire and hast gone away with
her like a thief. Moreover not even this by itself was enough for thee,
but thou art come hither with plunder taken from the house of thy host.
Now therefore depart, seeing that I have counted it of great moment not
to be a slayer of strangers. This woman indeed and the wealth which thou
hast I will not allow thee to carry away, but I shall keep them safe for
the Hellene who was thy host, until he come himself and desire to carry
them off to his home; to thyself however and thy fellow-voyagers I
proclaim that ye depart from your anchoring within three days and go
from my land to some other; and if not, that ye will be dealt with as
enemies."

116. This the priests said was the manner of Helen's coming to Proteus;
and I suppose that Homer also had heard this story, but since it was
not so suitable to the composition of his poem as the other which he
followed, he dismissed it finally, 96 making it clear at the same time
that he was acquainted with that story also: and according to the manner
in which he described 97 the wanderings of Alexander in the Iliad (nor
did he elsewhere retract that which he had said) it is clear that when
he brought Helen he was carried out of his course, wandering to various
lands, and that he came among other places to Sidon in Phenicia. Of this
the poet has made mention in the "prowess of Diomede," and the verses
run this: 98


 "There she had robes many-coloured, the works of women of Sidon,
  Those whom her son himself the god-like of form Alexander
  Carried from Sidon, what time the broad sea-path he sailed over
  Bringing back Helene home, of a noble father begotten."

And in the Odyssey also he has made mention of it in these verses: 99


 "Such had the daughter of Zeus, such drugs of exquisite cunning,
  Good, which to her the wife of Thon, Polydamna, had given,
  Dwelling in Egypt, the land where the bountiful meadow produces
  Drugs more than all lands else, many good being mixed, many evil."

And thus too Menelaos says to Telemachos: 100


 "Still the gods stayed me in Egypt, to come back hither desiring,
  Stayed me from voyaging home, since sacrifice was due I performed not."

In these lines he makes it clear that he knew of the wandering of
Alexander to Egypt, for Syria borders upon Egypt and the Phenicians, of
whom is Sidon, dwell in Syria.

117. By these lines and by this passage 101 it is also most clearly
shown that the "Cyprian Epic" was not written by Homer but by some other
man: for in this it is said that on the third day after leaving
Sparta Alexander came to Ilion bringing with him Helen, having had a
"gently-blowing wind and a smooth sea," whereas in the Iliad it says
that he wandered from his course when he brought her.

118. Let us now leave Homer and the "Cyprian" Epic; but this I will say,
namely that I asked the priests whether it is but an idle tale which
the Hellenes tell of that which they say happened about Ilion; and they
answered me thus, saying that they had their knowledge by inquiries from
Menelaos himself. After the rape of Helen there came indeed, they said,
to the Teucrian land a large army of Hellenes to help Menelaos; and
when the army had come out of the ships to land and had pitched its
camp there, they sent messengers to Ilion, with whom went also Menelaos
himself; and when these entered within the wall they demanded back Helen
and the wealth which Alexander had stolen from Menelaos and had taken
away; and moreover they demanded satisfaction for the wrongs done: and
the Teucrians told the same tale then and afterwards, both with oath and
without oath, namely that in deed and in truth they had not Helen nor
the wealth for which demand was made, but that both were in Egypt; and
that they could not justly be compelled to give satisfaction for that
which Proteus the king of Egypt had. The Hellenes however thought that
they were being mocked by them and besieged the city, until at last they
took it; and when they had taken the wall and did not find Helen, but
heard the same tale as before, then they believed the former tale and
sent Menelaos himself to Proteus.

119. And Menelaos having come to Egypt and having sailed up to Memphis,
told the truth of these matters, and not only found great entertainment,
but also received Helen unhurt, and all his own wealth besides. Then
however, after he had been thus dealt with, Menelaos showed himself
ungrateful to the Egyptians; for when he set forth to sail away,
contrary winds detained him, and as this condition of things lasted
long, he devised an impious deed; for he took two children of natives
and made sacrifice of them. After this, when it was known that he had
done so, he became abhorred, and being pursued he escaped and got away
in his ships to Libya; but whither he went besides after this, the
Egyptians were not able to tell. Of these things they said that they
found out part by inquiries, and the rest, namely that which happened in
their own land, they related from sure and certain knowledge.

120. Thus the priests of the Egyptians told me; and I myself also agree
with the story which was told of Helen, adding this consideration,
namely that if Helen had been in Ilion she would have been given up to
the Hellenes, whether Alexander consented or no; for Priam assuredly was
not so mad, nor yet the others of his house, that they were desirous to
run risk of ruin for themselves and their children and their city, in
order that Alexander might have Helen as his wife: and even supposing
that during the first part of the time they had been so inclined, yet
when many others of the Trojans besides were losing their lives as
often as they fought with the Hellenes, and of the sons of Priam himself
always two or three or even more were slain when a battle took place (if
one may trust at all to the Epic poets),—when, I say, things were coming
thus to pass, I consider that even if Priam himself had had Helen as his
wife, he would have given her back to the Achaians, if at least by so
doing he might be freed from the evils which oppressed him. Nor even
was the kingdom coming to Alexander next, so that when Priam was old the
government was in his hands; but Hector, who was both older and more of
a man than he, would have received it after the death of Priam; and
him it behoved not to allow his brother to go on with his wrong-doing,
considering that great evils were coming to pass on his account both to
himself privately and in general to the other Trojans. In truth however
they lacked the power to give Helen back; and the Hellenes did not
believe them, though they spoke the truth; because, as I declare my
opinion, the divine power was purposing to cause them utterly to perish,
and so make it evident to men that for great wrongs great also are the
chastisements which come from the gods. And thus have I delivered my
opinion concerning these matters.

121. After Proteus, they told me, Rhampsinitos received in succession
the kingdom, who left as a memorial of himself that gateway to the
temple of Hephaistos which is turned towards the West, and in front of
the gateway he set up two statues, in height five-and-twenty cubits, of
which the one which stands on the North side is called by the Egyptians
Summer and the one on the South side Winter; and to that one which they
call Summer they do reverence and make offerings, while to the other
which is called Winter they do the opposite of these things. (a) This
king, they said, got great wealth of silver, which none of the kings
born after him could surpass or even come near to; and wishing to store
his wealth in safety he caused to be built a chamber of stone, one of
the walls whereof was towards the outside of his palace: and the builder
of this, having a design against it, contrived as follows, that is, he
disposed one of the stones in such a manner that it could be taken
out easily from the wall either by two men or even by one. So when the
chamber was finished, the king stored his money in it, and after some
time the builder, being near the end of his life, called to him his sons
(for he had two) and to them he related how he had contrived in building
the treasury of the king, and all in forethought for them, that they
might have ample means of living. And when he had clearly set forth to
them everything concerning the taking out of the stone, he gave them the
measurements, saying that if they paid heed to this matter they would be
stewards of the king's treasury. So he ended his life, and his sons made
no long delay in setting to work, but went to the palace by night, and
having found the stone in the wall of the chamber they dealt with it
easily and carried forth for themselves great quantity of the wealth
within. (b) And the king happening to open the chamber, he marvelled
when he saw the vessels falling short of the full amount, and he did not
know on whom he should lay the blame, since the seals were unbroken and
the chamber had been close shut; but when upon his opening the chamber
a second and a third time the money was each time seen to be diminished,
for the thieves did not slacken in their assaults upon it, he did as
follows:—having ordered traps to be made he set these round about the
vessels in which the money was; and when the thieves had come as at
former times and one of them had entered, then so soon as he came near
to one of the vessels he was straightway caught in the trap: and when he
perceived in what evil case he was, straightway calling his brother
he showed him what the matter was, and bade him enter as quickly as
possible and cut off his head, for fear lest being seen and known he
might bring about the destruction of his brother also. And to the other
it seemed that he spoke well, and he was persuaded and did so; and
fitting the stone into its place he departed home bearing with him the
head of his brother. (c) Now when it became day, the king entered into
the chamber and was very greatly amazed, seeing the body of the thief
held in the trap without his head, and the chamber unbroken, with no way
to come in or go out: and being at a loss he hung up the dead body of
the thief upon the wall and set guards there, with charge if they saw
any one weeping or bewailing himself to seize him and bring him before
the king. And when the dead body had been hung up, the mother was
greatly grieved, and speaking with the son who survived she enjoined
him, in whatever way he could, to contrive means by which he might
take down and bring home the body of his dead brother; and if he should
neglect to do this, she earnestly threatened that she would go and give
information to the king that he had the money. (d) So as the mother
dealt hardly with the surviving son, and he though saying many things
to her did not persuade her, he contrived for his purpose a device as
follows:—Providing himself with asses he filled some skins with wine and
laid them upon the asses, and after that he drove them along: and when
he came opposite to those who were guarding the corpse hung up, he drew
towards him two or three of the necks 102 of the skins and loosened the
cords with which they were tied. Then when the wine was running out,
he began to beat his head and cry out loudly, as if he did not know to
which of the asses he should first turn; and when the guards saw the
wine flowing out in streams, they ran together to the road with drinking
vessels in their hands and collected the wine that was poured out,
counting it so much gain; and he abused them all violently, making as if
he were angry, but when the guards tried to appease him, after a time
he feigned to be pacified and to abate his anger, and at length he drove
his asses out of the road and began to set their loads right. Then more
talk arose among them, and one or two of them made jests at him and
brought him to laugh with them; and in the end he made them a present of
one of the skins in addition to what they had. Upon that they lay down
there without more ado, being minded to drink, and they took him into
their company and invited him to remain with them and join them in their
drinking: so he (as may be supposed) was persuaded and stayed. Then as
they in their drinking bade him welcome in a friendly manner, he made
a present to them also of another of the skins; and so at length having
drunk liberally the guards became completely intoxicated; and being
overcome by sleep they went to bed on the spot where they had been
drinking. He then, as it was now far on in the night, first took down
the body of his brother, and then in mockery shaved the right cheeks of
all the guards; and after that he put the dead body upon the asses and
drove them away home, having accomplished that which was enjoined him by
his mother. (e) Upon this the king, when it was reported to him that the
dead body of the thief had been stolen away, displayed great anger; and
desiring by all means that it should be found out who it might be who
devised these things, did this (so at least they said, but I do not
believe the account),—he caused his own daughter to sit in the stews,
and enjoined her to receive all equally, and before having commerce with
any one to compel him to tell her what was the most cunning and what the
most unholy deed which had been done by him in all his life-time; and
whosoever should relate that which had happened about the thief, him she
must seize and not let him go out. Then as she was doing that which was
enjoined by her father, the thief, hearing for what purpose this was
done and having a desire to get the better of the king in resource,
did thus:—from the body of one lately dead he cut off the arm at the
shoulder and went with it under his mantle: and having gone in to the
daughter of the king, and being asked that which the others also were
asked, he related that he had done the most unholy deed when he cut off
the head of his brother, who had been caught in a trap in the king's
treasure-chamber, and the most cunning deed in that he made drunk the
guards and took down the dead body of his brother hanging up; and she
when she heard it tried to take hold of him, but the thief held out to
her in the darkness the arm of the corpse, which she grasped and held,
thinking that she was holding the arm of the man himself; but the thief
left it in her hands and departed, escaping through the door. (f) Now
when this also was reported to the king, he was at first amazed at the
ready invention and daring of the fellow, and then afterwards he sent
round to all the cities and made proclamation granting a free pardon to
the thief, and also promising a great reward if he would come into his
presence. The thief accordingly trusting to the proclamation came to
the king, and Rhampsinitos greatly marvelled at him, and gave him this
daughter of his to wife, counting him to be the most knowing of all men;
for as the Egyptians were distinguished from all other men, so was he
from the other Egyptians.

122. After these things they said this king went down alive to that
place which by the Hellenes is called Hades, and there played at dice
with Demeter, and in some throws he overcame her and in others he was
overcome by her; and he came back again having as a gift from her a
handkerchief of gold: and they told me that because of the going down of
Rhampsinitos the Egyptians after he came back celebrated a feast, which
I know of my own knowledge also that they still observe even to my time;
but whether it is for this cause that they keep the feast or for
some other, I am not able to say. However, the priests weave a robe
completely on the very day of the feast, and forthwith they bind up the
eyes of one of them with a fillet, and having led him with the robe to
the way by which one goes to the temple of Demeter, they depart back
again themselves. This priest, they say, with his eyes bound up is led
by two wolves to the temple of Demeter, which is distant from the city
twenty furlongs, and then afterwards the wolves lead him back again from
the temple to the same spot.

123. Now as to the tales told by the Egyptians, any man may accept them
to whom such things appear credible; as for me, it is to be understood
throughout the whole of the history 103 that I write by hearsay that
which is reported by the people in each place. The Egyptians say that
Demeter and Dionysos are rulers of the world below; and the Egyptians
are also the first who reported the doctrine that the soul of man is
immortal, and that when the body dies, the soul enters into another
creature which chances then to be coming to the birth, and when it has
gone the round of all the creatures of land and sea and of the air, it
enters again into a human body as it comes to the birth; and that it
makes this round in a period of three thousand years. This doctrine
certain Hellenes adopted, some earlier and some later, as if it were
of their own invention, and of these men I know the names but I abstain
from recording them.

124. Down to the time when Rhampsinitos was king, they told me there
was in Egypt nothing but orderly rule, and Egypt prospered greatly; but
after him Cheops became king over them and brought them 104 to every
kind of evil: for he shut up all the temples, and having first kept them
from sacrificing there, he then bade all the Egyptians work for him.
So some were appointed to draw stones from the stone-quarries in the
Arabian mountains to the Nile, and others he ordered to receive the
stones after they had been carried over the river in boats, and to draw
them to those which are called the Libyan mountains; and they worked by
a hundred thousand men at a time, for each three months continually. Of
this oppression there passed ten years while the causeway was made by
which they drew the stones, which causeway they built, and it is a work
not much less, as it appears to me, than the pyramid; for the length
of it is five furlongs 105 and the breadth ten fathoms and the height,
where it is highest, eight fathoms, and it is made of stone smoothed
and with figures carved upon it. For this, they said, the ten years
were spent, and for the underground chambers on the hill upon which the
pyramids stand, which he caused to be made as sepulchral chambers for
himself in an island, having conducted thither a channel from the Nile.
For the making of the pyramid itself there passed a period of twenty
years; and the pyramid is square, each side measuring eight hundred
feet, and the height of it is the same. It is built of stone smoothed
and fitted together in the most perfect manner, not one of the stones
being less than thirty feet in length.

125. This pyramid was made after the manner of steps, which some call
"rows" 106 and others "bases": 107 and when they had first made it thus,
they raised the remaining stones with machines made of short pieces of
timber, raising them first from the ground to the first stage of the
steps, and when the stone got up to this it was placed upon another
machine standing on the first stage, and so from this it was drawn to
the second upon another machine; for as many as were the courses of the
steps, so many machines there were also, or perhaps they transferred
one and the same machine, made so as easily to be carried, to each stage
successively, in order that they might take up the stones; for let it be
told in both ways, according as it is reported. However that may be, the
highest parts of it were finished first, and afterwards they proceeded
to finish that which came next to them, and lastly they finished the
parts of it near the ground and the lowest ranges. On the pyramid it is
declared in Egyptian writing how much was spent on radishes and onions
and leeks for the workmen, and if I rightly remember that which the
interpreter said in reading to me this inscription, a sum of one
thousand six hundred talents of silver was spent; and if this is so, how
much besides is likely to have been expended upon the iron with which
they worked, and upon bread and clothing for the workmen, seeing that
they were building the works for the time which has been mentioned and
were occupied for no small time besides, as I suppose, in the cutting
and bringing of the stones and in working at the excavation under the
ground?

126. Cheops moreover came, they said, to such a pitch of wickedness,
that being in want of money he caused his own daughter to sit in the
stews, and ordered her to obtain from those who came a certain amount of
money (how much it was they did not tell me); but she not only obtained
the sum appointed by her father, but also she formed a design for
herself privately to leave behind her a memorial, and she requested each
man who came in to her to give her one stone upon her building: and of
these stones, they told me, the pyramid was built which stands in front
of the great pyramid in the middle of the three, 108 each side being one
hundred and fifty feet in length.

127. This Cheops, the Egyptians said, reigned fifty years; and after
he was dead his brother Chephren succeeded to the kingdom. This king
followed the same manner as the other, both in all the rest and also in
that he made a pyramid, not indeed attaining to the measurements of that
which was built by the former (this I know, having myself also measured
it), and moreover 109 there are no underground chambers beneath nor does
a channel come from the Nile flowing to this one as to the other, in
which the water coming through a conduit built for it flows round an
island within, where they say that Cheops himself is laid: but for a
basement he built the first course of Ethiopian stone of divers colours;
and this pyramid he made forty feet lower than the other as regards
size, 110 building it close to the great pyramid. These stand both upon
the same hill, which is about a hundred feet high. And Chephren they
said reigned fifty and six years.

128. Here then they reckon one hundred and six years, during which they
say that there was nothing but evil for the Egyptians, and the temples
were kept closed and not opened during all that time. These kings the
Egyptians by reason of their hatred of them are not very willing to
name; nay, they even call the pyramids after the name of Philitis 111
the shepherd, who at that time pastured flocks in those regions.

129. After him, they said, Mykerinos became king over Egypt, who was the
son of Cheops; and to him his father's deeds were displeasing, and he
both opened the temples and gave liberty to the people, who were ground
down to the last extremity of evil, to return to their own business and
to their sacrifices;: also he gave decisions of their causes juster
than those of all the other kings besides. In regard to this then they
commend this king more than all the other kings who had arisen in Egypt
before him; for he not only gave good decisions, but also when a man
complained of the decision, he gave him recompense from his own goods
and thus satisfied his desire. But while Mykerinos was acting mercifully
to his subjects and practising this conduct which has been said,
calamities befell him, of which the first was this, namely that his
daughter died, the only child whom he had in his house: and being above
measure grieved by that which had befallen him, and desiring to bury his
daughter in a manner more remarkable than others, he made a cow of
wood, which he covered over with gold, and then within it he buried this
daughter who, as I said, had died.

130. This cow was not covered up in the ground, but it might be seen
even down to my own time in the city of Saïs, placed within the royal
palace in a chamber which was greatly adorned; and they offer incense of
all kinds before it every day, and each night a lamp burns beside it all
through the night. Near this cow in another chamber stand images of the
concubines of Mykerinos, as the priests at Saïs told me; for there are
in fact colossal wooden statues, in number about twenty, made with naked
bodies; but who they are I am not able to say, except only that which is
reported.

131. Some however tell about this cow and the colossal statues the
following tale, namely that Mykerinos was enamoured of his own daughter
and afterwards ravished her; and upon this they say that the girl
strangled herself for grief, and he buried her in this cow; and her
mother cut off the hands of the maids who had betrayed the daughter to
her father; wherefore now the images of them have suffered that which
the maids suffered in their life. In thus saying they speak idly, as it
seems to me, especially in what they say about the hands of the statues;
for as to this, even we ourselves saw that their hands had dropped off
from lapse of time, and they were to be seen still lying at their feet
even down to my time.

132. The cow is covered up with a crimson robe, except only the head and
the neck, which are seen, overlaid with gold very thickly; and between
the horns there is the disc of the sun figured in gold. The cow is not
standing up but kneeling, and in size it is equal to a large living cow.
Every year it is carried forth from the chamber, at those times, I say,
the Egyptians beat themselves for that god whom I will not name upon
occasion of such a matter; at these times, I say, they also carry forth
the cow to the light of day, for they say that she asked of her father
Mykerinos, when she was dying, that she might look upon the sun once in
the year.

133. After the misfortune of his daughter it happened, they said,
secondly to this king as follows:—An oracle came to him from the city
of Buto, saying that he was destined to live but six years more, in the
seventh year to end his life: and he being indignant at it sent to the
Oracle a reproach against the god, 112 making complaint in reply that
whereas his father and uncle, who had shut up the temples and had not
only not remembered the gods, but also had been destroyers of men, had
lived for a long time, he himself, who practised piety, was destined to
end his life so soon: and from the Oracle there came a second message,
which said that it was for this very cause that he was bringing his life
to a swift close; 113 for he had not done that which it was appointed
for him to do, since it was destined that Egypt should suffer evils for
a hundred and fifty years, and the two kings who had risen before him
had perceived this, but he had not. Mykerinos having heard this, and
considering that this sentence had been passed upon him beyond recall,
procured many lamps, and whenever night came on he lighted these and
began to drink and take his pleasure, ceasing neither by day nor
by night; and he went about to the fen-country and to the woods and
wherever he heard there were the most suitable places for enjoyment.
This he devised (having a mind to prove that the Oracle spoke falsely)
in order that he might have twelve years of life instead of six, the
nights being turned into days.

134. This king also left behind him a pyramid, much smaller than that of
his father, of a square shape and measuring on each side three hundred
feet lacking twenty, built moreover of Ethiopian stone up to half the
height. This pyramid some of the Hellenes say was built by the courtesan
Rhodopis, not therein speaking rightly: and besides this it is evident
to me that they who speak thus do not even know who Rhodopis was,
for otherwise they would not have attributed to her the building of a
pyramid like this, on which have been spent (so to speak) innumerable
thousands of talents: moreover they do not know that Rhodopis flourished
in the reign of Amasis, and not in this king's reign; for Rhodopis lived
very many years later than the kings who left behind the pyramids. By
descent she was of Thrace, and she was a slave of Iadmon the son of
Hephaistopolis a Samian, and a fellow-slave of Esop the maker of fables;
for he too was once the slave of Iadmon, as was proved especially
in this fact, namely that when the people of Delphi repeatedly made
proclamation in accordance with an oracle, to find some one who would
take up 114 the blood-money for the death of Esop, no one else appeared,
but at length the grandson of Iadmon, called Iadmon also, took it up;
and thus it is shown that Esop too was the slave of Iadmon.

135. As for Rhodopis, she came to Egypt brought by Xanthes the Samian,
and having come thither to exercise her calling she was redeemed
from slavery for a great sum by a man of Mytilene, Charaxos son of
Scamandronymos and brother of Sappho the lyric poet. Thus was Rhodopis
set free, and she remained in Egypt and by her beauty won so much liking
that she made great gain of money for one like Rhodopis, 115 though not
enough to suffice for the cost of such a pyramid as this. In truth there
is no need to ascribe to her very great riches, considering that the
tithe of her wealth may still be seen even to this time by any one
who desires it: for Rhodopis wished to leave behind her a memorial of
herself in Hellas, namely to cause a thing to be made such as happens
not to have been thought of or dedicated in a temple by any besides, and
to dedicate this at Delphi as a memorial of herself. Accordingly with
the tithe of her wealth she caused to be made spits of iron of size
large enough to pierce a whole ox, and many in number, going as far
therein as her tithe allowed her, and she sent them to Delphi: these
are even at the present time lying there, heaped all together behind the
altar which the Chians dedicated, and just opposite to the cell of the
temple. 116 Now at Naucratis, as it happens, the courtesans are rather
apt to win credit; 117 for this woman first, about whom the story to
which I refer is told, became so famous that all the Hellenes without
exception come to know the name of Rhodopis, and then after her one
whose name was Archidiche became a subject of song over all Hellas,
though she was less talked of than the other. As for Charaxos, when
after redeeming Rhodopis he returned back to Mytilene, Sappho in an ode
violently abused him. 118 Of Rhodopis then I shall say no more.

136. After Mykerinos the priests said Asychis became king of Egypt,
and he made for Hephaistos the temple gateway 119 which is towards the
sunrising, by far the most beautiful and the largest of the gateways;
for while they all have figures carved upon them and innumerable
ornaments of building 120 besides, this has them very much more than
the rest. In this king's reign they told me that, as the circulation of
money was very slow, a law was made for the Egyptians that a man might
have that money lent to him which he needed, by offering as security
the dead body of his father; and there was added moreover to this law
another, namely that he who lent the money should have a claim also to
the whole sepulchral chamber belonging to him who received it, and that
the man who offered that security should be subject to this penalty,
if he refused to pay back the debt, namely that neither the man himself
should be allowed to have burial when he died, either in that family
burial-place or in any other, nor should he be allowed to bury any one
of his kinsmen whom he lost by death. This king desiring to surpass the
kings of Egypt who had arisen before him left as a memorial of himself
a pyramid which he made of bricks, and on it there is an inscription
carved in stone and saying thus: "Despise not me in comparison with the
pyramids of stone, seeing that I excel them as much as Zeus excels the
other gods; for with a pole they struck into the lake, and whatever
of the mud attached itself to the pole, this they gathered up and made
bricks, and in such manner they finished me."

Such were the deeds which this king performed;

137, and after him reigned a blind man of the city of Anysis, whose
name was Anysis. In his reign the Ethiopians and Sabacos the king of the
Ethiopians marched upon Egypt with a great host of men; so this blind
man departed, flying to the fen-country, and the Ethiopian was king
over Egypt for fifty years, during which he performed deeds as
follows:—whenever any man of the Egyptians committed any transgression,
he would never put him to death, but he gave sentence upon each man
according to the greatness of the wrong-doing, appointing them work at
throwing up an embankment before that city from whence each man came of
those who committed wrong. Thus the cities were made higher still than
before; for they were embanked first by those who dug the channels in
the reign of Sesostris, and then secondly in the reign of the Ethiopian,
and thus they were made very high: and while other cities in Egypt also
stood 121 high, I think in the town at Bubastis especially the earth was
piled up. In this city there is a temple very well worthy of mention,
for though there are other temples which are larger and built with more
cost, none more than this is a pleasure to the eyes. Now Bubastis in the
Hellenic tongue is Artemis,

138, and her temple is ordered thus:—Except the entrance it is
completely surrounded by water; for channels come in from the Nile, not
joining one another, but each extending as far as the entrance of the
temple, one flowing round on the one side and the other on the other
side, each a hundred feet broad and shaded over with trees; and the
gateway has a height of ten fathoms, and it is adorned with figures six
cubits high, very noteworthy. This temple is in the middle of the city
and is looked down upon from all sides as one goes round, for since the
city has been banked up to a height, while the temple has not been moved
from the place where it was at the first built, it is possible to look
down into it: and round it runs a stone wall with figures carved upon
it, while within it there is a grove of very large trees planted round
a large temple-house, within which is the image of the goddess: and the
breadth and length of the temple is a furlong every way. Opposite the
entrance there is a road paved with stone for about three furlongs,
which leads through the market-place towards the East, with a breadth
of about four hundred feet; and on this side and on that grow trees of
height reaching to heaven: and the road leads to the temple of Hermes.
This temple then is thus ordered.

139. The final deliverance from the Ethiopian came about (they said)
as follows:—he fled away because he had seen in his sleep a vision, in
which it seemed to him that a man came and stood by him and counselled
him to gather together all the priests of Egypt and cut them asunder in
the midst. Having seen this dream, he said that it seemed to him that
the gods were foreshowing him this to furnish an occasion against him,
122 in order that he might do an impious deed with respect to religion,
and so receive some evil either from the gods or from men: he would not
however do so, but in truth (he said) the time had expired, during
which it had been prophesied to him that he should rule Egypt before
he departed thence. For when he was in Ethiopia the Oracles which the
Ethiopians consult had told him that it was fated for him to rule Egypt
fifty years: since then this time was now expiring, and the vision of
the dream also disturbed him, Sabacos departed out of Egypt of his own
free will.

140. Then when the Ethiopian had gone away out of Egypt, the blind man
came back from the fen-country and began to rule again, having lived
there during fifty years upon an island which he had made by heaping up
ashes and earth: for whenever any of the Egyptians visited him bringing
food, according as it had been appointed to them severally to do without
the knowledge of the Ethiopian, he bade them bring also some ashes for
their gift. 123 This island none was able to find before Amyrtaios; that
is, for more than seven hundred years 124 the kings who arose before
Amyrtaios were not able to find it. Now the name of this island is Elbo,
and its size is ten furlongs each way.

141. After him there came to the throne the priest of Hephaistos, whose
name was Sethos. This man, they said, neglected and held in no regard
the warrior class of the Egyptians, considering that he would have no
need of them; and besides other slights which he put upon them, he also
took from them the yokes of corn-land 125 which had been given to them
as a special gift in the reigns of the former kings, twelve yokes
to each man. After this, Sanacharib king of the Arabians and of the
Assyrians marched a great host against Egypt. Then the warriors of the
Egyptians refused to come to the rescue, and the priest, being driven
into a strait, entered into the sanctuary of the temple 126 and bewailed
to the image of the god the danger which was impending over him; and as
he was thus lamenting, sleep came upon him, and it seemed to him in his
vision that the god came and stood by him and encouraged him, saying
that he should suffer no evil if he went forth to meet the army of
the Arabians; for he himself would send him helpers. Trusting in
these things seen in sleep, he took with him, they said, those of the
Egyptians who were willing to follow him, and encamped in Pelusion, for
by this way the invasion came: and not one of the warrior class followed
him, but shop-keepers and artisans and men of the market. Then after
they came, there swarmed by night upon their enemies mice of the fields,
and ate up their quivers and their bows, and moreover the handles of
their shields, so that on the next day they fled, and being without
defence of arms great numbers fell. And at the present time this king
stands in the temple of Hephaistos in stone, holding upon his hand a
mouse, and by letters inscribed he says these words: "Let him who looks
upon me learn to fear the gods."

142. So far in the story the Egyptians and the priests were they who
made the report, declaring that from the first king down to this
priest of Hephaistos who reigned last, there had been three hundred and
forty-one generations of men, and that in them there had been the same
number of chief-priests and of kings: but three hundred generations
of men are equal to ten thousand years, for a hundred years is three
generations of men; and in the one-and-forty generations which remain,
those I mean which were added to the three hundred, there are one
thousand three hundred and forty years. Thus in the period of eleven
thousand three hundred and forty years they said that there had arisen
no god in human form; nor even before that time or afterwards among the
remaining kings who arose in Egypt, did they report that anything of
that kind had come to pass. In this time they said that the sun had
moved four times from his accustomed place of rising, and where he now
sets he had thence twice had his rising, and in the place from whence he
now rises he had twice had his setting; 127 and in the meantime nothing
in Egypt had been changed from its usual state, neither that which comes
from the earth nor that which comes to them from the river nor that
which concerns diseases or deaths.

143. And formerly when Hecataios the historian was in Thebes, and had
traced his descent and connected his family with a god in the sixteenth
generation before, the priests of Zeus did for him much the same as they
did for me (though I had not traced my descent). They led me into the
sanctuary of the temple, which is of great size, and they counted up the
number, showing colossal wooden statues in number the same as they said;
for each chief-priest there sets up in his lifetime an image of himself:
accordingly the priests, counting and showing me these, declared to me
that each one of them was a son succeeding his own father, and they went
up through the series of images from the image of the one who had
died last, until they had declared this of the whole number. And when
Hecataios had traced his descent and connected his family with a god in
the sixteenth generation, they traced a descent in opposition to this,
besides their numbering, not accepting it from him that a man had been
born from a god; and they traced their counter-descent thus, saying that
each one of the statues had been piromis son of piromis, until they had
declared this of the whole three hundred and forty-five statues, each
one being surnamed piromis; and neither with a god nor a hero did
they connect their descent. Now piromis means in the tongue of Hellas
"honourable and good man."

144. From their declaration then it followed, that they of whom the
images were had been of form like this, and far removed from being gods:
but in the time before these men they said that gods were the rulers in
Egypt, not mingling 128 with men, and that of these always one had power
at a time; and the last of them who was king over Egypt was Oros the son
of Osiris, whom the Hellenes call Apollo: he was king over Egypt last,
having deposed Typhon. Now Osiris in the tongue of Hellas is Dionysos.

145. Among the Hellenes Heracles and Dionysos and Pan are accounted the
latest-born of the gods; but with the Egyptians Pan is a very ancient
god, and he is one of those which are called the eight gods, while
Heracles is of the second rank, who are called the twelve gods, and
Dionysos is of the third rank, namely of those who were born of the
twelve gods. Now as to Heracles I have shown already how many years old
he is according to the Egyptians themselves, reckoning down to the
reign of Amasis, and Pan is said to have existed for yet more years than
these, and Dionysos for the smallest number of years as compared with
the others; and even for this last they reckon down to the reign of
Amasis fifteen thousand years. This the Egyptians say that they know for
a certainty, since they always kept a reckoning and wrote down the years
as they came. Now the Dionysos who is said to have been born of Semele
the daughter of Cadmos, was born about sixteen hundred years before my
time, and Heracles who was the son of Alcmene, about nine hundred years,
and that Pan who was born of Penelope, for of her and of Hermes Pan is
said by the Hellenes to have been born, came into being later than the
wars of Troy, about eight hundred years before my time.

146. Of these two accounts every man may adopt that one which he shall
find the more credible when he hears it. I however, for my part, have
already declared my opinion about them. 129 For if these also, like
Heracles the son of Amphitryon, had appeared before all men's eyes and
had lived their lives to old age in Hellas, I mean Dionysos the son of
Semele and Pan the son of Penelope, then one would have said that these
also 130 had been born mere men, having the names of those gods who had
come into being long before: but as it is, with regard to Dionysos the
Hellenes say that as soon as he was born Zeus sewed him up in his thigh
and carried him to Nysa, which is above Egypt in the land of Ethiopia;
and as to Pan, they cannot say whither he went after he was born. Hence
it has become clear to me that the Hellenes learnt the names of these
gods later than those of the other gods, and trace their descent as if
their birth occurred at the time when they first learnt their names.

Thus far then the history is told by the Egyptians themselves;

147, but I will now recount that which other nations also tell, and the
Egyptians in agreement with the others, of that which happened in this
land: and there will be added to this also something of that which I
have myself seen.

Being set free after the reign of the priest of Hephaistos, the
Egyptians, since they could not live any time without a king, set up
over them twelve kings, having divided all Egypt into twelve parts.
These made intermarriages with one another and reigned, making agreement
that they would not put down one another by force, nor seek to get an
advantage over one another, but would live in perfect friendship: and
the reason why they made these agreements, guarding them very strongly
from violation, was this, namely that an oracle had been given to them
at first when they began to exercise their rule, that he of them who
should pour a libation with a bronze cup in the temple of Hephaistos,
should be king of all Egypt (for they used to assemble together in all
the temples).

148. Moreover they resolved to join all together and leave a memorial of
themselves; and having so resolved they caused to be made a labyrinth,
situated a little above the lake of Moiris and nearly opposite to that
which is called the City of Crocodiles. This I saw myself, and I found
it greater than words can say. For if one should put together and reckon
up all the buildings and all the great works produced by the Hellenes,
they would prove to be inferior in labour and expense to this labyrinth,
though it is true that both the temple at Ephesos and that at Samos are
works worthy of note. The pyramids also were greater than words can say,
and each one of them is equal to many works of the Hellenes, great
as they may be; but the labyrinth surpasses even the pyramids. It has
twelve courts covered in, with gates facing one another, six upon the
North side and six upon the South, joining on one to another, and the
same wall surrounds them all outside; and there are in it two kinds of
chambers, the one kind below the ground and the other above upon these,
three thousand in number, of each kind fifteen hundred. The upper set
of chambers we ourselves saw, going through them, and we tell of them
having looked upon them with our own eyes; but the chambers under ground
we heard about only; for the Egyptians who had charge of them were
not willing on any account to show them, saying that here were the
sepulchres of the kings who had first built this labyrinth and of the
sacred crocodiles. Accordingly we speak of the chambers below by what we
received from hearsay, while those above we saw ourselves and found them
to be works of more than human greatness. For the passages through the
chambers, and the goings this way and that way through the courts, which
were admirably adorned, afforded endless matter for marvel, as we went
through from a court to the chambers beyond it, and from the chambers
to colonnades, and from the colonnades to other rooms, and then from the
chambers again to other courts. Over the whole of these is a roof made
of stone like the walls; and the walls are covered with figures carved
upon them, each court being surrounded with pillars of white stone
fitted together most perfectly; and at the end of the labyrinth, by
the corner of it, there is a pyramid of forty fathoms, upon which large
figures are carved, and to this there is a way made under ground.

149. Such is this labyrinth; but a cause for marvel even greater than
this is afforded by the lake, which is called the lake of Moiris, along
the side of which this labyrinth is built. The measure of its circuit is
three thousand six hundred furlongs 131 (being sixty schoines), and this
is the same number of furlongs as the extent of Egypt itself along the
sea. The lake lies extended lengthwise from North to South, and in depth
where it is deepest it is fifty fathoms. That this lake is artificial
and formed by digging is self-evident, for about in the middle of the
lake stand two pyramids, each rising above the water to a height of
fifty fathoms, the part which is built below the water being of just the
same height; and upon each is placed a colossal statue of stone sitting
upon a chair. Thus the pyramids are a hundred fathoms high; and these
hundred fathoms are equal to a furlong of six hundred feet, the fathom
being measured as six feet or four cubits, the feet being four palms
each, and the cubits six. The water in the lake does not come from the
place where it is, for the country there is very deficient in water, but
it has been brought thither from the Nile by a canal: and for six months
the water flows into the lake, and for six months out into the Nile
again; and whenever it flows out, then for the six months it brings
into the royal treasury a talent of silver a day from the fish which are
caught, and twenty pounds 132 when the water comes in.

150. The natives of the place moreover said that this lake had an
outlet under ground to the Syrtis which is in Libya, turning towards the
interior of the continent upon the Western side and running along by
the mountain which is above Memphis. Now since I did not see anywhere
existing the earth dug out of this excavation (for that was a matter
which drew my attention), I asked those who dwelt nearest to the lake
where the earth was which had been dug out. These told me to what place
it had been carried away; and I readily believed them, for I knew by
report that a similar thing had been done at Nineveh, the city of the
Assyrians. There certain thieves formed a design once to carry away the
wealth of Sardanapallos son of Ninos, the king, which wealth was very
great and was kept in treasure-houses under the earth. Accordingly they
began from their own dwelling, and making estimate of their direction
they dug under ground towards the king's palace; and the earth which was
brought out of the excavation they used to carry away, when night came
on, to the river Tigris which flows by the city of Nineveh, until at
last they accomplished that which they desired. Similarly, as I heard,
the digging of the lake in Egypt was effected, except that it was done
not by night but during the day; for as they dug the Egyptians carried
to the Nile the earth which was dug out; and the river, when it received
it, would naturally bear it away and disperse it. Thus is this lake said
to have been dug out.

151. Now the twelve kings continued to rule justly, but in course of
time it happened thus:—After sacrifice in the temple of Hephaistos
they were about to make libation on the last day of the feast, and the
chief-priest, in bringing out for them the golden cups with which they
had been wont to pour libations, missed his reckoning and brought eleven
only for the twelve kings. Then that one of them who was standing last
in order, namely Psammetichos, since he had no cup took off from his
head his helmet, which was of bronze, and having held it out to receive
the wine he proceeded to make libation: likewise all the other kings
were wont to wear helmets and they happened to have them then. Now
Psammetichos held out his helmet with no treacherous meaning; but they
taking note of that which had been done by Psammetichos and of the
oracle, namely how it had been declared to them that whosoever of them
should make libation with a bronze cup should be sole king of Egypt,
recollecting, I say, the saying of the Oracle, they did not indeed deem
it right to slay Psammetichos, since they found by examination that he
had not done it with any forethought, but they determined to strip him
of almost all his power and to drive him away into the fen-country, and
that from the fen-country he should not hold any dealings with the rest
of Egypt.

152. This Psammetichos had formerly been a fugitive from the Ethiopian
Sabacos who had killed his father Necos, from him, I say, he had
then been a fugitive in Syria; and when the Ethiopian had departed in
consequence of the vision of the dream, the Egyptians who were of the
district of Saïs brought him back to his own country. Then afterwards,
when he was king, it was his fate to be a fugitive a second time
on account of the helmet, being driven by the eleven kings into the
fen-country. So then holding that he had been grievously wronged by
them, he thought how he might take vengeance on those who had driven
him out: and when he had sent to the Oracle of Leto in the city of Buto,
where the Egyptians have their most truthful Oracle, there was given to
him the reply that vengeance would come when men of bronze appeared from
the sea. And he was strongly disposed not to believe that bronze men
would come to help him; but after no long time had passed, certain
Ionians and Carians who had sailed forth for plunder were compelled to
come to shore in Egypt, and they having landed and being clad in bronze
armour, one of the Egyptians, not having before seen men clad in bronze
armour, came to the fen-land and brought a report to Psammetichos that
bronze men had come from the sea and were plundering the plain. So he,
perceiving that the saying of the Oracle was coming to pass, dealt in a
friendly manner with the Ionians and Carians, and with large promises he
persuaded them to take his part. Then when he had persuaded them, with
the help of those Egyptians who favoured his cause and of these foreign
mercenaries he overthrew the kings.

153. Having thus got power over all Egypt, Psammetichos made for
Hephaistos that gateway of the temple at Memphis which is turned towards
the South Wind; and he built a court for Apis, in which Apis is kept
when he appears, opposite to the gateway of the temple, surrounded all
with pillars and covered with figures; and instead of columns there
stand to support the roof of the court colossal statues twelve cubits
high. Now Apis is in the tongue of the Hellenes Epaphos.

154. To the Ionians and to the Carians who had helped him Psammetichos
granted portions of land to dwell in, opposite to one another with
the river Nile between, and these were called "Encampments": 133 these
portions of land he gave them, and he paid them besides all that he had
promised: moreover he placed with them Egyptian boys to have them taught
the Hellenic tongue; and from these, who learnt the language thoroughly,
are descended the present class of interpreters in Egypt. Now the
Ionians and Carians occupied these portions of land for a long time, and
they are towards the sea a little below the city of Bubastis, on that
which is called the Pelusian mouth of the Nile. These men king Amasis
afterwards removed from thence and established them at Memphis, making
them into a guard for himself against the Egyptians: and they being
settled in Egypt, we who are Hellenes know by intercourse with them
the certainty of all that which happened in Egypt beginning from king
Psammetichos and afterwards; for these were the first men of foreign
tongue who settled in Egypt: and in the land from which they were
removed there still remained down to my time the sheds where their ships
were drawn up and the ruins of their houses.

Thus then Psammetichos obtained Egypt:

155, and of the Oracle which is in Egypt I have made mention often
before this, and now I will give an account of it, seeing that it is
worthy to be described. This Oracle which is in Egypt is sacred to Leto,
and it is established in a great city near that mouth of the Nile which
is called Sebennytic, as one sails up the river from the sea; and the
name of this city where the Oracle is found is Buto, as I have said
before in mentioning it. In this Buto there is a temple of Apollo and
Artemis; and the temple-house 134 of Leto, in which the Oracle is, is
both great in itself and has a gateway of the height of ten fathoms: but
that which caused me most to marvel of the things to be seen there, I
will now tell. There is in this sacred enclosure a house of Leto made of
one single stone as regards both height and length, and of which all the
walls are in these two directions equal, each being forty cubits; and
for the covering in of the roof there lies another stone upon the top,
the cornice measuring four cubits. 135

156. This house then of all the things that were to be seen by me in
that temple is the most marvellous, and among those which come next is
the island called Chemmis. This is situated in a deep and broad lake
by the side of the temple at Buto, and it is said by the Egyptians
that this island is a floating island. I myself did not see it either
floating about or moved from its place, and I feel surprise at hearing
of it, wondering if it be indeed a floating island. In this island of
which I speak there is a great temple-house of Apollo, and three several
altars are set up within, and there are planted in the island many
palm-trees and other trees, both bearing fruit and not bearing fruit.
And the Egyptians, when they say that it is floating, add this story,
namely that in this island, which formerly was not floating, Leto, being
one of the eight gods who came into existence first, and dwelling in the
city of Buto where she has this Oracle, received Apollo from Isis as a
charge and preserved him, concealing him in the island which is said now
to be a floating island, at that time when Typhon came after him seeking
everywhere and desiring to find the son of Osiris. Now they say that
Apollo and Artemis are children of Dionysos and of Isis, and that Leto
became their nurse and preserver; and in the Egyptian tongue Apollo is
Oros, Demeter is Isis, and Artemis is Bubastis. From this story and from
no other Æschylus the son of Euphorion took 136 this which I shall say,
wherein he differs from all the preceding poets; he represented namely
that Artemis was the daughter of Demeter. For this reason then, they
say, it became a floating island.

Such is the story which they tell;

157, but as for Psammetichos, he was king over Egypt for four-and-fifty
years, of which for thirty years save one he was sitting before Azotos,
a great city of Syria, besieging it, until at last he took it: and this
Azotos of all cities about which we have knowledge held out for the
longest time under a siege.

158. The son of Psammetichos was Necos, and he became king of Egypt.
This man was the first who attempted the channel leading to the
Erythraian Sea, which Dareios the Persian afterwards completed: the
length of this is a voyage of four days, and in breadth it was so dug
that two triremes could go side by side driven by oars; and the water is
brought into it from the Nile. The channel is conducted a little above
the city of Bubastis by Patumos the Arabian city, and runs into the
Erythraian Sea: and it is dug first along those parts of the plain of
Egypt which lie towards Arabia, just above which run the mountains which
extend opposite Memphis, where are the stone-quarries,—along the base of
these mountains the channel is conducted from West to East for a great
way; and after that it is directed towards a break in the hills and
tends from these mountains towards the noon-day and the South Wind
to the Arabian gulf. Now in the place where the journey is least and
shortest from the Northern to the Southern Sea (which is also called
Erythraian), that is from Mount Casion, which is the boundary between
Egypt and Syria, the distance is exactly 137 a thousand furlongs to the
Arabian gulf; but the channel is much longer, since it is more winding;
and in the reign of Necos there perished while digging it twelve myriads
13701 of the Egyptians. Now Necos ceased in the midst of his digging,
because the utterance of an Oracle impeded him, which was to the effect
that he was working for the Barbarian: and the Egyptians call all men
Barbarians who do not agree with them in speech.

159. Thus having ceased from the work of the channel, Necos betook
himself to waging wars, and triremes were built by him, some for the
Northern Sea and others in the Arabian gulf for the Erythraian Sea; and
of these the sheds are still to be seen. These ships he used when he
needed them; and also on land Necos engaged battle at Magdolos with the
Syrians, and conquered them; and after this he took Cadytis, which is
a great city of Syria: and the dress which he wore when he made these
conquests he dedicated to Apollo, sending it to Branchidai of the
Milesians. After this, having reigned in all sixteen years, he brought
his life to an end, and handed on the kingdom to Psammis his son.

160. While this Psammis was king of Egypt, there came to him men sent by
the Eleians, who boasted that they ordered the contest at Olympia in the
most just and honourable manner possible and thought that not even the
Egyptians, the wisest of men, could find out anything besides, to be
added to their rules. Now when the Eleians came to Egypt and said that
for which they had come, then this king called together those of the
Egyptians who were reputed the wisest, and when the Egyptians had come
together they heard the Eleians tell of all that which it was their part
to do in regard to the contest; and when they had related everything,
they said that they had come to learn in addition anything which the
Egyptians might be able to find out besides, which was juster than this.
They then having consulted together asked the Eleians whether their own
citizens took part in the contest; and they said that it was permitted
to any one who desired it, both of their own people and of the other
Hellenes equally, to take part in the contest: upon which the Egyptians
said that in so ordering the games they had wholly missed the mark of
justice; for it could not be but that they would take part with the man
of their own State, if he was contending, and so act unfairly to the
stranger: but if they really desired, as they said, to order the games
justly, and if this was the cause for which they had come to Egypt, they
advised them to order the contest so as to be for strangers alone to
contend in, and that no Eleian should be permitted to contend. Such was
the suggestion made by the Egyptians to the Eleians.

161. When Psammis had been king of Egypt for only six years and had made
an expedition to Ethiopia and immediately afterwards had ended his life,
Apries the son of Psammis received the kingdom in succession. This man
came to be the most prosperous of all the kings up to that time except
only his forefather Psammetichos; and he reigned five-and-twenty years,
during which he led an army against Sidon and fought a sea-fight with
the king of Tyre. Since however it was fated that evil should come upon
him, it came by occasion of a matter which I shall relate at greater
length in the Libyan history, 138 and at present but shortly. Apries
having sent a great expedition against the Kyrenians, met with
correspondingly great disaster; and the Egyptians considering him
to blame for this revolted from him, supposing that Apries had with
forethought sent them out to evident calamity, in order (as they said)
that there might be a slaughter of them, and he might the more securely
rule over the other Egyptians. Being indignant at this, both these men
who had returned from the expedition and also the friends of those who
had perished made revolt openly.

162. Hearing this Apries sent to them Amasis, to cause them to cease
by persuasion; and when he had come and was seeking to restrain the
Egyptians, as he was speaking and telling them not to do so, one of the
Egyptians stood up behind him and put a helmet 139 upon his head, saying
as he did so that he put it on to crown him king. And to him this
that was done was in some degree not unwelcome, as he proved by his
behaviour; for as soon as the revolted Egyptians had set him up as king,
he prepared to march against Apries: and Apries hearing this sent to
Amasis one of the Egyptians who were about his own person, a man of
reputation, whose name was Patarbemis, enjoining him to bring Amasis
alive into his presence. When this Patarbemis came and summoned Amasis,
the latter, who happened to be sitting on horseback, lifted up his leg
and behaved in an unseemly manner, 140 bidding him take that back to
Apries. Nevertheless, they say, Patarbemis made demand of him that he
should go to the king, seeing that the king had sent to summon him; and
he answered him that he had for some time past been preparing to do
so, and that Apries would have no occasion to find fault with him. Then
Patarbemis both perceiving his intention from that which he said, and
also seeing his preparations, departed in haste, desiring to make known
as quickly as possible to the king the things which were being done:
and when he came back to Apries not bringing Amasis, the king paying
no regard to that which he said, 141 but being moved by violent anger,
ordered his ears and his nose to be cut off. And the rest of the
Egyptians who still remained on his side, when they saw the man of most
repute among them thus suffering shameful outrage, waited no longer but
joined the others in revolt, and delivered themselves over to Amasis.

163. Then Apries having heard this also, armed his foreign mercenaries
and marched against the Egyptians: now he had about him Carian and
Ionian mercenaries to the number of thirty thousand; and his royal
palace was in the city of Saïs, of great size and worthy to be seen.
So Apries and his army were going against the Egyptians, and Amasis and
those with him were going against the mercenaries; and both sides came
to the city of Momemphis and were about to make trial of one another in
fight.

164. Now of the Egyptians there are seven classes, and of these one
class is called that of the priests, and another that of the
warriors, while the others are the cowherds, swineherds, shopkeepers,
interpreters, and boatmen. This is the number of the classes of the
Egyptians, and their names are given them from the occupations
which they follow. Of them the warriors are called Calasirians and
Hermotybians, and they are of the following districts, 142—for all Egypt
is divided into districts.

165. The districts of the Hermotybians are those of Busiris, Saïs,
Chemmis, Papremis, the island called Prosopitis, and the half of
Natho,—of these districts are the Hermotybians, who reached when most
numerous the number of sixteen myriads. 14201 Of these not one has
learnt anything of handicraft, but they are given up to war entirely.

166. Again the districts of the Calasirians are those of Thebes,
Bubastis, Aphthis, Tanis, Mendes, Sebennytos, Athribis, Pharbaithos,
Thmuïs Onuphis, Anytis, Myecphoris,—this last is on an island opposite
to the city of Bubastis. These are the districts of the Calasirians;
and they reached, when most numerous, to the number of five-and-twenty
myriads 14202 of men; nor is it lawful for these, any more than for the
others, to practise any craft; but they practise that which has to do
with war only, handing down the tradition from father to son.

167. Now whether the Hellenes have learnt this also from the Egyptians,
I am not able to say for certain, since I see that the Thracians also
and Scythians and Persians and Lydians and almost all the Barbarians
esteem those of their citizens who learn the arts, and the descendants
of them, as less honourable than the rest; while those who have got free
from all practice of manual arts are accounted noble, and especially
those who are devoted to war: however that may be, the Hellenes have all
learnt this, and especially the Lacedemonians; but the Corinthians least
of all cast slight upon those who practise handicrafts.

168. The following privilege was specially granted to this class and to
none others of the Egyptians except the priests, that is to say, each
man had twelve yokes 143 of land specially granted to him free from
imposts: now the yoke of land measures a hundred Egyptian cubits every
way, and the Egyptian cubit is, as it happens, equal to that of Samos.
This, I say, was a special privilege granted to all, and they also had
certain advantages in turn and not the same men twice; that is to say, a
thousand of the Calasirians and a thousand of the Hermotybians acted as
body-guard to the king during each year; 144 and these had besides their
yokes of land an allowance given them for each day of five pounds weight
14401 of bread to each man, and two pounds of beef, and four half-pints
145 of wine. This was the allowance given to those who were serving as
the king's bodyguard for the time being.

169. So when Apries leading his foreign mercenaries, and Amasis at
the head of the whole body of the Egyptians, in their approach to one
another had come to the city of Momemphis, they engaged battle: and
although the foreign troops fought well, yet being much inferior in
number they were worsted by reason of this. But Apries is said to have
supposed that not even a god would be able to cause him to cease from
his rule, so firmly did he think that it was established. In that battle
then, I say, he was worsted, and being taken alive was brought away to
the city of Saïs, to that which had formerly been his own dwelling but
from thenceforth was the palace of Amasis. There for some time he was
kept in the palace, and Amasis dealt well with him; but at last, since
the Egyptians blamed him, saying that he acted not rightly in keeping
alive him who was the greatest foe both to themselves and to him,
therefore he delivered Apries over to the Egyptians; and they strangled
him, and after that buried him in the burial-place of his fathers: this
is in the temple of Athene, close to the sanctuary, on the left hand as
you enter. Now the men of Saïs buried all those of this district who had
been kings, within the temple; for the tomb of Amasis also, though it is
further from the sanctuary than that of Apries and his forefathers,
yet this too is within the court of the temple, and it consists of
a colonnade of stone of great size, with pillars carved to imitate
date-palms, and otherwise sumptuously adorned; and within the colonnade
are double-doors, and inside the doors a sepulchral chamber.

170. Also at Saïs there is the burial-place of him whom I account it not
pious to name in connexion with such a matter, which is in the temple of
Athene behind the house of the goddess, 146 stretching along the whole
wall of it; and in the sacred enclosure stand great obelisks of stone,
and near them is a lake adorned with an edging of stone and fairly made
in a circle, being in size, as it seemed to me, equal to that which is
called the "Round Pool" 147 in Delos.

171. On this lake they perform by night the show of his sufferings, and
this the Egyptians call Mysteries. Of these things I know more fully in
detail how they take place, but I shall leave this unspoken; and of the
mystic rites of Demeter, which the Hellenes call thesmophoria, of these
also, although I know, I shall leave unspoken all except so much as
piety permits me to tell. The daughters of Danaos were they who brought
this rite out of Egypt and taught it to the women of the Pelasgians;
then afterwards when all the inhabitants of Peloponnese were driven out
by the Dorians, the rite was lost, and only those who were left behind
of the Peloponnesians and not driven out, that is to say the Arcadians,
preserved it.

172. Apries having thus been overthrown, Amasis became king, being of
the district of Saïs, and the name of the city whence he was is Siuph.
Now at the first the Egyptians despised Amasis and held him in no
great regard, because he had been a man of the people and was of no
distinguished family; but afterwards Amasis won them over to himself by
wisdom and not wilfulness. Among innumerable other things of price which
he had, there was a foot-basin of gold in which both Amasis himself and
all his guests were wont always to wash their feet. This he broke up,
and of it he caused to be made the image of a god, and set it up in the
city, where it was most convenient; and the Egyptians went continually
to visit the image and did great reverence to it. Then Amasis, having
learnt that which was done by the men of the city, called together the
Egyptians and made known to them the matter, saying that the image had
been produced from the foot-basin, into which formerly the Egyptians
used to vomit and make water, and in which they washed their feet,
whereas now they did to it great reverence; and just so, he continued,
had he himself now fared, as the foot-basin; for though formerly he
was a man of the people, yet now he was their king, and he bade them
accordingly honour him and have regard for him.

173. In such manner he won the Egyptians to himself, so that they
consented to be his subjects; and his ordering of affairs was thus:—In
the early morning, and until the time of the filling of the market he
did with a good will the business which was brought before him;
but after this he passed the time in drinking and in jesting at his
boon-companions, and was frivolous and playful. And his friends being
troubled at it admonished him in some such words as these: "O king,
thou dost not rightly govern thyself in thus letting thyself descend
to behaviour so trifling; for thou oughtest rather to have been sitting
throughout the day stately upon a stately throne and administering thy
business; and so the Egyptians would have been assured that they were
ruled by a great man, and thou wouldest have had a better report: but as
it is, thou art acting by no means in a kingly fashion." And he answered
them thus: "They who have bows stretch them at such time as they wish to
use them, and when they have finished using them they loose them again;
148 for if they were stretched tight always they would break, so that
the men would not be able to use them when they needed them. So also
is the state of man: if he should always be in earnest and not relax
himself for sport at the due time, he would either go mad or be struck
with stupor before he was aware; and knowing this well, I distribute a
portion of the time to each of the two ways of living." Thus he replied
to his friends.

174. It is said however that Amasis, even when he was in a private
station, was a lover of drinking and of jesting, and not at all
seriously disposed; and whenever his means of livelihood failed him
through his drinking and luxurious living, he would go about and steal;
and they from whom he stole would charge him with having their property,
and when he denied it would bring him before the judgment of an Oracle,
whenever there was one in their place; and many times he was convicted
by the Oracles and many times he was absolved: and then when finally he
became king he did as follows:—as many of the gods as had absolved
him and pronounced him not to be a thief, to their temples he paid no
regard, nor gave anything for the further adornment of them, nor even
visited them to offer sacrifice, considering them to be worth nothing
and to possess lying Oracles; but as many as had convicted him of being
a thief, to these he paid very great regard, considering them to be
truly gods, and to present Oracles which did not lie.

175. First in Saïs he built and completed for Athene a temple-gateway
which is a great marvel, and he far surpassed herein all who had done
the like before, both in regard to height and greatness, so large
are the stones and of such quality. Then secondly he dedicated great
colossal statues and man-headed sphinxes very large, and for restoration
he brought other stones of monstrous size. Some of these he caused to
be brought from the stone-quarries which are opposite Memphis, others
of very great size from the city of Elephantine, distant a voyage of not
less than twenty days from Saïs: and of them all I marvel most at this,
namely a monolith chamber which he brought from the city of Elephantine;
and they were three years engaged in bringing this, and two thousand men
were appointed to convey it, who all were of the class of boatmen. Of
this house the length outside is one-and-twenty cubits, the breadth is
fourteen cubits, and the height eight. These are the measures of the
monolith house outside; but the length inside is eighteen cubits and
five-sixths of a cubit, 149 the breadth twelve cubits, and the height
five cubits. This lies by the side of the entrance to the temple; for
within the temple they did not draw it, because, as it said, while the
house was being drawn along, the chief artificer of it groaned aloud,
seeing that much time had been spent and he was wearied by the work; and
Amasis took it to heart as a warning and did not allow them to draw it
further onwards. Some say on the other hand that a man was killed by it,
of those who were heaving it with levers, and that it was not drawn in
for that reason.

176. Amasis also dedicated in all the other temples which were of
repute, works which are worth seeing for their size, and among them also
at Memphis the colossal statue which lies on its back in front of the
temple of Hephaistos, whose length is five-and-seventy feet; and on the
same base made of the same stone 150 are set two colossal statues, each
of twenty feet in length, one on this side and the other on that side of
the large statue. 151 There is also another of stone of the same size in
Saïs, lying in the same manner as that at Memphis. Moreover Amasis was
he who built and finished for Isis her temple at Memphis, which is of
great size and very worthy to be seen.

177. In the reign of Amasis it is said that Egypt became more prosperous
than at any other time before, both in regard to that which comes to the
land from the river and in regard to that which comes from the land
to its inhabitants, and that at this time the inhabited towns in it
numbered in all twenty thousand. It was Amasis too who established the
law that every year each one of the Egyptians should declare to the
ruler of his district, from what source he got his livelihood, and if
any man did not do this or did not make declaration of an honest way
of living, he should be punished with death. Now Solon the Athenian
received from Egypt this law and had it enacted for the Athenians, and
they have continued to observe it, since it is a law with which none can
find fault.

178. Moreover Amasis became a lover of the Hellenes; and besides other
proofs of friendship which he gave to several among them, he also
granted the city of Naucratis for those of them who came to Egypt to
dwell in; and to those who did not desire to stay, but who made voyages
thither, he granted portions of land to set up altars and make sacred
enclosures for their gods. Their greatest enclosure and that one which
has most name and is most frequented is called the Hellenion, and this
was established by the following cities in common:—of the Ionians Chios,
Teos, Phocaia, Clazomenai, of the Dorians Rhodes, Cnidos, Halicarnassos,
Phaselis, and of the Aiolians Mytilene alone. To these belongs this
enclosure and these are the cities which appoint superintendents of the
port; and all other cities which claim a share in it, are making a claim
without any right. 152 Besides this the Eginetans established on their
own account a sacred enclosure dedicated to Zeus, the Samians one to
Hera, and the Milesians one to Apollo.

179. Now in old times Naucratis alone was an open trading-place, and
no other place in Egypt: and if any one came to any other of the Nile
mouths, he was compelled to swear that he came not thither of his own
will, and when he had thus sworn his innocence he had to sail with his
ship to the Canobic mouth, or if it were not possible to sail by reason
of contrary winds, then he had to carry his cargo round the head of the
Delta in boats to Naucratis: thus highly was Naucratis privileged.

180. Moreover when the Amphictyons had let out the contract for building
the temple which now exists at Delphi, agreeing to pay a sum of three
hundred talents, (for the temple which formerly stood there had been
burnt down of itself), it fell to the share of the people of Delphi to
provide the fourth part of the payment; and accordingly the Delphians
went about to various cities and collected contributions. And when they
did this they got from Egypt as much as from any place, for Amasis gave
them a thousand talents' weight of alum, while the Hellenes who dwelt in
Egypt gave them twenty pounds of silver. 153

181. Also with the people of Kyrene Amasis made an agreement for
friendship and alliance; and he resolved too to marry a wife from
thence, whether because he desired to have a wife of Hellenic race,
or apart from that, on account of friendship for the people of Kyrene:
however that may be, he married, some say the daughter of Battos, others
of Arkesilaos, 154 and others of Critobulos, a man of repute among the
citizens; and her name was Ladike. Now whenever Amasis lay with her he
found himself unable to have intercourse, but with his other wives he
associated as he was wont; and as this happened repeatedly, Amasis said
to his wife, whose name was Ladike: "Woman, thou hast given me drugs,
and thou shalt surely perish 155 more miserably than any other woman."
Then Ladike, when by her denials Amasis was not at all appeased in his
anger against her, made a vow in her soul to Aphrodite, that if Amasis
on that night had intercourse with her (seeing that this was the remedy
for her danger), she would send an image to be dedicated to her at
Kyrene; and after the vow immediately Amasis had intercourse, and from
thenceforth whenever Amasis came in to her he had intercourse with her;
and after this he became very greatly attached to her. And Ladike paid
the vow that she had made to the goddess; for she had an image made
and sent it to Kyrene, and it was still preserved even to my own time,
standing with its face turned away from the city of the Kyrenians. This
Ladike Cambyses, having conquered Egypt and heard from her who she was,
sent back unharmed to Kyrene.

182. Amasis also dedicated offerings in Hellas, first at Kyrene an image
of Athene covered over with gold and a figure of himself made like by
painting; then in the temple of Athene at Lindson two images of stone
and a corslet of linen worthy to be seen; and also at Samos two wooden
figures of himself dedicated to Hera, which were standing even to my own
time in the great temple, behind the doors. Now at Samos he dedicated
offerings because of the guest-friendship between himself and Polycrates
the son of Aiakes; at Lindos for no guest-friendship but because the
temple of Athene at Lindos is said to have been founded by the daughters
of Danaos, who had touched land there at the time when they were fleeing
from the sons of Aigyptos. These offerings were dedicated by Amasis; and
he was the first of men who conquered Cyprus and subdued it so that it
paid him tribute.


