BOOK III. THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED THALEIA


1. Against this Amasis then Cambyses the son of Cyrus was making his
march, taking with him not only other nations of which he was ruler,
but also Hellenes, both Ionians and Aiolians: 1 and the cause of the
expedition was as follows:—Cambyses sent an envoy to Egypt and asked
Amasis to give him his daughter; and he made the request by counsel of
an Egyptian, who brought this upon Amasis 2 having a quarrel with him
for the following reason:—at the time when Cyrus sent to Amasis and
asked him for a physician of the eyes, whosoever was the best of those
in Egypt, Amasis had selected him from all the physicians in Egypt and
had torn him away from his wife and children and delivered him up
to Persia. Having, I say, this cause of quarrel, the Egyptian urged
Cambyses on by his counsel bidding him ask Amasis for his daughter, in
order that he might either be grieved if he gave her, or if he refused
to give her, might offend Cambyses. So Amasis, who was vexed by the
power of the Persians and afraid of it, knew neither how to give nor how
to refuse: for he was well assured that Cambyses did not intend to have
her as his wife but as a concubine. So making account of the matter
thus, he did as follows:—there was a daughter of Apries the former king,
very tall and comely of form and the only person left of his house, and
her name was Nitetis. This girl Amasis adorned with raiment and with
gold, and sent her away to Persia as his own daughter: but after a time,
when Cambyses saluted her calling her by the name of her father, the
girl said to him: "O king, thou dost not perceive how thou hast been
deceived by Amasis; for he adorned me with ornaments and sent me
away giving me to thee as his own daughter, whereas in truth I am the
daughter of Apries against whom Amasis rose up with the Egyptians and
murdered him, who was his lord and master." These words uttered and this
occasion having arisen, led Cambyses the son of Cyrus against Egypt,
moved to very great anger.

2. Such is the report made by the Persians; but as for the Egyptians
they claim Cambyses as one of themselves, saying that he was born of
this very daughter of Apries; for they say that Cyrus was he who sent to
Amasis for his daughter, and not Cambyses. In saying this however they
say not rightly; nor can they have failed to observe (for the Egyptians
fully as well as any other people are acquainted with the laws and
customs of the Persians), first that it is not customary among them for
a bastard to become king, when there is a son born of a true marriage,
and secondly that Cambyses was the son of Cassandane the daughter of
Pharnaspes, a man of the Achaimenid family, and not the son of the
Egyptian woman: but they pervert the truth of history, claiming to be
kindred with the house of Cyrus. Thus it is with these matters;

3, and the following story is also told, which for my part I do not
believe, namely that one of the Persian women came in to the wives of
Cyrus, and when she saw standing by the side of Cassandane children
comely of form and tall, she was loud in her praises of them, expressing
great admiration; and Cassandane, who was the wife of Cyrus, spoke
as follows: "Nevertheless, though I am the mother of such children of
these, Cyrus treats me with dishonour and holds in honour her whom he
has brought in from Egypt." Thus she spoke, they say, being vexed by
Nitetis, and upon that Cambyses the elder of her sons said: "For this
cause, mother, when I am grown to be a man, I will make that which is
above in Egypt to be below, and that which is below above." This he is
reported to have said when he was perhaps about ten years old, and the
women were astonished by it: and he, they say, kept it ever in mind, and
so at last when he had become a man and had obtained the royal power, he
made the expedition against Egypt.

4. Another thing also contributed to this expedition, which was as
follows:—There was among the foreign mercenaries 3 of Amasis a man who
was by race of Halicarnassos, and his name was Phanes, one who was both
capable in judgment and valiant in that which pertained to war. This
Phanes, having (as we may suppose) some quarrel with Amasis, fled away
from Egypt in a ship, desiring to come to speech with Cambyses: and as
he was of no small repute among the mercenaries and was very closely
acquainted with all the affairs of Egypt, Amasis pursued him and
considered it a matter of some moment to capture him: and he pursued by
sending after him the most trusted of his eunuchs with a trireme, who
captured him in Lykia; but having captured him he did not bring him back
to Egypt, since Phanes got the better of him by cunning; for he made
his guards drunk and escaped to Persia. So when Cambyses had made his
resolve to march upon Egypt, and was in difficulty about the march, as
to how he should get safely through the waterless region, this man
came to him and besides informing of the other matters of Amasis, he
instructed him also as to the march, advising him to send to the king
of the Arabians and ask that he would give him safety of passage through
this region.

5. Now by this way only is there a known entrance to Egypt: for from
Phenicia to the borders of the city of Cadytis belongs to the Syrians 4
who are called of Palestine, and from Cadytis, which is a city I suppose
not much less than Sardis, from this city the trading stations on the
sea-coast as far as the city of Ienysos belong to the king of Arabia,
and then from Ienysos again the country belongs to the Syrians as far as
the Serbonian lake, along the side of which Mount Casion extends towards
the Sea. After that, from the Serbonian lake, in which the story goes
that Typhon is concealed, from this point onwards the land is Egypt. Now
the region which lies between the city of Ienysos on the one hand and
Mount Casion and the Serbonian lake on the other, which is of no small
extent but as much as a three days' journey, is grievously destitute of
water.

6. And one thing I shall tell of, which few of those who go in ships to
Egypt have observed, and it is this:—into Egypt from all parts of Hellas
and also from Phenicia are brought twice every year earthenware jars
full of wine, and yet it may almost be said that you cannot see there
one single empty 5 wine-jar.

7. In what manner, then, it will be asked, are they used up? This also I
will tell. The head-man 6 of each place must collect all the earthenware
jars from his own town and convey them to Memphis, and those at Memphis
must fill them with water and convey them to these same waterless
regions of Syria: this the jars which come regularly to Egypt and are
emptied 7 there, are carried to Syria to be added to that which has come
before. It was the Persians who thus prepared this approach to Egypt,
furnishing it with water in the manner which has been said, from the
time when they first took possession of Egypt: but at the time of which
I speak, seeing that water was not yet provided, Cambyses, in accordance
with what he was told by his Halicarnassian guest, sent envoys to the
Arabian king and from him asked and obtained the safe passage, having
given him pledges of friendship and received them from him in return.

8. Now the Arabians have respect for pledges of friendship as much as
those men in all the world who regard them most; and they give them in
the following manner:—A man different from those who desire to give the
pledges to one another, standing in the midst between the two, cuts
with a sharp stone the inner parts of the hands, along by the thumbs,
of those who are giving the pledges to one another, and then he takes a
thread from the cloak of each one and smears with the blood seven
stones laid in the midst between them; and as he does this he calls upon
Dionysos and Urania. When the man has completed these ceremonies, he who
has given the pledges commends to the care of his friends the stranger
(or the fellow-tribesman, if he is giving the pledges to one who is
a member of his tribe), and the friends think it right that they also
should have regard for the pledges given. Of gods they believe in
Dionysos and Urania alone: moreover they say that the cutting of their
hair is done after the same fashion as that of Dionysos himself; and
they cut their hair in a circle round, shaving away the hair of the
temples. Now they call Dionysos Orotalt 8 and Urania they call Alilat.

9. So then when the Arabian king had given the pledge of friendship to
the men who had come to him from Cambyses, he contrived as follows:—he
took skins of camels and filled them with water and loaded them upon the
backs of all the living camels that he had; and having so done he drove
them to the waterless region and there awaited the army of Cambyses.
This which has been related is the more credible of the accounts given,
but the less credible must also be related, since it is a current
account. There is a great river in Arabia called Corys, and this runs
out into the Sea which is called Erythraian. From this river then it is
said that the king of the Arabians, having got a conduit pipe made by
sewing together raw ox-hides and other skins, of such a length as
to reach to the waterless region, conducted the water through these
forsooth, 9 and had great cisterns dug in the waterless region, that
they might receive the water and preserve it. Now it is a journey of
twelve days from the river to this waterless region; and moreover the
story says that he conducted the water by three 10 conduit-pipes to
three different parts of it.

10. Meanwhile Psammenitos the son of Amasis was encamped at the Pelusian
mouth of the Nile waiting for the coming of Cambyses: for Cambyses did
not find Amasis yet living when he marched upon Egypt, but Amasis had
died after having reigned forty and four years during which no great
misfortune had befallen him: and when he had died and had been embalmed
he was buried in the burial-place in the temple, which he had built for
himself. 11 Now when Psammenitos son of Amasis was reigning as king,
there happened to the Egyptians a prodigy, the greatest that had ever
happened: for rain fell at Thebes in Egypt, where never before had rain
fallen nor afterwards down to my time, as the Thebans themselves say;
for in the upper parts of Egypt no rain falls at all: but at the time of
which I speak rain fell at Thebes in a drizzling shower. 12

11. Now when the Persians had marched quite through the waterless region
and were encamped near the Egyptians with design to engage battle, then
the foreign mercenaries of the Egyptian king, who were Hellenes and
Carians, having a quarrel with Phanes because he had brought
against Egypt an army of foreign speech, contrived against him as
follows:—Phanes had children whom he had left behind in Egypt: these
they brought to their camp and into the sight of their father, and they
set up a mixing-bowl between the two camps, and after that they brought
up the children one by one and cut their throats so that the blood ran
into the bowl. Then when they had gone through the whole number of the
children, they brought and poured into the bowl both wine and water, and
not until the mercenaries had all drunk of the blood, did they engage
battle. Then after a battle had been fought with great stubbornness, and
very many had fallen of both the armies, the Egyptians at length turned
to flight.

12. I was witness moreover of a great marvel, being informed of it by
the natives of the place; for of the bones scattered about of those
who fell in this fight, each side separately, since the bones of the
Persians were lying apart on one side according as they were divided
at first, and those of the Egyptians on the other, the skulls of the
Persians are so weak that if you shall hit them only with a pebble
you will make a hole in them, while those of the Egyptians are so
exceedingly strong that you would hardly break them if you struck them
with a large stone. The cause of it, they say, was this, and I for my
part readily believe them, namely that the Egyptians beginning from
their early childhood shave their heads, and the bone is thickened by
exposure to the sun: and this is also the cause of their not becoming
bald-headed; for among the Egyptians you see fewer bald-headed men
than among any other race. This then is the reason why these have their
skulls strong; and the reason why the Persians have theirs weak is that
they keep them delicately in the shade from the first by wearing tiaras,
that is felt caps. So far of this: and I saw also a similar thing to
this at Papremis, in the case of those who were slain together with
Achaimenes the son of Dareios, by Inaros the Libyan.

13. The Egyptians when they turned to flight from the battle fled in
disorder: and they being shut up in Memphis, Cambyses sent a ship of
Mytilene up the river bearing a Persian herald, to summon the Egyptians
to make terms of surrender; but they, when they saw the ship had
entered into Memphis, pouring forth in a body from the fortress 13 both
destroyed the ship and also tore the men in it limb from limb, and so
bore them into the fortress. After this the Egyptians being besieged, in
course of time surrendered themselves; and the Libyans who dwell on the
borders of Egypt, being struck with terror by that which had happened to
Egypt, delivered themselves up without resistance, and they both laid
on themselves a tribute and sent presents: likewise also those of Kyrene
and Barca, being struck with terror equally with 14 the Libyans, acted
in a similar manner: and Cambyses accepted graciously the gifts which
came from the Libyans, but as for those which came from the men of
Kyrene, finding fault with them, as I suppose, because they were too
small in amount (for the Kyrenians sent in fact five hundred pounds'
weight 15 of silver), he took the silver by handfuls and scattered it
with his own hand among his soldiers.

14. On the tenth day after that on which he received the surrender
of the fortress of Memphis, Cambyses set the king of the Egyptians
Psammenitos, who had been king for six months, to sit in the suburb of
the city, to do him dishonour,—him I say with other Egyptians he set
there, and he proceeded to make trial of his spirit as follows:—having
arrayed his daughter in the clothing of a slave, he sent her forth with
a pitcher to fetch water, and with her he sent also other maidens chosen
from the daughters of the chief men, arrayed as was the daughter of the
king: and as the maidens were passing by their fathers with cries and
lamentation, the other men all began to cry out and lament aloud, 16
seeing that their children had been evilly entreated, but Psammenitos
when he saw it before his eyes and perceived it bent himself down to the
earth. Then when the water-bearers had passed by, next Cambyses sent his
son with two thousand Egyptians besides who were of the same age, with
ropes bound round their necks and bits placed in their mouths; and these
were being led away to execution to avenge the death of the Mytilenians
who had been destroyed at Memphis with their ship: for the Royal Judges
17 had decided that for each man ten of the noblest Egyptians should
lose their lives in retaliation. He then, when he saw them passing out
by him and perceived that his son was leading the way 18 to die, did
the same as he had done with respect to his daughter, while the other
Egyptians who sat round him were lamenting and showing signs of grief.
When these also had passed by, it chanced that a man of his table
companions, advanced in years, who had been deprived of all his
possessions and had nothing except such things as a beggar possesses,
and was asking alms from the soldiers, passed by Psammenitos the son of
Amasis and the Egyptians who were sitting in the suburb of the city: and
when Psammenitos saw him he uttered a great cry of lamentation, and he
called his companion by name and beat himself upon the head. Now there
was, it seems, men set to watch him, who made known to Cambyses all that
he did on the occasion of each going forth: and Cambyses marvelled
at that which he did, and he sent a messenger and asked him thus:
"Psammenitos, thy master Cambyses asks thee for what reason, when thou
sawest thy daughter evilly entreated and thy son going to death, thou
didst not cry aloud nor lament for them, whereas thou didst honour with
these signs of grief the beggar who, as he hears from others, is not
in any way related to thee?" Thus he asked, and the other answered
as follows: "O son of Cyrus, my own troubles were too great for me to
lament them aloud, but the trouble of my companion was such as called
for tears, seeing that he has been deprived of great wealth, and has
come to beggary upon the threshold of old age." When this saying was
reported by the messenger, it seemed to them 19 that it was well spoken;
and, as is reported by the Egyptians, Croesus shed tears (for he also,
as fortune would have it, had accompanied Cambyses to Egypt) and the
Persians who were present shed tears also; and there entered some pity
into Cambyses himself, and forthwith he bade them save the life of the
son of Psammenitos from among those who were being put to death, and
also he bade them raise Psammenitos himself from his place in the suburb
of the city and bring him into his own presence.

15. As for the son, those who went for him found that he was no longer
alive, but had been cut down first of all, but Psammenitos himself they
raised from his place and brought him into the presence of Cambyses,
with whom he continued to live for the rest of his time without
suffering any violence; and if he had known how to keep himself from
meddling with mischief, he would have received Egypt so as to be ruler
of it, since the Persians are wont to honour the sons of kings, and even
if the kings have revolted from them, they give back the power into the
hands of their sons. Of this, namely that it is their established rule
to act so, one may judge by many instances besides and especially 20
by the case of Thannyras the son of Inaros, who received back the power
which his father had, and by that of Pausiris the son of Amyrtaios, for
he too received back the power of his father: yet it is certain that no
men ever up to this time did more evil to the Persians than Inaros and
Amyrtaios. As it was, however, Psammenitos devised evil and received the
due reward: for he was found to be inciting the Egyptians to revolt; and
when this became known to Cambyses, Psammenitos drank bull's blood and
died forthwith. Thus he came to his end.

16. From Memphis Cambyses came to the city of Saïs with the purpose of
doing that which in fact he did: for when he had entered into the palace
of Amasis, he forthwith gave command to bring the corpse of Amasis forth
out of his burial-place; and when this had been accomplished, he gave
command to scourge it and pluck out the hair and stab it, and to do to
it dishonour in every possible way besides: and when they had done this
too until they were wearied out, for the corpse being embalmed held out
against the violence and did not fall to pieces in any part, Cambyses
gave command to consume it with fire, enjoining thereby a thing which
was not permitted by religion: for the Persians hold fire to be a god.
To consume corpses with fire then is by no means according to the
custom of either people, of the Persians for the reason which has been
mentioned, since they say that it is not right to give the dead body
of a man to a god; while the Egyptians have the belief established that
fire is a living wild beast, and that it devours everything which it
catches, and when it is satiated with the food it dies itself together
with that which it devours: but it is by no means their custom to give
the corpse of a man to wild beasts, for which reason they embalm it,
that it may not be eaten by worms as it lies in the tomb. Thus then
Cambyses was enjoining them to do that which is not permitted by the
customs of either people. However, the Egyptians say that it was not
Amasis who suffered this outrage, but another of the Egyptians who was
of the same stature of body as Amasis; and that to him the Persians did
outrage, thinking that they were doing it to Amasis: for they say that
Amasis learnt from an Oracle that which was about to happen with regard
to himself after his death; and accordingly, to avert the evil which
threatened to come upon him, he buried the dead body of this man who was
scourged within his own sepulchral chamber near the doors, and enjoined
his son to lay his own body as much as possible in the inner recess of
the chamber. These injunctions, said to have been given by Amasis with
regard to his burial and with regard to the man mentioned, were not
in my opinion really given at all, but I think that the Egyptians make
pretence of it from pride and with no good ground.

17. After this Cambyses planned three several expeditions, one against
the Carthaginians, another against the Ammonians, and a third against
the "Long-lived" Ethiopians, who dwell in that part of Libya which is by
the Southern Sea: and in forming these designs he resolved to send
his naval force against the Carthaginians, and a body chosen from his
land-army against the Ammonians; and to the Ethiopians to send spies
first, both to see whether the table of the Sun existed really, which is
said to exist among these Ethiopians, and in addition to this to spy out
all else, but pretending to be bearers of gifts for their king.

18. Now the table of the Sun is said to be as follows:—there is a meadow
in the suburb of their city full of flesh-meat boiled of all four-footed
creatures; and in this, it is said, those of the citizens who are in
authority at the time place the flesh by night, managing the matter
carefully, and by day any man who wishes comes there and feasts himself;
and the natives (it is reported) say that the earth of herself produces
these things continually.

19. Of such nature is the so-called table of the Sun said to be. So when
Cambyses had resolved to send the spies, forthwith he sent for those men
of the Ichthyophagoi who understood the Ethiopian tongue, to come from
the city of Elephantine: and while they were going to fetch these
men, he gave command to the fleet to sail against Carthage: but the
Phenicians said that they would not do so, for they were bound not to
do so by solemn vows, and they would not be acting piously if they
made expedition against their own sons: and as the Phenicians were not
willing, the rest were rendered unequal to the attempt. Thus then the
Carthaginians escaped being enslaved by the Persians; for Cambyses did
not think it right to apply force to compel the Phenicians, both because
they had delivered themselves over to the Persians of their own accord
and because the whole naval force was dependent upon the Phenicians. Now
the men of Cyprus also had delivered themselves over to the Persians,
and were joining in the expedition against Egypt.

20. Then as soon as the Ichthyophagoi came to Cambyses from Elephantine,
he sent them to the Ethiopians, enjoining them what they should say and
giving them gifts to bear with them, that is to say a purple garment,
and a collar of twisted gold with bracelets, and an alabaster box of
perfumed ointment, and a jar of palm-wine. Now these Ethiopians to whom
Cambyses was sending are said to be the tallest and the most beautiful
of all men; and besides other customs which they are reported to have
different from other men, there is especially this, it is said, with
regard to their regal power,—whomsoever of the men of their nation
they judge to be the tallest and to have strength in proportion to his
stature, this man they appoint to reign over them.

21. So when the Ichthyophagoi had come to this people they presented
their gifts to the king who ruled over them, and at the same time they
said as follows: "The king of the Persians Cambyses, desiring to become
a friend and guest to thee, sent us with command to come to speech with
thee, and he gives thee for gifts these things which he himself most
delights to use." The Ethiopian however, perceiving that they had
come as spies, spoke to them as follows: "Neither did the king of the
Persians send you bearing gifts because he thought it a matter of great
moment to become my guest-friend, nor do ye speak true things (for ye
have come as spies of my kingdom), nor again is he a righteous man; for
if he had been righteous he would not have coveted a land other than his
own, nor would he be leading away into slavery men at whose hands he has
received no wrong. Now however give him this bow and speak to him these
words: The king of the Ethiopians gives this counsel to the king of the
Persians, that when the Persians draw their bows (of equal size to mine)
as easily as I do this, then he should march against the Long-lived
Ethiopians, provided that he be superior in numbers; but until that time
he should feel gratitude to the gods that they do not put it into the
mind of the sons of the Ethiopians to acquire another land in addition
to their own."

22. Having thus said and having unbent the bow, he delivered it to those
who had come. Then he took the garment of purple and asked what it was
and how it had been made: and when the Ichthyophagoi had told him the
truth about the purple-fish and the dyeing of the tissue, he said that
the men were deceitful and deceitful also were their garments. Then
secondly he asked concerning the twisted gold of the collar and the
bracelets; and when the Ichthyophagoi were setting forth to him the
manner in which it was fashioned, the king broke into a laugh and said,
supposing them to be fetters, that they had stronger fetters than those
in their country. Thirdly he asked about the perfumed ointment, and when
they had told him of the manner of its making and of the anointing with
it, he said the same as he had said before about the garment. Then when
he came to the wine, and had learned about the manner of its making,
being exceedingly delighted with the taste of the drink he asked besides
what food the king ate, and what was the longest time that a Persian
man lived. They told him that he ate bread, explaining to him first the
manner of growing the wheat, and they said that eighty years was the
longest term of life appointed for a Persian man. In answer to this the
Ethiopian said that he did not wonder that they lived but a few years,
when they fed upon dung; for indeed they would not be able to live
even so many years as this, if they did not renew their vigour with the
drink, indicating to the Ichthyophagoi the wine; for in regard to this,
he said, his people were much behind the Persians.

23. Then when the Ichthyophagoi asked the king in return about the
length of days and the manner of life of his people, he answered that
the greater number of them reached the age of a hundred and twenty
years, and some surpassed even this; and their food was boiled flesh
and their drink was milk. And when the spies marvelled at the number of
years, he conducted them to a certain spring, in the water of which they
washed and became more sleek of skin, as if it were a spring of oil; and
from it there came a scent as it were of violets: and the water of this
spring, said the spies, was so exceedingly weak that it was not possible
for anything to float upon it, either wood or any of those things which
are lighter than wood, but they all went to the bottom. If this water
which they have be really such as it is said to be, it would doubtless
be the cause why the people are long-lived, as making use of it for all
the purposes of life. Then when they departed from this spring, he led
them to a prison-house for men, and there all were bound in fetters of
gold. Now among these Ethiopians bronze is the rarest and most precious
of all things. Then when they had seen the prison-house they saw also
the so-called table of the Sun:

24, and after this they saw last of all their receptacles of dead
bodies, which are said to be made of crystal in the following
manner:—when they have dried the corpse, whether it be after the
Egyptian fashion or in some other way, they cover it over completely
with plaster 21 and then adorn it with painting, making the figure as
far as possible like the living man. After this they put about it a
block of crystal hollowed out; for this they dig up in great quantity
and it is very easy to work: and the dead body being in the middle of
the block is visible through it, but produces no unpleasant smell nor
any other effect which is unseemly, and it has all its parts visible
like the dead body itself. For a year then they who are most nearly
related to the man keep the block in their house, giving to the dead man
the first share of everything and offering to him sacrifices: and after
this period they carry it out and set it up round about the city.

25. After they had seen all, the spies departed to go back; and when
they reported these things, forthwith Cambyses was enraged and proceeded
to march his army against the Ethiopians, not having ordered any
provision of food nor considered with himself that he was intending to
march an army to the furthest extremities of the earth; but as one who
is mad and not in his right senses, when he heard the report of the
Ichthyophagoi he began the march, ordering those of the Hellenes who
were present to remain behind in Egypt, and taking with him his whole
land force: and when in the course of his march he had arrived at
Thebes, he divided off about fifty thousand of his army, and these he
enjoined to make slaves of the Ammonians and to set fire to the seat of
the Oracle of Zeus, but he himself with the remainder of his army went
on against the Ethiopians. But before the army had passed over the
fifth part of the way, all that they had of provisions came to an end
completely; and then after the provisions the beasts of burden also were
eaten up and came to an end. Now if Cambyses when he perceived this had
changed his plan and led his army back, he would have been a wise man
in spite of 22 his first mistake; as it was, however, he paid no regard,
but went on forward without stopping. The soldiers accordingly, so long
as they were able to get anything from the ground, prolonged their lives
by eating grass; but when they came to the sand, some did a fearful
deed, that is to say, out of each company of ten they selected by lot
one of themselves and devoured him: and Cambyses, when he heard it,
being alarmed by this eating of one another gave up the expedition
against the Ethiopians and set forth to go back again; and he arrived
at Thebes having suffered loss of a great number of his army. Then from
Thebes he came down to Memphis and allowed the Hellenes to sail away
home.

26. Thus fared the expedition against the Ethiopians: and those of the
Persians who had been sent to march against the Ammonians set forth
from Thebes and went on their way with guides; and it is known that they
arrived at the city of Oasis, which is inhabited by Samians said to
be of the Aischrionian tribe, and is distant seven days' journey from
Thebes over sandy desert: now this place is called in the speech of the
Hellenes the "Isle of the Blessed." It is said that the army reached
this place, but from that point onwards, except the Ammonians themselves
and those who have heard the account from them, no man is able to say
anything about them; for they neither reached the Ammonians nor
returned back. This however is added to the story by the Ammonians
themselves:—they say that as the army was going from this Oasis through
the sandy desert to attack them, and had got to a point about mid-way
between them and the Oasis, while they were taking their morning meal
a violent South Wind blew upon them, and bearing with it heaps of the
desert sand it buried them under it, and so they disappeared and were
seen no more. Thus the Ammonians say that it came to pass with regard to
this army.

27. When Cambyses arrived at Memphis, Apis appeared to the Egyptians,
whom the Hellenes call Epaphos: and when he had appeared, forthwith the
Egyptians began to wear their fairest garments and to have festivities.
Cambyses accordingly seeing the Egyptians doing thus, and supposing that
they were certainly acting so by way of rejoicing because he had fared
ill, called for the officers who had charge of Memphis; and when they
had come into his presence, he asked them why when he was at Memphis on
the former occasion, the Egyptians were doing nothing of this kind, but
only now, when he came there after losing a large part of his army.
They said that a god had appeared to them, who was wont to appear at
intervals of long time, and that whenever he appeared, then all the
Egyptians rejoiced and kept festival. Hearing this Cambyses said that
they were lying, and as liars he condemned them to death.

28. Having put these to death, next he called the priests into his
presence; and when the priests answered him after the same manner, he
said that it should not be without his knowledge if a tame god had come
to the Egyptians; and having so said he bade the priests bring Apis away
into his presence: so they went to bring him. Now this Apis-Epaphos is a
calf born of a cow who after this is not permitted to conceive any other
offspring; and the Egyptians say that a flash of light comes down from
heaven upon this cow, and of this she produces Apis. This calf which is
called Apis is black and has the following signs, namely a white square
23 upon the forehead, and on the back the likeness of an eagle, and in
the tail the hairs are double, and on 24 the tongue there is a mark like
a beetle.

29. When the priests had brought Apis, Cambyses being somewhat affected
with madness drew his dagger, and aiming at the belly of Apis, struck
his thigh: then he laughed and said to the priests: "O ye wretched
creatures, are gods born such as this, with blood and flesh, and
sensible of the stroke of iron weapons? Worthy indeed of Egyptians
is such a god as this. Ye however at least shall not escape without
punishment for making a mock of me." Having thus spoken he ordered those
whose duty it was to do such things, to scourge the priests without
mercy, and to put to death any one of the other Egyptians whom they
should find keeping the festival. Thus the festival of the Egyptians had
been brought to an end, and the priests were being chastised, and Apis
wounded by the stroke in his thigh lay dying in the temple.

30. Him, when he had brought his life to an end by reason of the wound,
the priests buried without the knowledge of Cambyses: but Cambyses, as
the Egyptians say, immediately after this evil deed became absolutely
mad, not having been really in his right senses even before that time:
and the first of his evil deeds was that he put to death his brother
Smerdis, who was of the same father and the same mother as himself. This
brother he had sent away from Egypt to Persia in envy, because alone
of all the Persians he had been able to draw the bow which the
Ichthyophagoi brought from the Ethiopian king, to an extent of about two
finger-breadths; while of the other Persians not one had proved able
to do this. Then when Smerdis had gone away to Persia, Cambyses saw a
vision in his sleep of this kind:—it seemed to him that a messenger came
from Persia and reported that Smerdis sitting upon the royal throne had
touched the heaven with his head. Fearing therefore with regard to
this lest his brother might slay him and reign in his stead, he sent
Prexaspes to Persia, the man whom of all the Persians he trusted most,
with command to slay him. He accordingly went up to Susa and slew
Smerdis; and some say that he took him out of the chase and so slew him,
others that he brought him to the Erythraian Sea and drowned him.

31. This they say was the first beginning of the evil deeds of Cambyses;
and next after this he put to death his sister, who had accompanied
him to Egypt, to whom also he was married, she being his sister by both
parents. Now he took her to wife in the following manner (for
before this the Persians had not been wont at all to marry their
sisters):—Cambyses fell in love with one of his sisters, and desired to
take her to wife; so since he had it in mind to do that which was not
customary, he called the Royal Judges and asked them whether there
existed any law which permitted him who desired it to marry his sister.
Now the Royal Judges are men chosen out from among the Persians, and
hold their office until they die or until some injustice is found in
them, so long and no longer. These pronounce decisions for the Persians
and are the expounders of the ordinances of their fathers, and all
matters are referred to them. So when Cambyses asked them, they gave him
an answer which was both upright and safe, saying that they found no law
which permitted a brother to marry his sister, but apart from that they
had found a law to the effect that the king of the Persians might do
whatsoever he desired. Thus on the one hand they did not tamper with
the law for fear of Cambyses, and at the same time, that they might not
perish themselves in maintaining the law, they found another law beside
that which was asked for, which was in favour of him who wished to marry
his sisters. So Cambyses at that time took to wife her with whom he was
in love, but after no long time he took another sister. Of these it was
the younger whom he put to death, she having accompanied him to Egypt.

32. About her death, as about the death of Smerdis, two different
stories are told. The Hellenes say that Cambyses had matched a lion's
cub in fight with a dog's whelp, and this wife of his was also a
spectator of it; and when the whelp was being overcome, another whelp,
its brother, broke its chain and came to help it; and having become two
instead of one, the whelps then got the better of the cub: and Cambyses
was pleased at the sight, but she sitting by him began to weep; and
Cambyses perceived it and asked wherefore she wept; and she said that
she had wept when she saw that the whelp had come to the assistance of
its brother, because she remembered Smerdis and perceived that there was
no one who would come to his 25 assistance. The Hellenes say that it was
for this saying that she was killed by Cambyses: but the Egyptians say
that as they were sitting round at table, the wife took a lettuce and
pulled off the leaves all round, and then asked her husband whether the
lettuce was fairer when thus plucked round or when covered with
leaves, and he said "when covered with leaves": she then spoke thus:
"Nevertheless thou didst once produce the likeness of this lettuce, when
thou didst strip bare the house of Cyrus." And he moved to anger leapt
upon her, being with child, and she miscarried and died.

33. These were the acts of madness done by Cambyses towards those of his
own family, whether the madness was produced really on account of Apis
or from some other cause, as many ills are wont to seize upon men; for
it is said moreover that Cambyses had from his birth a certain grievous
malady, that which is called by some the "sacred" disease: 26 and it
was certainly nothing strange that when the body was suffering from a
grievous malady, the mind should not be sound either.

34. The following also are acts of madness which he did to the other
Persians:—To Prexaspes, the man whom he honoured most and who used to
bear his messages 2601 (his son also was cup-bearer to Cambyses, and
this too was no small honour),—to him it is said that he spoke as
follows: "Prexaspes, what kind of a man do the Persians esteem me to be,
and what speech do they hold concerning me?" and he said: "Master, in
all other respects thou art greatly commended, but they say that thou
art overmuch given to love of wine." Thus he spoke concerning the
Persians; and upon that Cambyses was roused to anger, and answered thus:
"It appears then that the Persians say I am given to wine, and that
therefore I am beside myself and not in my right mind; and their former
speech then was not sincere." For before this time, it seems, when the
Persians and Croesus were sitting with him in council, Cambyses asked
what kind of a man they thought he was as compared with his father
Cyrus; 27 and they answered that he was better than his father, for
he not only possessed all that his father had possessed, but also in
addition to this had acquired Egypt and the Sea. Thus the Persians
spoke; but Croesus, who was present and was not satisfied with their
judgment, spoke thus to Cambyses: "To me, O son of Cyrus, thou dost not
appear to be equal to thy father, for not yet hast thou a son such as
he left behind him in you." Hearing this Cambyses was pleased, and
commended the judgment of Croesus.

35. So calling to mind this, he said in anger to Prexaspes: "Learn then
now for thyself whether the Persians speak truly, or whether when they
say this they are themselves out of their senses: for if I, shooting at
thy son there standing before the entrance of the chamber, hit him in
the very middle of the heart, the Persians will be proved to be speaking
falsely, but if I miss, then thou mayest say that the Persians are
speaking the truth and that I am not in my right mind." Having thus said
he drew his bow and hit the boy; and when the boy had fallen down, it
is said that he ordered them to cut open his body and examine the place
where he was hit; and as the arrow was found to be sticking in the
heart, he laughed and was delighted, and said to the father of the boy:
"Prexaspes, it has now been made evident, as thou seest, that I am not
mad, but that it is the Persians who are out of their senses; and now
tell me, whom of all men didst thou ever see before this time hit the
mark so well in shooting?" Then Prexaspes, seeing that the man was not
in his right senses and fearing for himself, said: "Master, I think that
not even God himself could have hit the mark so fairly." Thus he did at
that time: and at another time he condemned twelve of the Persians, men
equal to the best, on a charge of no moment, and buried them alive with
the head downwards.

36. When he was doing these things, Croesus the Lydian judged it right
to admonish him in the following words: "O king, do not thou indulge the
heat of thy youth and passion in all things, but retain and hold thyself
back: it is a good thing to be prudent, and forethought is wise. Thou
however are putting to death men who are of thine own people, condemning
them on charges of no moment, and thou art putting to death men's sons
also. If thou do many such things, beware lest the Persians make revolt
from thee. As for me, thy father Cyrus gave me charge, earnestly bidding
me to admonish thee, and suggest to thee that which I should find to
be good." Thus he counselled him, manifesting goodwill towards him; but
Cambyses answered: "Dost thou venture to counsel me, who excellently
well didst rule thine own country, and well didst counsel my father,
bidding him pass over the river Araxes and go against the Massagetai,
when they were willing to pass over into our land, and so didst utterly
ruin thyself by ill government of thine own land, and didst utterly
ruin Cyrus, who followed thy counsel. However thou shalt not escape
punishment now, for know that before this I had very long been desiring
to find some occasion against thee." Thus having said he took his bow
meaning to shoot him, but Croesus started up and ran out: and so since
he could not shoot him, he gave orders to his attendants to take and
slay him. The attendants however, knowing his moods, concealed Croesus,
with the intention that if Cambyses should change his mind and seek
to have Croesus again, they might produce him and receive gifts as the
price of saving his life; but if he did not change his mind nor feel
desire to have him back, then they might kill him. Not long afterwards
Cambyses did in fact desire to have Croesus again, and the attendants
perceiving this reported to him that he was still alive: and Cambyses
said that he rejoiced with Croesus that he was still alive, but that
they who had preserved him should not get off free, but he would put
them to death: and thus he did.

37. Many such acts of madness did he both to Persians and allies,
remaining at Memphis and opening ancient tombs and examining the dead
bodies. Likewise also he entered into the temple of Hephaistos and very
much derided the image of the god: for the image of Hephaistos very
nearly resembles the Phenician Pataicoi, which the Phenicians carry
about on the prows of their triremes; and for him who has not seen
these, I will indicate its nature,—it is the likeness of a dwarfish man.
He entered also into the temple of the Cabeiroi, into which it is not
lawful for any one to enter except the priest only, and the images there
he even set on fire, after much mockery of them. Now these also are like
the images of Hephaistos, and it is said that they are the children of
that god.

38. It is clear to me therefore by every kind of proof that Cambyses
was mad exceedingly; for otherwise he would not have attempted to deride
religious rites and customary observances. For if one should propose
to all men a choice, bidding them select the best customs from all the
customs that there are, each race of men, after examining them all,
would select those of his own people; thus all think that their own
customs are by far the best: and so it is not likely that any but a
madman would make a jest of such things. Now of the fact that all men
are thus wont to think about their customs, we may judge by many other
proofs and more specially by this which follows:—Dareios in the course
of his reign summoned those of the Hellenes who were present in his
land, and asked them for what price they would consent to eat up their
fathers when they died; and they answered that for no price would
they do so. After this Dareios summoned those Indians who are called
Callatians, who eat their parents, and asked them in presence of the
Hellenes, who understood what they said by help of an interpreter, for
what payment they would consent to consume with fire the bodies of
their fathers when they died; and they cried out aloud and bade him
keep silence from such words. Thus then these things are established by
usage, and I think that Pindar spoke rightly in his verse, when he said
that "of all things law is king." 28

39. Now while Cambyses was marching upon Egypt, the Lacedemonians also
had made an expedition against Samos and against Polycrates the son
of Aiakes, who had risen against the government and obtained rule over
Samos. At first he had divided the State into three parts and had given
a share to his brothers Pantagnotos and Syloson; but afterwards he put
to death one of these, and the younger, namely Syloson, he drove
out, and so obtained possession of the whole of Samos. Then, being in
possession, 29 he made a guest-friendship with Amasis the king of Egypt,
sending him gifts and receiving gifts in return from him. After this
straightway within a short period of time the power of Polycrates
increased rapidly, and there was much fame of it not only in Ionia,
but also over the rest of Hellas: for to whatever part he directed his
forces, everything went fortunately for him: and he had got for himself
a hundred fifty-oared galleys and a thousand archers, and he plundered
from all, making no distinction of any; for it was his wont to say that
he would win more gratitude from his friend by giving back to him that
which he had taken, than by not taking at all. 30 So he had conquered
many of the islands and also many cities of the continent, and besides
other things he gained the victory in a sea-fight over the Lesbians, as
they were coming to help the Milesians with their forces, and conquered
them: these men dug the whole trench round the wall of the city of Samos
working in chains.

40. Now Amasis, as may be supposed, did not fail to perceive that
Polycrates was very greatly fortunate, and 31 it was to him an object
of concern; and as much more good fortune yet continued to come to
Polycrates, he wrote upon a paper these words and sent them to Samos:
"Amasis to Polycrates thus saith:—It is a pleasant thing indeed to hear
that one who is a friend and guest is faring well; yet to me thy great
good fortune is not pleasing, since I know that the Divinity is jealous;
and I think that I desire, both for myself and for those about whom I
have care, that in some of our affairs we should be prosperous and in
others should fail, and thus go through life alternately faring 32 well
and ill, rather than that we should be prosperous in all things: for
never yet did I hear tell of any one who was prosperous in all things
and did not come to an utterly 33 evil end at the last. Now therefore
do thou follow my counsel and act as I shall say with respect to thy
prosperous fortunes. Take thought and consider, and that which thou
findest to be the most valued by thee, and for the loss of which thou
wilt most be vexed in thy soul, that take and cast away in such a manner
that it shall never again come to the sight of men; and if in future
from that time forward good fortune does not befall thee in alternation
with calamities, 34 apply remedies in the manner by me suggested."

41. Polycrates, having read this and having perceived by reflection that
Amasis suggested to him good counsel, sought to find which one of his
treasures he would be most afflicted in his soul to lose; and seeking
he found this which I shall say:—he had a signet which he used to wear,
enchased in gold and made of an emerald stone; and it was the work of
Theodoros the son of Telecles of Samos. 35 Seeing then that he thought
it good to cast this away, he did thus:—he manned a fifty-oared galley
with sailors and went on board of it himself; and then he bade them
put out into the deep sea. And when he had got to a distance from the
island, he took off the signet-ring, and in the sight of all who were
with him in the ship he threw it into the sea. Thus having done he
sailed home; and when he came to his house he mourned for his loss.

42. But on the fifth or sixth day after these things it happened to
him as follows:—a fisherman having caught a large and beautiful fish,
thought it right that this should be given as a gift to Polycrates. He
bore it therefore to the door of the palace and said that he desired to
come into the presence of Polycrates, and when he had obtained this he
gave him the fish, saying: "O king, having taken this fish I did not
think fit to bear it to the market, although I am one who lives by the
labour of his hands; but it seemed to me that it was worthy of thee and
of thy monarchy: therefore I bring it and present it to thee." He
then, being pleased at the words spoken, answered thus: "Thou didst
exceedingly well, and double thanks are due to thee, for thy words and
also for thy gift; and we invite thee to come to dinner." The fisherman
then, thinking this a great thing, went away to this house; and the
servants as they were cutting up the fish found in its belly the
signet-ring of Polycrates. Then as soon as they had seen it and taken it
up, they bore it rejoicing to Polycrates, and giving him the signet-ring
they told him in what manner it had been found: and he perceiving that
the matter was of God, wrote upon paper all that he had done and all
that had happened to him, and having written he despatched it to Egypt.
36

43. Then Amasis, when he had read the paper which had come from
Polycrates, perceived that it was impossible for man to rescue man from
the event which was to come to pass, and that Polycrates was destined
not to have a good end, being prosperous in all things, seeing that he
found again even that which he cast away. Therefore he sent an envoy to
him in Samos and said that he broke off the guest-friendship; and this
he did lest when a fearful and great mishap befell Polycrates, he might
himself be grieved in his soul as for a man who was his guest.

44. It was this Polycrates then, prosperous in all things, against whom
the Lacedemonians were making an expedition, being invited by those
Samians who afterwards settled at Kydonia in Crete, to come to their
assistance. Now Polycrates had sent an envoy to Cambyses the son of
Cyrus without the knowledge of the Samians, as he was gathering an army
to go against Egypt, and had asked him to send to him in Samos and to
ask for an armed force. So Cambyses hearing this very readily sent to
Samos to ask Polycrates to send a naval force with him against Egypt:
and Polycrates selected of the citizens those whom he most suspected
of desiring to rise against him and sent them away in forty triremes,
charging Cambyses not to send them back.

