45. Now some say that those of the Samians who were sent away by
Polycrates never reached Egypt, but when they arrived on their voyage at
Carpathos, 37 they considered with themselves, and resolved not to sail
on any further: others say that they reached Egypt and being kept under
guard there, they made their escape from thence. Then, as they were
sailing in to Samos, Polycrates encountered them with ships and engaged
battle with them; and those who were returning home had the better and
landed in the island; but having fought a land-battle in the island,
they were worsted, and so sailed to Lacedemon. Some however say that
those from Egypt defeated Polycrates in the battle; but this in my
opinion is not correct, for there would have been no need for them to
invite the assistance of the Lacedemonians if they had been able by
themselves to bring Polycrates to terms. Moreover, it is not reasonable
either, seeing that he had foreign mercenaries and native archers very
many in number, to suppose that he was worsted by the returning Samians,
who were but few. Then Polycrates gathered together the children and
wives of his subjects and confined them in the ship-sheds, keeping them
ready so that, if it should prove that his subjects deserted to the side
of the returning exiles, he might burn them with the sheds.

46. When those of the Samians who had been driven out by Polycrates
reached Sparta, they were introduced before the magistrates and spoke
at length, being urgent in their request. The magistrates however at the
first introduction replied that they had forgotten the things which had
been spoken at the beginning, and did not understand those which were
spoken at the end. After this they were introduced a second time, and
bringing with them a bag they said nothing else but this, namely that
the bag was in want of meal; to which the others replied that they had
overdone it with the bag. 38 However, they resolved to help them.

47. Then the Lacedemonians prepared a force and made expedition to
Samos, in repayment of former services, as the Samians say, because the
Samians had first helped them with ships against the Messenians; but the
Lacedemonians say that they made the expedition not so much from desire
to help the Samians at their request, as to take vengeance on their own
behalf for the robbery of the mixing-bowl which they had been bearing as
a gift to Croesus, 39 and of the corslet which Amasis the king of Egypt
had sent as a gift to them; for the Samians had carried off the corslet
also in the year before they took the bowl; and it was of linen with
many figures woven into it and embroidered with gold and with cotton;
and each thread of this corslet is worthy of admiration, for that being
itself fine it has in it three hundred and sixty fibres, all plain to
view. Such another as this moreover is that which Amasis dedicated as an
offering to Athene at Lindos.

48. The Corinthians also took part with zeal in this expedition against
Samos, that it might be carried out; for there had been an offence
perpetrated against them also by the Samians a generation before 40 the
time of this expedition and about the same time as the robbery of the
bowl. Periander the son of Kypselos had despatched three hundred sons of
the chief men of Corcyra to Alyattes at Sardis to be made eunuchs; and
when the Corinthians who were conducting the boys had put in to Samos,
the Samians, being informed of the story and for what purpose they were
being conducted to Sardis, first instructed the boys to lay hold of the
temple of Artemis, and then they refused to permit the Corinthians to
drag the suppliants away from the temple: and as the Corinthians cut the
boys off from supplies of food, the Samians made a festival, which they
celebrate even to the present time in the same manner: for when night
came on, as long as the boys were suppliants they arranged dances of
maidens and youths, and in arranging the dances they made it a rule of
the festival that sweet cakes of sesame and honey should be carried, in
order that the Corcyrean boys might snatch them and so have support; and
this went on so long that at last the Corinthians who had charge of the
boys departed and went away; and as for the boys, the Samians carried
them back to Corcyra.

49. Now, if after the death of Periander the Corinthians had been on
friendly terms with the Corcyreans, they would not have joined in the
expedition against Samos for the cause which has been mentioned; but as
it is, they have been ever at variance with one another since they first
colonised the island. 41 This then was the cause why the Corinthians had
a grudge against the Samians.

50. Now Periander had chosen out the sons of the chief men of Corcyra
and was sending them to Sardis to be made eunuchs, in order that he
might have revenge; since the Corcyreans had first begun the offence and
had done to him a deed of reckless wrong. For after Periander had killed
his wife Melissa, it chanced to him to experience another misfortune
in addition to that which had happened to him already, and this was as
follows:—He had by Melissa two sons, the one of seventeen and the other
of eighteen years. These sons their mother's father Procles, who was
despot of Epidauros, sent for to himself and kindly entertained, as was
to be expected seeing that they were the sons of his own daughter; and
when he was sending them back, he said in taking leave of them: "Do
ye know, boys, who it was that killed your mother?" Of this saying
the elder of them took no account, but the younger, whose name was
Lycophron, was grieved so greatly at hearing it, that when he reached
Corinth again he would neither address his father, nor speak to him when
his father would have conversed with him, nor give any reply when he
asked questions, regarding him as the murderer of his mother. At length
Periander being enraged with his son drove him forth out of his house.

51. And having driven him forth, he asked of the elder son what his
mother's father had said to them in his conversation. He then related
how Procles had received them in a kindly manner, but of the saying
which he had uttered when he parted from them he had no remembrance,
since he had taken no note of it. So Periander said that it could not be
but that he had suggested to them something, and urged him further with
questions; and he after that remembered, and told of this also. Then
Periander taking note of it 42 and not desiring to show any indulgence,
sent a messenger to those with whom the son who had been driven forth
was living at that time, and forbade them to receive him into their
houses; and whenever having been driven away from one house he came to
another, he was driven away also from this, since Periander threatened
those who received him, and commanded them to exclude him; and so being
driven away again he would go to another house, where persons lived who
were his friends, and they perhaps received him because he was the son
of Periander, notwithstanding that they feared.

52. At last Periander made a proclamation that whosoever should either
receive him into their houses or converse with him should be bound
to pay a fine 43 to Apollo, stating the amount that it should be.
Accordingly, by reason of this proclamation no one was willing either to
converse with him or to receive him into their house; and moreover
even he himself did not think it fit to attempt it, since it had been
forbidden, but he lay about in the porticoes enduring exposure: and
on the fourth day after this, Periander seeing him fallen into squalid
misery and starvation felt pity for him; and abating his anger he
approached him and began to say: "Son, which of these two is to be
preferred, the fortune which thou dost now experience and possess, 44 or
to inherit the power and wealth which I possess now, by being submissive
to thy father's will? Thou however, being my son and the prince 45 of
wealthy Corinth, didst choose nevertheless the life of a vagabond by
making opposition and displaying anger against him with whom it behoved
thee least to deal so; for if any misfortune happened in those matters,
for which cause thou hast suspicion against me, this has happened to me
first, and I am sharer in the misfortune more than others, inasmuch as I
did the deed 46 myself. Do thou however, having learnt by how much to be
envied is better than to be pitied, and at the same time what a grievous
thing it is to be angry against thy parents and against those who are
stronger than thou, come back now to the house." Periander with these
words endeavoured to restrain him; but he answered nothing else to his
father, but said only that he ought to pay a fine to the god for having
come to speech with him. Then Periander, perceiving that the malady of
his son was hopeless and could not be overcome, despatched a ship to
Corcyra, and so sent him away out of his sight, for he was ruler also of
that island; and having sent him away, Periander proceeded to make war
against his father-in-law Procles, esteeming him most to blame for the
condition in which he was; and he took Epidauros and took also Procles
himself and made him a prisoner.

53. When however, as time went on, Periander had passed his prime and
perceived within himself that he was no longer able to overlook and
manage the government of the State, he sent to Corcyra and summoned
Lycophron to come back and take the supreme power; for in the elder of
his sons he did not see the required capacity, but perceived clearly
that he was of wits too dull. Lycophron however did not deign even to
give an answer to the bearer of his message. Then Periander, clinging
still in affection to the youth, sent to him next his own daughter, the
sister of Lycophron, supposing that he would yield to her persuasion
more than to that of others; and she arrived there and spoke to him
thus: "Boy, dost thou desire that both the despotism should fall to
others, and also the substance of thy father, carried off as plunder,
rather than that thou shouldest return back and possess them? Come
back to thy home: cease to torment thyself. Pride is a mischievous
possession. Heal not evil with evil. Many prefer that which is
reasonable to that which is strictly just; and many ere now in seeking
the things of their mother have lost the things of their father.
Despotism is an insecure thing, and many desire it: moreover he is now
an old man and past his prime. Give not thy good things unto others."
She thus said to him the most persuasive things, having been before
instructed by her father: but he in answer said, that he would never
come to Corinth so long as he heard that his father was yet alive. When
she had reported this, Periander the third time sent an envoy, and said
that he desired himself to come to Corcyra, exhorting Lycophron at the
same time to come back to Corinth and to be his successor on the throne.
The son having agreed to return on these terms, Periander was preparing
to sail to Corcyra and his son to Corinth; but the Corcyreans, having
learnt all that had taken place, put the young man to death, in order
that Periander might not come to their land. For this cause it was that
Periander took vengeance on those of Corcyra.

54. The Lacedemonians then had come with a great armament and were
besieging Samos; and having made an attack upon the wall, they occupied
the tower which stands by the sea in the suburb of the city, but
afterwards when Polycrates came up to the rescue with a large body they
were driven away from it. Meanwhile by the upper tower which is upon
the ridge of the mountain there had come out to the fight the foreign
mercenaries and many of the Samians themselves, and these stood their
ground against the Lacedemonians for a short while and then began to fly
backwards; and the Lacedemonians followed and were slaying them.

55. Now if the Lacedemonians there present had all been equal on that
day to Archias and Lycopas, Samos would have been captured; for Archias
and Lycopas alone rushed within the wall together with the flying
Samians, and being shut off from retreat were slain within the city of
the Samians. I myself moreover had converse in Pitane (for to that
deme he belonged) with the third in descent from this Archias, another
Archias the son of Samios the son of Archias, who honoured the Samians
of all strangers most; and not only so, but he said that his own father
had been called Samios because his father Archias had died by a glorious
death in Samos; and he said that he honoured Samians because his
grandfather had been granted a public funeral by the Samians.

56. The Lacedemonians then, when they had been besieging Samos for
forty days and their affairs made no progress, set forth to return to
Peloponnesus. But according to the less credible account which has been
put abroad of these matters Polycrates struck in lead a quantity of a
certain native coin, and having gilded the coins over, gave them to the
Lacedemonians, and they received them and upon that set forth to depart.
This was the first expedition which the Lacedemonians (being Dorians)
4601 made into Asia.

57. Those of the Samians who had made the expedition against Polycrates
themselves also sailed away, when the Lacedemonians were about to desert
them, and came to Siphnos: for they were in want of money, and the
people of Siphnos were then at their greatest height of prosperity and
possessed wealth more than all the other islanders, since they had
in their island mines of gold and silver, so that there is a treasury
dedicated at Delphi with the tithe of the money which came in from
these mines, and furnished in a manner equal to the wealthiest of these
treasuries: and the people used to divide among themselves the money
which came in from the mines every year. So when they were establishing
the treasury, they consulted the Oracle as to whether their present
prosperity was capable of remaining with them for a long time, and the
Pythian prophetess gave them this reply:


 "But when with white shall be shining 47 the hall of the city 48
    in Siphnos,
  And when the market is white of brow, one wary is needed
  Then, to beware of an army 49 of wood and a red-coloured herald."

Now just at that time the market-place and city hall of the Siphnians
had been decorated with Parian marble.

58. This oracle they were not able to understand either then at first or
when the Samians had arrived: for as soon as the Samians were putting in
50 to Siphnos they sent one of their ships to bear envoys to the city:
now in old times all ships were painted with red, and this was that
which the Pythian prophetess was declaring beforehand to the Siphnians,
bidding them guard against the "army of wood" and the "red-coloured
herald." The messengers accordingly came and asked the Siphnians to lend
them ten talents; and as they refused to lend to them, the Samians began
to lay waste their lands: so when they were informed of it, forthwith
the Siphnians came to the rescue, and having engaged battle with them
were defeated, and many of them were cut off by the Samians and shut out
of the city; and the Samians after this imposed upon them a payment of a
hundred talents.

59. Then from the men of Hermion they received by payment of money the
island of Hydrea, which is near the coast of Peloponnese, and they gave
it in charge to the Troizenians, but they themselves settled at Kydonia
which is in Crete, not sailing thither for that purpose but in order
to drive the Zakynthians out of the island. Here they remained and were
prosperous for five years, so much so that they were the builders of
the temples which are now existing in Kydonia, and also of the house of
Dictyna. 51 In the sixth year however the Eginetans together with the
Cretans conquered them in a sea-fight and brought them to slavery; and
they cut off the prows of their ships, which were shaped like boars, and
dedicated them in the temple of Athene in Egina. This the Eginetans did
because they had a grudge against the Samians; for the Samians had first
made expedition against Egina, when Amphicrates was king in Samos, and
had done much hurt to the Eginetans and suffered much hurt also from
them. Such was the cause of this event:

60, and about the Samians I have spoken at greater length, because they
have three works which are greater than any others that have been made
by Hellenes: first a passage beginning from below and open at both ends,
dug through a mountain not less than a hundred and fifty fathoms 52 in
height; the length of the passage is seven furlongs 53 and the height
and breadth each eight feet, and throughout the whole of it another
passage has been dug twenty cubits in depth and three feet in breadth,
through which the water is conducted and comes by the pipes to the city,
brought from an abundant spring: and the designer of this work was a
Megarian, Eupalinos the son of Naustrophos. This is one of the three;
and the second is a mole in the sea about the harbour, going down to
a depth of as much as 54 twenty fathoms; and the length of the mole is
more than two furlongs. The third work which they have executed is a
temple larger than all the other temples of which we know. Of this the
first designer was Rhoicos the son of Philes, a native of Samos. For
this reason I have spoken at greater length of the Samians.

61. Now while Cambyses the son of Cyrus was spending a long time in
Egypt and had gone out of his right mind, there rose up against him two
brothers, Magians, of whom the one had been left behind by Cambyses
as caretaker of his household. This man, I say, rose up against him
perceiving that the occurrence of the death of Smerdis was being kept
secret, and that there were but few of the Persians who were aware of
it, while the greater number believed without doubt that he was still
alive. Therefore he endeavoured to obtain the kingdom, and he formed his
plan as follows:—he had a brother (that one who, as I said, rose up
with him against Cambyses), and this man in form very closely resembled
Smerdis the son of Cyrus, whom Cambyses had slain, being his own
brother. He was like Smerdis, I say, in form, and not only so but he had
the same name, Smerdis. Having persuaded this man that he would manage
everything for him, the Magian Patizeithes brought him and seated him
upon the royal throne: and having so done he sent heralds about to
the various provinces, and among others one to the army in Egypt, to
proclaim to them that they must obey Smerdis the son of Cyrus for the
future instead of Cambyses.

62. So then the other heralds made this proclamation, and also the
one who was appointed to go to Egypt, finding Cambyses and his army at
Agbatana in Syria, stood in the midst and began to proclaim that which
had been commanded to him by the Magian. Hearing this from the herald,
and supposing that the herald was speaking the truth and that he had
himself been betrayed by Prexaspes, that is to say, that when Prexaspes
was sent to kill Smerdis he had not done so, Cambyses looked upon
Prexaspes and said: "Prexaspes, was it thus that thou didst perform for
me the thing which I gave over to thee to do?" and he said: "Master, the
saying is not true that Smerdis thy brother has risen up against thee,
nor that thou wilt have any contention arising from him, either great or
small: for I myself, having done that which thou didst command me to do,
buried him with my own hands. If therefore the dead have risen again to
life, then thou mayest expect that Astyages also the Mede will rise up
against thee; but if it is as it was beforetime, there is no fear
now that any trouble shall spring up for you, at least from him. Now
therefore I think it well that some should pursue after the herald and
examine him, asking from whom he has come to proclaim to us that we are
to obey Smerdis as king."

63. When Prexaspes had thus spoken, Cambyses was pleased with the
advice, and accordingly the herald was pursued forthwith and returned.
Then when he had come back, Prexaspes asked him as follows: "Man, thou
sayest that thou art come as a messenger from Smerdis the son of Cyrus:
now therefore speak the truth and go away in peace. I ask thee whether
Smerdis himself appeared before thine eyes and charged thee to say this,
or some one of those who serve him." He said: "Smerdis the son of Cyrus
I have never yet seen, since the day that king Cambyses marched to
Egypt: but the Magian whom Cambyses appointed to be guardian of his
household, he, I say, gave me this charge, saying that Smerdis the son
of Cyrus was he who laid the command upon me to speak these things to
you." Thus he spoke to them, adding no falsehoods to the first, and
Cambyses said: "Prexaspes, thou hast done that which was commanded thee
like an honest man, and hast escaped censure; but who of the Persians
may this be who has risen up against me and usurped the name of
Smerdis?" He said: "I seem to myself, O king, to have understanding
of this which has come to pass: the Magians have risen against thee,
Patizeithes namely, whom thou didst leave as caretaker of thy household,
and his brother Smerdis."

64. Then Cambyses, when he heard the name of Smerdis, perceived at once
the true meaning of this report and of the dream, for he thought in his
sleep that some one had reported to him that Smerdis was sitting
upon the royal throne and had touched the heaven with his head: and
perceiving that he had slain his brother without need, he began to
lament for Smerdis; and having lamented for him and sorrowed greatly for
the whole mishap, he was leaping upon his horse, meaning as quickly as
possible to march his army to Susa against the Magian; and as he leapt
upon his horse, the cap of his sword-sheath fell off, and the sword
being left bare struck his thigh. Having been wounded then in the same
part where he had formerly struck Apis the god of the Egyptians, and
believing that he had been struck with a mortal blow, Cambyses asked
what was the name of that town, and they said "Agbatana." Now even
before this he had been informed by the Oracle at the city of Buto that
in Agbatana he should bring his life to an end: and he supposed that he
should die of old age in Agbatana in Media, where was his chief seat of
power; but the oracle, it appeared, meant in Agbatana of Syria. So when
by questioning now he learnt the name of the town, being struck with
fear both by the calamity caused by the Magian and at the same time by
the wound, he came to his right mind, and understanding the meaning of
the oracle he said: "Here it is fated that Cambyses the son of Cyrus
shall end his life."

65. So much only he said at that time; but about twenty days afterwards
he sent for the most honourable of the Persians who were with him, and
said to them as follows: "Persians, it has become necessary for me to
make known to you the thing which I was wont to keep concealed beyond
all other things. Being in Egypt I saw a vision in my sleep, which I
would I had never seen, and it seemed to me that a messenger came from
home and reported to me that Smerdis was sitting upon the royal throne
and had touched the heaven with his head. Fearing then lest I should be
deprived of my power by my brother, I acted quickly rather than wisely;
for it seems that it is not possible for man 55 to avert that which
is destined to come to pass. I therefore, fool that I was, sent away
Prexaspes to Susa to kill Smerdis; and when this great evil had been
done, I lived in security, never considering the danger that some other
man might at some time rise up against me, now that Smerdis had been
removed: and altogether missing the mark of that which was about to
happen, I have both made myself the murderer of my brother, when there
was no need, and I have been deprived none the less of the kingdom; for
it was in fact Smerdis the Magian of whom the divine power declared to
me beforehand in the vision that he should rise up against me. So then,
as I say, this deed has been done by me, and ye must imagine that ye
no longer have Smerdis the son of Cyrus alive: but it is in truth the
Magians who are masters of your kingdom, he whom I left as guardian of
my household and his brother Smerdis. The man then who ought above all
others to have taken vengeance on my behalf for the dishonour which I
have suffered from the Magians, has ended his life by an unholy death
received from the hands of those who were his nearest of kin; and since
he is no more, it becomes most needful for me, as the thing next best of
those which remain, 56 to charge you, O Persians, with that which dying
I desire should be done for me. This then I lay upon you, calling upon
the gods of the royal house to witness it,—upon you and most of all upon
those of the Achaemenidai who are present here,—that ye do not permit
the return of the chief power to the Medes, but that if they have
acquired it by craft, by craft they be deprived of it by you, or if they
have conquered it by any kind of force, by force and by a strong hand ye
recover it. And if ye do this, may the earth bring forth her produce
and may your wives and your cattle be fruitful, while ye remain free for
ever; but if ye do not recover the power nor attempt to recover it, I
pray that curses the contrary of these blessings may come upon you, and
moreover that each man of the Persians may have an end to his life like
that which has come upon me." Then as soon as he had finished speaking
these things, Cambyses began to bewail and make lamentation for all his
fortunes.

66. And the Persians, when they saw that the king had begun to bewail
himself, both rent the garments which they wore and made lamentation
without stint. After this, when the bone had become diseased and the
thigh had mortified, Cambyses the son of Cyrus was carried off by the
wound, having reigned in all seven years and five months, and being
absolutely childless both of male and female offspring. The Persians
meanwhile who were present there were very little disposed to believe
57 that the power was in the hands of the Magians: on the contrary, they
were surely convinced that Cambyses had said that which he said about
the death of Smerdis to deceive them, in order that all the Persians
might be moved to war against him. These then were surely convinced that
Smerdis the son of Cyrus was established to be king; for Prexaspes also
very strongly denied that he had slain Smerdis, since it was not safe,
now that Cambyses was dead, for him to say that he had destroyed with
his own hand the son of Cyrus.

67. Thus when Cambyses had brought his life to an end, the Magian became
king without disturbance, usurping the place of his namesake Smerdis the
son of Cyrus; and he reigned during the seven months which were wanting
yet to Cambyses for the completion of the eight years: and during them
he performed acts of great benefit to all his subjects, so that after
his death all those in Asia except the Persians themselves mourned for
his loss: for the Magian sent messengers abroad to every nation over
which he ruled, and proclaimed freedom from military service and from
tribute for three years.

68. This proclamation, I say, he made at once when he established
himself upon the throne: but in the eighth month it was discovered
who he was in the following manner:—There was one Otanes the son of
Pharnaspes, in birth and in wealth not inferior to any of the Persians.
This Otanes was the first who had had suspicion of the Magian, that
he was not Smerdis the son of Cyrus but the person that he really was,
drawing his inference from these facts, namely that he never went abroad
out of the fortress, and that he did not summon into his presence any of
the honourable men among the Persians: and having formed a suspicion
of him, he proceeded to do as follows:—Cambyses had taken to wife his
daughter, whose name was Phaidyme; 58 and this same daughter the Magian
at that time was keeping as his wife and living with her as with all the
rest also of the wives of Cambyses. Otanes therefore sent a message to
this daughter and asked her who the man was by whose side she slept,
whether Smerdis the son of Cyrus or some other. She sent back word to
him saying that she did not know, for she had never seen Smerdis the
son of Cyrus, nor did she know otherwise who he was who lived with her.
Otanes then sent a second time and said: "If thou dost not thyself know
Smerdis the son of Cyrus, then do thou ask of Atossa who this man is,
with whom both she and thou live as wives; for assuredly it must be that
she knows her own brother."

69. To this the daughter sent back word: "I am not able either to come
to speech with Atossa or to see any other of the women who live here
with me; for as soon as this man, whosoever he may be, succeeded to
the kingdom, he separated us and placed us in different apartments by
ourselves." When Otanes heard this, the matter became more and more
clear to him, and he sent another message in to her, which said:
"Daughter, it is right for thee, nobly born as thou art, to undertake
any risk which thy father bids thee take upon thee: for if in truth this
is not Smerdis the son of Cyrus but the man whom I suppose, he ought not
to escape with impunity either for taking thee to his bed or for holding
the dominion of Persians, but he must pay the penalty. Now therefore do
as I say. When he sleeps by thee and thou perceivest that he is sound
asleep, feel his ears; and if it prove that he has ears, then believe
that thou art living with Smerdis the son of Cyrus, but if not, believe
that it is with the Magian Smerdis." To this Phaidyme sent an answer
saying that, if she should do so, she would run a great risk; for
supposing that he should chance not to have his ears, and she were
detected feeling for them, she was well assured that he would put her to
death; but nevertheless she would do this. So she undertook to do this
for her father: but as for this Magian Smerdis, he had had his ears
cut off by Cyrus the son of Cambyses when he was king, for some grave
offence. This Phaidyme then, the daughter of Otanes, proceeding to
perform all that she had undertaken for her father, when her turn
came to go to the Magian (for the wives of the Persians go in to them
regularly each in her turn), came and lay down beside him: and when the
Magian was in deep sleep, she felt his ears; and perceiving not with
difficulty but easily that her husband had no ears, so soon as it became
day she sent and informed her father of that which had taken place.

70. Then Otanes took to him Aspathines and Gobryas, 59 who were leading
men among the Persians and also his own most trusted friends, and
related to them the whole matter: and they, as it then appeared, had
suspicions also themselves that it was so; and when Otanes reported this
to them, they readily accepted his proposals. Then it was resolved
by them that each one should associate with himself that man of the
Persians whom he trusted most; so Otanes brought in Intaphrenes, 60
Gobryas brought in Megabyzos, and Aspathines brought in Hydarnes. When
they had thus become six, Dareios the son of Hystaspes arrived at
Susa, having come from the land of Persia, for of this his father was
governor. Accordingly when he came, the six men of the Persians resolved
to associate Dareios also with themselves.

71. These then having come together, being seven in number, gave pledges
of faith to one another and deliberated together; and when it came to
Dareios to declare his opinion, he spoke to them as follows: "I thought
that I alone knew this, namely that it was the Magian who was reigning
as king and that Smerdis the son of Cyrus had brought his life to an
end; and for this very reason I am come with earnest purpose to contrive
death for the Magian. Since however it has come to pass that ye also
know and not I alone, I think it well to act at once and not to put the
matter off, for that is not the better way." To this replied Otanes:
"Son of Hystaspes, thou art the scion of a noble stock, and thou art
showing thyself, as it seems, in no way inferior to thy father: do not
however hasten this enterprise so much without consideration, but take
it up more prudently; for we must first become more in numbers, and then
undertake the matter." In answer to this Dareios said: "Men who are here
present, if ye shall follow the way suggested by Otanes, know that
ye will perish miserably; for some one will carry word to the Magian,
getting gain thereby privately for himself. Your best way would have
been to do this action upon your own risk alone; but since it seemed
good to you to refer the matter to a greater number, and ye communicated
it to me, either let us do the deed to-day, or be ye assured that if
this present day shall pass by, none other shall prevent me 61 as your
accuser, but I will myself tell these things to the Magian."

72. To this Otanes, when he saw Dareios in violent haste, replied:
"Since thou dost compel us to hasten the matter and dost not permit us
to delay, come expound to us thyself in what manner we shall pass into
the palace and lay hands upon them: for that there are guards set in
various parts, thou knowest probably thyself as well as we, if not from
sight at least from hearsay; and in what manner shall we pass through
these?" Dareios made reply with these words: "Otanes, there are many
things in sooth which it is not possible to set forth in speech, but
only in deed; and other things there are which in speech can be set
forth, but from them comes no famous deed. Know ye however that the
guards which are set are not difficult to pass: for in the first place,
we being what we are, there is no one who will not let us go by, partly,
as may be supposed, from having respect for us, and partly also perhaps
from fear; and secondly I have myself a most specious pretext by means
of which we may pass by; for I shall say that I am just now come from
the Persian land and desire to declare to the king a certain message
from my father: for where it is necessary that a lie be spoken, let it
be spoken; seeing that we all aim at the same object, both they who lie
and they who always speak the truth; those lie whenever they are likely
to gain anything by persuading with their lies, and these tell the truth
in order that they may draw to themselves gain by the truth, and that
things 62 may be entrusted to them more readily. Thus, while practising
different ways, we aim all at the same thing. If however they were not
likely to make any gain by it, the truth-teller would lie and the
liar would speak the truth, with indifference. Whosoever then of the
door-keepers shall let us pass by of his own free will, for him it shall
be the better afterwards; but whosoever shall endeavour to oppose our
passage, let him then and there be marked as our enemy, 63 and after
that let us push in and set about our work."

73. Then said Gobryas: "Friends, at what time will there be a fairer
opportunity for us either to recover our rule, or, if we are not able to
get it again, to die? seeing that we being Persians on the one hand lie
under the rule of a Mede, a Magian, and that too a man whose ears
have been cut off. Moreover all those of you who stood by the side
of Cambyses when he was sick remember assuredly what he laid upon the
Persians as he was bringing his life to an end, if they should not
attempt to win back the power; and this we did not accept then, but
supposed that Cambyses had spoken in order to deceive us. Now therefore
I give my vote that we follow the opinion of Dareios, and that we do not
depart from this assembly to go anywhither else but straight to attack
the Magian." Thus spoke Gobryas, and they all approved of this proposal.

74. Now while these were thus taking counsel together, it was coming to
pass by coincidence as follows:—The Magians taking counsel together had
resolved to join Prexaspes with themselves as a friend, both because
he had suffered grievous wrong from Cambyses, who had killed his son by
shooting him, and because he alone knew for a certainty of the death
of Smerdis the son of Cyrus, having killed him with his own hands, and
finally because Prexaspes was in very great repute among the Persians.
For these reasons they summoned him and endeavoured to win him to be
their friend, engaging him by pledge and with oaths, that he would
assuredly keep to himself and not reveal to any man the deception which
had been practised by them upon the Persians, and promising to give
him things innumerable 64 in return. After Prexaspes had promised to do
this, the Magians, having persuaded him so far, proposed to him a second
thing, and said that they would call together all the Persians to
come up to the wall of the palace, and bade him go up upon a tower and
address them, saying that they were living under the rule of Smerdis the
son of Cyrus and no other. This they so enjoined because they supposed
65 that he had the greatest credit among the Persians, and because he
had frequently declared the opinion that Smerdis the son of Cyrus was
still alive, and had denied that he had slain him.

75. When Prexaspes said that he was ready to do this also, the Magians
having called together the Persians caused him to go up upon a tower and
bade him address them. Then he chose to forget those things which they
asked of him, and beginning with Achaimenes he traced the descent of
Cyrus on the father's side, and then, when he came down to Cyrus, he
related at last what great benefits he had conferred upon the Persians;
and having gone through this recital he proceeded to declare the truth,
saying that formerly he kept it secret, since it was not safe for him
to tell of that which had been done, but at the present time he was
compelled to make it known. He proceeded to say how he had himself slain
Smerdis the son of Cyrus, being compelled by Cambyses, and that it was
the Magians who were now ruling. Then he made imprecation of many evils
on the Persians, if they did not win back again the power and take
vengeance upon the Magians, and upon that he let himself fall down from
the tower head foremost. Thus Prexaspes ended his life, having been
throughout his time a man of repute.

76. Now the seven of the Persians, when they had resolved forthwith to
lay hands upon the Magians and not to delay, made prayer to the gods
and went, knowing nothing of that which had been done with regard
to Prexaspes: and as they were going and were in the middle of their
course, they heard that which had happened about Prexaspes. Upon that
they retired out of the way and again considered with themselves, Otanes
and his supporters strongly urging that they should delay and not set to
the work when things were thus disturbed, 66 while Dareios and those of
his party urged that they should go forthwith and do that which had been
resolved, and not delay. Then while they were contending, there appeared
seven pairs of hawks pursuing two pairs of vultures, plucking out
their feathers and tearing them. Seeing this the seven all approved
the opinion of Dareios and thereupon they went to the king's palace,
encouraged by the sight of the birds.

77. When they appeared at the gates, it happened nearly as Dareios
supposed, for the guards, having respect for men who were chief among
the Persians, and not suspecting that anything would be done by them of
the kind proposed, allowed them to pass in under the guiding of heaven,
and none asked them any question. Then when they had passed into the
court, they met the eunuchs who bore in the messages to the king; and
these inquired of them for what purpose they had come, and at the same
time they threatened with punishment the keepers of the gates for having
let them pass in, and tried to stop the seven when they attempted to
go forward. Then they gave the word to one another and drawing their
daggers stabbed these men there upon the spot, who tried to stop them,
and themselves went running on towards the chamber of the men. 6601

78. Now the Magians happened both of them to be there within, consulting
about that which had been done by Prexaspes. So when they saw that the
eunuchs had been attacked and were crying aloud, they ran back 67
both of them, and perceiving that which was being done they turned to
self-defence: and one of them got down his bow and arrows before he was
attacked, while the other had recourse to his spear. Then they engaged
in combat with one another; and that one of them who had taken up his
bow and arrows found them of no use, since his enemies were close at
hand and pressed hard upon him, but the other defended himself with his
spear, and first he struck Aspathines in the thigh, and then Intaphrenes
in the eye; and Intaphrenes lost his eye by reason of the wound, but his
life he did not lose. These then were wounded by one of the Magians, but
the other, when his bow and arrows proved useless to him, fled into a
bedchamber which opened into the chamber of the men, intending to close
the door; and with him there rushed in two of the seven, Dareios and
Gobryas. And when Gobryas was locked together in combat with the Magian,
Dareios stood by and was at a loss what to do, because it was dark, and
he was afraid lest he should strike Gobryas. Then seeing him standing by
idle, Gobryas asked why he did not use his hands, and he said: "Because
I am afraid lest I may strike thee": and Gobryas answered: "Thrust
with thy sword even though it stab through us both." So Dareios was
persuaded, and he thrust with his danger and happened to hit the Magian.

79. So when they had slain the Magians and cut off their heads, they
left behind those of their number who were wounded, both because they
were unable to go, and also in order that they might take charge of the
fortress, and the five others taking with them the heads of the Magians
ran with shouting and clashing of arms and called upon the other
Persians to join them, telling them of that which had been done and
showing the heads, and at the same time they proceeded to slay every one
of the Magians who crossed their path. So the Persians when they heard
of that which had been brought to pass by the seven and of the deceit
of the Magians, thought good themselves also to do the same, and drawing
their daggers they killed the Magians wherever they found one; so that
if night had not come on and stopped them, they would not have left a
single Magian alive. This day the Persians celebrate in common more than
all other days, and upon it they keep a great festival which is called
by the Persians the festival of the slaughter of the Magians, 6701 on
which no Magian is permitted to appear abroad, but the Magians keep
themselves within their houses throughout that day.

80. When the tumult had subsided and more than five days had elapsed, 68
those who had risen against the Magians began to take counsel about the
general state, and there were spoken speeches which some of the Hellenes
do not believe were really uttered, but spoken they were nevertheless.
69 On the one hand Otanes urged that they should resign the government
into the hands of the whole body of the Persians, and his words were as
follows: "To me it seems best that no single one of us should henceforth
be ruler, for that is neither pleasant nor profitable. Ye saw the
insolent temper of Cambyses, to what lengths it went, and ye have had
experience also of the insolence of the Magian: and how should the rule
of one alone be a well-ordered thing, seeing that the monarch may do
what he desires without rendering any account of his acts? Even the best
of all men, if he were placed in this disposition, would be caused by
it to change from his wonted disposition: for insolence is engendered in
him by the good things which he possesses, and envy is implanted in man
from the beginning; and having these two things, he has all vice: for he
does many deeds of reckless wrong, partly moved by insolence proceeding
from satiety, and partly by envy. And yet a despot at least ought to
have been free from envy, seeing that he has all manner of good
things. He is however naturally in just the opposite temper towards
his subjects; for he grudges to the nobles that they should survive and
live, but delights in the basest of citizens, and he is more ready than
any other man to receive calumnies. Then of all things he is the most
inconsistent; for if you express admiration of him moderately, he is
offended that no very great court is paid to him, whereas if you
pay court to him extravagantly, he is offended with you for being a
flatterer. And the most important matter of all is that which I am about
to say:—he disturbs the customs handed down from our fathers, he is a
ravisher of women, and he puts men to death without trial. On the other
hand the rule of many has first a name attaching to it which is the
fairest of all names, that is to say 'Equality'; 70 next, the multitude
does none of those things which the monarch does: offices of state are
exercised by lot, and the magistrates are compelled to render account
of their action: and finally all matters of deliberation are referred to
the public assembly. I therefore give as my opinion that we let monarchy
go and increase the power of the multitude; for in the many is contained
everything."

81. This was the opinion expressed by Otanes; but Megabyzos urged that
they should entrust matters to the rule of a few, saying these words:
"That which Otanes said in opposition to a tyranny, let it be counted as
said for me also, but in that which he said urging that we should make
over the power to the multitude, he has missed the best counsel: for
nothing is more senseless or insolent than a worthless crowd; and
for men flying from the insolence of a despot to fall into that of
unrestrained popular power, is by no means to be endured: for he, if he
does anything, does it knowing what he does, but the people cannot even
know; for how can that know which has neither been taught anything noble
by others nor perceived anything of itself, 71 but pushes on matters
with violent impulse and without understanding, like a torrent stream?
Rule of the people then let them adopt who are foes to the Persians; but
let us choose a company of the best men, and to them attach the chief
power; for in the number of these we shall ourselves also be, and it is
likely that the resolutions taken by the best men will be the best."

82. This was the opinion expressed by Megabyzos; and thirdly Dareios
proceeded to declare his opinion, saying: "To me it seems that in
those things which Megabyzos said with regard to the multitude he spoke
rightly, but in those which he said with regard to the rule of a few,
not rightly: for whereas there are three things set before us, and each
is supposed 72 to be the best in its own kind, that is to say a good
popular government, and the rule of a few, and thirdly the rule of
one, I say that this last is by far superior to the others; for nothing
better can be found than the rule of an individual man of the best
kind; seeing that using the best judgment he would be guardian of the
multitude without reproach; and resolutions directed against enemies
would so best be kept secret. In an oligarchy however it happens often
that many, while practising virtue with regard to the commonwealth,
have strong private enmities arising among themselves; for as each man
desires to be himself the leader and to prevail in counsels, they come
to great enmities with one another, whence arise factions among them,
and out of the factions comes murder, and from murder results the rule
of one man; and thus it is shown in this instance by how much that is
the best. Again, when the people rules, it is impossible that corruption
73 should not arise, and when corruption arises in the commonwealth,
there arise among the corrupt men not enmities but strong ties of
friendship: for they who are acting corruptly to the injury of the
commonwealth put their heads together secretly to do so. And this
continues so until at last some one takes the leadership of the people
and stops the course of such men. By reason of this the man of whom I
speak is admired by the people, and being so admired he suddenly appears
as monarch. Thus he too furnishes herein an example to prove that the
rule of one is the best thing. Finally, to sum up all in a single word,
whence arose the liberty which we possess, and who gave it to us? Was it
a gift of the people or of an oligarchy or of a monarch? I therefore
am of opinion that we, having been set free by one man, should preserve
that form of rule, and in other respects also that we should not annul
the customs of our fathers which are ordered well; for that is not the
better way."

83. These three opinions then had been proposed, and the other four
men of the seven gave their assent to the last. So when Otanes, who was
desirous to give equality to the Persians, found his opinion defeated,
he spoke to those assembled thus: "Partisans, it is clear that some
one of us must become king, selected either by casting lots, or by
entrusting the decision to the multitude of the Persians and taking him
whom it shall choose, or by some other means. I therefore shall not be a
competitor with you, for I do not desire either to rule or to be ruled;
and on this condition I withdraw from my claim to rule, namely that I
shall not be ruled by any of you, either I myself or my descendants in
future time." When he had said this, the six made agreement with him on
those terms, and he was no longer a competitor with them, but withdrew
from the assembly; and at the present time this house remains free alone
of all the Persian houses, and submits to rule only so far as it wills
to do so itself, not transgressing the laws of the Persians.

84. The rest however of the seven continued to deliberate how they
should establish a king in the most just manner; and it was resolved by
them that to Otanes and his descendants in succession, if the kingdom
should come to any other of the seven, there should be given as special
gifts a Median dress every year and all those presents which are
esteemed among the Persians to be the most valuable: and the reason why
they determined that these things should be given to him, was because
he first suggested to them the matter and combined them together. These
were special gifts for Otanes; and this they also determined for all in
common, namely that any one of the seven who wished might pass in to the
royal palaces without any to bear in a message, unless the king happened
to be sleeping with his wife; and that it should not be lawful for the
king to marry from any other family, but only from those of the men who
had made insurrection with him: and about the kingdom they determined
this, namely that the man whose horse should first neigh at sunrise
in the suburb of the city when they were mounted upon their horses, he
should have the kingdom.

85. Now Dareios had a clever horse-keeper, whose name was Oibares. To
this man, when they had left their assembly, Dareios spoke these words:
"Oibares, we have resolved to do about the kingdom thus, namely that the
man whose horse first neighs at sunrise, when we are mounted upon our
horses he shall be king. Now therefore, if thou hast any cleverness,
contrive that we may obtain this prize, and not any other man." Oibares
replied thus: "If, my master, it depends in truth upon this whether thou
be king or no, have confidence so far as concerns this and keep a good
heart, for none other shall be king before thee; such charms have I at
my command." Then Dareios said: "If then thou hast any such trick, it
is time to devise it and not to put things off, for our trial is
to-morrow." Oibares therefore hearing this did as follows:—when night
was coming on he took one of the mares, namely that one which the horse
of Dareios preferred, and this he led into the suburb of the city and
tied her up: then he brought to her the horse of Dareios, and having for
some time led him round her, making him go so close by so as to touch
the mare, at last he let the horse mount.

86. Now at dawn of day the six came to the place as they had agreed,
riding upon their horses; and as they rode through by the suburb of the
city, when they came near the place where the mare had been tied up on
the former night, the horse of Dareios ran up to the place and neighed;
and just when the horse had done this, there came lightning and
thunder from a clear sky: and the happening of these things to Dareios
consummated his claim, for they seemed to have come to pass by some
design, and the others leapt down from their horses and did obeisance to
Dareios.

87. Some say that the contrivance of Oibares was this, but others say
as follows (for the story is told by the Persians in both ways), namely
that he touched with his hands the parts of this mare and kept his hand
hidden in his trousers; and when at sunrise they were about to let
the horses go, this Oibares pulled out his hand and applied it to the
nostrils of the horse of Dareios; and the horse, perceiving the smell,
snorted and neighed.

88. So Dareios the son of Hystaspes had been declared king; and in Asia
all except the Arabians were his subjects, having been subdued by
Cyrus and again afterwards by Cambyses. The Arabians however were never
obedient to the Persians under conditions of subjection, but had become
guest-friends when they let Cambyses pass by to Egypt: for against the
will of the Arabians the Persians would not be able to invade Egypt.
Moreover Dareios made the most noble marriages possible in the
estimation of the Persians; for he married two daughters of Cyrus,
Atossa and Artystone, of whom the one, Arossa, had before been the
wife of Cambyses her brother and then afterwards of the Magian, while
Artystone was a virgin; and besides them he married the daughter of
Smerdis the son of Cyrus, whose name was Parmys; and he also took to
wife the daughter of Otanes, he who had discovered the Magian; and all
things became filled with his power. And first he caused to be a carving
in stone, and set it up; and in it there was the figure of a man on
horseback, and he wrote upon it writing to this effect: "Dareios son of
Hystaspes by the excellence of his horse," mentioning the name of it,
"and of his horse-keeper Oibares obtained the kingdom of the Persians."

