89. Having so done in Persia, he established twenty provinces, which the
Persians themselves call satrapies; and having established the provinces
and set over them rulers, he appointed tribute to come to him from them
according to races, joining also to the chief races those who dwelt on
their borders, or passing beyond the immediate neighbours and assigning
to various races those which lay more distant. He divided the provinces
and the yearly payment of tribute as follows: and those of them
who brought in silver were commanded to pay by the standard of the
Babylonian talent, but those who brought in gold by the Euboïc talent;
now the Babylonian talent is equal to eight-and-seventy Euboïc pounds.
74 For in the reign of Cyrus, and again of Cambyses, nothing was fixed
about tribute, but they used to bring gifts: and on account of this
appointing of tribute and other things like this, the Persians say that
Dareios was a shopkeeper, Cambyses a master, and Cyrus a father; the
one because he dealt with all his affairs like a shopkeeper, the second
because he was harsh and had little regard for any one, and the other
because he was gentle and contrived for them all things good.

90. From the Ionians and the Magnesians who dwell in Asia and the
Aiolians, Carians, Lykians, Milyans and Pamphylians (for one single
sum was appointed by him as tribute for all these) there came in four
hundred talents of silver. This was appointed by him to be the first
division. 75 From the Mysians and Lydians and Lasonians and Cabalians
and Hytennians 76 there came in five hundred talents: this is the second
division. From the Hellespontians who dwell on the right as one sails
in and the Phrygians and the Thracians who dwell in Asia and the
Paphlagonians and Mariandynoi and Syrians 77 the tribute was three
hundred and sixty talents: this is the third division. From the
Kilikians, besides three hundred and sixty white horses, one for every
day in the year, there came also five hundred talents of silver; of
these one hundred and forty talents were spent upon the horsemen which
served as a guard to the Kilikian land, and the remaining three hundred
and sixty came in year by year to Dareios: this is the fourth division.

91. From that division which begins with the city of Posideion, founded
by Amphilochos the son of Amphiaraos on the borders of the Kilikians and
the Syrians, and extends as far as Egypt, not including the territory
of the Arabians (for this was free from payment), the amount was
three hundred and fifty talents; and in this division are the whole of
Phenicia and Syria which is called Palestine and Cyprus: this is the
fifth division. From Egypt and the Libyans bordering upon Egypt, and
from Kyrene and Barca, for these were so ordered as to belong to
the Egyptian division, there came in seven hundred talents, without
reckoning the money produced by the lake of Moiris, that is to say from
the fish; 7701 without reckoning this, I say, or the corn which was
contributed in addition by measure, there came in seven hundred talents;
for as regards the corn, they contribute by measure one hundred and
twenty thousand 78 bushels for the use of those Persians who are
established in the "White Fortress" at Memphis, and for their foreign
mercenaries: this is the sixth division. The Sattagydai and Gandarians
and Dadicans and Aparytai, being joined together, brought in one hundred
and seventy talents: this is the seventh division. From Susa and the
rest of the land of the Kissians there came in three hundred: this is
the eighth division.

92. From Babylon and from the rest of Assyria there came in to him a
thousand talents of silver and five hundred boys for eunuchs: this is
the ninth division. From Agbatana and from the rest of Media and the
Paricanians and Orthocorybantians, four hundred and fifty talents: this
is the tenth division. The Caspians and Pausicans 79 and Pantimathoi and
Dareitai, contributing together, brought in two hundred talents: this
is the eleventh division. From the Bactrians as far as the Aigloi
the tribute was three hundred and sixty talents: this is the twelfth
division.

93. From Pactyïke and the Armenians and the people bordering upon them
as far as the Euxine, four hundred talents: this is the thirteenth
division. From the Sagartians and Sarangians and Thamanaians and Utians
and Mycans and those who dwell in the islands of the Erythraian Sea,
where the king settles those who are called the "Removed," 80 from all
these together a tribute was produced of six hundred talents: this is
the fourteenth division. The Sacans and the Caspians 81 brought in two
hundred and fifty talents: this is the fifteenth division. The Parthians
and Chorasmians and Sogdians and Areians three hundred talents: this is
the sixteenth division.

94. The Paricanians and Ethiopians in Asia brought in four hundred
talents: this is the seventeenth division. To the Matienians and
Saspeirians and Alarodians was appointed a tribute of two hundred
talents: this is the eighteenth division. To the Moschoi and Tibarenians
and Macronians and Mossynoicoi and Mares three hundred talents were
ordered: this is the nineteenth division. Of the Indians the number is
far greater than that of any other race of men of whom we know; and
they brought in a tribute larger than all the rest, that is to say three
hundred and sixty talents of gold-dust: this is the twentieth division.

95. Now if we compare Babylonian with Euboïc talents, the silver is
found to amount to nine thousand eight hundred and eighty 82 talents;
and if we reckon the gold at thirteen times the value of silver, weight
for weight, the gold-dust is found to amount to four thousand six
hundred and eighty Euboïc talents. These being all added together,
the total which was collected as yearly tribute for Dareios amounts to
fourteen thousand five hundred and sixty Euboïc talents: the sums which
are less than these 83 I pass over and do not mention.

96. This was the tribute which came in to Dareios from Asia and from
a small part of Libya: but as time went on, other tribute came in also
from the islands and from those who dwell in Europe as far as Thessaly.
This tribute the king stores up in his treasury in the following
manner:—he melts it down and pours it into jars of earthenware, and when
he has filled the jars he takes off the earthenware jar from the
metal; and when he wants money he cuts off so much as he needs on each
occasion.

97. These were the provinces and the assessments of tribute: and
the Persian land alone has not been mentioned by me as paying a
contribution, for the Persians have their land to dwell in free from
payment. The following moreover had no tribute fixed for them to pay,
but brought gifts, namely the Ethiopians who border upon Egypt, whom
Cambyses subdued as he marched against the Long-lived Ethiopians, those
84 who dwell about Nysa, which is called "sacred," and who celebrate the
festivals in honour of Dionysos: these Ethiopians and those who dwell
near them have the same kind of seed as the Callantian Indians, and they
have underground dwellings. 85 These both together brought every other
year, and continue to bring even to my own time, two quart measures 86
of unmelted gold and two hundred blocks of ebony and five Ethiopian boys
and twenty large elephant tusks. The Colchians also had set themselves
among those who brought gifts, and with them those who border upon them
extending as far as the range of the Caucasus (for the Persian rule
extends as far as these mountains, but those who dwell in the
parts beyond Caucasus toward the North Wind regard the Persians no
longer),—these, I say, continued to bring the gifts which they had fixed
for themselves every four years 87 even down to my own time, that is to
say, a hundred boys and a hundred maidens. Finally, the Arabians brought
a thousand talents of frankincense every year. Such were the gifts which
these brought to the king apart from the tribute.

98. Now this great quantity of gold, out of which the Indians bring in
to the king the gold-dust which has been mentioned, is obtained by them
in a manner which I shall tell:—That part of the Indian land which is
towards the rising sun is sand; for of all the peoples in Asia of which
we know or about which any certain report is given, the Indians dwell
furthest away towards the East and the sunrising; seeing that the
country to the East of the Indians is desert on account of the sand. Now
there are many tribes of Indians, and they do not agree with one another
in language; and some of them are pastoral and others not so, and some
dwell in the swamps of the river 88 and feed upon raw fish, which they
catch by fishing from boats made of cane; and each boat is made of one
joint of cane. These Indians of which I speak wear clothing made of
rushes: they gather and cut the rushes from the river and then weave
them together into a kind of mat and put it on like a corslet.

99. Others of the Indians, dwelling to the East of these, are pastoral
and eat raw flesh: these are called Padaians, and they practise the
following customs:—whenever any of their tribe falls ill, whether it be
a woman or a man, if a man then the men who are his nearest associates
put him to death, saying that he is wasting away with the disease and
his flesh is being spoilt for them: 89 and meanwhile he denies stoutly
and says that he is not ill, but they do not agree with him; and after
they have killed him they feast upon his flesh: but if it be a woman
who falls ill, the women who are her greatest intimates do to her in the
same manner as the men do in the other case. For 90 in fact even if a
man has come to old age they slay him and feast upon him; but very few
of them come to be reckoned as old, for they kill every one who falls
into sickness, before he reaches old age.

100. Other Indians have on the contrary a manner of life as
follows:—they neither kill any living thing nor do they sow any crops
nor is it their custom to possess houses; but they feed on herbs, and
they have a grain of the size of millet, in a sheath, which grows of
itself from the ground; this they gather and boil with the sheath, and
make it their food: and whenever any of them falls into sickness, he
goes to the desert country and lies there, and none of them pay any
attention either to one who is dead or to one who is sick.

101. The sexual intercourse of all these Indians of whom I have spoken
is open like that of cattle, and they have all one colour of skin,
resembling that of the Ethiopians: moreover the seed which they emit is
not white like that of other races, but black like their skin; and the
Ethiopians also are similar in this respect. These tribes of Indians
dwell further off than the Persian power extends, and towards the South
Wind, and they never became subjects of Dareios.

102. Others however of the Indians are on the borders of the city of
Caspatyros and the country of Pactyïke, dwelling towards the North 91 of
the other Indians; and they have a manner of living nearly the same as
that of the Bactrians: these are the most warlike of the Indians, and
these are they who make expeditions for the gold. For in the parts where
they live it is desert on account of the sand; and in this desert and
sandy tract are produced ants, which are in size smaller than dogs but
larger than foxes, for 92 there are some of them kept at the residence
of the king of Persia, which are caught here. These ants then make their
dwelling under ground and carry up the sand just in the same manner as
the ants found in the land of the Hellenes, which they themselves
93 also very much resemble in form; and the sand which is brought up
contains gold. To obtain this sand the Indians make expeditions into the
desert, each one having yoked together three camels, placing a female in
the middle and a male like a trace-horse to draw by each side. On this
female he mounts himself, having arranged carefully that she shall be
taken to be yoked from young ones, the more lately born the better. For
their female camels are not inferior to horses in speed, and moreover
they are much more capable of bearing weights.

103. As to the form of the camel, I do not here describe it, since the
Hellenes for whom I write are already acquainted with it, but I shall
tell that which is not commonly known about it, which is this:—the camel
has in the hind legs four thighs and four knees, 94 and its organs of
generation are between the hind legs, turned towards the tail.

104. The Indians, I say, ride out to get the gold in the manner and with
the kind of yoking which I have described, making calculations so that
they may be engaged in carrying it off at the time when the greatest
heat prevails; for the heat causes the ants to disappear underground.
Now among these nations the sun is hottest in the morning hours, not
at midday as with others, but from sunrise to the time of closing the
market: and during this time it produces much greater heat than at
midday in Hellas, so that it is said that then they drench themselves
with water. Midday however has about equal degree of heat with the
Indians as with other men, while after midday their sun becomes like the
morning sun with other men, and after this, as it goes further away, it
produces still greater coolness, until at last at sunset it makes the
air very cool indeed.

105. When the Indians have come to the place with bags, they fill them
with the sand and ride away back as quickly as they can, for forthwith
the ants, perceiving, as the Persians allege, by the smell, begin to
pursue them: and this animal, they say, is superior to every other
creature in swiftness, so that unless the Indians got a start in their
course, while the ants were gathering together, not one of them would
escape. So then the male camels, for they are inferior in speed of
running to the females, if they drag behind are even let loose 95 from
the side of the female, one after the other; 96 the females however,
remembering the young which they left behind, do not show any slackness
in their course. 97 Thus it is that the Indians get most part of the
gold, as the Persians say; there is however other gold also in their
land obtained by digging, but in smaller quantities.

106. It seems indeed that the extremities of the inhabited world had
allotted to them by nature the fairest things, just as it was the lot
of Hellas to have its seasons far more fairly tempered than other lands:
for first, India is the most distant of inhabited lands towards the
East, as I have said a little above, and in this land not only the
animals, birds as well as four-footed beasts, are much larger than in
other places (except the horses, which are surpassed by those of Media
called Nessaian), but also there is gold in abundance there, some got
by digging, some brought down by rivers, and some carried off as I
explained just now: and there also the trees which grow wild produce
wool which surpasses in beauty and excellence that from sheep, and the
Indians wear clothing obtained from these trees.

107. Then again Arabia is the furthest of inhabited lands in the
direction of the midday, and in it alone of all lands grow frankincense
and myrrh and cassia and cinnamon and gum-mastich. All these except
myrrh are got with difficulty by the Arabians. Frankincense they collect
by burning the storax, which is brought thence to the Hellenes by the
Phenicians, by burning this, I say, so as to produce smoke they take
it; for these trees which produce frankincense are guarded by winged
serpents, small in size and of various colours, which watch in great
numbers about each tree, of the same kind as those which attempt to
invade Egypt: 9701 and they cannot be driven away from the trees by any
other thing but only the smoke of storax.

108. The Arabians say also that all the world would have been by this
time filled with these serpents, if that did not happen with regard to
them which I knew happened with regard to vipers: and it seems that the
Divine Providence, as indeed was to be expected, seeing that it is wise,
has made all those animals prolific which are of cowardly spirit and
good for food, in order that they may not be all eaten up and their race
fail, whereas it has made those which are bold and noxious to have small
progeny. For example, because the hare is hunted by every beast and bird
as well as by man, therefore it is so very prolific as it is: and this
is the only one of all beasts which becomes pregnant again before the
former young are born, and has in its womb some of its young covered
with fur and others bare; and while one is just being shaped in the
matrix, another is being conceived. Thus it is in this case; whereas
the lioness, which is the strongest and most courageous of creatures,
produces one cub once only in her life; for when she produces young
she casts out her womb together with her young; and the cause of it is
this:—when the cub being within the mother 98 begins to move about, then
having claws by far sharper than those of any other beast he tears the
womb, and as he grows larger he proceeds much further in his scratching:
at last the time of birth approaches and there is now nothing at all
left of it in a sound condition.

109. Just so also, if vipers and the winged serpents of the Arabians
were produced in the ordinary course of their nature, man would not be
able to live upon the earth; but as it is, when they couple with one
another and the male is in the act of generation, as he lets go from
him the seed, the female seizes hold of his neck, and fastening on to
it does not relax her hold till she has eaten it through. The male then
dies in the manner which I have said, but the female pays the penalty of
retribution for the male in this manner:—the young while they are still
in the womb take vengeance for their father by eating through their
mother, 99 and having eaten through her belly they thus make their way
out for themselves. Other serpents however, which are not hurtful to
man, produce eggs and hatch from them a very large number of offspring.
Now vipers are distributed over all the earth; but the others, which are
winged, are found in great numbers together in Arabia and in no other
land: therefore it is that they appear to be numerous.

110. This frankincense then is obtained thus by the Arabians; and cassia
is obtained as follows:—they bind up in cows'-hide and other kinds of
skins all their body and their face except only the eyes, and then go to
get the cassia. This grows in a pool not very deep, and round the pool
and in it lodge, it seems, winged beasts nearly resembling bats, and
they squeak horribly and are courageous in fight. These they must keep
off from their eyes, and so cut the cassia.

111. Cinnamon they collect in a yet more marvellous manner than this:
for where it grows and what land produces it they are not able to tell,
except only that some say (and it is a probable account) that it grows
in those regions where Dionysos was brought up; and they say that large
birds carry those dried sticks which we have learnt from the Phenicians
to call cinnamon, carry them, I say, to nests which are made of clay and
stuck on to precipitous sides of mountains, which man can find no means
of scaling. With regard to this then the Arabians practise the following
contrivance:—they divide up the limbs of the oxen and asses that die and
of their other beasts of burden, into pieces as large as convenient, and
convey them to these places, and when they have laid them down not far
from the nests, they withdraw to a distance from them: and the birds fly
down and carry the limbs 100 of the beasts of burden off to their nests;
and these are not able to bear them, but break down and fall to the
earth; and the men come up to them and collect the cinnamon. Thus
cinnamon is collected and comes from this nation to the other countries
of the world.

112. Gum-mastich however, which the Arabians call ladanon, comes in a
still more extraordinary manner; for though it is the most sweet-scented
of all things, it comes in the most evil-scented thing, since it is
found in the beards of he-goats, produced there like resin from wood:
this is of use for the making of many perfumes, and the Arabians use it
more than anything else as incense.

113. Let what we have said suffice with regard to spices; and from the
land of Arabia there blows a scent of them most marvellously sweet. They
have also two kinds of sheep which are worthy of admiration and are not
found in any other land: the one kind has the tail long, not less than
three cubits in length; and if one should allow these to drag these
after them, they would have sores 101 from their tails being worn away
against the ground; but as it is, every one of the shepherds knows
enough of carpentering to make little cars, which they tie under the
tails, fastening the tail of each animal to a separate little car.
The other kind of sheep has the tail broad, even as much as a cubit in
breadth.

114. As one passes beyond the place of the midday, the Ethiopian land is
that which extends furthest of all inhabited lands towards the sunset.
This produces both gold in abundance and huge elephants and trees of all
kinds growing wild and ebony, and men who are of all men the tallest,
the most beautiful and the most long-lived.

115. These are the extremities in Asia and in Libya; but as to the
extremities of Europe towards the West, I am not able to speak with
certainty: for neither do I accept the tale that there is a river called
in Barbarian tongue Eridanos, flowing into the sea which lies towards
the North Wind, whence it is said that amber comes; nor do I know of the
real existence of "Tin Islands" 102 from which tin 103 comes to us: for
first the name Eridanos itself declares that it is Hellenic and that it
does not belong to a Barbarian speech, but was invented by some
poet; and secondly I am not able to hear from any one who has been an
eye-witness, though I took pains to discover this, that there is a
sea on the other side of Europe. However that may be, tin and amber
certainly come to us from the extremity of Europe.

116. Then again towards the North of Europe, there is evidently a
quantity of gold by far larger than in any other land: as to how it is
got, here again I am not able to say for certain, but it is said to be
carried off from the griffins by Arimaspians, a one-eyed race of men.
104 But I do not believe this tale either, that nature produces one-eyed
men which in all other respects are like other men. However, it would
seem that the extremities which bound the rest of the world on every
side and enclose it in the midst, possess the things which by us are
thought to be the most beautiful and the most rare.

117. Now there is a plain in Asia bounded by mountains on all sides, and
through the mountains there are five clefts. This plain belonged once
to the Chorasmians, and it lies on the borders of the Chorasmians
themselves, the Hyrcanians, Parthians, Sarangians, and Thamanaians; but
from the time that the Persians began to bear rule it belongs to the
king. From this enclosing mountain of which I speak there flows a great
river, and its name is Akes. This formerly watered the lands of these
nations which have been mentioned, being divided into five streams and
conducted through a separate cleft in the mountains to each separate
nation; but from the time that they have come to be under the Persians
they have suffered as follows:—the king built up the clefts in the
mountains and set gates at each cleft; and so, since the water has been
shut off from its outlet, the plain within the mountains is made into a
sea, because the river runs into it and has no way out in any direction.
Those therefore who in former times had been wont to make use of the
water, not being able now to make use of it are in great trouble: for
during the winter they have rain from heaven, as also other men have,
but in the summer they desire to use the water when they sow millet and
sesame seed. So then, the water not being granted to them, they come to
the Persians both themselves and their wives, and standing at the gates
of the king's court they cry and howl; and the king orders that for
those who need it most, the gates which lead to their land shall be
opened; and when their land has become satiated with drinking in the
water, these gates are closed, and he orders the gates to be opened for
others, that is to say those most needing it of the rest who remain:
and, as I have heard, he exacts large sums of money for opening them,
besides the regular tribute.

118. Thus it is with these matters: but of the seven men who had risen
against the Magian, it happened to one, namely Intaphrenes, to be put to
death immediately after their insurrection for an outrage which I shall
relate. He desired to enter into the king's palace and confer with the
king; for the law was in fact so, that those who had risen up against
the Magian were permitted to go in to the king's presence without any
one to announce them, unless the king happened to be lying with his
wife. Accordingly Intaphrenes did not think it fit that any one should
announce his coming; but as he was one of the seven, he desired to
enter. The gatekeeper however and the bearer of messages endeavoured
to prevent him, saying that the king was lying with his wife: but
Intaphrenes believing that they were not speaking the truth, drew his
sword 105 and cut off their ears and their noses, and stringing these
upon his horse's bridle he tied them round their necks and so let them
go.

119. Upon this they showed themselves to the king and told the cause for
which they had suffered this; and Dareios, fearing that the six might
have done this by common design, sent for each one separately and made
trial of his inclinations, as to whether he approved of that which had
been done: and when he was fully assured that Intaphrenes had not done
this in combination with them, he took both Intaphrenes himself and his
sons and all his kinsmen, being much disposed to believe that he was
plotting insurrection against him with the help of his relations; and
having seized them he put them in bonds as for execution. Then the wife
of Intaphrenes, coming constantly to the doors of the king's court,
wept and bewailed herself; and by doing this continually after the same
manner she moved Dareios to pity her. Accordingly he sent a messenger
and said to her: "Woman, king Dareios grants to thee to save from death
one of thy kinsmen who are lying in bonds, whomsoever thou desirest of
them all." She then, having considered with herself, answered thus: "If
in truth the king grants me the life of one, I choose of them all my
brother." Dareios being informed of this, and marvelling at her speech,
sent and addressed her thus: "Woman, the king asks thee what was in thy
mind, that thou didst leave thy husband and thy children to die, and
didst choose thy brother to survive, seeing that he is surely less
near to thee in blood than thy children, and less dear to thee than
thy husband." She made answer: "O king, I might, if heaven willed, have
another husband and other children, if I should lose these; but another
brother I could by no means have, seeing that my father and my mother
are no longer alive. This was in my mind when I said those words." To
Dareios then it seemed that the woman had spoken well, and he let go
not only him for whose life she asked, but also the eldest of her
sons because he was pleased with her: but all the others he slew. One
therefore of the seven had perished immediately in the manner which has
been related.

120. Now about the time of the sickness of Cambyses it had come to pass
as follows:—There was one Oroites, a Persian, who had been appointed by
Cyrus to be governor of the province of Sardis. 106 This man had set his
desire upon an unholy thing; for though from Polycrates the Samian he
had never suffered anything nor heard any offensive word nor even seen
him before that time, he desired to take him and put him to death for
a reason of this kind, as most who report the matter say:—while Oroites
and another Persian whose name was Mitrobates, ruler of the province of
Daskyleion, 107 were sitting at the door of the king's court, they came
from words to strife with one another; and as they debated their several
claims to excellence, Mitrobates taunting Oroites said: "Dost thou 108
count thyself a man, who didst never yet win for the king the island of
Samos, which lies close to thy province, when it is so exceedingly easy
of conquest that one of the natives of it rose up against the government
with fifteen men-at-arms and got possession of the island, and is now
despot of it?" Some say that because he heard this and was stung by the
reproach, he formed the desire, not so much to take vengeance on him who
said this, as to bring Polycrates to destruction at all costs, since by
reason of him he was ill spoken of:

121, the lesser number however of those who tell the tale say that
Oroites sent a herald to Samos to ask for something or other, but what
it was is not mentioned; and Polycrates happened to be lying down in the
men's chamber 109 of his palace, and Anacreon also of Teos was present
with him: and somehow, whether it was by intention and because he made
no account of the business of Oroites, or whether some chance occurred
to bring it about, it happened that the envoy of Oroites came into his
presence and spoke with him, and Polycrates, who chanced to be turned
away 110 towards the wall, neither turned round at all nor made any
answer.

122. The cause then of the death of Polycrates is reported in these two
different ways, and we may believe whichever of them we please. Oroites
however, having his residence at that Magnesia which is situated upon
the river Maiander, sent Myrsos the son of Gyges, a Lydian, to Samos
bearing a message, since he had perceived the designs of Polycrates. For
Polycrates was the first of the Hellenes of whom we have any knowledge,
who set his mind upon having command of the sea, excepting Minos the
Cnossian and any other who may have had command of the sea before his
time. Of that which we call mortal race Polycrates was the first; and
he had great expectation of becoming ruler of Ionia and of the islands.
Oroites accordingly, having perceived that he had this design, sent a
message to him and said thus: "Oroites to Polycrates saith as follows:
I hear that thou art making plans to get great power, and that thou hast
not wealth according to thy high thoughts. Now therefore if thou shalt
do as I shall say, thou wilt do well for thyself on the one hand, and
also save me from destruction: for king Cambyses is planning death for
me, and this is reported to me so that I cannot doubt it. Do thou then
carry away out of danger both myself and with me my wealth; and of
this keep a part for thyself and a part let me keep, and then so far
as wealth may bring it about, thou shalt be ruler of all Hellas. And if
thou dost not believe that which I say about the money, send some one,
whosoever happens to be most trusted by thee, and to him I will show
it."

123. Polycrates having heard this rejoiced, and was disposed to agree;
and as he had a great desire, it seems, for wealth, he first sent
Maiandrios the son of Maiandrios, a native of Samos who was his
secretary, to see it: this man was the same who not long after these
events dedicated all the ornaments of the men's chamber in the palace of
Polycrates, ornaments well worth seeing, as an offering to the temple of
Hera. Oroites accordingly, having heard that the person sent to examine
might be expected soon to come, did as follows, that is to say, he
filled eight chests with stones except a small depth at the very top of
each, and laid gold above upon the stones; then he tied up the chests
and kept them in readiness. So Maiandrios came and looked at them and
brought back word to Polycrates:

124, and he upon that prepared to set out thither, although the diviners
and also his friends strongly dissuaded him from it, and in spite
moreover of a vision which his daughter had seen in sleep of this
kind,—it seemed to her that her father was raised up on high and was
bathed by Zeus and anointed by the Sun. Having seen this vision, she
used every kind of endeavour to dissuade Polycrates from leaving
his land to go to Oroites, and besides that, as he was going to his
fifty-oared galley she accompanied his departure with prophetic words:
and he threatened her that if he should return safe, she should remain
unmarried for long; but she prayed that this might come to pass, for she
desired rather, she said, to be unmarried for long than to be an orphan,
having lost her father.

125. Polycrates however neglected every counsel and set sail to go to
Oroites, taking with him, besides many others of his friends, Demokedes
also the son of Calliphon, a man of Croton, who was a physician and
practised his art better than any other man of his time. Then when he
arrived at Magnesia, Polycrates was miserably put to death in a manner
unworthy both of himself and of his high ambition: for excepting those
who become despots of the Syracusans, not one besides of the Hellenic
despots is worthy to be compared with Polycrates in magnificence. And
when he had killed him in a manner not fit to be told, Oroites impaled
his body: and of those who accompanied him, as many as were Samians he
released, bidding them be grateful to him that they were free men; but
all those of his company who were either allies or servants, he held in
the estimation of slaves and kept them. Polycrates then being hung up
accomplished wholly the vision of his daughter, for he was bathed by
Zeus whenever it rained, 11001 and anointed by the Sun, giving forth
moisture himself from his body.

126. To this end came the great prosperity of Polycrates, as Amasis
the king of Egypt had foretold to him: 111 but not long afterwards
retribution overtook Oroites in his turn for the murder of Polycrates.
For after the death of Cambyses and the reign of the Magians Oroites
remained at Sardis and did no service to the Persians, when they had
been deprived of their empire by the Medes; moreover during this time
of disturbance he slew Mitrobates the governor in Daskyleion, who had
brought up against him the matter of Polycrates as a reproach; and he
slew also Cranaspes the son of Mitrobates, both men of repute among
the Persians: and besides other various deeds of insolence, once when a
bearer of messages had come to him from Dareios, not being pleased with
the message which he brought he slew him as he was returning, having set
men to lie in wait for him by the way; and having slain him he made away
with the bodies both of the man and of his horse.

127. Dareios accordingly, when he had come to the throne, was desirous
of taking vengeance upon Oroites for all his wrongdoings and especially
for the murder of Mitrobates and his son. However he did not think
it good to act openly and to send an army against him, since his own
affairs were still in a disturbed state 112 and he had only lately come
to the throne, while he heard that the strength of Oroites was great,
seeing that he had a bodyguard of a thousand Persian spearmen and was
in possession of the divisions 113 of Phrygia and Lydia and Ionia.
Therefore Dareios contrived as follows:—having called together those of
the Persians who were of most repute, he said to them: "Persians, which
of you all will undertake to perform this matter for me with wisdom,
and not by force or with tumult? for where wisdom is wanted, there is no
need of force. Which of you, I say, will either bring Oroites alive to
me or slay him? for he never yet did any service to the Persians, and on
the other hand he has done to them great evil. First he destroyed two of
us, Mitrobates and his son; then he slays the men who go to summon him,
sent by me, displaying insolence not to be endured. Before therefore he
shall accomplish any other evil against the Persians, we must check his
course by death."

128. Thus Dareios asked, and thirty men undertook the matter, each
one separately desiring to do it himself; and Dareios stopped their
contention and bade them cast lots: so when they cast lots, Bagaios
the son of Artontes obtained the lot from among them all. Bagaios
accordingly, having obtained the lot, did thus:—he wrote many papers
dealing with various matters and on them set the seal of Dareios, and
with them he went to Sardis. When he arrived there and came into the
presence of Oroites, he took the covers off the papers one after another
and gave them to the Royal Secretary to read; for all the governors of
provinces have Royal Secretaries. Now Bagaios thus gave the papers in
order to make trial of the spearmen of the guard, whether they would
accept the motion to revolt from Oroites; and seeing that they paid
great reverence to the papers and still more to the words which were
recited from them, he gave another paper in which were contained
these words: "Persians, king Dareios forbids you to serve as guards
to Oroites": and they hearing this lowered to him the points of their
spears. Then Bagaios, seeing that in this they were obedient to the
paper, took courage upon that and gave the last of the papers to the
secretary; and in it was written: "King Dareios commands the Persians
who are in Sardis to slay Oroites." So the spearmen of the guard, when
they heard this, drew their swords and slew him forthwith. Thus did
retribution for the murder of Polycrates the Samian overtake Oroites.

129. When the wealth of Oroites had come or had been carried 114 up to
Susa, it happened not long after, that king Dareios while engaged in
hunting wild beasts twisted his foot in leaping off his horse, and
it was twisted, as it seems, rather violently, for the ball of his
ankle-joint was put out of the socket. Now he had been accustomed to
keep about him those of the Egyptians who were accounted the first in
the art of medicine, and he made use of their assistance then: but these
by wrenching and forcing the foot made the evil continually greater. For
seven days then and seven nights Dareios was sleepless owing to the
pain which he suffered; and at last on the eighth day, when he was in a
wretched state, some one who had heard talk before while yet at Sardis
of the skill of Demokedes of Croton, reported this to Dareios; and he
bade them bring him forthwith into his presence. So having found him
somewhere unnoticed among the slaves of Oroites, they brought him forth
into the midst dragging fetters after him and clothed in rags.

130. When he had been placed in the midst of them, Dareios asked him
whether he understood the art; but he would not admit it, fearing lest,
if he declared himself to be what he was, he might lose for ever
the hope of returning to Hellas: and it was clear to Dareios that he
understood that art but was practising another, 115 and he commanded
those who had brought him thither to produce scourges and pricks.
Accordingly upon that he spoke out, saying that he did not understand
it precisely, but that he had kept company with a physician and had some
poor knowledge of the art. Then after this, when Dareios had committed
the case to him, by using Hellenic drugs and applying mild remedies
after the former violent means, he caused him to get sleep, and in a
short time made him perfectly well, though he had never hoped to be
sound of foot again. Upon this Dareios presented him with two pairs of
golden fetters; and he asked him whether it was by design that he had
given to him a double share of his suffering, because he had made him
well. Being pleased by this saying, Dareios sent him to visit his wives,
and the eunuchs in bringing him in said to the women that this was he
who had restored to the king his life. Then each one of them plunged a
cup into the gold-chest 116 and presented Demokedes with so abundant a
gift that his servant, whose name was Skiton, following and gathering
up the coins 117 which fell from the cups, collected for himself a very
large sum of gold.

131. This Demokedes came from Croton, and became the associate of
Polycrates in the following manner:—at Croton he lived in strife with
his father, who was of a harsh temper, and when he could no longer
endure him, he departed and came to Egina. Being established there he
surpassed in the first year all the other physicians, although he was
without appliances and had none of the instruments which are used in the
art. In the next year the Eginetan State engaged him for a payment of
one talent, in the third year he was engaged by the Athenians for a
hundred pounds weight of silver, 118 and in the fourth by Polycrates for
two talents. Thus he arrived in Samos; and it was by reason of this
man more than anything else that the physicians of Croton got their
reputation: for this event happened at the time when the physicians of
Croton began to be spoken of as the first in Hellas, while the Kyrenians
were reputed to have the second place. About this same time also the
Argives had the reputation of being the first musicians in Hellas. 119

132. Then Demokedes having healed king Dareios had a very great house
in Susa, and had been made a table-companion of the king; and except the
one thing of returning to the land of the Hellenes, he had everything.
And first as regards the Egyptian physicians who tried to heal the king
before him, when they were about to be impaled because they had proved
inferior to a physician who was a Hellene, he asked their lives of the
king and rescued them from death: then secondly, he rescued an Eleian
prophet, who had accompanied Polycrates and had remained unnoticed among
the slaves. In short Demokedes was very great in the favour of the king.

133. Not long time after this another thing came to pass which was
this:—Atossa the daughter of Cyrus and wife of Dareios had a tumour upon
her breast, which afterwards burst and then was spreading further:
and so long as it was not large, she concealed it and said nothing to
anybody, because she was ashamed; but afterwards when she was in evil
case, she sent for Demokedes and showed it to him: and he said that he
would make her well, and caused her to swear that she would surely do
for him in return that which he should ask of her; and he would ask, he
said, none of such things as are shameful.

134. So when after this by his treatment he had made her well, then
Atossa instructed by Demokedes uttered to Dareios in his bedchamber some
such words as these: "O king, though thou hast such great power, thou
dost sit still, and dost not win in addition any nation or power for
the Persians: and yet it is reasonable that a man who is both young
and master of much wealth should be seen to perform some great deed, in
order that the Persians may know surely that he is a man by whom they
are ruled. It is expedient indeed in two ways that thou shouldest do so,
both in order that the Persians may know that their ruler is a man, and
in order that they may be worn down by war and not have leisure to plot
against thee. For now thou mightest display some great deed, while thou
art still young; seeing that as the body grows the spirit grows old
also with it, and is blunted for every kind of action." Thus she spoke
according to instructions received, and he answered thus: "Woman, thou
hast said all the things which I myself have in mind to do; for I have
made the plan to yoke together a bridge from this continent to the other
and to make expedition against the Scythians, and these designs will be
by way of being fulfilled within a little time." Then Atossa said: "Look
now,—forbear to go first against the Scythians, for these will be in
thy power whenever thou desirest: but do thou, I pray thee, make an
expedition against Hellas; for I am desirous to have Lacedemonian women
and Argive and Athenian and Corinthian, for attendants, because I hear
of them by report: and thou hast the man who of all men is most fitted
to show thee all things which relate to Hellas and to be thy guide, that
man, I mean, who healed thy foot." Dareios made answer: "Woman, since it
seems good to thee that we should first make trial of Hellas, I think
it better to send first to them men of the Persians together with him of
whom thou speakest, to make investigation, that when these have learnt
and seen, they may report each several thing to us; and then I shall go
to attack them with full knowledge of all."

135. Thus he said, and he proceeded to do the deed as he spoke the word:
for as soon as day dawned, he summoned fifteen Persians, men of
repute, and bade them pass through the coasts of Hellas in company with
Demokedes, and take care not to let Demokedes escape from them, but
bring him back at all costs. Having thus commanded them, next he
summoned Demokedes himself and asked him to act as a guide for the whole
of Hellas and show it to the Persians, and then return back: and he bade
him take all his movable goods and carry them as gifts to his father and
his brothers, saying that he would give him in their place many times
as much; and besides this, he said, he would contribute to the gifts a
merchant ship filled with all manner of goods, which should sail with
him. Dareios, as it seems to me, promised him these things with no
crafty design; but Demokedes was afraid that Dareios was making trial
of him, and did not make haste to accept all that was offered, but said
that he would leave his own things where they were, so that he might
have them when he came back; he said however that he accepted the
merchant ship which Dareios promised him for the presents to his
brothers. Dareios then, having thus given command to him also, sent them
away to the sea.

136. So these, when they had gone down to Phenicia and in Phenicia to
the city of Sidon, forthwith manned two triremes, and besides them they
also filled a large ship of burden with all manner of goods. Then when
they had made all things ready they set sail for Hellas, and touching
at various places they saw the coast regions of it and wrote down a
description, until at last, when they had seen the greater number of the
famous places, they came to Taras 120 in Italy. There from complaisance
121 to Demokedes Aristophilides the king of the Tarentines unfastened
and removed the steering-oars of the Median ships, and also confined the
Persians in prison, because, as he alleged, they came as spies. While
they were being thus dealt with, Demokedes went away and reached Croton;
and when he had now reached his own native place, Aristophilides set the
Persians free and gave back to them those parts of their ships which he
had taken away.

137. The Persians then sailing thence and pursuing Demokedes reached
Croton, and finding him in the market-place they laid hands upon him;
and some of the men of Croton fearing the Persian power were willing to
let him go, but others took hold of him and struck with their staves at
the Persians, who pleaded for themselves in these words: "Men of Croton,
take care what ye are about: ye are rescuing a man who was a slave
of king Dareios and who ran away from him. How, think you, will king
Dareios be content to receive such an insult; and how shall this which
ye do be well for you, if ye take him away from us? Against what city,
think you, shall we make expedition sooner than against this, and what
city before this shall we endeavour to reduce to slavery?" Thus
saying they did not however persuade the men of Croton, but having
had Demokedes rescued from them and the ship of burden which they were
bringing with them taken away, they set sail to go back to Asia, and
did not endeavour to visit any more parts of Hellas or to find out about
them, being now deprived of their guide. This much however Demokedes
gave them as a charge when they were putting forth to sea, bidding them
say to Dareios that Demokedes was betrothed to the daughter of Milon:
for the wrestler Milon had a great name at the king's court; and I
suppose that Demokedes was urgent for this marriage, spending much
money to further it, in order that Dareios might see that he was held in
honour also in his own country.

138. The Persians however, after they had put out from Croton, were cast
away with their ships in Iapygia; and as they were remaining there as
slaves, Gillos a Tarentine exile rescued them and brought them back to
king Dareios. In return for this Dareios offered to give him whatsoever
thing he should desire; and Gillos chose that he might have the power of
returning to Taras, narrating first the story of his misfortune: and in
order that he might not disturb all Hellas, as would be the case if on
his account a great armament should sail to invade Italy, he said it was
enough for him that the men of Cnidos should be those who brought him
back, without any others; because he supposed that by these, who were
friends with the Tarentines, his return from exile would most easily be
effected. Dareios accordingly having promised proceeded to perform; for
he sent a message to Cnidos and bade them being back Gillos to Taras:
and the men of Cnidos obeyed Dareios, but nevertheless they did not
persuade the Tarentines, and they were not strong enough to apply force.
Thus then it happened with regard to these things; and these were the
first Persians who came from Asia to Hellas, and for the reason which
has been mentioned these were sent as spies.

139. After this king Dareios took Samos before all other cities, whether
of Hellenes or Barbarians, and for a cause which was as follows:—When
Cambyses the son of Cyrus was marching upon Egypt, many Hellenes arrived
in Egypt, some, as might be expected, joining in the campaign to make
profit, 122 and some also coming to see the land itself; and among these
was Syloson the son of Aiakes and brother of Polycrates, an exile from
Samos. To this Syloson a fortunate chance occurred, which was this:—he
had taken and put upon him a flame-coloured mantle, and was about the
market-place in Memphis; and Dareios, who was then one of the spearmen
of Cambyses and not yet held in any great estimation, seeing him had
a desire for the mantle, and going up to him offered to buy it. Then
Syloson, seeing that Dareios very greatly desired the mantle, by some
divine inspiration said: "I will not sell this for any sum, but I will
give it thee for nothing, if, as it appears, it must be thine at all
costs." To this Dareios agreed and received from him the garment.

140. Now Syloson supposed without any doubt that he had altogether lost
this by easy simplicity; but when in course of time Cambyses was dead,
and the seven Persians had risen up against the Magian, and of the seven
Dareios had obtained the kingdom, Syloson heard that the kingdom had
come about to that man to whom once in Egypt he had given the garment at
his request: accordingly he went up to Susa and sat down at the entrance
123 of the king's palace, and said that he was a benefactor of Dareios.
The keeper of the door hearing this reported it to the king; and
he marvelled at it and said to him: "Who then of the Hellenes is my
benefactor, to whom I am bound by gratitude? seeing that it is now but
a short time that I possess the kingdom, and as yet scarcely one 124 of
them has come up to our court; and I may almost say that I have no debt
owing to a Hellene. Nevertheless bring him in before me, that I may know
what he means when he says these things." Then the keeper of the door
brought Syloson before him, and when he had been set in the midst, the
interpreters asked him who he was and what he had done, that he called
himself the benefactor of the king. Syloson accordingly told all that
had happened about the mantle, and how he was the man who had given it;
to which Dareios made answer: "O most noble of men, thou art he who
when as yet I had no power gavest me a gift, small it may be, but
nevertheless the kindness is counted with me to be as great as if I
should now receive some great thing from some one. Therefore I will give
thee in return gold and silver in abundance, that thou mayest not
ever repent that thou didst render a service to Dareios the son of
Hystaspes." To this Syloson replied: "To me, O king, give neither gold
nor silver, but recover and give to me my fatherland Samos, which now
that my brother Polycrates has been slain by Oroites is possessed by our
slave. This give to me without bloodshed or selling into slavery."

141. Dareios having heard this prepared to send an expedition with
Otanes as commander of it, who had been one of the seven, charging him
to accomplish for Syloson all that which he had requested. Otanes then
went down to the sea-coast and was preparing the expedition.

142. Now Maiandrios the son of Maiandrios was holding the rule over
Samos, having received the government as a trust from Polycrates; and
he, though desiring to show himself the most righteous of men, did not
succeed in so doing: for when the death of Polycrates was reported to
him, he did as follows:—first he founded an altar to Zeus the Liberator
and marked out a sacred enclosure round it, namely that which exists
still in the suburb of the city: then after he had done this he gathered
together an assembly of all the citizens and spoke these words: "To me,
as ye know as well as I, has been entrusted the sceptre of Polycrates
and all his power; and now it is open to me to be your ruler; but that
for the doing of which I find fault with my neighbour, I will myself
refrain from doing, so far as I may: for as I did not approve of
Polycrates acting as master of men who were not inferior to himself, so
neither do I approve of any other who does such things. Now Polycrates
for his part fulfilled his own appointed destiny, and I now give the
power into the hands of the people, and proclaim to you equality. 125
These privileges however I think it right to have assigned to me, namely
that from the wealth of Polycrates six talents should be taken out and
given to me as a special gift; and in addition to this I choose for
myself and for my descendants in succession the priesthood of Zeus the
Liberator, to whom I myself founded a temple, while I bestow liberty
upon you." He, as I say, made these offers to the Samians; but one of
them rose up and said: "Nay, but unworthy too art thou 126 to be
our ruler, seeing that thou art of mean birth and a pestilent fellow
besides. Rather take care that thou give an account of the money which
thou hadst to deal with."

143. Thus said one who was a man of repute among the citizens, whose
name was Telesarchos; and Maiandrios perceiving that if he resigned the
power, some other would be set up as despot instead of himself, did not
keep the purpose at all 127 of resigning it; but having retired to the
fortress he sent for each man separately, pretending that he was going
to give an account of the money, and so seized them and put them in
bonds. These then had been put in bonds; but Maiandrios after this
was overtaken by sickness, and his brother, whose name was Lycaretos,
expecting that he would die, put all the prisoners to death, in order
that he might himself more easily get possession of the power over
Samos: and all this happened because, as it appears, they did not choose
to be free.

144. So when the Persians arrived at Samos bringing Syloson home from
exile, no one raised a hand against them, and moreover the party of
Maiandrios and Maiandrios himself said that they were ready to retire
out of the island under a truce. Otanes therefore having agreed on these
terms and having made a treaty, the most honourable of the Persians had
seats placed for them in front of the fortress and were sitting there.

145. Now the despot Maiandrios had a brother who was somewhat mad, and
his name was Charilaos. This man for some offence which he had been
committed had been confined in an underground dungeon, 128 and at this
time of which I speak, having heard what was being done and having put
his head through out of the dungeon, when he saw the Persians peacefully
sitting there he began to cry out and said that he desired to come to
speech with Maiandrios. So Maiandrios hearing his voice bade them loose
him and bring him into his presence; and as soon as he was brought he
began to abuse and revile him, trying to persuade him to attack the
Persians, and saying thus: "Thou basest of men, didst thou put me in
bonds and judge me worthy of the dungeon under ground, who am thine
own brother and did no wrong worthy of bonds, and when thou seest the
Persians casting thee forth from the land and making thee homeless, dost
thou not dare to take any revenge, though they are so exceedingly easy
to be overcome? Nay, but if in truth thou art afraid of them, give me
thy mercenaries and I will take vengeance on them for their coming here;
and thyself I am willing to let go out of the island."

146. Thus spoke Charilaos, and Maiandrios accepted that which he said,
not, as I think, because he had reached such a height of folly as to
suppose that his own power would overcome that of the king, but rather
because he grudged Syloson that he should receive from him the State
without trouble, and with no injury inflicted upon it. Therefore he
desired to provoke the Persians to anger and make the Samian power as
feeble as possible before he gave it up to him, being well assured that
the Persians, when they had suffered evil, would be likely to be as
bitter against the Samians as well as against those who did the wrong,
129 and knowing also that he had a safe way of escape from the island
whenever he desired: for he had had a secret passage made under ground,
leading from the fortress to the sea. Maiandrios then himself sailed out
from Samos; but Charilaos armed all the mercenaries, and opening wide
the gates sent them out upon the Persians, who were not expecting any
such thing, but supposed that all had been arranged: and the mercenaries
falling upon them began to slay those of the Persians who had seats
carried for them 130 and were of most account. While these were thus
engaged, the rest of the Persian force came to the rescue, and the
mercenaries were hard pressed and forced to retire to the fortress.

147. Then Otanes the Persian commander, seeing that the Persians had
suffered greatly, purposely forgot the commands which Dareios gave him
when he sent him forth, not to kill any one of the Samians nor to sell
any into slavery, but to restore the island to Syloson free from all
suffering of calamity,—these commands, I say, he purposely forgot, and
gave the word to his army to slay every one whom they should take, man
or boy, without distinction. So while some of the army were besieging
the fortress, others were slaying every one who came in their way, in
sanctuary or out of sanctuary equally.

148. Meanwhile Maiandrios had escaped from Samos and was sailing to
Lacedemon; and having come thither and caused to be brought up to the
city the things which he had taken with him when he departed, he did
as follows:—first, he would set out his cups of silver and of gold,
and then while the servants were cleaning them, he would be engaged
in conversation with Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides, then king of
Sparta, and would bring him on to his house; and when Cleomenes saw the
cups he marvelled and was astonished at them, and Maiandrios would bid
him take away with him as many of them as he pleased. Maiandrios said
this twice or three times, but Cleomenes herein showed himself the most
upright of men; for he not only did not think fit to take that which was
offered, but perceiving that Maiandrios would make presents to others
of the citizens, and so obtain assistance for himself, he went to the
Ephors and said that it was better for Sparta that the stranger of Samos
should depart from Peloponnesus, lest he might persuade either himself
or some other man of the Spartans to act basely. They accordingly
accepted his counsel, and expelled Maiandrios by proclamation.

149. As to Samos, the Persians, after sweeping the population off it,
131 delivered it to Syloson stripped of men. Afterwards however the
commander Otanes even joined in settling people there, moved by a vision
of a dream and by a disease which seized him, so that he was diseased in
the genital organs.

150. After a naval force had thus gone against Samos, the Babylonians
made revolt, being for this exceedingly well prepared; for during all
the time of the reign of the Magian and of the insurrection of the
seven, during all this time and the attendant confusion they were
preparing themselves for the siege of their city: and it chanced by some
means that they were not observed to be doing this. Then when they made
open revolt, they did as follows:—after setting apart their mothers
first, each man set apart also for himself one woman, whosoever he
wished of his own household, and all the remainder they gathered
together and killed by suffocation. Each man set apart the one who has
been mentioned to serve as a maker of bread, and they suffocated the
rest in order that they might not consume their provisions.

151. Dareios being informed of this and having gathered together all his
power, made expedition against them, and when he had marched his army
up to Babylon he began to besiege them; but they cared nothing about the
siege, for the Babylonians used to go up to the battlements of the wall
and show contempt of Dareios and of his army by gestures and by words;
and one of them uttered this saying: "Why, O Persians, do ye remain
sitting here, and not depart? For then only shall ye capture us, when
mules shall bring forth young." This was said by one of the Babylonians,
not supposing that a mule would ever bring forth young.

152. So when a year and seven months had now passed by, Dareios began
to be vexed and his whole army with him, not being able to conquer the
Babylonians. And yet Dareios had used against them every kind of device
and every possible means, but not even so could he conquer them, though
besides other devices he had attempted it by that also with which Cyrus
conquered them; but the Babylonians were terribly on their guard and he
was not able to conquer them.

153. Then in the twentieth month there happened to Zopyros the son of
that Megabyzos who had been of the seven men who slew the Magian, to
this Zopyros, I say, son of Megabyzos there happened a prodigy,—one of
the mules which served as bearers of provisions for him produced young:
and when this was reported to him, and Zopyros had himself seen the
foal, because he did not believe the report, he charged those who
had seen it not to tell that which had happened to any one, and he
considered with himself what to do. And having regard to the words
spoken by the Babylonian, who had said at first that when mules should
produce young, then the wall would be taken, having regard (I say) to
this ominous saying, it seemed to Zopyros that Babylon could be taken:
for he thought that both the man had spoken and his mule had produced
young by divine dispensation.

154. Since then it seemed to him that it was now fated that Babylon
should be captured, he went to Dareios and inquired of him whether he
thought it a matter of very great moment to conquer Babylon; and hearing
in answer that he thought it of great consequence, he considered again
how he might be the man to take it and how the work might be his own:
for among the Persians benefits are accounted worthy of a very high
degree of honour. 132 He considered accordingly that he was not able to
make conquest of it by any other means, but only if he should maltreat
himself and desert to their side. So, making light esteem of himself, he
maltreated his own body in a manner which could not be cured; for he cut
off his nose and his ears, and shaved his hair round in an unseemly way,
and scourged himself, and so went into the presence of Dareios.

155. And Dareios was exceedingly troubled when he saw the man of most
repute with him thus maltreated; and leaping up from his seat he cried
aloud and asked him who was the person who had maltreated him, and for
what deed. He replied: "That man does not exist, excepting thee, who has
so great power as to bring me into this condition; and not any stranger,
O king, has done this, but I myself to myself, accounting it a very
grievous thing that the Assyrians should make a mock of the Persians."
He made answer: "Thou most reckless of men, thou didst set the fairest
name to the foulest deed when thou saidest that on account of those who
are besieged thou didst bring thyself into a condition which cannot be
cured. How, O thou senseless one, will the enemy surrender to us more
quickly, because thou hast maltreated thyself? Surely thou didst wander
out of thy senses in thus destroying thyself." And he said, "If I had
communicated to thee that which I was about to do, thou wouldst not have
permitted me to do it; but as it was, I did it on my own account. Now
therefore, unless something is wanting on thy part, we shall conquer
Babylon: for I shall go straightway as a deserter to the wall; and I
shall say to them that I suffered this treatment at thy hands: and I
think that when I have convinced them that this is so, I shall obtain
the command of a part of their forces. Do thou then on the tenth day
from that on which I shall enter within the wall take of those troops
about which thou wilt have no concern if they be destroyed,—of these, I
say, get a thousand by 133 the gate of the city which is called the gate
of Semiramis; and after this again on the seventh day after the tenth
set, I pray thee, two thousand by the gate which is called the gate of
the Ninevites; and after this seventh day let twenty days elapse, and
then lead other four thousand and place them by the gate called the
gate of the Chaldeans: and let neither the former men nor these have any
weapons to defend them except daggers, but this weapon let them have.
Then after the twentieth day at once bid the rest of the army make an
attack on the wall all round, and set the Persians, I pray thee, by
those gates which are called the gate of Belos and the gate of Kissia:
for, as I think, when I have displayed great deeds of prowess, the
Babylonians will entrust to me, besides their other things, also the
keys which draw the bolts of the gates. Then after that it shall be the
care of myself and the Persians to do that which ought to be done."

156. Having thus enjoined he proceeded to go to the gate of the
city, turning to look behind him as he went, as if he were in truth a
deserter; and those who were set in that part of the wall, seeing him
from the towers ran down, and slightly opening one wing of the gate
asked who he was, and for what purpose he had come. And he addressed
them and said that he was Zopyros, and that he came as a deserter to
them. The gate-keepers accordingly when they heard this led him to the
public assembly of the Babylonians; and being introduced before it he
began to lament his fortunes, saying that he had in fact suffered at his
own hands, and that he had suffered this because he had counselled the
king to withdraw his army, since in truth there seemed to be no means of
taking the town: "And now," he went on to say, "I am come for very great
good to you, O Babylonians, but for very great evil to Dareios and
his army, and to the Persians, 134 for he shall surely not escape with
impunity for having thus maltreated me; and I know all the courses of
his counsels."

157. Thus he spoke, and the Babylonians, when they saw the man of most
reputation among the Persians deprived of nose and ears and smeared over
with blood from scourging, supposing assuredly that he was speaking the
truth and had come to be their helper, were ready to put in his power
that for which he asked them, and he asked them that he might command
a certain force. Then when he had obtained this from them, he did that
which he had agreed with Dareios that he would do; for he led out on
the tenth day the army of the Babylonians, and having surrounded the
thousand men whom he had enjoined Dareios first to set there, he slew
them. The Babylonians accordingly, perceiving that the deeds which he
displayed were in accordance with his words, were very greatly rejoiced
and were ready to serve him in all things: and after the lapse of the
days which had been agreed upon, he again chose men of the Babylonians
and led them out and slew the two thousand men of the troops of Dareios.
Seeing this deed also, the Babylonians all had the name of Zopyros upon
their tongues, and were loud in his praise. He then again, after the
lapse of the days which had been agreed upon, led them out to the place
appointed, and surrounded the four thousand and slew them. When this
also had been done, Zopyros was everything among the Babylonians, and he
was appointed both commander of their army and guardian of their walls.

158. But when Dareios made an attack according to the agreement on every
side of the wall, then Zopyros discovered all his craft: for while
the Babylonians, having gone up on the wall, were defending themselves
against the attacks of the army of Dareios, Zopyros opened the gates
called the gates of Kissia and of Belos, and let in the Persians within
the wall. And of the Babylonians those who saw that which was done fled
to the temple of Zeus Belos, but those who did not see remained each in
his own appointed place, until at last they also learnt that they had
been betrayed.

159. Thus was Babylon conquered for the second time: and Dareios when he
had overcome the Babylonians, first took away the wall from round their
city and pulled down all the gates; for when Cyrus took Babylon before
him, he did neither of these things: and secondly Dareios impaled the
leading men to the number of about three thousand, but to the rest of
the Babylonians he gave back their city to dwell in: and to provide that
the Babylonians should have wives, in order that their race might be
propagated, Dareios did as follows (for their own wives, as has been
declared at the beginning, the Babylonians had suffocated, in provident
care for their store of food):—he ordered the nations who dwelt round to
bring women to Babylon, fixing a certain number for each nation, so that
the sum total of fifty thousand women was brought together, and from
these women the present Babylonians are descended.

160. As for Zopyros, in the judgment of Dareios no one of the Persians
surpassed him in good service, either of those who came after or of
those who had gone before, excepting Cyrus alone; for to Cyrus no man of
the Persians ever yet ventured to compare himself: and Dareios is said
to have declared often that he would rather that Zopyros were free
from the injury than that he should have twenty Babylons added to his
possession in addition to that one which he had. Moreover he gave him
great honours; for not only did he give him every year those things
which by the Persians are accounted the most honourable, but also he
granted him Babylon to rule free from tribute, so long as he should
live; and he added many other gifts. The son of this Zopyros was
Megabyzos, who was made commander in Egypt against the Athenians and
their allies; and the son of this Megabyzos was Zopyros, who went over
to Athens as a deserter from the Persians.


