BOOK IV. THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED MELPOMENE


1. After Babylon had been taken, the march of Dareios himself 1 against
the Scythians took place: for now that Asia was flourishing in respect
of population, and large sums were being gathered in as revenue, Dareios
formed the desire to take vengeance upon the Scythians, because they
had first invaded the Median land and had overcome in fight those
who opposed them; and thus they had been the beginners of wrong. The
Scythians in truth, as I have before said, 2 had ruled over Upper Asia
3 for eight-and-twenty years; for they had invaded Asia in their pursuit
of the Kimmerians, and they had deposed 4 the Medes from their rule, who
had rule over Asia before the Scythians came. Now when the Scythians had
been absent from their own land for eight-and-twenty years, as they were
returning to it after that interval of time, they were met by a contest
5 not less severe than that which they had had with the Medes, since
they found an army of no mean size opposing them. For the wives of the
Scythians, because their husbands were absent from them for a long time,
had associated with the slaves.

2. Now the Scythians put out the eyes of all their slaves because of the
milk which they drink; and they do as follows:—they take blow-pipes of
bone just like flutes, and these they insert into the vagina of the mare
and blow with their mouths, and others milk while they blow: and they
say that they do this because the veins of the mare are thus filled,
being blown out, and so the udder is let down. When they had drawn the
milk they pour it into wooden vessels hollowed out, and they set the
blind slaves in order about 6 the vessels and agitate the milk. Then
that which comes to the top they skim off, considering it the more
valuable part, whereas they esteem that which settles down to be less
good than the other. For this reason 7 the Scythians put out the eyes of
all whom they catch; for they are not tillers of the soil but nomads.

3. From these their slaves then, I say, and from their wives had been
born and bred up a generation of young men, who having learnt the manner
of their birth set themselves to oppose the Scythians as they were
returning from the Medes. And first they cut off their land by digging
a broad trench extending from the Tauric mountains to the Maiotian
lake, at the point where 8 this is broadest; then afterwards when the
Scythians attempted to invade the land, they took up a position against
them and fought; and as they fought many times, and the Scythians were
not able to get any advantage in the fighting, one of them said: "What a
thing is this that we are doing, Scythians! We are fighting against our
own slaves, and we are not only becoming fewer in number ourselves by
being slain in battle, but also we are killing them, and so we shall
have fewer to rule over in future. Now therefore to me it seems good
that we leave spears and bows and that each one take his horse-whip
and so go up close to them: for so long as they saw us with arms in our
hands, they thought themselves equal to us and of equal birth; but when
they shall see that we have whips instead of arms, they will perceive
that they are our slaves, and having acknowledged this they will not
await our onset."

4. When they heard this, the Scythians proceeded to do that which he
said, and the others being panic-stricken by that which was done forgot
their fighting and fled. Thus the Scythians had ruled over Asia; and
in such manner, when they were driven out again by the Medes, they had
returned to their own land. For this Dareios wished to take vengeance
upon them, and was gathering together an army to go against them.

5. Now the Scythians say that their nation is the youngest of all
nations, and that this came to pass as follows:—The first man who ever
existed in this region, which then was desert, was one named Targitaos:
and of this Targitaos they say, though I do not believe it for my part,
however they say the parents were Zeus and the daughter of the river
Borysthenes. Targitaos, they report, was produced from some such origin
as this, and of him were begotten three sons, Lipoxaïs and Arpoxaïs
and the youngest Colaxaïs. In the reign of these 9 there came down from
heaven certain things wrought of gold, a plough, a yoke, a battle-axe,
10 and a cup, and fell in the Scythian land: and first the eldest saw
and came near them, desiring to take them, but the gold blazed with fire
when he approached it: then when he had gone away from it, the second
approached, and again it did the same thing. These then the gold
repelled by blazing with fire; but when the third and youngest came up
to it, the flame was quenched, and he carried them to his own house.
The elder brothers then, acknowledging the significance of this thing,
delivered the whole of the kingly power to the youngest.

6. From Lixopaïs, they say, are descended those Scythians who are called
the race of the Auchatai; from the middle brother Arpoxaïs those who are
called Catiaroi and Traspians, and from the youngest of them the "Royal"
tribe, 11 who are called Paralatai: and the whole together are called,
they say, Scolotoi, after the name of their king; 12 but the Hellenes
gave them the name of Scythians.

7. Thus the Scythians say they were produced; and from the time of their
origin, that is to say from the first king Targitaos, to the passing
over of Dareios against them, they say that there is a period of a
thousand years and no more. Now this sacred gold is guarded by the
kings with the utmost care, and they visit it every year with solemn
sacrifices of propitiation: moreover if any one goes to sleep while
watching in the open air over this gold during the festival, the
Scythians say that he does not live out the year; and there is given him
for this so much land as he shall ride round himself on his horse in one
day. Now as the land was large, Colaxaïs, they say, established three
kingdoms for his sons; and of these he made one larger than the rest,
and in this the gold is kept. But as to the upper parts which lie on the
North side of those who dwell above this land, they say one can neither
see nor pass through any further by reason of feathers which are poured
down; for both the earth and the air are full of feathers, and this is
that which shuts off the view.

8. Thus say the Scythians about themselves and about the region
above them; but the Hellenes who dwell about the Pontus say as
follows:—Heracles driving the cattle of Geryones came to this land, then
desert, which the Scythians now inhabit; and Geryones, says the tale,
dwelt away from the region of the Pontus, living in the island called
by the Hellenes Erytheia, near Gadeira which is outside the Pillars of
Heracles by the Ocean.—As to the Ocean, they say indeed that it flows
round the whole earth beginning from the place of the sunrising, but
they do not prove this by facts.—From thence Heracles came to the land
now called Scythia; and as a storm came upon him together with icy cold,
he drew over him his lion's skin and went to sleep. Meanwhile the mares
harnessed in his chariot disappeared by a miraculous chance, as they
were feeding.

9. Then when Heracles woke he sought for them; and having gone over the
whole land, at last he came to the region which is called Hylaia; and
there he found in a cave a kind of twofold creature formed by the union
of a maiden and a serpent, whose upper parts from the buttocks upwards
were those of a woman, but her lower parts were those of a snake. Having
seen her and marvelled at her, he asked her then whether she had seen
any mares straying anywhere; and she said that she had them herself and
would not give them up until he lay with her; and Heracles lay with her
on condition of receiving them. She then tried to put off the giving
back of the mares, desiring to have Heracles with her as long as
possible, while he on the other hand desired to get the mares and
depart; and at last she gave them back and said: "These mares when they
came hither I saved for thee, and thou didst give me reward for saving
them; for I have by thee three sons. Tell me then, what must I do with
these when they shall be grown to manhood, whether I shall settle them
here, for over this land I have power alone, or send them away to thee?"
She thus asked of him, and he, they say, replied: "When thou seest that
the boys are grown to men, do this and thou shalt not fail of doing
right:—whichsoever of them thou seest able to stretch this bow as I do
now, and to be girded 1201 with this girdle, him cause to be the settler
of this land; but whosoever of them fails in the deeds which I enjoin,
send him forth out of the land: and if thou shalt do thus, thou wilt
both have delight thyself and perform that which has been enjoined to
thee."

10. Upon this he drew one of his bows (for up to that time Heracles,
they say, was wont to carry two) and showed her the girdle, and then he
delivered to her both the bow and the girdle, which had at the end of
its clasp a golden cup; and having given them he departed. She then,
when her sons had been born and had grown to be men, gave them names
first, calling one of them Agathyrsos and the next Gelonos and the
youngest Skythes; then bearing in mind the charge given to her, she did
that which was enjoined. And two of her sons, Agathyrsos and Gelonos,
not having proved themselves able to attain to the task set before them,
departed from the land, being cast out by her who bore them; but Skythes
the youngest of them performed the task and remained in the land:
and from Skythes the son of Heracles were descended, they say, the
succeeding kings of the Scythians (Skythians): and they say moreover
that it is by reason of the cup that the Scythians still even to this
day wear cups attached to their girdles: and this alone his mother
contrived for Skythes. 13 Such is the story told by the Hellenes who
dwell about the Pontus.

11. There is however also another story, which is as follows, and to
this I am most inclined myself. It is to the effect that the nomad
Scythians dwelling in Asia, being hard pressed in war by the Massagetai,
left their abode and crossing the river Araxes came towards the
Kimmerian land (for the land which now is occupied by the Scythians is
said to have been in former times the land of the Kimmerians); and the
Kimmerians, when the Scythians were coming against them, took counsel
together, seeing that a great host was coming to fight against them;
and it proved that their opinions were divided, both opinions being
vehemently maintained, but the better being that of their kings: for the
opinion of the people was that it was necessary to depart and that they
ought not to run the risk of fighting against so many, 14 but that of
the kings was to fight for their land with those who came against them:
and as neither the people were willing by means to agree to the counsel
of the kings nor the kings to that of the people, the people planned
to depart without fighting and to deliver up the land to the invaders,
while the kings resolved to die and to be laid in their own land, and
not to flee with the mass of the people, considering the many goods of
fortune which they had enjoyed, and the many evils which it might be
supposed would come upon them, if they fled from their native land.
Having resolved upon this, they parted into two bodies, and making their
numbers equal they fought with one another: and when these had all been
killed by one another's hands, then the people of the Kimmerians buried
them by the bank of the river Tyras (where their burial-place is still
to be seen), and having buried them, then they made their way out
from the land, and the Scythians when they came upon it found the land
deserted of its inhabitants.

12. And there are at the present time in the land of Scythia Kimmerian
walls, and a Kimmerian ferry; and there is also a region which is called
Kimmeria, and the so-called Kimmerian Bosphorus. It is known moreover
that the Kimmerians, in their flight to Asia from the Scythians, also
made a settlement on that peninsula on which now stands the Hellenic
city of Sinope; and it is known too that the Scythians pursued them
and invaded the land of Media, having missed their way; for while the
Kimmerians kept ever along by the sea in their flight, the Scythians
pursued them keeping Caucasus on their right hand, until at last they
invaded Media, directing their course inland. This then which has been
told is another story, and it is common both to Hellenes and Barbarians.

13. Aristeas however the son of Caÿstrobios, a man of Proconnesos,
said in the verses which he composed, that he came to the land of the
Issedonians being possessed by Phoebus, and that beyond the Issedonians
dwelt Arimaspians, a one-eyed race, and beyond these the gold-guarding
griffins, and beyond them the Hyperboreans extending as far as the sea:
and all these except the Hyperboreans, beginning with the Arimaspians,
were continually making war on their neighbours, and the Issedonians
were gradually driven out of their country by the Arimaspians and the
Scythians by the Issedonians, and so the Kimmerians, who dwelt on the
Southern Sea, being pressed by the Scythians left their land. Thus
neither does he agree in regard to this land with the report of the
Scythians.

14. As to Aristeas who composed 15 this, I have said already whence
he was; and I will tell also the tale which I heard about him in
Proconnesos and Kyzicos. They say that Aristeas, who was in birth
inferior to none of the citizens, entered into a fuller's shop in
Proconnesos and there died; and the fuller closed his workshop and went
away to report the matter to those who were related to the dead man. And
when the news had been spread abroad about the city that Aristeas was
dead, a man of Kyzicos who had come from the town of Artake entered into
controversy with those who said so, and declared that he had met him
going towards Kyzicos and had spoken with him: and while he was vehement
in dispute, those who were related to the dead man came to the fuller's
shop with the things proper in order to take up the corpse for burial;
and when the house was opened, Aristeas was not found there either dead
or alive. In the seventh year after this he appeared at Proconnesos
and composed those verses which are now called by the Hellenes the
Arimaspeia, and having composed them he disappeared the second time.

15. So much is told by these cities; and what follows I know happened
to the people of Metapontion in Italy 16 two hundred 17 and forty
years after the second disappearance of Aristeas, as I found by putting
together the evidence at Proconnesos and Metapontion. The people of
Metapontion say that Aristeas himself appeared in their land and bade
them set up an altar of Apollo and place by its side a statue bearing
the name of Aristeas of Proconnesos; for he told them that to their
land alone of all the Italiotes 18 Apollo had come, and he, who now was
Aristeas, was accompanying him, being then a raven when he accompanied
the god. Having said this he disappeared; and the Metapontines say that
they sent to Delphi and asked the god what the apparition of the man
meant: and the Pythian prophetess bade them obey the command of the
apparition, and told them that if they obeyed, it would be the better
for them. They therefore accepted this answer and performed the
commands; and there stands a statue now bearing the name of Aristeas
close by the side of the altar dedicated to Apollo, 19 and round it
stand laurel trees; and the altar is set up in the market-place. Let
this suffice which has been said about Aristeas.

16. Now of the land about which this account has been begun, no one
knows precisely what lies beyond it: 20 for I am not able to hear of any
one who alleges that he knows as an eye-witness; and even Aristeas,
the man of whom I was making mention just now, even he, I say, did not
allege, although he was composing verse, 21 that he went further than
the Issedonians; but that which is beyond them he spoke of by hearsay,
and reported that it was the Issedonians who said these things. So far
however as we were able to arrive at certainty by hearsay, carrying
inquiries as far as possible, all this shall be told.

17. Beginning with the trading station of the Borysthenites,—for of the
parts along the sea this is the central point of all Scythia,—beginning
with this, the first regions are occupied by the Callipidai, who are
Hellenic Scythians; and above these is another race, who are called
Alazonians. 22 These last and the Callipidai in all other respects have
the same customs as the Scythians, but they both sow corn and use it as
food, and also onions, leeks, lentils and millet. Above the Alazonians
dwell Scythians who till the ground, and these sow their corn not for
food but to sell.

18.Beyond them dwell the Neuroi; and beyond the Neuroi towards the North
Wind is a region without inhabitants, as far as we know. These races
are along the river Hypanis to the West of the Borysthenes; but after
crossing the Borysthenes, first from the sea-coast is Hylaia, and beyond
this as one goes up the river dwell agricultural Scythians, whom the
Hellenes who live upon the river Hypanis call Borysthenites, calling
themselves at the same time citizens of Olbia. 23 These agricultural
Scythians occupy the region which extends Eastwards for a distance of
three days' journey, 24 reaching to a river which is called Panticapes,
and Northwards for a distance of eleven days' sail up the Borysthenes.
Then immediately beyond these begins the desert 25 and extends for
a great distance; and on the other side of the desert dwell the
Androphagoi, 26 a race apart by themselves and having no connection with
the Scythians. Beyond them begins a region which is really desert and
has no race of men in it, as far as we know.

19. The region which lies to the East of these agricultural Scythians,
after one has crossed the river Panticapes, is occupied by nomad
Scythians, who neither sow anything nor plough the earth; and this whole
region is bare of trees except Hylaia. These nomads occupy a country
which extends to the river Gerros, a distance of fourteen 27 days'
journey Eastwards.

20. Then on the other side of the Gerros we have those parts which are
called the "Royal" lands and those Scythians who are the bravest and
most numerous and who esteem the other Scythians their slaves. These
reach Southwards to the Tauric land, and Eastwards to the trench which
those who were begotten of the blind slaves dug, and to the trading
station which is called Cremnoi 28 upon the Maiotian lake; and some
parts of their country reach to the river Tanaïs. Beyond the Royal
Scythians towards the North Wind dwell the Melanchlainoi, 29 of a
different race and not Scythian. The region beyond the Melanchlainoi is
marshy and not inhabited by any, so far as we know.

21. After one has crossed the river Tanaïs the country is no longer
Scythia, but the first of the divisions belongs to the Sauromatai,
who beginning at the corner of the Maiotian lake occupy land extending
towards the North Wind fifteen days' journey, and wholly bare of trees
both cultivated and wild. Above these, holding the next division of
land, dwell the Budinoi, who occupy a land wholly overgrown with forest
consisting of all kinds of trees.

22. Then beyond the Budinoi towards the North, first there is desert for
seven days' journey; and after the desert turning aside somewhat more
towards the East Wind we come to land occupied by the Thyssagetai, a
numerous people and of separate race from the others. These live by
hunting; and bordering upon them there are settled also in these same
regions men who are called Irycai, who also live by hunting, which they
practise in the following manner:—the hunter climbs up a tree and lies
in wait there for his game (now trees are abundant in all this country),
and each has a horse at hand, which has been taught to lie down upon its
belly in order that it may make itself low, and also a dog: and when he
sees the wild animal from the tree, he first shoots his arrow and then
mounts upon his horse and pursues it, and the dog seizes hold of it.
Above these in a direction towards the East dwell other Scythians, who
have revolted from the Royal Scythians and so have come to this region.

23. As far as the country of these Scythians the whole land which has
been described is level plain and has a deep soil; but after this point
it is stony and rugged. Then when one has passed through a great extent
of this rugged country, there dwell in the skirts of lofty mountains
men who are said to be all bald-headed from their birth, male and female
equally, and who have flat noses and large chins and speak a language of
their own, using the Scythian manner of dress, and living on the produce
of trees. The tree on the fruit of which they live is called the Pontic
tree, and it is about the size of a fig-tree: this bears a fruit the
size of a bean, containing a stone. When the fruit has ripened, they
strain it through cloths and there flows from it a thick black juice,
and this juice which flows from it is called as-chy. This they either
lick up or drink mixed with milk, and from its lees, that is the solid
part, they make cakes and use them for food; for they have not many
cattle, since the pastures there are by no means good. Each man has his
dwelling under a tree, in winter covering the tree all round with close
white felt-cloth, and in summer without it. These are injured by no men,
for they are said to be sacred, and they possess no weapon of war. These
are they also who decide the disputes rising among their neighbours; and
besides this, whatever fugitive takes refuge with them is injured by no
one: and they are called Argippaians. 30

24. Now as far as these bald-headed men there is abundantly clear
information about the land and about the nations on this side of them;
for not only do certain of the Scythians go to them, from whom it is not
difficult to get information, but also some of the Hellenes who are at
the trading-station of the Borysthenes and the other trading-places of
the Pontic coast: and those of the Scythians who go to them transact
their business through seven interpreters and in seven different
languages.

25. So far as these, I say, the land is known; but concerning the region
to the North of the bald-headed men no one can speak with certainty,
for lofty and impassable mountains divide it off, and no one passes over
them. However these bald-headed men say (though I do not believe it)
that the mountains are inhabited by men with goats' feet; and that after
one has passed beyond these, others are found who sleep through six
months of the year. This I do not admit at all as true. However, the
country to the East of the bald-headed men is known with certainty,
being inhabited by the Issedonians, but that which lies beyond both the
bald-headed men and the Issedonians towards the North Wind is unknown,
except so far as we know it from the accounts given by these nations
which have just been mentioned.

26. The Issedonians are said to have these customs:—when a man's father
is dead, all the relations bring cattle to the house, and then having
slain them and cut up the flesh, they cut up also the dead body of the
father of their entertainer, and mixing all the flesh together they set
forth a banquet. His skull however they strip of the flesh and clean it
out and then gild it over, and after that they deal with it as a sacred
thing 31 and perform for the dead man great sacrifices every year.
This each son does for his father, just as the Hellenes keep the day of
memorial for the dead. 32 In other respects however this race also is
said to live righteously, and their women have equal rights with the
men.

27. These then also are known; but as to the region beyond them, it
is the Issedonians who report that there are there one-eyed men and
gold-guarding griffins; and the Scythians report this having received it
from them, and from the Scythians we, that is the rest of mankind, have
got our belief; and we call them in Scythian language Arimaspians, for
the Scythians call the number one arima and the eye spu.

28. This whole land which has been described is so exceedingly severe in
climate, that for eight months of the year there is frost so hard as to
be intolerable; and during these if you pour out water you will not be
able to make mud, but only if you kindle a fire can you make it; and
the sea is frozen and the whole of the Kimmerian Bosphorus, so that the
Scythians who are settled within the trench make expeditions and drive
their waggons over into the country of the Sindians. Thus it continues
to be winter for eight months, and even for the remaining four it is
cold in those parts. This winter is distinguished in its character from
all the winters which come in other parts of the world; for in it there
is no rain to speak of at the usual season for rain, whereas in summer
it rains continually; and thunder does not come at the time when it
comes in other countries, but is very frequent, 33 in the summer; and if
thunder comes in winter, it is marvelled at as a prodigy: just so, if
an earthquake happens, whether in summer or in winter, it is accounted
a prodigy in Scythia. Horses are able to endure this winter, but neither
mules nor asses can endure it at all, whereas in other countries horses
if they stand in frost lose their limbs by mortification, while asses
and mules endure it.

29. I think also that it is for this reason that the hornless breed
of oxen in that country have no horns growing; and there is a verse of
Homer in the Odyssey 34 supporting my opinion, which runs this:—


    "Also the Libyan land, where the sheep very quickly grow hornèd,"

for it is rightly said that in hot regions the horns come quickly,
whereas in extreme cold the animals either have no horns growing at all,
or hardly any. 35

30. In that land then this takes place on account of the cold; but
(since my history proceeded from the first seeking occasions for
digression) 36 I feel wonder that in the whole land of Elis mules cannot
be bred, though that region is not cold, nor is there any other evident
cause. The Eleians themselves say that in consequence of some curse
mules are not begotten in their land; but when the time approaches for
the mares to conceive, they drive them out into the neighbouring
lands and there in the land of their neighbours they admit to them the
he-asses until the mares are pregnant, and then they drive them back.

31. As to the feathers of which the Scythians say that the air is full,
and that by reason of them they are not able either to see or to pass
through the further parts of the continent, the opinion which I have is
this:—in the parts beyond this land it snows continually, though less
in summer than in winter, as might be supposed. Now whomsoever has seen
close at hand snow falling thickly, knows what I mean without further
explanation, for the snow is like feathers: and on account of this
wintry weather, being such as I have said, the Northern parts of this
continent are uninhabitable. I think therefore that by the feathers the
Scythians and those who dwell near them mean symbolically the snow. This
then which has been said goes to the furthest extent of the accounts
given.

32. About a Hyperborean people the Scythians report nothing, nor do any
of those who dwell in this region, unless it be the Issedonians: but
in my opinion neither do these report anything; for if they did the
Scythians also would report it, as they do about the one-eyed people.
Hesiod however has spoken of Hyperboreans, and so also has Homer in the
poem of the "Epigonoi," at least if Homer was really the composer of
that Epic.

33. But much more about them is reported by the people of Delos than by
any others. For these say that sacred offerings bound up in wheat straw
are carried from the land of the Hyperboreans and come to the Scythians,
and then from the Scythians the neighbouring nations in succession
receive them and convey them Westwards, finally as far as the Adriatic:
thence they are sent forward towards the South, and the people of Dodona
receive them first of all the Hellenes, and from these they come down to
the Malian gulf and are passed over to Euboea, where city sends them on
to city till they come to Carystos. After this Andros is left out, for
the Carystians are those who bring them to Tenos, and the Tenians to
Delos. Thus they say that these sacred offerings come to Delos; but at
first, they say, the Hyperboreans sent two maidens bearing the sacred
offerings, whose names, say the Delians, were Hyperoche and Laodike, and
with them for their protection the Hyperboreans sent five men of their
nation to attend them, those namely who are now called Perphereës and
have great honours paid to them in Delos. Since however the Hyperboreans
found that those who were sent away did not return back, they were
troubled to think that it would always befall them to send out and not
to receive back; and so they bore the offerings to the borders of their
land bound up in wheat straw, and laid a charge upon their neighbours,
bidding them send these forward from themselves to another nation. These
things then, they say, come to Delos being thus sent forward; and I know
of my own knowledge that a thing is done which has resemblance to
these offerings, namely that the women of Thrace and Paionia, when they
sacrifice to Artemis "the Queen," do not make their offerings without
wheat straw.

34. These I know do as I have said; and for those maidens from the
Hyperboreans, who died in Delos, both the girls and the boys of the
Delians cut off their hair: the former before marriage cut off a lock
and having wound it round a spindle lay it upon the tomb (now the tomb
is on the left hand as one goes into the temple of Artemis, and over it
grows an olive-tree), and all the boys of the Delians wind some of their
hair about a green shoot of some tree, and they also place it upon the
tomb.

35. The maidens, I say, have this honour paid them by the dwellers in
Delos: and the same people say that Arge and Opis also, being maidens,
came to Delos, passing from the Hyperboreans by the same nations which
have been mentioned, even before Hyperoche and Laodike. These last, they
say, came bearing for Eileithuia the tribute which they had laid upon
themselves for the speedy birth, 37 but Arge and Opis came with the
divinities themselves, and other honours have been assigned to them by
the people of Delos: for the women, they say, collect for them, naming
them by their names in the hymn which Olen a man of Lykia composed in
their honour; and both the natives of the other islands and the
Ionians have learnt from them to sing hymns naming Opis and Arge and
collecting:—now this Olen came from Lukia and composed also the other
ancient hymns which are sung in Delos:—and moreover they say that when
the thighs of the victim are consumed upon the altar, the ashes of them
are used to cast upon the grave of Opis and Arge. Now their grave is
behind the temple of Artemis, turned towards the East, close to the
banqueting hall of the Keïeans.

36. Let this suffice which has been said of the Hyperboreans; for the
tale of Abaris, who is reported to have been a Hyperborean, I do not
tell, namely 3701 how he carried the arrow about all over the earth,
eating no food. If however there are any Hyperboreans, it follows that
there are also Hypernotians; and I laugh when I see that, though many
before this have drawn maps of the Earth, yet no one has set the matter
forth in an intelligent way; seeing that they draw Ocean flowing round
the Earth, which is circular exactly as if drawn with compasses, and
they make Asia equal in size to Europe. In a few words I shall declare
the size of each division and of what nature it is as regards outline.

37. The Persians inhabit Asia 38 extending to the Southern Sea, which is
called the Erythraian; and above these towards the North Wind dwell the
Medes, and above the Medes the Saspeirians, and above the Saspeirians
the Colchians, extending to the Northern Sea, into which the river
Phasis runs. These four nations inhabit from sea to sea.

38. From them Westwards two peninsulas 39 stretch out from Asia into the
sea, and these I will describe. The first peninsula on the one of its
sides, that is the Northern, stretches along beginning from the Phasis
and extending to the sea, going along the Pontus and the Hellespont as
far as Sigeion in the land of Troy; and on the Southern side the same
peninsula stretches from the Myriandrian gulf, which lies near Phenicia,
in the direction of the sea as far as the headland Triopion; and in this
peninsula dwell thirty races of men.

39. This then is one of the peninsulas, and the other beginning from the
land of the Persians stretches along to the Erythraian Sea, including
Persia and next after it Assyria, and Arabia after Assyria: and this
ends, or rather is commonly supposed to end, 40 at the Arabian gulf,
into which Dareios conducted a channel from the Nile. Now in the line
stretching to Phenicia from the land of the Persians the land is broad
and the space abundant, but after Phenicia this peninsula goes by the
shore of our Sea along Palestine, Syria, and Egypt, where it ends; and
in it there are three nations only.

40. These are the parts of Asia which tend towards the West from the
Persian land; but as to those which lie beyond the Persians and Medes
and Saspeirians and Colchians towards the East and the sunrising, on one
side the Erythraian Sea runs along by them, and on the North both the
Caspian Sea and the river Araxes, which flows towards the rising sun:
and Asia is inhabited as far as the Indian land; but from this onwards
towards the East it becomes desert, nor can any one say what manner of
land it is.

41. Such and so large is Asia: and Libya is included in the second
peninsula; for after Egypt Libya succeeds at once. Now about Egypt
this peninsula is narrow, for from our Sea to the Erythraian Sea is a
distance there of ten myriads of fathoms, 41 which would amount to
a thousand furlongs; but after this narrow part, the portion of the
peninsula which is called Libya is, as it chances, extremely broad.

42. I wonder then at those who have parted off and divided the world
into Libya, Asia, and Europe, since the difference between these is not
small; for in length Europe extends along by both, while in breadth
it is clear to me that it is beyond comparison larger; 42 for Libya
furnishes proofs about itself that it is surrounded by sea, except so
much of it as borders upon Asia; and this fact was shown by Necos king
of the Egyptians first of all those about whom we have knowledge. He
when he had ceased digging the channel 43 which goes through from the
Nile to the Arabian gulf, sent Phenicians with ships, bidding them sail
and come back through the Pillars of Heracles to the Northern Sea and so
to Egypt. The Phenicians therefore set forth from the Erythraian Sea and
sailed through the Southern Sea; and when autumn came, they would put
to shore and sow the land, wherever in Libya they might happen to be as
they sailed, and then they waited for the harvest: and having reaped
the corn they would sail on, so that after two years had elapsed, in the
third year they turned through the Pillars of Heracles and arrived again
in Egypt. And they reported a thing which I cannot believe, but another
man may, namely that in sailing round Libya they had the sun on their
right hand.

43. Thus was this country first known to be what it is, and after this
it is the Carthaginians who make report of it; for as to Sataspes the
son of Teaspis the Achaimenid, he did not sail round Libya, though he
was sent for this very purpose, but was struck with fear by the length
of the voyage and the desolate nature of the land, and so returned back
and did not accomplish the task which his mother laid upon him. For this
man had outraged a daughter of Zopyros the son of Megabyzos, a virgin;
and then when he was about to be impaled by order of king Xerxes for
this offence, the mother of Sataspes, who was a sister of Dareios,
entreated for his life, saying that she would herself lay upon him a
greater penalty than Xerxes; for he should be compelled (she said) to
sail round Libya, until in sailing round it he came to the Arabian gulf.
So then Xerxes having agreed upon these terms, Sataspes went to Egypt,
and obtaining a ship and sailors from the Egyptians, he sailed to the
Pillars of Heracles; and having sailed through them and turned the point
of Libya which is called the promontory of Soloeis, he sailed on towards
the South. Then after he had passed over much sea in many months, as
there was needed ever more and more voyaging, he turned about and sailed
back again to Egypt: and having come from thence into the presence of
king Xerxes, he reported saying that at the furthest point which he
reached he was sailing by dwarfish people, who used clothing made from
the palm-tree, and who, whenever they came to land with their ship, left
their towns and fled away to the mountains: and they, he said, did no
injury when they entered into the towns, but took food 4301 from them
only. And the cause, he said, why he had not completely sailed round
Libya was that the ship could not advance any further but stuck fast.
Xerxes however did not believe that he was speaking the truth, and since
he had not performed the appointed task, he impaled him, inflicting upon
him the penalty pronounced before. A eunuch belonging to this Sataspes
ran away to Samos as soon as he heard that his master was dead,
carrying with him large sums of money; and of this a man of Samos took
possession, whose name I know, but I purposely pass it over without
mention.

44. Of Asia the greater part was explored by Dareios, who desiring to
know of the river Indus, which is a second river producing crocodiles of
all the rivers in the world,—to know, I say, of this river where it runs
out into the sea, sent with ships, besides others whom he trusted to
speak the truth, Skylax also, a man of Caryanda. These starting from
the city of Caspatyros and the land of Pactyïke, sailed down the river
towards the East and the sunrising to the sea; and then sailing over the
sea Westwards they came in the thirtieth month to that place from whence
the king of the Egyptians had sent out the Phenicians of whom I spoke
before, to sail round Libya. After these had made their voyage round the
coast, Dareios both subdued the Indians and made use of this sea. Thus
Asia also, excepting the parts of it which are towards the rising sun,
has been found to be similar 44 to Libya.

45. As to Europe, however, it is clearly not known by any, either as
regards the parts which are towards the rising sun or those towards the
North, whether it be surrounded by sea: but in length it is known
to stretch along by both the other divisions. And I am not able to
understand for what reason it is that to the Earth, which is one, three
different names are given derived from women, and why there were set
as boundaries to divide it the river Nile of Egypt and the Phasis in
Colchis (or as some say the Maiotian river Tanaïs and the Kimmerian
ferry); nor can I learn who those persons were who made the boundaries,
or for what reason they gave the names. Libya indeed is said by most of
the Hellenes to have its name from Libya a woman of that country, and
Asia from the wife of Prometheus: but this last name is claimed by the
Lydians, who say that Asia has been called after Asias the son of Cotys
the son of Manes, and not from Asia the wife of Prometheus; and from
him too they say the Asian tribe in Sardis has its name. As to Europe
however, it is neither known by any man whether it is surrounded by sea,
nor does it appear whence it got this name or who he was who gave it,
unless we shall say that the land received its name from Europa the
Tyrian; and if so, it would appear that before this it was nameless like
the rest. She however evidently belongs to Asia and did not come to this
land which is now called by the Hellenes Europe, but only from Phenicia
to Crete, and from Crete to Lykia. Let this suffice now which has been
said about these matters; for we will adopt those which are commonly
accepted of the accounts.

46. Now the region of the Euxine upon which Dareios was preparing to
march has, apart from the Scythian race, the most ignorant nations
within it of all lands: for we can neither put forward any nation of
those who dwell within the region of Pontus as eminent in ability, nor
do we know of any man of learning 45 having arisen there, apart from the
Scythian nation and Anacharsis. By the Scythian race one thing which is
the most important of all human things has been found out more cleverly
than by any other men of whom we know; but in other respects I have no
great admiration for them: and that most important thing which they have
discovered is such that none can escape again who has come to attack
them, and if they do not desire to be found, it is not possible to catch
them: for they who have neither cities founded nor walls built, but all
carry their houses with them and are mounted archers, living not by the
plough but by cattle, and whose dwellings are upon cars, these assuredly
are invincible and impossible to approach.

47. This they have found out, seeing that their land is suitable to it
and at the same time the rivers are their allies: for first this land
is plain land and is grassy and well watered, and then there are rivers
flowing through it not much less in number than the channels in Egypt.
Of these as many as are noteworthy and also can be navigated from the
sea, I will name: there is Ister with five mouths, and after this Tyras,
Hypanis, Borysthenes, Panticapes, Kypakyris, Gerros and Tanaïs. These
flow as I shall now describe.

48. The Ister, which is the greatest of all the rivers which we know,
flows always with equal volume in summer and winter alike. It is the
first towards the West of all the Scythian rivers, and it has become the
greatest of all rivers because other rivers flow into it. And these
are they which make it great: 46—five in number are those 47 which flow
through the Scythian land, namely that which the Scythians call Porata
and the Hellenes Pyretos, and besides this, Tiarantos and Araros and
Naparis and Ordessos. The first-mentioned of these is a great river
lying towards the East, and there it joins waters with the Ister, the
second Tiarantos is more to the West and smaller, and the Araros and
Naparis and Ordessos flow into the Ister going between these two.

49. These are the native Scythian rivers which join to swell its stream,
while from the Agathyrsians flows the Maris and joins the Ister, and
from the summits of Haimos flow three other great rivers towards the
North Wind and fall into it, namely Atlas and Auras and Tibisis. Through
Thrace and the Thracian Crobyzians flow the rivers Athrys and Noes
and Artanes, running into the Ister; and from the Paionians and Mount
Rhodope the river Kios, 48 cutting through Haimos in the midst, runs
into it also. From the Illyrians the river Angros flows Northwards and
runs out into the Triballian plain and into the river Brongos, and the
Brongos flows into the Ister; thus the Ister receives both these, being
great rivers. From the region which is above the Ombricans, the river
Carpis and another river, the Alpis, flow also towards the North Wind
and run into it; for the Ister flows in fact through the whole of
Europe, beginning in the land of the Keltoi, who after the Kynesians
dwell furthest towards the sun-setting of all the peoples of Europe;
and thus flowing through all Europe it falls into the sea by the side of
Scythia.

50. So then it is because these which have been named and many others
join their waters together, that Ister becomes the greatest of rivers;
since if we compare the single streams, the Nile is superior in volume
of water; for into this no river or spring flows, to contribute to its
volume. And the Ister flows at an equal level always both in summer and
in winter for some such cause as this, as I suppose:—in winter it is
of the natural size, or becomes only a little larger than its nature,
seeing that this land receives very little rain in winter, but
constantly has snow; whereas in summer the snow which fell in the
winter, in quantity abundant, melts and runs from all parts into the
Ister. This snow of which I speak, running into the river helps to swell
its volume, and with it also many and violent showers of rain, for it
rains during the summer: and thus the waters which mingle with the Ister
are more copious in summer than they are in winter by about as much as
the water which the Sun draws to himself in summer exceeds that which he
draws in winter; and by the setting of these things against one another
there is produced a balance; so that the river is seen to be of equal
volume always.

51. One, I say, of the rivers which the Scythians have is the Ister; and
after it the Tyras, which starts from the North and begins its course
from a large lake which is the boundary between the land of the
Scythians and that of the Neuroi. At its mouth are settled those
Hellenes who are called Tyritai.

52. The third river is the Hypanis, which starts from Scythia and flows
from a great lake round which feed white wild horses; and this lake is
rightly called "Mother of Hypanis." From this then the river Hypanis
takes its rise and for a distance of five days' sail it flows shallow
and with sweet water still; 49 but from this point on towards the sea
for four days' sail it is very bitter, for there flows into it the water
of a bitter spring, which is so exceedingly bitter that, small as it is,
it changes the water of the Hypanis by mingling with it, though that
is a river to which few are equal in greatness. This spring is on
the border between the lands of the agricultural Scythians and of the
Alazonians, and the name of the spring and of the place from which it
flows is in Scythian Exampaios, and in the Hellenic tongue Hierai Hodoi.
50 Now the Tyras and the Hypanis approach one another in their windings
in the land of the Alazonians, but after this each turns off and widens
the space between them as they flow.

53. Fourth is the river Borysthenes, which is both the largest of these
after the Ister, and also in our opinion the most serviceable not only
of the Scythian rivers but also of all the rivers of the world besides,
excepting only the Nile of Egypt, for to this it is not possible to
compare any other river: of the rest however the Borysthenes is the most
serviceable, seeing that it provides both pastures which are the fairest
and the richest for cattle, and fish which are better by far and more
numerous than those of any other river, and also it is the sweetest
water to drink, and flows with clear stream, though others beside it are
turbid, and along its banks crops are produced better than elsewhere,
while in parts where it is not sown, grass grows deeper. Moreover at its
mouth salt forms of itself in abundance, and it produces also huge fish
without spines, which they call antacaioi, to be used for salting, and
many other things also worthy of wonder. Now as far as the region of the
Gerrians, 51 to which it is a voyage of forty 52 days, the Borysthenes
is known as flowing from the North Wind; but above this none can tell
through what nations it flows: it is certain however that it runs
through desert 53 to the land of the agricultural Scythians; for these
Scythians dwell along its banks for a distance of ten days' sail. Of
this river alone and of the Nile I cannot tell where the sources are,
nor, I think, can any of the Hellenes. When the Borysthenes comes near
the sea in its course, the Hypanis mingles with it, running out into the
same marsh; 5301 and the space between these two rivers, which is as it
were a beak of land, 54 is called the point of Hippoles, and in it is
placed a temple of the Mother, 55 and opposite the temple upon the river
Hypanis are settled the Borysthenites.

54. This is that which has to do with these rivers; and after these
there is a fifth river besides, called Panticapes. This also flows 56
both from the North and from a lake, and in the space between this river
and the Borysthenes dwell the agricultural Scythians: it runs out into
the region of Hylaia, and having passed by this it mingles with the
Borysthenes.

55. Sixth comes the river Hypakyris, which starts from a lake, and
flowing through the midst of the nomad Scythians runs out into the sea
by the city of Carkinitis, skirting on its right bank the region of
Hylaia and the so-called racecourse of Achilles.

56. Seventh is the Gerros, which parts off from the Borysthenes near
about that part of the country where the Borysthenes ceases to be
known,—it parts off, I say, in this region and has the same name which
this region itself has, namely Gerros; and as it flows to the sea it
borders the country of the nomad and that of the Royal Scythians, and
runs out into the Hypakyris.

57. The eighth is the river Tanaïs, which starts in its flow at first
from a large lake, and runs out into a still larger lake called Maiotis,
which is the boundary between the Royal Scythians and the Sauromatai.
Into this Tanaïs falls another river, whose name is Hyrgis.

58. So many are the rivers of note with which the Scythians are
provided: and for cattle the grass which comes up in the land of Scythia
is the most productive of bile of any grass which we know; and that this
is so you may judge when you open the bodies of the cattle.

59. Thus abundant supply have they of that which is most important;
and as for the rest their customs are as follows. The gods whom they
propitiate by worship are these only:—Hestia most of all, then Zeus and
the Earth, supposing that Earth is the wife of Zeus, and after these
Apollo, and Aphrodite Urania, and Heracles, and Ares. Of these all
the Scythians have the worship established, and the so-called Royal
Scythians sacrifice also to Poseidon. Now Hestia is called in Scythian
Tabiti, and Zeus, being most rightly named in my opinion, is called
Papaios, and Earth Api, 57 and Apollo Oitosyros, 58 and Aphrodite Urania
is called Argimpasa, 59 and Poseidon Thagimasidas. 60 It is not their
custom however to make images, altars or temples to any except Ares, but
to him it is their custom to make them.

60. They have all the same manner of sacrifice established for all their
religious rites equally, and it is thus performed:—the victim stands
with its fore-feet tied, and the sacrificing priest stands behind the
victim, and by pulling the end of the cord he throws the beast down; and
as the victim falls, he calls upon the god to whom he is sacrificing,
and then at once throws a noose round its neck, and putting a small
stick into it he turns it round and so strangles the animal, without
either lighting a fire or making any first offering from the victim or
pouring any libation over it: and when he has strangled it and flayed
off the skin, he proceeds to boil it.

61. Now as the land of Scythia is exceedingly ill wooded, this
contrivance has been invented for the boiling of the flesh:—having
flayed the victims, they strip the flesh off the bones and then put it
into caldrons, if they happen to have any, of native make, which
very much resemble Lesbian mixing-bowls except that they are much
larger,—into these they put the flesh and boil it by lighting under it
the bones of the victim: if however thy have not at hand the caldron,
they put all the flesh into the stomachs of the victims and adding water
they light the bones under them; and these blaze up beautifully, and the
stomachs easily hold the flesh when it has been stripped off the bones:
thus an ox is made to boil itself, and the other kinds of victims each
boil themselves also. Then when the flesh is boiled, the sacrificer
takes a first offering of the flesh and of the vital organs and casts
it in front of him. And they sacrifice various kinds of cattle, but
especially horses.

62. To the others of the gods they sacrifice thus and these kinds
of beasts, but to Ares as follows:—In each district of the several
governments 61 they have a temple of Ares set up in this way:—bundles
of brushwood are heaped up for about three furlongs 62 in length and
in breadth, but less in height; and on the top of this there is a level
square made, and three of the sides rise sheer but by the remaining one
side the pile may be ascended. Every year they pile on a hundred and
fifty waggon-loads of brushwood, for it is constantly settling down by
reason of the weather. 63 Upon this pile of which I speak each people
has an ancient iron sword 64 set up, and this is the sacred symbol 65 of
Ares. To this sword they bring yearly offerings of cattle and of horses;
and they have the following sacrifice in addition, beyond what they make
to the other gods, that is to say, of all the enemies whom they take
captive in war they sacrifice one man in every hundred, not in the same
manner as they sacrifice cattle, but in a different manner: for they
first pour wine over their heads, and after that they cut the throats of
the men, so that the blood runs into a bowl; and then they carry this up
to the top of the pile of brushwood and pour the blood over the sword.
This, I say, they carry up; and meanwhile below by the side of the
temple they are doing thus:—they cut off all the right arms of the
slaughtered men with the hands and throw them up into the air, and then
when they have finished offering the other victims, they go away; and
the arm lies wheresoever it has chanced to fall, and the corpse apart
from it.

63. Such are the sacrifices which are established among them; but of
swine these make no use, nor indeed are they wont to keep them at all in
their land.

