64. That which relates to war is thus ordered with them:—When a Scythian
has slain his first man, he drinks some of his blood: and of all those
whom he slays in the battle he bears the heads to the king; for if he
has brought a head he shares in the spoil which they have taken, but
otherwise not. And he takes off the skin of the head by cutting it round
about the ears and then taking hold of the scalp and shaking it off;
afterwards he scrapes off the flesh with the rib of an ox, and works the
skin about with his hands; and when he has thus tempered it, he keeps it
as a napkin to wipe the hands upon, and hangs it from the bridle of the
horse on which he himself rides, and takes pride in it; for whosoever
has the greatest number of skins to wipe the hands upon, he is judged to
be the bravest man. Many also make cloaks to wear of the skins stripped
off, sewing them together like shepherds' cloaks of skins; 66 and many
take the skin together with the finger-nails off the right hands of
their enemies when they are dead, and make them into covers for their
quivers: now human skin it seems is both thick and glossy in appearance,
more brilliantly white than any other skin. Many also take the skins
off the whole bodies of men and stretch them on pieces of wood and carry
them about on their horses.

65. Such are their established customs about these things; and to the
skulls themselves, not of all but of their greatest enemies, they do
thus:—the man saws off all below the eyebrows and clears out the inside;
and if he is a poor man he only stretches ox-hide round it and then
makes use of it; but if he be rich, besides stretching the ox-hide he
gilds it over within, and makes use of it as a drinking-cup. They do
this also if any of their own family have been at variance with them and
the man gets the better of his adversary in trial before the king; and
when strangers come to him whom he highly esteems, he sets these skulls
before them, and adds the comment that they being of his own family had
made war against him, and that he had got the better of them; and this
they hold to be a proof of manly virtue.

66. Once every year each ruler of a district mixes in his own district
a bowl of wine, from which those of the Scythians drink by whom enemies
have been slain; but those by whom this has not been done do not taste
of the wine, but sit apart dishonoured; and this is the greatest of
all disgraces among them: but those of them who have slain a very great
number of men, drink with two cups together at the same time.

67. Diviners there are many among the Scythians, and they divine with a
number of willow rods in the following manner:—they bring large bundles
of rods, and having laid them on the ground they unroll them, and
setting each rod by itself apart they prophesy; and while speaking thus,
they roll the rods together again, and after that they place them in
order a second time one by one. 67 This manner of divination they have
from their fathers: but the Enareës or "man-women" 68 say that Aphrodite
gave them the gift of divination, and they divine accordingly with
the bark of the linden-tree. Having divided the linden-bark into three
strips, the man twists them together in his fingers and untwists them
again, and as he does this he utters the oracle.

68. When the king of the Scythians is sick, he sends for three of the
diviners, namely those who are most in repute, who divine in the manner
which has been said: and these say for the most part something like
this, namely that so and so has sworn falsely by the hearth of the king,
and they name one of the citizens, whosoever it may happen to be: now it
is the prevailing custom of the Scythians to swear by the hearth of the
king at the times when they desire to swear the most solemn oath. He
then who they say has sworn falsely, is brought forthwith held fast on
both sides; and when he has come the diviners charge him with this, that
he is shown by their divination to have sworn falsely by the hearth of
the king, and that for this reason the king is suffering pain: and
he denies and says that he did not swear falsely, and complains
indignantly: and when he denies it, the king sends for other diviners
twice as many in number, and if these also by looking into their
divination pronounce him guilty of having sworn falsely, at once they
cut off the man's head, and the diviners who came first part his goods
among them by lot; but if the diviners who came in afterwards acquit
him, other diviners come in, and again others after them. If then the
greater number acquit the man, the sentence is that the first diviners
shall themselves be put to death.

69. They put them to death accordingly in the following manner:—first
they fill a waggon with brushwood and yoke oxen to it; then having bound
the feet of the diviners and tied their hands behind them and stopped
their mouths with gags, they fasten them down in the middle of the
brushwood, and having set fire to it they scare the oxen and let them
go: and often the oxen are burnt to death together with the diviners,
and often they escape after being scorched, when the pole to which they
are fastened has been burnt: and they burn the diviners in the manner
described for other causes also, calling them false prophets. Now when
the king puts any to death, he does not leave alive their sons either,
but he puts to death all the males, not doing any hurt to the females.

70. In the following manner the Scythians make oaths to whomsoever they
make them:—they pour wine into a great earthenware cup and mingle with
it blood of those who are taking the oath to one another, either making
a prick with an awl or cutting with a dagger a little way into their
body, and then they dip into the cup a sword and arrows and a battle-axe
and a javelin; and having done this, they invoke many curses on the
breaker of the oath, and afterwards they drink it off, both they who are
making the oath and the most honourable of their company.

71. The burial-place of the kings is in the land of the Gerrians, the
place up to which the Borysthenes is navigable. In this place, when
their king has died, they make a large square excavation in the earth;
and when they have made this ready, they take up the corpse (the body
being covered over with wax and the belly ripped up and cleansed, and
then sewn together again, after it has been filled with kyperos 69
cut up and spices and parsley-seed and anise), and they convey it in
a waggon to another nation. Then those who receive the corpse thus
conveyed to them do the same as the Royal Scythians, that is they
cut off a part of their ear and shave their hair round about and cut
themselves all over the arms and tear their forehead and nose and pass
arrows through their left hand. Thence they convey in the waggon the
corpse of the king to another of the nations over whom they rule; and
they to whom they came before accompany them: and when they have gone
round to all conveying the corpse, then they are in the land of the
Gerrians, who have their settlements furthest away of all the nations
over whom they rule, and they have reached the spot where the burial
place is. After that, having placed the corpse in the tomb upon a bed of
leaves, they stick spears along on this side and that of the corpse and
stretch pieces of wood over them, and then they cover the place in with
matting. Then they strangle and bury in the remaining space of the
tomb one of the king's mistresses, his cup-bearer, his cook, his
horse-keeper, his attendant, and his bearer of messages, and also
horses, and a first portion of all things else, and cups of gold; for
silver they do not use at all, nor yet bronze. 70 Having thus done they
all join together to pile up a great mound, vying with one another and
zealously endeavouring to make it as large as possible.

72. Afterwards, when the year comes round again, they do as
follows:—they take the most capable of the remaining servants,—and these
are native Scythians, for those serve him whom the king himself commands
to do so, and his servants are not bought for money,—of these attendants
then they strangle fifty and also fifty of the finest horses; and when
they have taken out their bowels and cleansed the belly, they fill it
with chaff and sew it together again. Then they set the half of a wheel
upon two stakes with the hollow side upwards, and the other half of the
wheel upon other two stakes, and in this manner they fix a number of
these; and after this they run thick stakes through the length of the
horses as far as the necks, and they mount them upon the wheels; and the
front pieces of wheel support the shoulders of the horses, while those
behind bear up their bellies, going by the side of the thighs; and both
front and hind legs hang in the air. On the horses they put bridles and
bits, and stretch the bridles tight in front of them and then tie them
up to pegs: and of the fifty young men who have been strangled they
mount each one upon his horse, having first 71 run a straight stake
through each body along by the spine up to the neck; and a part of this
stake projects below, which they fasten into a socket made in the other
stake that runs through the horse. Having set horsemen such as I have
described in a circle round the tomb, they then ride away.

73. Thus they bury their kings; but as for the other Scythians, when
they die their nearest relations carry them round laid in waggons to
their friends in succession; and of them each one when he receives the
body entertains those who accompany it, and before the corpse they serve
up of all things about the same quantity as before the others. Thus
private persons are carried about for forty days, and then they are
buried: and after burying them the Scythians cleanse themselves in the
following way:—they soap their heads and wash them well, and then, for
their body, they set up three stakes leaning towards one another and
about them they stretch woollen felt coverings, and when they have
closed them as much as possible they throw stones heated red-hot into a
basin placed in the middle of the stakes and the felt coverings.

74. Now they have hemp growing in their land, which is very like flax
except in thickness and in height, for in these respects the hemp is
much superior. This grows both of itself and with cultivation; and of
it the Thracians even make garments, which are very like those made of
flaxen thread, so that he who was not specially conversant with it would
not be able to decide whether the garments were of flax or of hemp; and
he who had not before seen stuff woven of hemp would suppose that the
garment was made of flax.

75. The Scythians then take the seed of this hemp and creep under the
felt coverings, and then they throw the seed upon the stones which have
been heated red-hot: and it burns like incense and produces a vapour so
thick that no vapour-bath in Hellas would surpass it: and the Scythians
being delighted with the vapour-bath howl like wolves. 72 This is to
them instead of washing, for in fact they do not wash their bodies at
all in water. Their women however pound with a rough stone the wood of
the cypress and cedar and frankincense tree, pouring in water with it,
and then with this pounded stuff, which is thick, they plaster over all
their body and also their face; and not only does a sweet smell attach
to them by reason of this, but also when they take off the plaster on
the next day, their skin is clean and shining.

76. This nation also 73 is very averse to adopting strange customs,
rejecting even those of other tribes among themselves, 74 but especially
those of the Hellenes, as the history of Anacharsis and also afterwards
of Skyles proved. 75 For as to Anacharsis first, when he was returning
to the abodes of the Scythians, after having visited many lands 76 and
displayed in them much wisdom, as he sailed through the Hellespont he
put in to Kyzicos: and since he found the people of Kyzicos celebrating
a festival very magnificently in honour of the Mother of the gods,
Anacharsis vowed to the Mother that if he should return safe and sound
to his own land, he would both sacrifice to her with the same rites as
he saw the men of Kyzicos do, and also hold a night festival. So when
he came to Scythia he went down into the region called Hylaia (this is
along by the side of the racecourse of Achilles and is quite full, as it
happens, of trees of all kinds),—into this, I say, Anacharsis went down,
and proceeded to perform all the ceremonies of the festival in honour of
the goddess, with a kettle-drum and with images hung about himself. And
one of the Scythians perceived him doing this and declared it to Saulios
the king; and the king came himself also, and when he saw Anacharsis
doing this, he shot him with an arrow and killed him. Accordingly at the
present time if one asks about Anacharsis, the Scythians say that they
do not know him, and for this reason, because he went out of his own
country to Hellas and adopted foreign customs. And as I heard from
Tymnes the steward 77 of Ariapeithes, he was the uncle on the father's
side of Idanthyrsos king of the Scythians, and the son of Gnuros, the
son of Lycos, the son of Spargapeithes. If then Anacharsis was of
this house, let him know that he died by the hand of his brother,
for Idanthyrsos was the son of Saulios, and Saulios was he who killed
Anacharsis.

77. However I have heard also another story, told by the Peloponnesians,
that Anacharsis was sent out by the king of the Scythians, and so made
himself a disciple of Hellas; and that when he returned back he said
to him that had sent him forth, that the Hellenes were all busied about
every kind of cleverness except the Lacedemonians; but these alone knew
how to exchange speech sensibly. This story however has been invented 78
without any ground by the Hellenes themselves; and however that may be,
the man was slain in the way that was related above.

78. This man then fared thus badly by reason of foreign customs and
communication with Hellenes; and very many years afterwards Skyles the
son of Ariapeithes suffered nearly the same fate as he. For Ariapeithes
the king of the Scythians with other sons had Skyles born to him: and
he was born of a woman who was of Istria, and certainly not a native of
Scythia; and this mother taught him the language and letters of Hellas.
Afterwards in course of time Ariapeithes was brought to his end by
treachery at the hands of Spargapeithes the king of the Agathyrsians,
and Skyles succeeded to the kingdom; and he took not only that but also
the wife of his father, whose name was Opoia: this Opoia was a native
Scythian and from her was born Oricos to Ariapeithes. Now when Skyles
was king of the Scythians, he was by no means satisfied with the
Scythian manner of life, but was much more inclined towards Hellenic
ways because of the training with which he had been brought up, and he
used to do somewhat as follows:—When he came with the Scythians in arms
to the city of the Borysthenites (now these Borysthenites say that they
are of Miletos),—when Skyles came to these, he would leave his band in
the suburbs of the city and go himself within the walls and close the
gates. After that he would lay aside his Scythian equipments and
take Hellenic garments, and wearing them he would go about in the
market-place with no guards or any other man accompanying him (and they
watched the gates meanwhile, that none of the Scythians might see him
wearing this dress): and while in other respects too he adopted Hellenic
manners of life, he used also to perform worship to the gods according
to the customs of the Hellenes. Then having stayed a month or more than
that, he would put on the Scythian dress and depart. This he did many
times, and he both built for himself a house in Borysthenes and also
took to it a woman of the place as his wife.

79. Since however it was fated that evil should happen to him, it
happened by an occasion of this kind:—he formed a desire to be initiated
in the rites of Bacchus-Dionysos, and as he was just about to receive 79
the initiation, there happened a very great portent. He had in the city
of the Borysthenites a house of great size and built with large expense,
of which also I made mention a little before this, and round it were
placed sphinxes and griffins of white stone: on this house Zeus 7901
caused a bolt to fall; and the house was altogether burnt down,
but Skyles none the less for this completed his initiation. Now the
Scythians make the rites of Bacchus a reproach against the Hellenes, for
they say that it is not fitting to invent a god like this, who impels
men to frenzy. So when Skyles had been initiated into the rites of
Bacchus, one of the Borysthenites went off 80 to the Scythians and said:
"Whereas ye laugh at us, O Scythians, because we perform the rite of
Bacchus and because the god seizes us, now this divinity has seized also
your king; and he is both joining in the rite of Bacchus and maddened
by the influence of the god. And if ye disbelieve me, follow and I
will show you." The chief men of the Scythians followed him, and the
Borysthenite led them secretly into the town and set them upon a
tower. So when Skyles passed by with the company of revellers, and the
Scythians saw him joining in the rite of Bacchus, they were exceedingly
grieved at it, and they went out and declared to the whole band that
which they had seen.

80. After this when Skyles was riding out again to his own abode, the
Scythians took his brother Octamasades for their leader, who was a son
of the daughter of Teres, and made insurrection against Skyles. He then
when he perceived that which was being done to his hurt and for what
reason it was being done, fled for refuge to Thrace; and Octamasades
being informed of this, proceeded to march upon Thrace. So when he had
arrived at the river Ister, the Thracians met him; and as they were
about to engage battle, Sitalkes sent a messenger to Octamasades and
said: "Why must we make trial of one another in fight? Thou art my
sister's son and thou hast in thy power my brother. Do thou give him
back to me, and I will deliver to thee thy brother Skyles: and let
us not either of us set our armies in peril, either thou or I." Thus
Sitalkes proposed to him by a herald; for there was with Octamasades
a brother of Sitalkes, who had gone into exile for fear of him. And
Octamasades agreed to this, and by giving up his own mother's brother to
Sitalkes he received his brother Skyles in exchange: and Sitalkes when
he received his brother led him away as a prisoner, but Octamasades
cut off the head of Skyles there upon the spot. Thus do the Scythians
carefully guard their own customary observances, and such are the
penalties which they inflict upon those who acquire foreign customs
besides their own.

81. How many the Scythians are I was not able to ascertain precisely,
but I heard various reports of the number: for reports say both that
they are very many in number and also that they are few, at least as
regards the true Scythians. 81 Thus far however they gave me evidence of
my own eyesight:—there is between the river Borysthenes and the Hypanis
a place called Exampaios, of which also I made mention somewhat before
this, saying that there was in it a spring of bitter water, from which
the water flows and makes the river Hypanis unfit to drink. In this
place there is set a bronze bowl, in size at least six times as large as
the mixing-bowl at the entrance of the Pontus, which Pausanias the son
of Cleombrotos dedicated: and for him who has never seen that, I will
make the matter clear by saying that the bowl in Scythia holds easily
six hundred amphors, 82 and the thickness of this Scythian bowl is six
fingers. This then the natives of the place told me had been made of
arrow-heads: for their king, they said, whose name was Ariantas, wishing
to know how many the Scythians were, ordered all the Scythians to bring
one arrow-head, each from his own arrow, and whosoever should not bring
one, he threatened with death. So a great multitude of arrow-heads was
brought, and he resolved to make of them a memorial and to leave it
behind him: from these then, they said, he made this bronze bowl and
dedicated it in this place Exampaios.

82. This is what I heard about the number of the Scythians. Now this
land has no marvellous things except that it has rivers which are by far
larger and more numerous than those of any other land. One thing however
shall be mentioned which it has to show, and which is worthy of wonder
even besides the rivers and the greatness of the plain, that is to say,
they point out a footprint of Heracles in the rock by the bank of the
river Tyras, which in shape is like the mark of a man's foot but in size
is two cubits long. This then is such as I have said; and I will go back
now to the history which I was about to tell at first.

83. While Dareios was preparing to go against the Scythians and was
sending messengers to appoint to some the furnishing of a land-army, to
others that of ships, and to others the bridging over of the Thracian
Bosphorus, Artabanos, the son of Hystaspes and brother of Dareios, urged
him by no means to make the march against the Scythians, telling him
how difficult the Scythians were to deal with. Since however he did not
persuade him, though he gave him good counsel, he ceased to urge; and
Dareios, when all his preparations had been made, began to march his
army forth from Susa.

84. Then one of the Persians, Oiobazos, made request to Dareios that as
he had three sons and all were serving in the expedition, one might be
left behind for him: and Dareios said that as he was a friend and made a
reasonable request, he would leave behind all the sons. So Oiobazos was
greatly rejoiced, supposing that his sons had been freed from service,
but Dareios commanded those who had the charge of such things to put to
death all the sons of Oiobazos.

85. These then were left, having been slain upon the spot where they
were: and Dareios meanwhile set forth from Susa and arrived at the
place on the Bosphorus where the bridge of ships had been made, in the
territory of Chalcedon; and there he embarked in a ship and sailed
to the so-called Kyanean rocks, which the Hellenes say formerly moved
backwards and forwards; and taking his seat at the temple 83 he gazed
upon the Pontus, which is a sight well worth seeing. Of all seas indeed
it is the most marvellous in its nature. The length of it is eleven
thousand one hundred furlongs, 84 and the breadth, where it is broadest,
three thousand three hundred: and of this great Sea the mouth is but
four furlongs broad, and the length of the mouth, that is of the neck of
water which is called Bosphorus, where, as I said, the bridge of ships
had been made, is not less than a hundred and twenty furlongs. This
Bosphorus extends to the Propontis; and the Propontis, being in breadth
five hundred furlongs and in length one thousand four hundred, has its
outlet into the Hellespont, which is but seven furlongs broad at the
narrowest place, though it is four hundred furlongs in length: and the
Hellespont runs out into that expanse of sea which is called the Egean.

86. These measurements I have made as follows:—a ship completes on an
average in a long day a distance of seventy thousand fathoms, and in
a night sixty thousand. Now we know that to the river Phasis from the
mouth of the Sea (for it is here that the Pontus is longest) is a voyage
of nine days and eight nights, which amounts to one hundred and eleven
myriads 85 of fathoms; and these fathoms are eleven thousand one hundred
furlongs. Then from the land of the Sindians to Themiskyra on the river
Thermodon (for here is the broadest part of the Pontus) it is a voyage
of three days and two nights, which amounts to thirty-three myriads 86
of fathoms or three thousand three hundred furlongs. This Pontus then
and also the Bosphorus and the Hellespont have been measured by me thus,
and their nature is such as has been said: and this Pontus also has a
lake which has its outlet into it, which lake is not much less in size
than the Pontus itself, and it is called Maiotis and "Mother of the
Pontus."

87. Dareios then having gazed upon the Pontus sailed back to the bridge,
of which Mandrocles a Samian had been chief constructor; and having
gazed upon the Bosphorus also, he set up two pillars 8601 by it of white
stone with characters cut upon them, on the one Assyrian and on the
other Hellenic, being the names of all the nations which he was leading
with him: and he was leading with him all over whom he was ruler. The
whole number of them without the naval force was reckoned to be seventy
myriads 87 including cavalry, and ships had been gathered together to
the number of six hundred. These pillars the Byzantians conveyed to
their city after the events of which I speak, and used them for the
altar of Artemis Orthosia, excepting one stone, which was left standing
by the side of the temple of Dionysos in Byzantion, covered over with
Assyrian characters. Now the place on the Bosphorus where Dareios made
his bridge is, as I conclude, 8701 midway between Byzantion and the
temple at the mouth of the Pontus.

88. After this Dareios being pleased with the floating bridge rewarded
the chief constructor of it, Mandrocles the Samian, with gifts tenfold;
88 and as an offering from these Mandrocles had a painting made of
figures to present the whole scene of the bridge over the Bosphorus and
king Dareios sitting in a prominent seat and his army crossing over;
this he caused to be painted and dedicated it as an offering in the
temple of Hera, with the following inscription:


 "Bosphorus having bridged over, the straits fish-abounding, to Hera
    Mandrocleës dedicates this, of his work to record;
  A crown on himself he set, and he brought to the Samians glory,
    And for Dareios performed everything after his mind."

89. This memorial was made of him who constructed the bridge: and
Dareios, after he had rewarded Mandrocles with gifts, passed over into
Europe, having first commanded the Ionians to sail into the Pontus as
far as the river Ister, and when they arrived at the Ister, there to
wait for him, making a bridge meanwhile over the river; for the chief of
his naval force were the Ionians, the Aiolians and the Hellespontians.
So the fleet sailed through between the Kyanean rocks and made straight
for the Ister; and then they sailed up the river a two days' voyage from
the sea and proceeded to make a bridge across the neck, as it were, of
the river, where the mouths of the Ister part off. Dareios meanwhile,
having crossed the Bosphorus on the floating bridge, was advancing
through Thrace, and when he came to the sources of the river Tearos he
encamped for three days.

90. Now the Tearos is said by those who dwell near it to be the best of
all rivers, both in other respects which tend to healing and especially
for curing diseases of the skin 89 both in men and in horses: and its
springs are thirty-eight in number, flowing all from the same rock, of
which some are cold and others warm. The way to them is of equal length
from the city of Heraion near Perinthos and from Apollonia upon the
Euxine Sea, that is to say two days' journey by each road. This Tearos
runs into the river Contadesdos and the Contadesdos into the Agrianes
and the Agrianes into the Hebros, which flows into the sea by the city
of Ainos.

91. Dareios then, having come to this river and having encamped there,
was pleased with the river and set up a pillar there also, with an
inscription as follows: "The head-springs of the river Tearos give the
best and fairest water of all rivers; and to them came leading an army
against the Scythians the best and fairest of all men, Dareios the son
of Hystaspes, of the Persians and of all the Continent king." These were
the words which were there written.

92. Dareios then set out from thence and came to another river whose
name is Artescos, which flows through the land of the Odrysians. Having
come to this river he did as follows:—he appointed a place for his
army and bade every man as he passed out by it place one stone in this
appointed place: and when the army had performed this, then he marched
away his army leaving behind great mounds of these stones.

93. But before he came to the Ister he conquered first the Getai, who
believe in immortality: for the Thracians who occupy Salmydessos and
are settled above the cities of Apollonian and Mesambria, called the
Kyrmianai 90 and the Nipsaioi, delivered themselves over to Dareios
without fighting; but the Getai, who are the bravest and the most
upright in their dealings of all the Thracians, having betaken
themselves to obstinacy were forthwith subdued.

94. And their belief in immortality is of this kind, that is to say,
they hold that they do not die, but that he who is killed goes to
Salmoxis, 91 a divinity, 92 whom some of them call Gebeleizis; and at
intervals of four years 93 they send one of themselves, whomsoever
the lot may select, as a messenger to Salmoxis, charging him with
such requests as they have to make on each occasion; and they send him
thus:—certain of them who are appointed for this have three javelins,
and others meanwhile take hold on both sides of him who is being sent to
Salmoxis, both by his hands and his feet, and first they swing him up,
then throw him into the air so as to fall upon the spear-points: and
if when he is pierced through he is killed, they think that the god is
favourable to them; but if he is not killed, they find fault with the
messenger himself, calling him a worthless man, and then having
found fault with him they send another: and they give him the charge
beforehand, while he is yet alive. These same Thracians also shoot
arrows up towards the sky when thunder and lightning come, and use
threats to the god, not believing that there exists any other god except
their own.

95. This Salmoxis I hear from the Hellenes who dwell about the
Hellespont and the Pontus, was a man, and he became a slave in Samos,
and was in fact a slave of Pythagoras the son of Mnesarchos. Then having
become free he gained great wealth, and afterwards returned to his
own land: and as the Thracians both live hardly and are rather
simple-minded, this Salmoxis, being acquainted with the Ionian way of
living and with manners more cultivated 94 than the Thracians were used
to see, since he had associated with Hellenes (and not only that but
with Pythagoras, not the least able philosopher 95 of the Hellenes),
prepared a banqueting-hall, 96 where he received and feasted the chief
men of the tribe and instructed them meanwhile that neither he himself
nor his guests nor their descendants in succession after them would die;
but that they would come to a place where they would live for ever and
have all things good. While he was doing that which has been mentioned
and was saying these things, he was making for himself meanwhile
a chamber under the ground; and when his chamber was finished, he
disappeared from among the Thracians and went down into the underground
chamber, where he continued to live for three years: and they grieved
for his loss and mourned for him as dead. Then in the fourth year he
appeared to the Thracians, and in this way the things which Salmoxis
said became credible to them.

96. Thus they say that he did; but as to this matter and the chamber
under ground, I neither disbelieve it nor do I very strongly believe,
but I think that this Salmoxis lived many years before Pythagoras.
However, whether there ever lived a man Salmoxis, or whether he is
simply a native deity of the Getai, let us bid farewell to him now.

97. These, I say, having such manners as I have said, were subdued by
the Persians and accompanied the rest of the army: and when Dareios and
with him the land-army arrived at the Ister, then after all had passed
over, Dareios commanded the Ionians to break up the floating bridge and
to accompany him by land, as well as the rest of the troops which were
in the ships: and when the Ionians were just about to break it up and to
do that which he commanded, Coës the son of Erxander, who was commander
of the Mytilenians, said thus to Dareios, having first inquired whether
he was disposed to listen to an opinion from one who desired to declare
it: "O king, seeing that thou art about to march upon a land where no
cultivated ground will be seen nor any inhabited town, do thou therefore
let this bridge remain where it is, leaving to guard it those same
men who constructed it. Then, if we find the Scythians and fare as we
desire, we have a way of return; and also even if we shall not be able
to find them, at least our way of return is secured: for that we should
be worsted by the Scythians in fight I never feared yet, but rather that
we might not be able to find them, and might suffer some disaster in
wandering about. Perhaps some one will say that in speaking thus I am
speaking for my own advantage, in order that I may remain behind; but in
truth I am bringing forward, O king, the opinion which I found best for
thee, and I myself will accompany thee and not be left behind." With
this opinion Dareios was very greatly pleased and made answer to him in
these words: "Friend from Lesbos, when I have returned safe to my house,
be sure that thou appear before me, in order that I may requite thee
with good deeds for good counsel."

98. Having thus said and having tied sixty knots in a thong, he called
the despots of the Ionians to speak with him and said as follows:
"Men of Ionia, know that I have given up the opinion which I formerly
declared with regard to the bridge; and do ye keep this thong and do
as I shall say:—so soon as ye shall have seen me go forward against the
Scythians, from that time begin, and untie a knot on each day: and if
within this time I am not here, and ye find that the days marked by the
knots have passed by, then sail away to your own lands. Till then, since
our resolve has thus been changed, guard the floating bridge, showing
all diligence to keep it safe and to guard it. And thus acting, ye will
do for me a very acceptable service." Thus said Dareios and hastened on
his march forwards.

99. Now in front of Scythia in the direction towards the sea 97 lies
Thrace; and where a bay is formed in this land, there begins Scythia,
into which the Ister flows out, the mouth of the river being turned
towards the South-East Wind. Beginning at the Ister then I am about to
describe the coast land of the true Scythia, with regard to measurement.
At once from the Ister begins this original land of Scythia, and it
lies towards the midday and the South Wind, extending as far as the city
called Carkinitis. After this the part which lies on the coast of the
same sea still, a country which is mountainous and runs out in the
direction of the Pontus, is occupied by the Tauric race, as far as the
peninsula which is called the "Rugged Chersonese"; and this extends to
the sea which lies towards the East Wind: for two sides of the Scythian
boundaries lie along by the sea, one by the sea on the South, and the
other by that on the East, just as it is with Attica: and in truth the
Tauroi occupy a part of Scythia which has much resemblance to Attica; it
is as if in Attica another race and not the Athenians occupied the hill
region 98 of Sunion, supposing it to project more at the point into
the sea, that region namely which is cut off by a line from Thoricos to
Anaphlystos. Such I say, if we may be allowed to compare small things
such as this with great, is the form of the Tauric land. 99 For him
however who has not sailed along this part of the coast of Attica I will
make it clear by another comparison:—it is as if in Iapygia another race
and not the Iapygians had cut off for themselves and were holding
that extremity of the land which is bounded by a line beginning at the
harbour of Brentesion and running to Taras. And in mentioning these two
similar cases I am suggesting many other things also to which the Tauric
land has resemblance.

100. After the Tauric land immediately come Scythians again, occupying
the parts above the Tauroi and the coasts of the Eastern sea, that is to
say the parts to the West of the Kimmerian Bosphorus and of the Maiotian
lake, as far as the river Tanaïs, which runs into the corner of this
lake. In the upper parts which tend inland Scythia is bounded (as we
know) 100 by the Agathyrsians first, beginning from the Ister, and
then by the Neuroi, afterwards by the Androphagoi, and lastly by the
Melanchlainoi.

101. Scythia then being looked upon as a four-sided figure with two of
its sides bordered by the sea, has its border lines equal to one another
in each direction, that which tends inland and that which runs along
by the sea: for from Ister to the Borysthenes is ten days' journey,
and from the Borysthenes to the Maiotian lake ten days' more; and
the distance inland to the Melanchlainoi, who are settled above the
Scythians, is a journey of twenty days. Now I have reckoned the day's
journey at two hundred furlongs: 101 and by this reckoning the cross
lines of Scythia 102 would be four thousand furlongs in length, and the
perpendiculars which tend inland would be the same number of furlongs.
Such is the size of this land.

102. The Scythians meanwhile having considered with themselves that they
were not able to repel the army of Dareios alone by a pitched battle,
proceeded to send messengers to those who dwelt near them: and already
the kings of these nations had come together and were taking counsel
with one another, since so great an army was marching towards them. Now
those who had come together were the kings of the Tauroi, Agathyrsians,
Neuroi, Androphagoi, Melanchlainoi, Gelonians, Budinoi and Sauromatai.

103. Of these the Tauroi have the following customs:—they sacrifice to
the "Maiden" both ship-wrecked persons and also those Hellenes whom they
can capture by putting out to sea against them; 103 and their manner
of sacrifice is this:—when they have made the first offering from the
victim they strike his head with a club: and some say that they push
the body down from the top of the cliff (for it is upon a cliff that
the temple is placed) and set the head up on a stake; but others, while
agreeing as to the heads, say nevertheless that the body is not pushed
down from the top of the cliff, but buried in the earth. This divinity
to whom they sacrifice, the Tauroi themselves say is Iphigeneia the
daughter of Agamemnon. Whatsoever enemies they have conquered they
treat in this fashion:—each man cuts off a head and bears it away to his
house; then he impales it on a long stake and sets it up above his house
raised to a great height, generally above the chimney; and they say that
these are suspended above as guards to preserve the whole house. This
people has its living by plunder and war.

104. The Agathyrsians are the most luxurious of men and wear gold
ornaments for the most part: also they have promiscuous intercourse with
their women, in order that they may be brethren to one another and being
all nearly related may not feel envy or malice one against another. In
their other customs they have come to resemble the Thracians.

105. The Neuroi practise the Scythian customs: and one generation before
the expedition of Dareios it so befell them that they were forced
to quit their land altogether by reason of serpents: for their land
produced serpents in vast numbers, and they fell upon them in still
larger numbers from the desert country above their borders; until at
last being hard pressed they left their own land and settled among the
Budinoi. These men it would seem are wizards; for it is said of them by
the Scythians and by the Hellenes who are settled in the Scythian land
that once in every year each of the Neuroi becomes a wolf for a few
days and then returns again to his original form. For my part I do not
believe them when they say this, but they say it nevertheless, and swear
it moreover.

106. The Androphagoi have the most savage manners of all human beings,
and they neither acknowledge any rule of right nor observe any customary
law. They are nomads and wear clothing like that of the Scythians, but
have a language of their own; and alone of all these nations they are
man-eaters.

107. The Melanchlainoi wear all of them black clothing, whence also they
have their name; and they practise the customs of the Scythians.

108. The Budinoi are a very great and numerous race, and are all very
blue-eyed and fair of skin: and in their land is built a city of wood,
the name of which is Gelonos, and each side of the wall is thirty
furlongs in length and lofty at the same time, all being of wood; and
the houses are of wood also and the temples; for there are in it temples
of Hellenic gods furnished after Hellenic fashion with sacred images and
altars and cells, 104 all of wood; and they keep festivals every
other year 105 to Dionysos and celebrate the rites of Bacchus: for the
Gelonians are originally Hellenes, and they removed 106 from the trading
stations on the coast and settled among the Budinoi; and they use partly
the Scythian language and partly the Hellenic. The Budinoi however
do not use the same language as the Gelonians, nor is their manner of
living the same:

109, for the Budinoi are natives of the soil and a nomad people, and
alone of the nations in these parts feed on fir-cones; 107 but the
Gelonians are tillers of the ground and feed on corn and have gardens,
and resemble them not at all either in appearance or in complexion of
skin. However by the Hellenes the Budinoi also are called Gelonians,
not being rightly so called. Their land is all thickly overgrown with
forests of all kinds of trees, and in the thickest forest there is a
large and deep lake, and round it marshy ground and reeds. In this
are caught otters and beavers and certainly other wild animals with
square-shaped faces. The fur of these is sewn as a fringe round their
coats of skin, and the testicles are made use of by them for curing
diseases of the womb.

110. About the Sauromatai the following tale is told:—When the Hellenes
had fought with the Amazons,—now the Amazons are called by the Scythians
Oiorpata, 108 which name means in the Hellenic tongue "slayers of men,"
for "man" they call oior, and pata means "to slay,"—then, as the
story goes, the Hellenes, having conquered them in the battle at the
Thermodon, were sailing away and conveying with them in three ships as
many Amazons as they were able to take prisoners. These in the open sea
set upon the men and cast them out of the ships; but they knew nothing
about ships, nor how to use rudders or sails or oars, and after they
had cast out the men they were driven about by wave and wind and came to
that part of the Maiotian lake where Cremnoi stands; now Cremnoi is in
the land of the free Scythians. 109 There the Amazons disembarked from
their ships and made their way into the country, and having met first
with a troop of horses feeding they seized them, and mounted upon these
they plundered the property of the Scythians.

111. The Scythians meanwhile were not able to understand the matter,
for they did not know either their speech or their dress or the race to
which they belonged, but were in wonder as to whence they had come and
thought that they were men, of an age corresponding to their appearance:
and finally they fought a battle against them, and after the battle
the Scythians got possession of the bodies of the dead, and thus
they discovered that they were women. They took counsel therefore and
resolved by no means to go on trying to kill them, but to send against
them the youngest men from among themselves, making conjecture of the
number so as to send just as many men as there were women. These were
told to encamp near them, and do whatsoever they should do; if however
the women should come after them, they were not to fight but to retire
before them, and when the women stopped, they were to approach near and
encamp. This plan was adopted by the Scythians because they desired to
have children born from them.

112. The young men accordingly were sent out and did that which had been
commanded them: and when the Amazons perceived that they had not come
to do them any harm, they let them alone; and the two camps approached
nearer to one another every day: and the young men, like the Amazons,
had nothing except their arms and their horses, and got their living, as
the Amazons did, by hunting and by taking booty.

113. Now the Amazons at midday used to scatter abroad either one by one
or by two together, dispersing to a distance from one another to ease
themselves; and the Scythians also having perceived this did the same
thing: and one of the Scythians came near to one of those Amazons who
were apart by themselves, and she did not repulse him but allowed him
to lie with her: and she could not speak to him, for they did not
understand one another's speech, but she made signs to him with her hand
to come on the following day to the same place and to bring another with
him, signifying to him that there should be two of them, and that she
would bring another with her. The young man therefore, when he returned,
reported this to the others; and on the next day he came himself to the
place and also brought another, and he found the Amazon awaiting him
with another in her company. Then hearing this the rest of the young men
also in their turn tamed for themselves the remainder of the Amazons;

114, and after this they joined their camps and lived together, each man
having for his wife her with whom he had had dealings at first; and the
men were not able to learn the speech of the women, but the women came
to comprehend that of the men. So when they understood one another,
the men spoke to the Amazons as follows: "We have parents and we have
possessions; now therefore let us no longer lead a life of this kind,
but let us go away to the main body of our people and dwell with them;
and we will have you for wives and no others." They however spoke thus
in reply: "We should not be able to live with your women, for we and
they have not the same customs. We shoot with bows and hurl javelins and
ride horses, but the works of women we never learnt; whereas your women
do none of these things which we said, but stay in the waggons and work
at the works of women, neither going out to the chase nor anywhither
else. We therefore should not be able to live in agreement with them:
but if ye desire to keep us for your wives and to be thought honest men,
go to your parents and obtain from them your share of the goods, and
then let us go and dwell by ourselves."

115. The young men agreed and did this; and when they had obtained the
share of the goods which belonged to them and had returned back to the
Amazons, the women spoke to them as follows: "We are possessed by fear
and trembling to think that we must dwell in this place, having not
only separated you from your fathers, but also done great damage to your
land. Since then ye think it right to have us as your wives, do this
together with us,—come and let us remove from this land and pass over
the river Tanaïs and there dwell."

116. The young men agreed to this also, and they crossed over the Tanaïs
and made their way towards the rising sun for three days' journey from
Tanaïs, and also towards the North Wind for three days' journey from
the Maiotian lake: and having arrived at the place where they are now
settled, they took up their abode there: and from thenceforward the
women of the Sauromatai practise their ancient way of living, going out
regularly on horseback to the chase both in company with the men and
apart from them, and going regularly to war, and wearing the same dress
as the men.

117. And the Sauromatai make use of the Scythian tongue, speaking it
barbarously however from the first, since the Amazons did not learn it
thoroughly well. As regards marriages their rule is this, that no maiden
is married until she has slain a man of their enemies; and some of them
even grow old and die before they are married, because they are not able
to fulfil the requirement of the law.

118. To the kings of these nations then, which have been mentioned
in order, the messengers of the Scythians came, finding them gathered
together, and spoke declaring to them how the Persian king, after having
subdued all things to himself in the other continent, had laid a bridge
over the neck of the Bosphorus and had crossed over to that continent,
and having crossed over and subdued the Thracians, was making a bridge
over the river Ister, desiring to bring under his power all these
regions also. "Do ye therefore," they said, "by no means stand aloof and
allow us to be destroyed, but let us become all of one mind and oppose
him who is coming against us. If ye shall not do so, we on our part
shall either be forced by necessity to leave our land, or we shall stay
in it and make a treaty with the invader; for what else can we do if ye
are not willing to help us? and for you after this 110 it will be in
no respect easier; for the Persian has come not at all less against you
than against us, nor will it content him to subdue us and abstain from
you. And of the truth of that which we say we will mention a strong
evidence: if the Persian had been making his expedition against us
alone, because he desired to take vengeance for the former servitude,
he ought to have abstained from all the rest and to have come at once to
invade our land, and he would thus have made it clear to all that he
was marching to fight against the Scythians and not against the rest.
In fact however, ever since he crossed over to this continent, he has
compelled all who came in his way to submit to him, and he holds under
him now not only the other Thracians but also the Getai, who are our
nearest neighbours."

119. When the Scythians proposed this, the kings who had come from the
various nations took counsel together, and their opinions were divided.
The kings of the Gelonians, of the Budinoi and of the Sauromatai agreed
together and accepted the proposal that they should help the Scythians,
but those of the Agathyrsians, Neuroi, Androphagoi, Melanchlainoi and
Tauroi returned answer to the Scythians as follows: "If ye had not been
the first to do wrong to the Persians and to begin war, then we should
have surely thought that ye were speaking justly in asking for those
things for which ye now ask, and we should have yielded to your request
and shared your fortunes. As it is however, ye on the one hand made
invasion without us into their land, and bare rule over the Persians for
so long a time as God permitted you; and they in their turn, since
the same God stirs them up, are repaying you with the like. As for us
however, neither at that time did we do any wrong to these men nor now
shall we attempt to do any wrong to them unprovoked: if however the
Persians shall come against our land also, and do wrong first to us, we
also shall refuse to submit 111: but until we shall see this, we shall
remain by ourselves, for we are of opinion that the Persians have come
not against us, but against those who were the authors of the wrong."

120. When the Scythians heard this answer reported, they planned not to
fight a pitched battle openly, since these did not join them as allies,
but to retire before the Persians and to drive away their cattle from
before them, choking up with earth the wells and the springs of water by
which they passed and destroying the grass from off the ground, having
parted themselves for this into two bodies; and they resolved that the
Sauromatai should be added to one of their divisions, namely that over
which Scopasis was king, and that these should move on, if the Persians
turned in that direction, straight towards the river Tanaïs, retreating
before him by the shore of the Maiotian lake; and when the Persian
marched back again, they should come after and pursue him. This was one
division of their kingdom, appointed to go by the way which has been
said; and the other two of the kingdoms, the large one over which
Idanthyrsos was king, and the third of which Taxakis was king, were to
join together in one, with the Gelonians and the Budinoi added to them,
and they also were to retire before the Persians one day's march in
front of them, going on out of their way and doing that which had been
planned. First they were to move on straight for the countries which had
refused to give their alliance, in order that they might involve these
also in the war, and though these had not voluntarily undertaken the war
with the Persians, they were to involve them in it nevertheless against
their will; and after that they were to return to their own land and
attack the enemy, if it should seem good to them in council so to do.

121. Having formed this plan the Scythians went to meet the army of
Dareios, sending off the best of their horsemen before them as scouts;
but all 112 the waggons in which their children and their women lived
they sent on, and with them all their cattle (leaving only so much as
was sufficient to supply them with food), and charged them that they
should proceed continually towards the North Wind. These, I say, were
being carried on before:

122, but when the scouts who went in front of the Scythians discovered
the Persians distant about three days' march from Ister, then the
Scythians having discovered them continued to pitch their camp one day's
march in front, destroying utterly that which grew from the ground: and
when the Persians saw that the horsemen of the Scythians had made their
appearance, they came after them following in their track, while the
Scythians continually moved on. After this, since they had directed
their march towards the first of the divisions, the Persians continued
to pursue towards the East and the river Tanaïs; and when the Scythians
crossed over the river Tanaïs, the Persians crossed over after them and
continued still to pursue, until they had passed quite through the land
of the Sauromatai and had come to that of the Budinoi.

123. Now so long as the Persians were passing through Scythia and the
land of the Sauromatai, they had nothing to destroy, seeing that the
land was bare, 113 but when they invaded the land of the Budinoi,
then they fell in with the wooden wall, which had been deserted by the
Budinoi and left wholly unoccupied, and this they destroyed by fire.
Having done so they continued to follow on further in the tracks of
the enemy, until they had passed through the whole of this land and had
arrived at the desert. This desert region is occupied by no men, and it
lies above the land of the Budinoi, extending for a seven days' journey;
and above this desert dwell the Thyssagetai, and four large rivers flow
from them through the land of the Maiotians and run into that which is
called the Maiotian lake, their names being as follows,—Lycos, Oaros,
Tanaïs, Syrgis. 114

