124. When therefore Dareios came to the desert region, he ceased from
his course and halted his army upon the river Oaros. Having so done he
began to build eight large fortifications at equal distances from one
another, that is to say about sixty furlongs, of which the ruins
still existed down to my time; and while he was occupied in this,
the Scythians whom he was pursuing came round by the upper parts and
returned back to Scythia. Accordingly, since these had altogether
disappeared and were no longer seen by the Persians at all, Dareios left
those fortifications half finished, and turning back himself began to
go towards the West, supposing that these were the whole body of the
Scythians and that they were flying towards the West.

125. And marching his army as quickly as possible, when he came to
Scythia he met with the two divisions of the Scythians together, and
having fallen in with these he continued to pursue them, while they
retired out of his way one day's journey in advance: and as Dareios did
not cease to come after them, the Scythians according to the plan which
they had made continued to retire before him towards the land of those
who had refused to give their alliance, and first towards that of the
Melanchlainoi; and when Scythians and Persians both together had invaded
and disturbed these, the Scythians led the way to the country of the
Androphagoi; and when these had also been disturbed, they proceeded to
the land of the Neuroi; and while these too were being disturbed, the
Scythians went on retiring before the enemy to the Agathyrsians. The
Agathyrsians however, seeing that their next neighbours also were flying
from the Scythians and had been disturbed, sent a herald before the
Scythians invaded their land and proclaimed to the Scythians not to set
foot upon their confines, warning them that if they should attempt
to invade the country, they would first have to fight with them. The
Agathyrsians then having given this warning came out in arms to their
borders, meaning to drive off those who were coming upon them; but
the Melanchlainoi and Androphagoi and Neuroi, when the Persians and
Scythians together invaded them, did not betake themselves to brave
defence but forgot their former threat 115 and fled in confusion ever
further towards the North to the desert region. The Scythians however,
when the Agathyrsians had warned them off, did not attempt any more to
come to these, but led the Persians from the country of the Neuroi back
to their own land.

126. Now as this went on for a long time and did not cease, Dareios sent
a horseman to Idanthyrsos king of the Scythians and said as follows:
"Thou most wondrous man, why dost thou fly for ever, when thou mightest
do of these two things one?—if thou thinkest thyself able to make
opposition to my power, stand thou still and cease from wandering
abroad, and fight; but if thou dost acknowledge thyself too weak, cease
then in that case also from thy course, and come to speech with thy
master, bringing to him gifts of earth and water."

127. To this the king of the Scythians Idanthyrsos made answer thus: "My
case, O Persian, stands thus:—Never yet did I fly because I was afraid,
either before this time from any other man, or now from thee; nor have
I done anything different now from that which I was wont to do also in
time of peace: and as to the cause why I do not fight with thee at once,
this also I will declare to thee. We have neither cities nor land sown
with crops, about which we should fear lest they should be captured
or laid waste, and so join battle more speedily with you; but if it
be necessary by all means to come to this speedily, know that we have
sepulchres in which our fathers are buried; therefore come now, find
out these and attempt to destroy them, and ye shall know then whether we
shall fight with you for the sepulchres or whether we shall not fight.
Before that however, unless the motion comes upon us, we shall not join
battle with thee. About fighting let so much as has been said suffice;
but as to masters, I acknowledge none over me but Zeus my ancestor and
Hestia the queen of the Scythians. To thee then in place of gifts of
earth and water I shall send such things as it is fitting that thou
shouldest receive; and in return for thy saying that thou art my master,
for that I say, woe betide thee." 116 This is the proverbial "saying of
the Scythians." 117

128. The herald then had departed to report this to Dareios; and the
kings of the Scythians, having heard mention of subjection to a master,
were filled with wrath. They sent accordingly the division which was
appointed to be joined with the Sauromatai, that division of which
Scopasis was in command, bidding them come to speech with the Ionians,
namely those who were guarding the bridge of the Ister, and meanwhile
they who were left behind resolved not to lead the Persians wandering
about any more, but to attack them constantly as they were getting
provisions. Therefore they observed the soldiers of Dareios as they got
provisions, and did that which they had determined: and the cavalry of
the Scythians always routed that of the enemy, but the Persian horsemen
as they fled fell back upon the men on foot, and these would come up to
their assistance; and meanwhile the Scythians when they had driven in
the cavalry turned back, fearing the men on foot. Also by night the
Scythians used to make similar attacks:

129, and the thing which, strange to say, most helped the Persians and
hindered the Scythians in their attacks upon the camp of Dareios, I will
mention, namely the voice of the asses and the appearance of the mules;
for Scythia produces neither ass nor mule, as I have declared before,
nor is there at all in the Scythian country either ass or mule on
account of the cold. The asses accordingly by riotously braying used to
throw into confusion the cavalry of the Scythians; and often, as they
were in the middle of riding against the Persians, when the horses heard
the voice of the asses they turned back in confusion and were possessed
with wonder, pricking up their ears, because they had never heard such a
voice nor seen the form of the creature before.

130. So far then the Persians had the advantage for a small part of the
war. 118 But the Scythians, whenever they saw that the Persians were
disquieted, then in order that they might remain a longer time in
Scythia and in remaining might suffer by being in want of everything,
would leave some of their own cattle behind with the herdsmen, while
they themselves rode out of the way to another place, and the Persians
would come upon the cattle and take them, and having taken them they
were elated at what they had done.

131. As this happened often, at length Dareios began to be in straits;
and the kings of the Scythians perceiving this sent a herald bearing
as gifts to Dareios a bird and a mouse and a frog and five arrows. The
Persians accordingly asked the bearer of the gifts as to the meaning
of the gifts which were offered; but he said that nothing more had been
commanded to him but to give them and get away as speedily as possible;
and he bade the Persians find out for themselves, if they had wisdom,
that which the gifts were meant to express.

132. Having heard this the Persians took counsel with one another; and
the opinion of Dareios was that the Scythians were giving to him both
themselves and also earth and water, making his conjecture by this,
namely that a mouse is produced in the earth and feeds on the same
produce of the earth as man, and a frog in the water, while a bird has
great resemblance to a horse; 119 and moreover that in giving the arrows
they were delivering up their own might in battle. This was the opinion
expressed by Dareios; but the opinion of Gobryas, one of the seven men
who killed the Magian, was at variance with it, for he conjectured that
the gifts expressed this: "Unless ye become birds and fly up into the
heaven, O Persians, or become mice and sink down under the earth, or
become frogs and leap into the lakes, ye shall not return back home, but
shall be smitten by these arrows."

133. The Persians then, I say, were making conjecture of the gifts:
and meanwhile the single division of the Scythians, that which had been
appointed at first to keep guard along the Maiotian lake and then to go
to the Ister and come to speech with the Ionians, when they arrived
at the bridge spoke as follows: "Ionians, we have come bringing you
freedom, if at least ye are willing to listen to us; for we are informed
that Dareios gave you command to guard the bridge for sixty days only,
and then, if he had not arrived within that time, to get you away to
your own land. Now therefore, if ye do as we say, ye will be without
blame from his part and without blame also from ours: stay the appointed
days and then after that get you away." They then, when the Ionians had
engaged themselves to do this, hastened back again by the quickest way:

134, and meanwhile, after the coming of the gifts to Dareios, the
Scythians who were left had arrayed themselves against the Persians with
both foot and horse, meaning to engage battle. Now when the Scythians
had been placed in battle-array, a hare darted through them into the
space between the two armies, and each company of them, as they saw the
hare, began to run after it. When the Scythians were thus thrown into
disorder and were raising loud cries, Dareios asked what was this
clamour arising from the enemy; and hearing that they were running after
the hare, he said to those men to whom he was wont to say things at
other times: "These men have very slight regard for us, and I perceive
now that Gobryas spoke rightly about the Scythian gifts. Seeing then
that now I myself too think that things are so, we have need of good
counsel, in order that our retreat homewards may be safely made." To
this replied Gobryas and said: "O king, even by report I was almost
assured of the difficulty of dealing with these men; and when I came I
learnt it still more thoroughly, since I saw that they were mocking us.
Now therefore my opinion is, that as soon as night comes on, we kindle
the camp-fires as we are wont to do at other times also, and deceive
with a false tale those of our men who are weakest to endure hardships,
and tie up all the asses and get us away, before either the Scythians
make for the Ister to destroy the bridge or something be resolved by the
Ionians which may be our ruin."

135. Thus Gobryas advised; and after this, when night came on, Dareios
acted on this opinion. Those of his men who were weakened by fatigue and
whose loss was of least account, these he left behind in the camp, and
the asses also tied up: and for the following reasons he left behind the
asses and the weaker men of his army,—the asses in order that they might
make a noise which should be heard, and the men really because of their
weakness, but on a pretence stated openly that he was about to attack
the Scythians with the effective part of the army, and that they
meanwhile were to be defenders of the camp. Having thus instructed those
who were left behind, and having kindled camp-fires, Dareios hastened
by the quickest way towards the Ister: and the asses, having no longer
about them the usual throng, 120 very much more for that reason caused
their voice to be heard; 121 so the Scythians, hearing the asses,
supposed surely that the Persians were remaining in their former place.

136. But when it was day, those who were left behind perceived that
they had been betrayed by Dareios, and they held out their hands in
submission to the Scythians, telling them what their case was; and the
Scythians, when they heard this, joined together as quickly as possible,
that is to say the two combined divisions of the Scythians and the
single division, and also the Sauromatai, 122 Budinoi, and Gelonians,
and began to pursue the Persians, making straight for the Ister: but as
the Persian army for the most part consisted of men on foot, and was
not acquainted with the roads (the roads not being marked with tracks),
while the Scythian army consisted of horsemen and was acquainted
with the shortest cuts along the way, they missed one another and the
Scythians arrived at the bridge much before the Persians. Then having
learnt that the Persians had not yet arrived, they said to the Ionians
who were in the ships: "Ionians, the days of your number are past, and
ye are not acting uprightly in that ye yet remain waiting: but as ye
stayed before from fear, so now break up the passage as quickly as ye
may, and depart free and unhurt, 123 feeling thankfulness both to the
gods and to the Scythians: and him who was formerly your master we
will so convince, that he shall never again march with an army upon any
nation."

137. Upon this the Ionians took counsel together; and Miltiades the
Athenian on the one hand, who was commander and despot of the men of
the Chersonese in Hellespont, was of opinion that they should follow the
advice of the Scythians and set Ionia free: but Histiaios the Milesian
was of the opposite opinion to this; for he said that at the present
time it was by means of Dareios that each one of them was ruling as
despot over a city; and if the power of Dareios should be destroyed,
neither he himself would be able to bear rule over the Milesians, nor
would any other of them be able to bear rule over any other city; for
each of the cities would choose to have popular rather than despotic
rule. When Histiaios declared his opinion thus, forthwith all turned to
this opinion, whereas at the first they were adopting that of Miltiades.

138. Now these were they who gave the vote between the two opinions, and
were men of consequence in the eyes of the king, 124—first the despots
of the Hellespontians, Daphnis of Abydos, Hippoclos of Lampsacos,
Herophantos of Parion, Metrodoros of Proconnesos, Aristagoras of
Kyzicos, and Ariston of Byzantion, these were those from the Hellespont;
and from Ionia, Strattis of Chios, Aiakes of Samos, Laodamas of Phocaia,
and Histiaios of Miletos, whose opinion had been proposed in opposition
to that of Miltiades; and of the Aiolians the only man of consequence
there present was Aristagoras of Kyme.

139. When these adopted the opinion of Histiaios, they resolved to add
to it deeds and words as follows, namely to break up that part of the
bridge which was on the side towards the Scythians, to break it up, I
say, for a distance equal to the range of an arrow, both in order that
they might be thought to be doing something, though in fact they were
doing nothing, and for fear that the Scythians might make an attempt
using force and desiring to cross the Ister by the bridge: and in
breaking up that part of the bridge which was towards Scythia they
resolved to say that they would do all that which the Scythians desired.
This they added to the opinion proposed, and then Histiaios coming forth
from among them made answer to the Scythians as follows: "Scythians, ye
are come bringing good news, and it is a timely haste that ye make to
bring it; and ye on your part give us good guidance, while we on ours
render to you suitable service. For, as ye see, we are breaking up the
passage, and we shall show all zeal in our desire to be free: and while
we are breaking up the bridge, it is fitting that ye should be seeking
for those of whom ye speak, and when ye have found them, that ye should
take vengeance on them on behalf of us as well as of yourselves in such
manner as they deserve."

140. The Scythians then, believing for the second time that the Ionians
were speaking the truth, turned back to make search for the Persians,
but they missed altogether their line of march through the land. Of this
the Scythians themselves were the cause, since they had destroyed the
pastures for horses in that region and had choked up with earth the
springs of water; for if they had not done this, it would have been
possible for them easily, if they desired it, to discover the Persians:
but as it was, by those things wherein they thought they had taken their
measures best, they failed of success. The Scythians then on their part
were passing through those regions of their own land where there was
grass for the horses and springs of water, and were seeking for the
enemy there, thinking that they too were taking a course in their
retreat through such country as this; while the Persians in fact marched
keeping carefully to the track which they had made before, and so they
found the passage of the river, though with difficulty: 125 and as they
arrived by night and found the bridge broken up, they were brought to
the extreme of fear, lest the Ionians should have deserted them.

141. Now there was with Dareios an Egyptian who had a voice louder than
that of any other man on earth, and this man Dareios ordered to take his
stand upon the bank of the Ister and to call Histiaios of Miletos. He
accordingly proceeded to do so; and Histiaios, hearing the first hail,
produced all the ships to carry the army over and also put together the
bridge.

142. Thus the Persians escaped, and the Scythians in their search missed
the Persians the second time also: and their judgment of the Ionians is
that on the one hand, if they be regarded as free men, they are the most
worthless and cowardly of all men, but on the other hand, if regarded
as slaves, they are the most attached to their master and the least
disposed to run away of all slaves. This is the reproach which is cast
against the Ionians by the Scythians.

143. Dareios then marching through Thrace arrived at Sestos in the
Chersonese; and from that place, he passed over himself in his ships to
Asia, but to command his army in Europe he left Megabazos a Persian, to
whom Dareios once gave honour by uttering in the land of Persia 126 this
saying:—Dareios was beginning to eat pomegranates, and at once when he
opened the first of them, Artabanos his brother asked him of what he
would desire to have as many as there were seeds in the pomegranate: and
Dareios said that he would desire to have men like Megabazos as many as
that in number, rather than to have Hellas subject to him. In Persia, I
say, he honoured him by saying these words, and at this time he left him
in command with eight myriads 127 of his army.

144. This Megabazos uttered one saying whereby he left of himself an
imperishable memory with the peoples of Hellespont: for being once at
Byzantion he heard that the men of Calchedon had settled in that region
seventeen years before the Byzantians, and having heard it he said that
those of Calchedon at that time chanced to be blind; for assuredly they
would not have chosen the worse place, when they might have settled in
that which was better, if they had not been blind. This Megabazos it was
who was left in command at that time in the land of the Hellespontians,
and he proceeded to subdue all who did not take the side of the Medes.

145. He then was doing thus; and at this very same time a great
expedition was being made also against Libya, on an occasion which
I shall relate when I have first related this which follows.—The
children's children of those who voyaged in the Argo, having been driven
forth by those Pelasgians who carried away at Brauron the women of the
Athenians,—having been driven forth I say by these from Lemnos, had
departed and sailed to Lacedemon, and sitting down on Mount Taÿgetos
they kindled a fire. The Lacedemonians seeing this sent a messenger to
inquire who they were and from whence; and they answered the question
of the messenger saying that they were Minyai and children of heroes who
sailed in the Argo, for 128 these, they said, had put in to Lemnos and
propagated the race of which they sprang. The Lacedemonians having heard
the story of the descent of the Minyai, sent a second time and asked for
what purpose they had come into the country and were causing a fire to
blaze. They said that they had been cast out by the Pelasgians, and were
come now to the land of their fathers, 129 for most just it was that
this should so be done; and they said that their request was to be
permitted to dwell with these, having a share of civil rights and a
portion allotted to them of the land. And the Lacedemonians were content
to receive the Minyai upon the terms which they themselves desired,
being most of all impelled to do this by the fact that the sons of
Tyndareus were voyagers in the Argo. So having received the Minyai they
gave them a share of land and distributed them in the tribes; and they
forthwith made marriages, and gave in marriage to others the women whom
they brought with them from Lemnos.

146. However, when no very long time had passed, the Minyai forthwith
broke out into insolence, asking for a share of the royal power and also
doing other impious things: therefore the Lacedemonians resolved to put
them to death; and having seized them they cast them into a prison.
Now the Lacedemonians put to death by night all those whom they put to
death, but no man by day. When therefore they were just about to kill
them, the wives of the Minyai, being native Spartans and daughters
of the first citizens of Sparta, entreated to be allowed to enter the
prison and come to speech every one with her own husband: and they let
them pass in, not supposing that any craft would be practised by them.
They however, when they had entered, delivered to their husbands all the
garments which they were wearing, and themselves received those of their
husbands: thus the Minyai having put on the women's clothes went forth
out of prison as women, and having escaped in this manner they went
again to Taÿgetos and sat down there.

147. Now at this very same time Theras the son of Autesion, the son of
Tisamenos, the son of Thersander, the son of Polyneikes, was preparing
to set forth from Lacedemon to found a settlement. This Theras, who was
of the race of Cadmos, was mother's brother to the sons of Aristodemos,
Eurysthenes and Procles; and while these sons were yet children, Theras
as their guardian held the royal power in Sparta. When however his
nephews were grown and had taken the power into their hands, then
Theras, being grieved that he should be ruled by others after he had
tasted of rule himself, said that he would not remain in Lacedemon, but
would sail away to his kinsmen. Now there were in the island which
is now called Thera, but formerly was called Callista, descendants
of Membliaros the son of Poikiles, a Phenician: for Cadmos the son of
Agenor in his search for Europa put in to land at the island which is
now called Thera; and, whether it was that the country pleased him when
he had put to land, or whether he chose to do so for any other reason,
he left in this island, besides other Phenicians, Membliaros also, of
his own kinsmen. These occupied the island called Callista for eight
generations of men, before Theras came from Lacedemon.

148. To these then, I say, Theras was preparing to set forth, taking
with him people from the tribes, and intending to settle together with
those who have been mentioned, not with any design to drive them out,
but on the contrary claiming them very strongly as kinfolk. And when
the Minyai after having escaped from the prison went and sat down on
Taÿgetos, Theras entreated of the Lacedemonians, as they were proposing
to put them to death, that no slaughter might take place, and at the
same time he engaged himself to take them forth out of the land. The
Lacedemonians having agreed to this proposal, he sailed away with three
thirty-oared galleys to the descendants of Membliaros, not taking with
him by any means all the Minyai, but a few only; for the greater number
of them turned towards the land of the Paroreatai and Caucones, and
having driven these out of their country, they parted themselves
into six divisions and founded in their territory the following
towns,—Lepreon, Makistos, Phrixai, Pyrgos, Epion, Nudion; of these the
Eleians sacked the greater number within my own lifetime. The island
meanwhile got its name of Thera after Theras 130 who led the settlement.

149. And since his son said that he would not sail with him, therefore
he said that he would leave him behind as a sheep among wolves; and in
accordance with that saying this young man got the name of Oiolycos, 131
and it chanced that this name prevailed over his former name: then from
Oiolycos was begotten Aigeus, after whom are called the Aigeidai, a
powerful clan 132 in Sparta: and the men of this tribe, since their
children did not live to grow up, established by the suggestion of an
oracle a temple to the Avenging Deities 133 of Laïos and OEdipus, and
after this the same thing was continued 134 in Thera by the descendants
of these men.

150. Up to this point of the story the Lacedemonians agree in their
report with the men of Thera; but in what is to come it is those of
Thera alone who report that it happened as follows. Grinnos 135 the son
of Aisanios, a descendant of the Theras who has been mentioned, and
king of the island of Thera, came to Delphi bringing the offering of a
hecatomb from his State; and there were accompanying him, besides others
of the citizens, also Battos the son of Polymnestos, who was by descent
of the family of Euphemos 136 of the race of the Minyai. Now when
Grinnos the king of the Theraians was consulting the Oracle about other
matters, the Pythian prophetess gave answer bidding him found a city in
Libya; and he made reply saying: "Lord, 137 I am by this time somewhat
old and heavy to stir, but do thou bid some one of these younger ones do
this." As he thus said he pointed towards Battos. So far at that time:
but afterwards when he had come away they were in difficulty about the
saying of the Oracle, neither having any knowledge of Libya, in what
part of the earth it was, nor venturing to send a colony to the unknown.

151. Then after this for seven years there was no rain in Thera, and
in these years all the trees in their island were withered up excepting
one: and when the Theraians consulted the Oracle, the Pythian prophetess
alleged this matter of colonising Libya to be the cause. As then they
had no remedy for their evil, they sent messengers to Crete, to find out
whether any of the Cretans or of the sojourners in Crete had ever come
to Libya. These as they wandered round about the country came also
the city of Itanos, and there they met with a fisher for purple named
Corobios, who said that he had been carried away by winds and had come
to Libya, and in Libya to the island of Platea. This man they persuaded
by payment of money and took him to Thera, and from Thera there set sail
men to explore, at first not many in number; and Corobios having guided
them to this same island of Platea, they left Corobios there, leaving
behind with him provisions for a certain number of months, and sailed
themselves as quickly as possible to make report about the island to the
men of Thera.

152. Since however these stayed away longer than the time appointed,
Corobios found himself destitute; and after this a ship of Samos, of
which the master was Colaios, while sailing to Egypt was carried out of
its course and came to this island of Platea; and the Samians hearing
from Corobios the whole story left him provisions for a year.
They themselves then put out to sea from the island and sailed on,
endeavouring to reach Egypt but carried away continually by the East
Wind; and as the wind did not cease to blow, they passed through the
Pillars of Heracles and came to Tartessos, guided by divine providence.
Now this trading-place was at that time untouched by any, so that when
these returned back home they made profit from their cargo greater than
any other Hellenes of whom we have certain knowledge, with the exception
at least of Sostratos the son of Laodamas the Eginetan, for with him it
is not possible for any other man to contend. And the Samians set apart
six talents, the tenth part of their gains, and had a bronze vessel made
like an Argolic mixing-bowl with round it heads of griffins projecting
in a row; and this they dedicated as an offering in the temple of Hera,
setting as supports under it three colossal statues of bronze seven
cubits in height, resting upon their knees. By reason first of this
deed great friendship was formed by those of Kyrene and Thera with the
Samians.

153. The Theraians meanwhile, when they arrived at Thera after having
left Corobios in the island, reported that they had colonised an island
on the coast of Libya: and the men of Thera resolved to send one of
every two brothers selected by lot and men besides taken from all the
regions of the island, which are seven in number; and further that
Battos should be both their leader and their king. Thus then they sent
forth two fifty-oared galleys to Platea.

154. This is the report of the Theraians; and for the remainder of the
account from this point onwards the Theraians are in agreement with the
men of Kyrene: from this point onwards, I say, since in what concerns
Battos the Kyrenians tell by no means the same tale as those of Thera;
for their account is this:—There is in Crete a city called Oäxos 138
in which one Etearchos became king, who when he had a daughter,
whose mother was dead, named Phronime, took to wife another woman
notwithstanding. She having come in afterwards, thought fit to be a
stepmother to Phronime in deed as well as in name, giving her evil
treatment and devising everything possible to her hurt; and at last she
brings against her a charge of lewdness and persuades her husband that
the truth is so. He then being convinced by his wife, devised an unholy
deed against the daughter: for there was in Oäxos one Themison, a
merchant of Thera, whom Etearchos took to himself as a guest-friend
and caused him to swear that he would surely serve him in whatsoever he
should require: and when he had caused him to swear this, he brought and
delivered to him his daughter and bade him take her away and cast
her into the sea. Themison then was very greatly vexed at the
deceit practised in the matter of the oath, and he dissolved his
guest-friendship and did as follows, that is to say, he received the
girl and sailed away, and when he got out into the open sea, to free
himself from blame as regards the oath which Etearchos had made him
swear, he tied her on each side with ropes and let her down into the
sea, and then drew her up and came to Thera.

155. After that, Polymnestos, a man of repute among the Theraians,
received Phronime from him and kept her as his concubine; and in course
of time there was born to him from her a son with an impediment in his
voice and lisping, to whom, as both Theraians and Kyrenians say, was
given the name Battos, but I think that some other name was then given,
139 and he was named Battos instead of this after he came to Libya,
taking for himself this surname from the oracle which was given to him
at Delphi and from the rank which he had obtained; for the Libyans call
a king battos: and for this reason, I think, the Pythian prophetess in
her prophesying called him so, using the Libyan tongue, because she knew
that he would be a king in Libya. For when he had grown to be a man,
he came to Delphi to inquire about his voice; and when he asked, the
prophetess thus answered him:


 "For a voice thou camest, O Battos, but thee lord Phoebus Apollo
  Sendeth as settler forth to the Libyan land sheep-abounding,"

just as if she should say using the Hellenic tongue, "For a voice thou
camest, O king." He thus made answer: "Lord, I came to thee to inquire
concerning my voice, but thou answerest me other things which are not
possible, bidding me go as a settler to Libya; but with what power,
or with what force of men should I go?" Thus saying he did not at all
persuade her to give him any other reply; and as she was prophesying to
him again the same things as before, Battos departed while she was yet
speaking, 140 and went away to Thera.

156. After this there came evil fortune both to himself and to the other
men of Thera; 141 and the Theraians, not understanding that which
befell them, sent to Delphi to inquire about the evils which they were
suffering: and the Pythian prophetess gave them reply that if they
joined with Battos in founding Kyrene in Libya, they would fare the
better. After this the Theraians sent Battos with two fifty-oared
galleys; and these sailed to Libya, and then came away back to Thera,
for they did not know what else to do: and the Theraians pelted them
with missiles when they endeavoured to land, and would not allow them
to put to shore, but bade them sail back again. They accordingly being
compelled sailed away back, and they made a settlement in an island
lying near the coast of Libya, called, as was said before, Platea.
This island is said to be of the same size as the now existing city of
Kyrene.

157. In this they continued to dwell two years; but as they had no
prosperity, they left one of their number behind and all the rest sailed
away to Delphi, and having come to the Oracle they consulted it, saying
that they were dwelling in Libya and that, though they were dwelling
there, they fared none the better: and the Pythian prophetess made
answer to them thus:


 "Better than I if thou knowest the Libyan land sheep-abounding,
  Not having been there than I who have been, at thy wisdom I wonder."

Having heard this Battos and his companions sailed away back again; for
in fact the god would not let them off from the task of settlement till
they had come to Libya itself: and having arrived at the island and
taken up him whom they had left, they made a settlement in Libya itself
at a spot opposite the island, called Aziris, which is enclosed by most
fair woods on both sides and a river flows by it on one side.

158. In this spot they dwelt for six years; and in the seventh year the
Libyans persuaded them to leave it, making request and saying that they
would conduct them to a better region. So the Libyans led them from that
place making them start towards evening; and in order that the Hellenes
might not see the fairest of all the regions as they passed through it,
they led them past it by night, having calculated the time of daylight:
and this region is called Irasa. Then having conducted them to the
so-called spring of Apollo, they said, "Hellenes, here is a fit place
for you to dwell, for here the heaven is pierced with holes."

159. Now during the lifetime of the first settler Battos, who reigned
forty years, and of his son Arkesilaos, who reigned sixteen years, the
Kyrenians continued to dwell there with the same number as 142 when they
first set forth to the colony; but in the time of the third king, called
Battos the Prosperous, the Pythian prophetess gave an oracle wherein
she urged the Hellenes in general to sail and join with the Kyrenians
in colonising Libya. For the Kyrenians invited them, giving promise of a
division of land; and the oracle which she uttered was as follows:


 "Who to the land much desirèd, to Libya, afterwards cometh,
  After the land be divided, 143 I say he shall some day repent it."

Then great numbers were gathered at Kyrene, and the Libyans who dwelt
round had much land cut off from their possessions; therefore they with
their king whose name was Adicran, as they were not only deprived of
their country but also were dealt with very insolently by the Kyrenians,
sent to Egypt and delivered themselves over to Apries king of Egypt. He
then having gathered a great army of Egyptians, sent it against Kyrene;
and the men of Kyrene marched out to the region of Irasa and to the
spring Theste, 144 and there both joined battle with the Egyptians and
defeated them in the battle: for since the Egyptians had not before made
trial of the Hellenes in fight and therefore despised them, they were so
slaughtered that but few of them returned back to Egypt. In consequence
of this and because they laid the blame of it upon Apries, the Egyptians
revolted from him.

160. This Battos had a son called Arkesilaos, who first when he became
king made a quarrel with his own brothers, until they finally departed
to another region of Libya, and making the venture for themselves
founded that city which was then and is now called Barca; and at the
same time as they founded this, they induced the Libyans to revolt from
the Kyrenians. After this, Arkesilaos made an expedition against those
Libyans who had received them and who had also revolted from Kyrene, and
the Libyans fearing him departed and fled towards the Eastern tribes
of Libyans: and Arkesilaos followed after them as they fled, until
he arrived in his pursuit at Leucon in Libya, and there the Libyans
resolved to attack him. Accordingly they engaged battle and defeated the
Kyrenians so utterly that seven thousand hoplites of the Kyrenians fell
there. After this disaster Arkesilaos, being sick and having swallowed a
potion, was strangled by his brother Haliarchos, 145 and Haliarchos was
killed treacherously by the wife of Arkesilaos, whose name was Eryxo.

161. Then Battos the son of Arkesilaos succeeded to the kingdom, who
was lame and not sound in his feet: and the Kyrenians with a view to the
misfortune which had befallen them sent men to Delphi to ask what form
of rule they should adopt, in order to live in the best way possible;
and the Pythian prophetess bade them take to themselves a reformer
of their State from Mantineia of the Arcadians. The men of Kyrene
accordingly made request, and those of Mantineia gave them the man
of most repute among their citizens, whose name was Demonax. This
man therefore having come to Kyrene and having ascertained all things
exactly, 146 in the first place caused them to have three tribes,
distributing them thus:—one division he made of the Theraians and their
dependants, 147 another of the Peloponnesians and Cretans, and a third
of all the islanders. 148 Then secondly for the king Battos he set apart
domains of land and priesthoods, but all the other powers which the
kings used to possess before, he assigned as of public right to the
people.

162. During the reign of this Battos things continued to be thus, but in
the reign of his son Arkesilaos there arose much disturbance about
the offices of the State: for Arkesilaos son of Battos the Lame and
of Pheretime said that he would not suffer it to be according as the
Mantineian Demonax had arranged, but asked to have back the royal rights
of his forefathers. After this, stirring up strife he was worsted and
went as an exile to Samos, and his mother to Salamis in Cyprus. Now at
that time the ruler of Salamis was Euelthon, the same who dedicated as
an offering the censer at Delphi, a work well worth seeing, which is
placed in the treasury of the Corinthians. To him having come, Pheretime
asked him for an army to restore herself and her son to Kyrene. Euelthon
however was ready to give her anything else rather than that; and she
when she received that which he gave her said that this too was a fair
gift, but fairer still would be that other gift of an army for which she
was asking. As she kept saying this to every thing which was given, at
last Euelthon sent out to her a present of a golden spindle and distaff,
with wool also upon it: and when Pheretime uttered again the same saying
about this present, Euelthon said that such things as this were given as
gifts to women and not an army.

163. Arkesilaos meanwhile, being in Samos, was gathering every one
together by a promise of dividing land; and while a great host was being
collected, Arkesilaos set out to Delphi to inquire of the Oracle about
returning from exile: and the Pythian prophetess gave him this answer:
"For four named Battos and four named Arkesilaos, eight generations
of men, Loxias grants to you to be kings of Kyrene, but beyond this he
counsels you not even to attempt it. Thou however must keep quiet when
thou hast come back to thy land; and if thou findest the furnace full of
jars, heat not the jars fiercely, but let them go with a fair wind: if
however thou heat the furnace fiercely, enter not thou into the place
flowed round by water; for if thou dost thou shalt die, both thou and
the bull which is fairer than all the rest."

164. Thus the Pythian prophetess gave answer to Arkesilaos; and he,
having taken to him those in Samos, made his return to Kyrene; and when
he had got possession of the power, he did not remember the saying of
the Oracle but endeavoured to exact penalties from those of the opposite
faction for having driven him out. Of these some escaped out of the
country altogether, but some Arkesilaos got into his power and sent them
away to Cyprus to be put to death. These were driven out of their course
to Cnidos, and the men of Cnidos rescued them and sent them away to
Thera. Some others however of the Kyrenians fled to a great tower
belonging to Aglomachos a private citizen, and Arkesilaos burnt them by
piling up brushwood round. Then after he had done the deed he perceived
that the Oracle meant this, in that the Pythian prophetess forbade
him, if he found the jars in the furnace, to heat them fiercely; and he
voluntarily kept away from the city of the Kyrenians, fearing the death
which had been prophesied by the Oracle and supposing that Kyrene was
flowed round by water. 149 Now he had to wife a kinswoman of his own,
the daughter of the king of Barca whose name was Alazeir: to him he
came, and men of Barca together with certain of the exiles from Kyrene,
perceiving him going about in the market-place, killed him, and also
besides him his father-in-law Alazeir. Arkesilaos accordingly, having
missed the meaning of the oracle, whether with his will or against his
will, fulfilled his own destiny.

165. His mother Pheretime meanwhile, so long as Arkesilaos having worked
evil for himself dwelt at Barca, herself held the royal power of her son
at Kyrene, both exercising his other rights and also sitting in council:
but when she heard that her son had been slain in Barca, she departed
and fled to Egypt: for she had on her side services done for Cambyses
the son of Cyrus by Arkesilaos, since this was the Arkesilaos who had
given over Kyrene to Cambyses and had laid a tribute upon himself.
Pheretime then having come to Egypt sat down as a suppliant of Aryandes,
bidding him help her, and alleging as a reason that it was on account
of his inclination to the side of the Medes that her son had been slain.
166. Now this Aryandes had been appointed ruler of the province of Egypt
by Cambyses; and after the time of these events he lost his life because
he would measure himself with Dareios. For having heard and seen that
Dareios desired to leave behind him as a memorial of himself a thing
which had not been made by any other king, he imitated him, until at
last he received his reward: for whereas Dareios refined gold and made
it as pure as possible, and of this caused coins to be struck, Aryandes,
being ruler of Egypt, did the same thing with silver; and even now the
purest silver is that which is called Aryandic. Dareios then having
learnt that he was doing this put him to death, bringing against him
another charge of attempting rebellion.

167. Now at the time of which I speak this Aryandes had compassion on
Pheretime and gave her all the troops that were in Egypt, both the
land and the sea forces, appointing Amasis a Maraphian to command the
land-army and Badres, of the race of the Pasargadai, to command the
fleet: but before he sent away the army, Aryandes despatched a herald
to Barca and asked who it was who had killed Arkesilaos; and the men of
Barca all took it upon themselves, for they said they suffered formerly
many great evils at his hands. Having heard this, Aryandes at last sent
away the army together with Pheretime. This charge then was the pretext
alleged; but in fact the army was being sent out (as I believe) for the
purpose of subduing Libya: for of the Libyans there are many nations of
nations of various kinds, and but few of them are subject to the king,
while the greater number paid no regard to Dareios.

168. Now the Libyans have their dwelling as follows:—Beginning from
Egypt, first of the Libyans are settled the Adyrmachidai, who practise
for the most part the same customs as the Egyptians, but wear clothing
similar to that of the other Libyans. Their women wear a bronze ring
150 upon each leg, and they have long hair on their heads, and when they
catch their lice, each one bites her own in retaliation and then throws
them away. These are the only people of the Lybians who do this; and
they alone display to the king their maidens when they are about to
be married, and whosoever of them proves to be pleasing to the king is
deflowered by him. These Adyrmachidai extend along the coast from Egypt
as far as the port which is called Plynos.

169. Next after these come the Giligamai, 151 occupying the country
towards the West as far as the island of Aphrodisias. In the space
within this limit lies off the coast the island of Platea, where the
Kyrenians made their settlement; and on the coast of the mainland there
is Port Menelaos, and Aziris, where the Kyrenians used to dwell. From
this point begins the silphion 152 and it extends along the coast from
the island of Platea as far as the entrance of the Syrtis. This nation
practises customs nearly resembling those of the rest.

170. Next to the Giligamai on the West are the Asbystai: 153 these dwell
above 154 Kyrene, and the Asbystai do not reach down the sea, for the
region along the sea is occupied by Kyrenians. These most of all the
Libyans are drivers of four-horse chariots, and in the greater number of
their customs they endeavour to imitate the Kyrenians.

171. Next after the Asbystai on the West come the Auchisai: these dwell
above Barca and reach down to the sea by Euesperides: and in the middle
of the country of the Auchisai dwell the Bacales, 155 a small tribe,
who reach down to the sea by the city of Taucheira in the territory of
Barca: these practise the same customs as those above Kyrene.

172. Next after these Auschisai towards the West come the Nasamonians,
a numerous race, who in the summer leave their flocks behind by the sea
and go up to the region of Augila to gather the fruit of the date-palms,
which grow in great numbers and very large and are all fruit-bearing:
these hunt the wingless locusts, and they dry them in the sun and then
pound them up, and after that they sprinkle them upon milk and drink
them. Their custom is for each man to have many wives, and they make
their intercourse with them common in nearly the same manner as the
Massagetai, 156 that is they set up a staff in front of the door and
so have intercourse. When a Nasamonian man marries his first wife,
the custom is for the bride on the first night to go through the whole
number of the guests having intercourse with them, and each man when he
has lain with her gives a gift, whatsoever he has brought with him from
his house. The forms of oath and of divination which they use are as
follows:—they swear by the men among themselves who are reported to have
been the most righteous and brave, by these, I say, laying hands upon
their tombs; and they divine by visiting the sepulchral mounds of their
ancestors and lying down to sleep upon them after having prayed; and
whatsoever thing the man sees in his dream, this he accepts. They
practise also the exchange of pledges in the following manner, that is
to say, one gives the other to drink from his hand, and drinks himself
from the hand of the other; and if they have no liquid, they take of the
dust from the ground and lick it.

173. Adjoining the Nasamonians is the country of the Psylloi. These have
perished utterly in the following manner:—The South Wind blowing upon
them dried up all their cisterns of water, and their land was waterless,
lying all within the Syrtis. They then having taken a resolve by common
consent, marched in arms against the South Wind (I report that which is
reported by the Libyans), and when they had arrived at the sandy tract,
the South Wind blew and buried them in the sand. These then having
utterly perished, the Nasamonians from that time forward possess their
land.

174. Above these towards the South Wind in the region of wild beasts
dwell the Garamantians, 157 who fly from every man and avoid the company
of all; and they neither possess any weapon of war, nor know how to
defend themselves against enemies.

175. These dwell above the Nasamonians; and next to the Nasamonians
along the sea coast towards the West come the Macai, who shave their
hair so as to leave tufts, letting the middle of their hair grow long,
but round this on all sides shaving it close to the skin; and for
fighting they carry shields made of ostrich skins. Through their land
the river Kinyps runs out into the sea, flowing from a hill called the
"Hill of the Charites." This Hill of the Charites is overgrown thickly
with wood, while the rest of Libya which has been spoken of before is
bare of trees; and the distance from the sea to this hill is two hundred
furlongs.

176. Next to these Macai are the Gindanes, whose women wear each of
them a number of anklets made of the skins of animals, for the following
reason, as it is said:—for every man who has commerce with her she binds
on an anklet, and the woman who has most is esteemed the best, since she
has been loved by the greatest number of men.

177. In a peninsula which stands out into the sea from the land of these
Gindanes dwell the Lotophagoi, who live by eating the fruit of the
lotos only. Now the fruit of the lotos is in size like that of the
mastich-tree, and in flavour 158 it resembles that of the date-palm. Of
this fruit the Lotophagoi even make for themselves wine.

178. Next after the Lotophagoi along the sea-coast are the Machlyans,
who also make use of the lotos, but less than those above mentioned.
These extend to a great river named the river Triton, and this runs out
into a great lake called Tritonis, in which there is an island named
Phla. About this island they say there was an oracle given to the
Lacedemonians that they should make a settlement in it.

179. The following moreover is also told, namely that Jason, when
the Argo had been completed by him under Mount Pelion, put into it
a hecatomb and with it also 159 a tripod of bronze, and sailed round
Pelopponese, desiring to come to Delphi; and when in sailing he got near
Malea, a North Wind seized his ship and carried it off to Libya, and
before he caught sight of land he had come to be in the shoals of the
lake Tritonis. Then as he was at a loss how he should bring his ship
forth, the story goes that Triton appeared to him and bade Jason give
him the tripod, saying that he would show them the right course and let
them go away without hurt: and when Jason consented to it, then Triton
showed them the passage out between the shoals and set the tripod in his
own temple, after having first uttered a prophecy over the tripod 160
and having declared to Jason and his company the whole matter, namely
that whensoever one of the descendants of those who sailed with him in
the Argo should carry away this tripod, then it was determined by fate
that a hundred cities of Hellenes should be established about the lake
Tritonis. Having heard this the native Libyans concealed the tripod.

180. Next to these Machlyans are the Auseans. These and the Machlyans
dwell round the lake Tritonis, and the river Triton is the boundary
between them: and while the Machlyans grow their hair long at the back
of the head, the Auseans do so in front. At a yearly festival of Athene
their maidens take their stand in two parties and fight against one
another with stones and staves, and they say that in doing so they are
fulfilling the rites handed down by their fathers for the divinity who
was sprung from that land, whom we call Athene: and those of the maidens
who die of the wounds received they call "false-maidens." But before
they let them begin the fight they do this:—all join together and equip
the maiden who is judged to be the fairest on each occasion, with a
Corinthian helmet and with full Hellenic armour, and then causing her to
go up into a chariot they conduct her round the lake. Now I cannot tell
with what they equipped the maidens in old time, before the Hellenes
were settled near them; but I suppose that they used to be equipped
with Egyptian armour, for it is from Egypt that both the shield and the
helmet have come to the Hellenes, as I affirm. They say moreover that
Athene is the daughter of Poseidon and of the lake Tritonis, and that
she had some cause of complaint against her father and therefore gave
herself to Zeus, and Zeus made her his own daughter. Such is the story
which these tell; and they have their intercourse with women in common,
not marrying but having intercourse like cattle: and when the child of
any woman has grown big, he is brought before a meeting of the men held
within three months of that time, 161 and whomsoever of the men the
child resembles, his son he is accounted to be.

181. Thus then have been mentioned those nomad Libyans who live along
the sea-coast: and above these inland is the region of Libya which has
wild beasts; and above the wild-beast region there stretches a raised
belt of sand, extending from Thebes of the Egyptians to the Pillars of
Heracles. In this belt at intervals of about ten days' journey there are
fragments of salt in great lumps forming hills, and at the top of each
hill there shoots up from the middle of the salt a spring of water cold
and sweet; and about the spring dwell men, at the furthest limit towards
the desert, and above the wild-beast region. First, at a distance of ten
days' journey from Thebes, are the Ammonians, whose temple is derived
from that of the Theban Zeus, for the image of Zeus in Thebes also, as I
have said before, 162 has the head of a ram. These, as it chances, have
also other water of a spring, which in the early morning is warm; at the
time when the market fills, 163 cooler; when midday comes, it is quite
cold, and then they water their gardens; but as the day declines, it
abates from its coldness, until at last, when the sun sets, the water is
warm; and it continues to increase in heat still more until it reaches
midnight, when it boils and throws up bubbles; and when midnight passes,
it becomes cooler gradually till dawn of day. This spring is called the
fountain of the Sun.

182. After the Ammonians, as you go on along the belt of sand, at an
interval again of ten days' journey there is a hill of salt like that
of the Ammonians, and a spring of water, with men dwelling about it; and
the name of this place is Augila. To this the Nasamonians come year by
year to gather the fruit of the date-palms.

183. From Augila at a distance again of ten days' journey there
is another hill of salt and spring of water and a great number of
fruit-bearing date-palms, as there are also in the other places: and
men dwell here who are called the Garmantians, a very great nation, who
carry earth to lay over the salt and then sow crops. From this point is
the shortest way to the Lotophagoi, for from these it is a journey
of thirty days to the country of the Garmantians. Among them also are
produced the cattle which feed backwards; and they feed backwards for
this reason, because they have their horns bent down forwards, and
therefore they walk backwards as they feed; for forwards they cannot go,
because the horns run into the ground in front of them; but in nothing
else do they differ from other cattle except in this and in the
thickness and firmness to the touch 164 of their hide. These
Garamantians of whom I speak hunt the "Cave-dwelling" 165 Ethiopians
with their four-horse chariots, for the Cave-dwelling Ethiopians are
the swiftest of foot of all men about whom we hear report made: and the
Cave-dwellers feed upon serpents and lizards and such creeping things,
and they use a language which resembles no other, for in it they squeak
just like bats.

184. From the Garmantians at a distance again of ten days' journey there
is another hill of salt and spring of water, and men dwell round
it called Atarantians, who alone of all men about whom we know are
nameless; for while all taken together have the name Atarantians,
each separate man of them has no name given to him. These utter curses
against the Sun when he is at his height, 166 and moreover revile him
with all manner of foul terms, because he oppresses them by his burning
heat, both themselves and their land. After this at a distance of ten
days' journey there is another hill of salt and spring of water, and men
dwell round it. Near this salt hill is a mountain named Atlas, which is
small in circuit and rounded on every side; and so exceedingly lofty is
it said to be, that it is not possible to see its summits, for clouds
never leave them either in the summer or in the winter. This the natives
say is the pillar of the heaven. After this mountain these men got their
name, for they are called Atlantians; and it is said that they neither
eat anything that has life nor have any dreams.

185. As far as these Atlantians I am able to mention in order the names
of those who are settled in the belt of sand; but for the parts beyond
these I can do so no more. However, the belt extends as far as the
Pillars of Heracles and also in the parts outside them: and there is
a mine of salt in it at a distance of ten days' journey from the
Atlantians, and men dwelling there; and these all have their houses
built of the lumps of salt, since these parts of Libya which we have now
reached 167 are without rain; for if it rained, the walls being made of
salt would not be able to last: and the salt is dug up there both white
and purple in colour. 168 Above the sand-belt, in the parts which are in
the direction of the South Wind and towards the interior of Libya, the
country is uninhabited, without water and without wild beasts, rainless
and treeless, and there is no trace of moisture in it.

186. I have said that from Egypt as far as the lake Tritonis Libyans
dwell who are nomads, eating flesh and drinking milk; and these do not
taste at all of the flesh of cows, for the same reason as the Egyptians
also abstain from it, nor do they keep swine. Moreover the women of
the Kyrenians too think it not right to eat cows' flesh, because of the
Egyptian Isis, and they even keep fasts and celebrate festivals for her;
and the women of Barca, in addition from cows' flesh, do not taste of
swine either.

187. Thus it is with these matters: but in the region to the West of
lake Tritonis the Libyans cease to be nomads, and they do not practise
the same customs, nor do to their children anything like that which
the nomads are wont to do; for the nomad Libyans, whether all of them
I cannot say for certain, but many of them, do as follows:—when their
children are four years old, they burn with a greasy piece of sheep's
wool the veins in the crowns of their heads, and some of them burn
the veins of the temples, so that for all their lives to come the cold
humour may not run down from their heads and do them hurt: and for this
reason it is (they say) that they are so healthy; for the Libyans are in
truth the most healthy of all races concerning which we have knowledge,
whether for this reason or not I cannot say for certain, but the most
healthy they certainly are: and if, when they burn the children, a
convulsion comes on, they have found out a remedy for this; for they
pour upon them the water of a he-goat and so save them. I report that
which is reported by the Libyans themselves.

188. The following is the manner of sacrifice which the nomads
have:—they cut off a part of the animal's ear as a first offering and
throw it over the house, 169 and having done this they twist its neck.
They sacrifice only to the Sun and the Moon; that is to say, to these
all the Libyans sacrifice, but those who dwell round the lake Tritonis
sacrifice most of all to Athene, and next to Triton and Poseidon.

189. It would appear also that the Hellenes made the dress and the aigis
of the images of Athene after the model of the Libyan women; for except
that the dress of the Libyan women is of leather, and the tassels which
hang from their aigis are not formed of serpents but of leather thongs,
in all other respects Athene is dressed like them. Moreover the name too
declares that the dress of the figures of Pallas has come from Libya,
for the Libyan women wear over their other garments bare goat-skins
(aigeas) with tasselled fringes and coloured over with red madder, and
from the name of these goat-skins the Hellenes formed the name aigis.
I think also that in these regions first arose the practice of crying
aloud during the performance of sacred rites, for the Libyan women do
this very well. 170 The Hellenes learnt from the Libyans also the yoking
together of four horses.

190. The nomads bury those who die just in the same manner as the
Hellenes, except only the Nasamonians: these bury bodies in a sitting
posture, taking care at the moment when the man expires to place
him sitting and not to let him die lying down on his back. They have
dwellings composed of the stems of asphodel entwined with rushes, and
so made that they can be carried about. Such are the customs followed by
these tribes.

191. On the West of the river Triton next after the Auseans come Libyans
who are tillers of the soil, and whose custom it is to possess fixed
habitations; and they are called Maxyans. They grow their hair long on
the right side of their heads and cut it short upon the left, and smear
their bodies over with red ochre. These say that they are of the men who
came from Troy.

This country and the rest of Libya which is towards the West is both
much more frequented by wild beasts and much more thickly wooded than
the country of the nomads: for whereas the part of Libya which is
situated towards the East, where the nomads dwell, is low-lying and
sandy up to the river Triton, that which succeeds it towards the West,
the country of those who till the soil, is exceedingly mountainous and
thickly-wooded and full of wild beasts: for in the land of these are
found both the monstrous serpent and the lion and the elephant, and
bears and venomous snakes and horned asses, besides the dog-headed men,
and the headless men with their eyes set in their breasts (at least
so say the Libyans about them), and the wild men and wild women, and a
great multitude of other beasts which are not fabulous like these. 171

192. In the land of the nomads however there exist none of these, but
other animals as follows:—white-rump antelopes, gazelles, buffaloes,
asses, not the horned kind but others which go without water (for in
fact these never drink), oryes, 172 whose horns are made into the sides
of the Phenician lyre (this animal is in size about equal to an ox),
small foxes, hyenas, porcupines, wild rams, wolves, 173 jackals,
panthers, boryes, land-crocodiles about three cubits in length and very
much resembling lizards, ostriches, and small snakes, each with one
horn: these wild animals there are in this country, as well as those
which exist elsewhere, except the stag and the wild-boar; but Libya has
no stags nor wild boars at all. Also there are in this country three
kinds of mice, one is called the "two-legged" mouse, another the zegeris
(a name which is Libyan and signifies in the Hellenic tongue a "hill"),
and a third the "prickly" mouse. 174 There are also weasels produced in
the silphion, which are very like those of Tartessos. Such are the wild
animals which the land of the Libyans possesses, so far as we were able
to discover by inquiries extended as much as possible.

193. Next to the Maxyan Libyans are the Zauekes, 175 whose women drive
their chariots for them to war.

194. Next to these are the Gyzantes, 176 among whom honey is made in
great quantity by bees, but in much greater quantity still it is said
to be made by men, who work at it as a trade. However that may be, these
all smear themselves over with red ochre and eat monkeys, which are
produced in very great numbers upon their mountains.

195. Opposite these, as the Carthaginians say, there lies an island
called Kyrauis, two hundred furlongs in length but narrow, to which one
may walk over from the mainland; and it is full of olives and vines.
In it they say there is a pool, from which the native girls with birds'
feathers smeared over with pitch bring up gold-dust out of the mud.
Whether this is really so I do not know, but I write that which is
reported; and nothing is impossible, 177 for even in Zakynthos I saw
myself pitch brought up out of a pool of water. There are there several
pools, and the largest of them measures seventy feet each way and is
two fathoms in depth. Into this they plunge a pole with a myrtle-branch
bound to it, and then with the branch of the myrtle they bring up pitch,
which has the smell of asphalt, but in other respects it is superior to
the pitch of Pieria. This they pour into a pit dug near the pool; and
when they have collected a large quantity, then they pour it into the
jars from the pit: and whatever thing falls into the pool goes under
ground and reappears in the sea, which is distant about four furlongs
from the pool. Thus then the report about the island lying near the
coast of Libya is also probably enough true.

196. The Carthaginians say also this, namely that there is a place in
Libya and men dwelling there, outside the Pillars of Heracles, to whom
when they have come and have taken the merchandise forth from their
ships, they set it in order along the beach and embark again in their
ships, and after that they raise a smoke; and the natives of the country
seeing the smoke come to the sea, and then they lay down gold as an
equivalent for the merchandise and retire to a distance away from the
merchandise. The Carthaginians upon that disembark and examine it,
and if the gold is in their opinion sufficient for the value of the
merchandise, they take it up and go their way; but if not, they
embark again in their ships and sit there; and the others approach and
straightway add more gold to the former, until they satisfy them:
and they say that neither party wrongs the other; for neither do the
Carthaginians lay hands on the gold until it is made equal to the value
of their merchandise, nor do the others lay hands on the merchandise
until the Carthaginians have taken the gold.

197. These are the Libyan tribes whom we are able to name; and of these
the greater number neither now pay any regard to the king of the Medes
nor did they then. Thus much also I have to say about this land, namely
that it is occupied by four races and no more, so far as we know; and
of these races two are natives of the soil and the other two not so; for
the Libyans and the Ethiopians are natives, the one race dwelling in
the Northern parts of Libya and the other in the Southern, while the
Phenicians and the Hellenes are strangers.

198. I think moreover that (besides other things) in goodness of soil
Libya does not very greatly excel 178 as compared with Asia or Europe,
except only the region of Kinyps, for the same name is given to the land
as to the river. This region is equal to the best of lands in bringing
forth the fruit of Demeter, 179 nor does it at all resemble the rest of
Libya; for it has black soil and is watered by springs, and neither has
it fear of drought nor is it hurt by drinking too abundantly of rain;
for rain there is in this part of Libya. Of the produce of the crops
the same measures hold good here as for the Babylonian land. And that is
good land also which the Euesperites occupy, for when it bears best it
produces a hundred-fold, but the land in the region of Kinyps produces
sometimes as much as three-hundred-fold.

199. Moreover the land of Kyrene, which is the highest land of the part
of Libya which is occupied by nomads, has within its confines three
seasons of harvest, at which we may marvel: for the parts by the
sea-coasts first have their fruits ripe for reaping and for gathering
the vintage; and when these have been gathered in, the parts which lie
above the sea-side places, those situated in the middle, which they call
the hills, 180 are ripe for the gathering in; and as soon as this middle
crop has been gathered in, that in the highest part of the land comes
to perfection and is ripe; so that by the time the first crop has been
eaten and drunk up, the last is just coming in. Thus the harvest for the
Kyrenians lasts eight months. Let so much as has been said suffice for
these things.

200. Now when the Persian helpers of Pheretime, 181 having been sent
from Egypt by Aryandes, had arrived at Barca, they laid siege to the
city, proposing to the inhabitants that they should give up those who
were guilty of the murder of Arkesilaos: but as all their people had
taken a share in the guilt, they did not accept the proposals. Then they
besieged Barca for nine months, both digging underground passages which
led to the wall and making vigorous attacks upon it. Now the passages
dug were discovered by a worker of bronze with a shield covered over
with bronze, who had thought of a plan as follows:—carrying it round
within the wall he applied it to the ground in the city, and whereas
the other places to which he applied it were noiseless, at those places
where digging was going on the bronze of the shield gave a sound; and
the men of Barca would make a countermine there and slay the Persians
who were digging mines. This then was discovered as I have said, and the
attacks were repulsed by the men of Barca.

201. Then as they were suffering hardship for a long time and many were
falling on both sides, and especially on that of the Persians, Amasis
the commander of the land-army contrived as follows:—perceiving that the
Barcaians were not to be conquered by force but might be conquered by
guile, he dug by night a broad trench and over it he laid timber of no
great strength, and brought earth and laid it above on the top of the
timber, making it level with the rest of the ground: then at daybreak he
invited the men of Barca to a parley; and they gladly consented, and
at last they agreed to make a treaty: and the treaty they made with one
another was taken over the hidden trench, namely that so long as this
earth should continue to be as it was, so long the oath should remain
firm, and that the men of Barca should promise to pay tribute of due
amount to the king, and the Persians should do no further violence to
the men of Barca. 182 After the oath the men of Barca trusting to these
engagements both went forth themselves from their city and let any who
desired it of the enemy pass within their walls, having opened all the
gates; but the Persians first broke down the concealed bridge and then
began to run inside the city wall. And the reason why they broke down
the bridge which they had made was that they might keep their oaths,
since they had sworn to the men of Barca that the oath should remain
firm continually for so long time as the earth should remain as it then
was, but after that they had broken it down, the oath no longer remained
firm.

202. Now the most guilty of the Barcaians, when they were delivered to
her by the Persians, Pheretime impaled in a ring round about the wall;
and she cut off the breasts of their wives and set the wall round with
these also in order: but the rest of the men of Barca she bade the
Persians carry off as spoil, except so many of them as were of the
house of Battos and not sharers in the guilt of the murder; and to these
Pheretime gave the city in charge.

203. So the Persians having made slaves of the rest of the Barcaians
departed to go back: and when they appeared at the gates of the city of
Kyrene, the Kyrenians let them go through their town in order to avoid
neglect of some oracle. Then as the army was going through, Badres the
commander of the fleet urged that they should capture the city, but
Amasis the commander of the land-army would not consent to it; for
he said that they had been sent against no other city of the Hellenes
except Barca. When however they had passed through and were encamping on
the hill of Zeus Lycaios, they repented of not having taken possession
of Kyrene; and they endeavoured again to pass into it, but the men of
Kyrene would not allow them. Then upon the Persians, although no one
fought against them, there fell a sudden panic, and they ran away for
about sixty furlongs and then encamped. And when the camp had been
placed here, there came to it a messenger from Aryandes summoning them
back; so the Persians asked the Kyrenians to give them provisions for
their march and obtained their request; and having received these, they
departed to go to Egypt. After this the Libyans took them up, 183 and
killed for the sake of their clothes and equipment those of them who
at any time were left or straggled behind, until at last they came to
Egypt.

204. This army of the Persians reached Euesperides, and this was their
furthest point in Libya: and those of the Barcaians whom they had
reduced to slavery they removed again from Egypt and brought them to
the king, and king Dareios gave them a village in the land of Bactria in
which to make a settlement. To this village they gave the name of Barca,
and it still continued to be inhabited by them even down to my own time,
in the land of Bactria.

205. Pheretime however did not bring her life happily to an end any more
than they: for as soon as she had returned from Libya to Egypt after
having avenged herself on the Barcaians, she died an evil death, having
become suddenly full of worms while yet alive: for, as it seems, too
severe punishments inflicted by men prove displeasing 184 to the gods.
Such and so great was the punishment inflicted by Pheretime the wife of
Battos on the men of Barca.


