57. Now the Gephyraians, of whom were those who murdered Hipparchos,
according to their own account were originally descended from Eretria;
but as I find by carrying inquiries back, they were Phenicians of those
who came with Cadmos to the land which is now called Boeotia, and they
dwelt in the district of Tanagra, which they had had allotted to them
in that land. Then after the Cadmeians had first been driven out by the
Argives, these Gephyraians next were driven out by the Boeotians and
turned then towards Athens: and the Athenians received them on certain
fixed conditions to be citizens of their State, laying down rules that
they should be excluded from a number of things not worth mentioning
here.

58. Now these Phenicians who came with Cadmos, of whom were the
Gephyraians, brought in among the Hellenes many arts when they settled
in this land of Boeotia, and especially letters, which did not exist, as
it appears to me, among the Hellenes before this time; and at first they
brought in those which are used by the Phenician race generally, but
afterwards, as time went on, they changed with their speech the form of
the letters also. During this time the Ionians were the race of Hellenes
who dwelt near them in most of the places where they were; and these,
having received letters by instruction of the Phenicians, changed their
form slightly and so made use of them, and in doing so they declared
them to be called "phenicians," as was just, seeing that the Phenicians
had introduced them into Hellas. Also the Ionians from ancient time call
paper "skins," because formerly, paper being scarce, they used skins of
goat and sheep; nay, even in my own time many of the Barbarians write on
such skins.

59. I myself too once saw Cadmeian characters in the temple of Ismenian
Apollo at Thebes of the Boeotians, engraved on certain 4901 tripods, and
in most respects resembling the Ionic letters: one of these tripods has
the inscription,


 "Me Amphitryon offered from land Teleboian returning:" 50
 this inscription would be of an age contemporary  with Laïos
 the son of Labdacos, the son of Polydoros, the son of Cadmos.

60. Another tripod says thus in hexameter rhythm:


 "Me did Scaios offer to thee, far-darting Apollo,
  Victor in contest of boxing, a gift most fair in thine honour:"

now Scaios would be the son of Hippocoön (at least if it were really he
who offered it, and not another with  the same name as the son of
Hippocoön), being of an age contemporary with OEdipus the son of Laïos:

61. and the third tripod, also in hexameter rhythm, says:


 "Me Laodamas offered to thee, fair-aiming Apollo,
  He, of his wealth, 51 being king, as a gift most fair in thine honor:"

now it was in the reign of this very Laodamas the son of Eteocles that
the Cadmeians were driven out by the Argives and turned to go to the
Enchelians; and the Gephyraians being then left behind were afterwards
forced by the Boeotians to retire to Athens. Moreover they have temples
established in Athens, in which the other Athenians have no part, and
besides others which are different from the rest, there is especially a
temple of Demeter Achaia and a celebration of her mysteries.

62. I have told now of the vision of a dream seen by Hipparchos, and
also whence the Gephrynians were descended, of which race were the
murderers of Hipparchos; and in addition to this I must resume and
continue the story which I was about to tell at first, how the Athenians
were freed from despots. When Hippias was despot and was dealing harshly
with the Athenians because of the death of Hipparchos, the Alcmaionidai,
who were of Athenian race and were fugitives from the sons of
Peisistratos, 52 as they did not succeed in their attempt made together
with the other Athenian exiles to return by force, but met with great
disaster when they attempted to return and set Athens free, after they
had fortified Leipsydrion which is above Paionia,--these Alomaionidai
after that, still devising every means against the sons of Peisistratos,
accepted the contract to build and complete the temple at Delphi, that
namely which now exists but then did not as yet: and being wealthy and
men of repute already from ancient time, they completed the temple in
a manner more beautiful than the plan required, and especially in this
respect, that having agreed to make the temple of common limestone, 53
they built the front parts of it in Parian marble.

63. So then, as the Athenians say, these men being settled at Delphi
persuaded the Pythian prophetess by gifts of money, that whenever men of
the Spartans should come to inquire of the Oracle, either privately
or publicly sent, she should propose to them to set Athens free. The
Lacedemonians therefore, since the same utterance was delivered to them
on all occasions, sent Anchimolios the son of Aster, who was of repute
among their citizens, with an army to drive out the sons of Peisistratos
from Athens, although these were very closely connected with them by
guest-friendship; for they held that the concerns of the god 5301 should
be preferred to those of men: and this force they sent by sea in ships.
He therefore, having put in to shore at Phaleron, disembarked his army;
but the sons of Peisistratos being informed of this beforehand called
in to their aid an auxiliary force from Thessaly, for they had made an
alliance with the Thessalians; and the Thessalians at their request
sent by public resolution a body of a thousand horse and also their king
Kineas, a man of Conion. 54 So having obtained these as allies, the sons
of Peisistratos contrived as follows:--they cut down the trees in the
plain of Phaleron and made this district fit for horsemen to ride over,
and after that they sent the cavalry to attack the enemy's camp,
who falling upon it slew (besides many others of the Lacedemonians)
Anchimolios himself also: and the survivors of them they shut up in
their ships. Such was the issue of the first expedition from Lacedemon:
and the burial-place of Anchimolios is at Alopecai in Attica, near the
temple of Heracles which is at Kynosarges.

64. After this the Lacedemonians equipped a larger expedition and sent
it forth against Athens; and they appointed to be commander of the army
their king Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides, and sent it this time
not by sea but by land. With these, when they had invaded the land of
Attica, first the Thessalian horse engaged battle; and in no long time
they were routed and there fell of them more than forty men; so the
survivors departed without more ado and went straight back to Thessaly.
Then Cleomenes came to the city together with those of the Athenians
who desired to be free, and began to besiege the despots shut up in the
Pelasgian wall.

65. And the Lacedemonians would never have captured the sons of
Peisistratos at all; for they on their side had no design to make a long
blockade, and the others were well provided with food and drink; so that
they would have gone away back to Sparta after besieging them for a few
days only: but as it was, a thing happened just at this time which was
unfortunate for those, and at the same time of assistance to these;
for the children of the sons of Peisistratos were captured, while being
secretly removed out of the country: and when this happened, all their
matters were thereby cast into confusion, and they surrendered receiving
back their children on the terms which the Athenians desired, namely
that they should depart out of Attica within five days. After this they
departed out of the country and went to Sigeion on the Scamander, after
their family had ruled over the Athenians for six-and-thirty years.
These also were originally Pylians and sons of Neleus, descended from
the same ancestors as the family of Codros and Melanthos, who had
formerly become kings of Athens being settlers from abroad. Hence too
Hippocrates had given to his son the name of Peisistratos as a memorial,
calling him after Peisistratos the son of Nestor.

Thus the Athenians were freed from despots; and the things worthy to be
narrated which they did or suffered after they were liberated, up to the
time when Ionia revolted from Dareios and Aristagoras the Milesian
came to Athens and asked them to help him, these I will set forth first
before I proceed further.

66. Athens, which even before that time was great, then, after having
been freed from despots, became gradually yet greater; and in it two men
exercised power, namely Cleisthenes a descendant of Alcmaion, the same
who is reported to have bribed the Pythian prophetess, and Isagoras,
the son of Tisander, of a family which was highly reputed, but of his
original descent I am not able to declare; his kinsmen however offer
sacrifices to the Carian Zeus. These men came to party strife for power;
and then Cleisthenes was being worsted in the struggle, he made common
cause with the people. After this he caused the Athenians to be in ten
tribes, who were formerly in four; and he changed the names by which
they were called after the sons of Ion, namely Geleon, Aigicoreus,
Argades, and Hoples, and invented for them names taken from other
heroes, all native Athenians except Ajax, whom he added as a neighbour
and ally, although he was no Athenian.

67. Now in these things it seems to me that this Cleisthenes was
imitating his mother's father Cleisthenes the despot of Sikyon: for
Cleisthenes when he went to war with Argos first caused to cease in
Sikyon the contests of rhapsodists, which were concerned with the
poems of Homer, because Argives and Argos are celebrated in them almost
everywhere; then secondly, since there was (as still there is) in the
market-place itself of the Sikyonians a hero-temple of Adrastos the son
of Talaos, Cleisthenes had a desire to cast him forth out of the land,
because he was an Argive. So having come to Delphi he consulted the
Oracle as to whether he should cast out Adrastos; and the Pythian
prophetess answered him saying that Adrastos was king of the Sikyonians,
whereas he was a stoner 55 of them. So since the god did not permit him
to do this, he went away home and considered means by which Adrastos
should be brought to depart of his own accord: and when he thought that
he had discovered them, he sent to Thebes in Boeotia and said that he
desired to introduce into his city Melanippos the son of Astacos, and
the Thebans gave him leave. So Cleisthenes introduced Melanippos into
his city, and appointed for him a sacred enclosure within the precincts
of the City Hall 56 itself, and established him there in the strongest
position. Now Cleisthenes introduced Melanippos (for I must relate this
also) because he was the greatest enemy of Adrastos, seeing that he had
killed both his brother Mekisteus and his son-in-law Tydeus: and when he
had appointed the sacred enclosure for him, he took away the sacrifices
and festivals of Adrastos and gave them to Melanippos. Now the
Sikyonians were accustomed to honour Adrastos with very great honours;
for this land was formerly the land of Polybos, and Adrastos was
daughter's son to Polybos, and Polybos dying without sons gave his
kingdom to Adrastos: the Sikyonians then not only gave other honours
to Adrastos, but also with reference to his sufferings they specially
honoured him with tragic choruses, not paying the honour to Dionysos but
to Adrastos. Cleisthenes however gave back the choruses to Dionysos, and
the other rites besides this he gave to Melannipos.

68. Thus he had done to Adrastos; and he also changed the names of the
Dorian tribes, in order that the Sikyonians might not have the same
tribes as the Argives; in which matter he showed great contempt of the
Sikyonians, for the names he gave were taken from the names of a pig
and an ass by changing only the endings, except in the case of his own
tribe, to which he gave a name from his own rule. These last then were
called Archelaoi, 57 while of the rest those of one tribe were called
Hyatai, 58 of another Oneatai, 59 and of the remaining tribe Choireatai.
60 These names of tribes were used by the men of Sikyon not only in the
reign of Cleisthenes, but also beyond that for sixty years after his
death; then however they considered the matter and changed them into
Hylleis, Pamphyloi, and Dymanatai, adding to these a fourth, to which
they gave the name Aigialeis after Aigialeus the son of Adrastos.

69. Thus had the Cleisthenes of Sikyon done: and the Athenian
Cleisthenes, who was his daughter's son and was called after him,
despising, as I suppose, the Ionians, as he the Dorians, imitated his
namesake Cleisthenes in order that the Athenians might not have the same
tribes as the Ionians: for when at the time of which we speak he added
to his own party the whole body of the common people of the Athenians,
which in former time he had despised, 61 he changed the names of the
tribes and made them more in number than they had been; he made in fact
ten rulers of tribes instead of four, and by tens also he distributed
the demes in the tribes; and having added the common people to his party
he was much superior to his opponents.

70. Then Isagoras, as he was being worsted in his turn, contrived a
plan in opposition to him, that is to say, he called in Cleomenes the
Lacedemonian to help him, who had been a guest-friend to himself since
the siege of the sons of Peisistratos; moreover Cleomenes was accused
of being intimate with the wife of Isagoras. First then Cleomenes sent
a herald to Athens demanding the expulsion of Cleisthenes and with him
many others of the Athenians, calling them the men who were under the
curse: 62 this message he sent by instruction of Isagoras, for the
Alcmaionidai and their party were accused of the murder to which
reference was thus made, while he and his friends had no part in it.

71. Now the men of the Athenians who were "under the curse" got this
name as follows:--there was one Kylon among the Athenians, a man who
had gained the victory at the Olympic games: this man behaved with
arrogance, wishing to make himself despot; and having formed for himself
an association of men of his own age, he endeavoured to seize the
Acropolis: but not being able to get possession of it, he sat down as a
suppliant before the image of the goddess. 63 These men were taken from
their place as suppliants by the presidents of the naucraries, who then
administered affairs at Athens, on the condition that they should be
liable to any penalty short of death; and the Alcmaionidai are accused
of having put them to death. This had occurred before the time of
Peisistratos.

72. Now when Cleomenes sent demanding the expulsion of Cleisthenes and
of those under the curse, Cleisthenes himself retired secretly; but
after that nevertheless Cleomenes appeared in Athens with no very
large force, and having arrived he proceeded to expel as accursed seven
hundred Athenian families, of which Isagoras had suggested to him the
names. Having done this he next endeavoured to dissolve the Senate, and
he put the offices of the State into the hands of three hundred, who
were the partisans of Isagoras. The Senate however making opposition,
and not being willing to submit, Cleomenes with Isagoras and his
partisans seized the Acropolis. Then the rest of the Athenians joined
together by common consent and besieged them for two days; and on the
third day so many of them as were Lacedemonians departed out of the
country under a truce. Thus was accomplished for Cleomenes the ominous
saying which was uttered to him: for when he had ascended the Acropolis
with the design of taking possession of it, he was going to the
sanctuary of the goddess, as to address her in prayer; but the priestess
stood up from her seat before he had passed through the door, and said,
"Lacedemonian stranger, go back and enter not into the temple, for it is
not lawful for Dorians to pass in hither." He said: "Woman, I am not
a Dorian, but an Achaian." So then, paying no attention to the ominous
speech, he made his attempt and then was expelled again with the
Lacedemonians; but the rest of the men the Athenians laid in bonds to
be put to death, and among them Timesitheos the Delphian, with regard to
whom I might mention very great deeds of strength and courage which he
performed.

73. These then having been thus laid in bonds were put to death; and the
Athenians after this sent for Cleisthenes to return, and also for the
seven hundred families which had been driven out by Cleomenes: and
then they sent envoys to Sardis, desiring to make an alliance with
the Persians; for they were well assured that the Lacedemonians and
Cleomenes had been utterly made their foes. So when these envoys had
arrived at Sardis and were saying that which they had been commanded
to say, Artaphrenes the son of Hystaspes, the governor of Sardis, asked
what men these were who requested to be allies of the Persians, and
where upon the earth they dwelt; and having heard this from the envoys,
he summed up his answer to them thus, saying that if the Athenians
were willing to give earth and water to Dareios, he was willing to make
alliance with them, but if not, he bade them begone: and the envoys
taking the matter upon themselves said that they were willing to do so,
because they desired to make the alliance.

74. These, when they returned to their own land, were highly censured:
and Cleomenes meanwhile, conceiving that he had been outrageously dealt
with by the Athenians both with words and with deeds, was gathering
together an army from the whole of the Peloponnese, not declaring the
purpose for which he was gathering it, but desiring to take vengeance on
the people of the Athenians, and intending to make Isagoras despot; for
he too had come out of the Acropolis together with Cleomenes. Cleomenes
then with a large army entered Eleusis, while at the same time the
Boeotians by agreement with him captured Oinoe and Hysiai, the demes
which lay upon the extreme borders of Attica, and the Chalkidians on the
other side invaded and began to ravage various districts of Attica. The
Athenians then, though attacked on more sides than one, thought that
they would remember the Boeotians and Chalkidians afterwards, and
arrayed themselves against the Peloponnesians who were in Eleusis.

75. Then as the armies were just about the join battle, the Corinthians
first, considering with themselves that they were not acting rightly,
changed their minds and departed; and after that Demaratos the son of
Ariston did the same, who was king of the Spartans as well as Cleomenes,
though he had joined with him in leading the army out from Lacedemon and
had not been before this at variance with Cleomenes. In consequence
of this dissension a law was laid down at Sparta that it should not be
permitted, when an army went out, that both the kings should go with
it, for up to this time both used to go with it, and that as one of the
kings was set free from service, so one of the sons of Tyndareus 64
also should be left behind; for before this time both of these two were
called upon by them for help and went with the armies.

76. At this time then in Eleusis the rest of the allies, seeing that the
kings of the Lacedemonians did not agree and also that the Corinthians
had deserted their place in the ranks, themselves too departed and got
them away quickly. And this was the fourth time that the Dorians had
come to Attica, twice having invaded it to make war against it, and
twice to help the mass of the Athenian people,--first when they at the
same time colonised Megara (this expedition may rightly be designated as
taking place when Codros was king of the Athenians), for the second and
third times when they came making expeditions from Sparta to drive out
the sons of Peisistratos, and fourthly on this occasion, when Cleomenes
at the head of the Peloponnesians invaded Eleusis: thus the Dorians
invaded Athens then for the fourth time.

77. This army then having been ingloriously broken up, the Athenians
after that, desiring to avenge themselves, made expedition first against
the Chalkidians; and the Boeotians came to the Euripos to help the
Chalkidians. The Athenians, therefore, seeing those who had come
to help, 6401 resolved first to attack the Boeotians before the
Chalkidians. Accordingly they engaged battle with the Boeotians, and
had much the better of them, and after having slain very many they
took seven hundred of them captive. On this very same day the Athenians
passed over into Euboea and engaged battle with the Chalkidians as well;
and having conquered these also, they left four thousand holders of
allotments in the land belonging to the "Breeders of Horses": 65 now the
wealthier of the Chalkidians were called the Breeders of Horses. And
as many of them as they took captive, they kept in confinement together
with the Boeotians who had been captured, bound with fetters; and then
after a time they let them go, having fixed their ransom at two pounds
of silver apiece: 66 but their fetters, in which they had been bound,
they hung up on the Acropolis; and these were still existing even to my
time hanging on walls which had been scorched with fire by the Mede, 67
and just opposite the sanctuary which lies towards the West. The tenth
part of the ransom also they dedicated for an offering, and made of it a
four-horse chariot of bronze, which stands on the left hand as you enter
the Propylaia in the Acropolis, and on it is the following inscription:


 "Matched in the deeds of war with the tribes of Boeotia and Chalkis
    The sons of Athens prevailed, conquered and tamed them in fight:
  In chains of iron and darkness they quenched their insolent spirit;
    And to Athene present these, of their ransom a tithe."

78. The Athenians accordingly increased in power; and it is evident, not
by one instance only but in every way, that Equality 68 is an excellent
thing, since the Athenians while they were ruled by despots were not
better in war that any of those who dwelt about them, whereas after they
had got rid of despots they became far the first. This proves that when
they were kept down they were wilfully slack, because they were working
for a master, whereas when they had been set free each one was eager to
achieve something for himself.

79. These then were faring thus: and the Thebans after this sent to the
god, desiring to be avenged on the Athenians; the Pythian prophetess
however said that vengeance was not possible for them by their own
strength alone, but bade them report the matter to the "many-voiced"
and ask help of those who were "nearest" to them. So when those who were
sent to consult the Oracle returned, they made a general assembly and
reported the oracle; and then the Thebans heard them say that they were
to ask help of those who were nearest to them, they said: "Surely
those who dwell nearest to us are the men of Tanagra and Coroneia and
Thespiai; and these always fight zealously on our side and endure the
war with us to the end: what need is there that we ask of these? Rather
perhaps that is not the meaning of the oracle."

80. While they commented upon it thus, at length one perceived "that
which the oracle means to tell us. Asopos is said to have had two
daughters born to him, Thebe and Egina; and as these are sisters, I
think that the god gave us for answer that we should ask the men of
Egina to become our helpers." Then as there seemed to be no opinion
expressed which was better than this, they sent forthwith and asked
the men of Egina to help them, calling upon them in accordance with the
oracle; and they, when these made request, said that they sent with them
the sons of Aiacos to help them.

81. After that the Thebans, having made an attempt with the alliance
of the sons of Aiacos and having been roughly handled by the Athenians,
sent again and gave them back the sons of Aiacos and asked them for men.
So the Eginetans, exalted by great prosperity and calling to mind an
ancient grudge against the Athenians, then on the request of the Thebans
commenced a war against the Athenians without notice: for while the
Athenians were intent on the Boeotians, they sailed against them to
Attica with ships of war, and they devastated Phaleron and also many
demes in the remainder of the coast region, and so doing they deeply
stirred the resentment of the Athenians. 69

82. Now the grudge which was due beforehand from the Eginetans to the
Athenians came about from a beginning which was as follows:--The land
of the Epidaurians yielded to its inhabitants no fruit; and accordingly
with reference to this calamity the Epidaurians went to inquire at
Delphi, and the Pythian prophetess bade them set up images of Damia and
Auxesia, and said that when they had set up these, they would meet with
better fortune. The Epidaurians then asked further whether they should
make images of bronze or of stone; and the prophetess bade them not use
either of these, but make them of the wood of a cultivated olive-tree.
The Epidaurians therefore asked the Athenians to allow them to cut for
themselves an olive-tree, since they thought that their olives were the
most sacred; nay some say that at that time there were no olives in any
part of the earth except at Athens. The Athenians said that they would
allow them on condition that they should every year bring due offerings
to Athene Polias 70 and to Erechtheus. The Epidaurians, then, having
agreed to these terms, obtained that which they asked, and they made
images out of these olive-trees and set them up: and their land bore
fruit and they continued to fulfil towards the Athenians that which they
had agreed to do.

83. Now during this time and also before this the Eginetans were subject
to the Epidaurians, and besides other things they were wont to pass over
to Epidauros to have their disputes with one another settled by law: 71
but after this time they built for themselves ships and made revolt
from the Epidaurians, moved thereto by wilfulness. So as they were at
variance with them, they continued to inflict damage on them, since in
fact they had command of the sea, and especially they stole away from
them these images of Damia and Auxesia, and they brought them and set
them up in the inland part of their country at a place called Oia, which
is about twenty furlongs distant from their city. Having set them up
in this spot they worshipped them with sacrifices and choruses of women
accompanied with scurrilous jesting, ten men being appointed for each of
the deities to provide the choruses: and the choruses spoke evil of no
man, but only of the women of the place. Now the Epidaurians also had
the same rites; and they have also rites which may not be divulged.

84. These images then having been stolen, the Epidaurians no longer
continued to fulfil towards the Athenians that which they had agreed.
The Athenians accordingly sent and expressed displeasure to the
Epidaurians; and they declared saying that they were doing no wrong; for
during the time when they had the images in their country they continued
to fulfil that which they had agreed upon, but since they had been
deprived of them, it was not just that they should make the offerings
any more; and they bade them demand these from the men of Egina, who had
the images. So the Athenians sent to Egina and demanded the images back;
but the Eginetans said that they had nothing to do with the Athenians.

85. The Athenians then report that in one single trireme were despatched
those of their citizens who were sent by the State after this demand;
who having come to Egina, attempted to tear up from off their pedestals
the images, (alleging that they were made of wood which belonged to the
Athenians), in order to carry them back with them: but not being able
to get hold of them in this manner (say the Athenians) they threw ropes
round them and were pulling them, when suddenly, as they pulled, thunder
came on and an earthquake at the same time with the thunder; and the
crew of the trireme who were pulling were made beside themselves by
these, and being brought to this condition they killed one another as if
they were enemies, until at last but one of the whole number was left;
and he returned alone to Phaleron.

86. Thus the Athenians report that it came to pass: but the Eginetans
say that it was not with a single ship that the Athenians came; for
a single ship, and even a few more than one, they could have easily
repelled, even if they had not happened to have ships of their own: but
they say that the Athenians sailed upon their country with a large fleet
of ships, and they gave way before them and did not fight a sea-battle.
They cannot however declare with certainty whether they gave way thus
because they admitted that they were not strong enough to fight the
battle by sea, or because they intended to do something of the kind
which they actually did. The Athenians then, they say, as no one met
them in fight, landed from their ships and made for the images; but
not being able to tear them up from their pedestals, at last they threw
ropes round them and began to pull, until the images, as they were being
pulled, did both the same thing (and here they report something which
I cannot believe, but some other man may), for they say that the images
fell upon their knees to them and that they continue to be in that
position ever since this time. The Athenians, they say, were doing thus;
and meanwhile they themselves (say the Eginetans), being informed that
the Athenians were about to make an expedition against them, got the
Argives to help them; and just when the Athenians had disembarked upon
the Eginetan land, the Argives had come to their rescue, and not having
been perceived when they passed over from Epidauros to the island, they
fell upon the Athenians before these had heard anything of the matter,
cutting them off secretly from the way to their ships; and at this
moment it was that the thunder and the earthquake came upon them.

87. This is the report which is given by the Argives and Eginetans both,
and it is admitted by the Athenians also that but one alone of them
survived and came back to Attica: only the Argives say that this one
remained alive from destruction wrought by them upon the army of
Athens, while the Athenians say that the divine power was the destroyer.
However, even this one man did not remain alive, but perished, they say,
in the following manner:--when he returned to Athens he reported the
calamity which had happened; and the wives of the men who had gone on
the expedition to Egina, hearing it and being very indignant that he
alone of all had survived, came round this man and proceeded to stab him
with the brooches of their mantles, each one of them asking of him where
her husband was. Thus he was slain; and to the Athenians it seemed
that the deed of the women was a much more terrible thing even than
the calamity which had happened; and not knowing, it is said, how they
should punish the women in any other way, they changed their fashion of
dress to that of Ionia,--for before this the women of the Athenians wore
Dorian dress, very like that of Corinth,--they changed it therefore to
the linen tunic, in order that they might not have use for brooches.

88. In truth however this fashion of dress is not Ionian originally but
Carian, for the old Hellenic fashion of dress for women was universally
the same as that which we now call Dorian. Moreover it is said that with
reference to these events the Argives and Eginetans made it a custom
among themselves in both countries 72 to have the brooches made half
as large again as the size which was then established in use, and that
their women should offer brooches especially in the temple of these
goddesses, 73 and also that they should carry neither pottery of Athens
nor anything else of Athenian make to the temple, but that it should be
the custom for the future to drink there from pitchers made in the lands
themselves.

89. The women of the Argives and Eginetans from this time onwards
because of the quarrel with the Athenians continued to wear brooches
larger than before, and still do so even to my time; and the origin of
the enmity of the Athenians towards the Eginetans came in the manner
which has been said. So at this time, when the Thebans invaded them, the
Eginetans readily came to the assistance of the Boeotians, calling to
mind what occurred about the images. The Eginetans then were laying
waste, as I have said, the coast regions of Attica; and when the
Athenians were resolved to make an expedition against the Eginetans,
an oracle came to them from Delphi bidding them stay for thirty years
reckoned from the time of the wrong done by the Eginetans, and in the
one-and-thirtieth year to appoint a sacred enclosure for Aiacos and then
to begin the war against the Eginetans, and they would succeed as they
desired; but if they should make an expedition against them at once,
they would suffer in the meantime very much evil and also inflict very
much, but at last they would subdue them. When the Athenians heard the
report of this, they appointed a sacred enclosure for Aiacos, namely
that which is now established close to the market-place, but they could
not endure to hear that they must stay for thirty years, when they had
suffered injuries from the Eginetans.

90. While however they were preparing to take vengeance, a matter arose
from the Lacedemonians which provided a hindrance to them: for the
Lacedemonians, having learnt that which had been contrived by the
Alcmaionidai with respect to the Pythian prophetess, and that which had
been contrived by the Pythian prophetess against themselves and the sons
of Peisistratos, were doubly grieved, not only because they had driven
out into exile men who were their guest-friends, but also because after
they had done this no gratitude was shown to them by the Athenians.
Moreover in addition to this, they were urged on by the oracles which
said that many injuries would be suffered by them from the Athenians;
of which oracles they had not been aware of before, but they had come to
know them, since Cleomenes had brought them to Sparta. In fact Cleomenes
had obtained from the Acropolis of the Athenians those oracles which the
sons of Peisistratos possessed before and had left in the temple when
they were driven out; and Cleomenes recovered them after they had been
left behind.

91. At this time, then, when the Lacedemonians had recovered the oracles
and when they saw that the Athenians were increasing in power and were
not at all willing to submit to them, observing that the Athenian race
now that it was free was becoming 74 a match for their own, whereas when
held down by despots it was weak and ready to be ruled,--perceiving, I
say, all these things, they sent for Hippias the son of Peisistratos to
come from Sigeion on the Hellespont, whither the family of Peisistratos
go for refuge; 75 and when Hippias had come upon the summons, the
Spartans sent also for envoys to come from their other allies and spoke
to them as follows: "Allies, we are conscious within ourselves that we
have not acted rightly; for incited by counterfeit oracles we drove out
into exile men who were very closely united with us as guest-friends and
who undertook the task of rendering Athens submissive to us, and then
after having done this we delivered over the State to a thankless
populace, which so soon as it had raised its head, having been freed by
our means drove out us and our king with wanton outrage; and now exalted
with pride 76 it is increasing in power, so that the neighbours of these
men first of all, that is the Boeotians and Chalkidians, have already
learnt, and perhaps some others also will afterwards learn, that they
committed an error. 7601 As however we erred in doing those things of
which we have spoken, we will try now to take vengeance on them, going
thither together with you; 77 since it was for this very purpose that we
sent for Hippias, whom ye see here, and for you also, to come from your
cities, in order that with common counsel and a common force we might
conduct him to Athens and render back to him that which we formerly took
away."

92. Thus they spoke; but the majority of the allies did not approve of
their words. The rest however kept silence, but the Corinthian Socles 78
spoke as follows: (a) "Surely now the heaven shall be below the earth,
and the earth raised up on high above the heaven, and men shall have
their dwelling in the sea, and fishes shall have that habitation which
men had before, seeing that ye, Lacedemonians, are doing away with free
governments 79 and are preparing to bring back despotism again into our
cities, than which there is no more unjust or more murderous thing
among men. For if in truth this seems to you to be good, namely that
the cities should be ruled by despots, do ye yourselves first set up a
despot in your own State, and then endeavour to establish them also for
others: but as it is, ye are acting unfairly towards your allies, seeing
that ye have had no experience of despots yourselves and provide with
the greatest care at Sparta that this may never come to pass. If
however ye had had experience of it, as we have had, ye would be able
to contribute juster opinions of it than at present. (b) For the
established order of the Corinthian State was this:--the government was
an oligarchy, and the oligarchs, who were called Bacchiadai, had control
over the State and made marriages among themselves. 80 Now one of these
men, named Amphion, had a daughter born to him who was lame, and her
name was Labda. This daughter, since none of the Bacchiadai wished to
marry her, was taken to wife by Aëtion the son of Echecrates, who was of
the deme of Petra, but by original descent a Lapith and of the race of
Caineus. Neither from this wife nor from another were children born to
him, therefore he set out to Delphi to inquire about offspring; and as
he entered, forthwith the prophetess addressed him in these lines:


  "'Much to be honoured art thou, yet none doth render thee honour. 81
  Labda conceives, and a rolling rock will she bear, which shall ruin
  Down on the heads of the kings, and with chastisement visit Corinthos.'

This answer given to Aëtion was by some means reported to the
Bacchiadai, to whom the oracle which had come to Corinth before this was
not intelligible, an oracle which had reference to the same thing as
that of Aëtion and said thus:


 "'An eagle conceives in the rocks 82 and shall bear a ravening lion,
  Strong and fierce to devour, who the knees of many shall loosen.
  Ponder this well in your minds, I bid you, Corinthians, whose dwelling
  Lies about fair Peirene's spring and in craggy Corinthos.' 83

(c) This oracle, I say, having come before to the Bacchiadai was
obscure; but afterwards when they heard that which had come to Aëtion,
forthwith they understood the former also, that it was in accord with
that of Aëtion; and understanding this one also they kept quiet,
desiring to destroy the offspring which should be born to Aëtion. Then,
so soon as his wife bore a child, they sent ten of their own number to
the deme in which Aëtion had his dwelling, to slay the child; and when
these had come to Petra and had passed into the court of Aëtion's house,
they asked for the child; and Labda, not knowing anything of the purpose
for which they had come, and supposing them to be asking for the child
on account of friendly feeling towards its father, brought it and placed
it in the hands of one of them. Now they, it seems, had resolved by the
way that the first of them who received the child should dash it upon
the ground. However, when Labda brought and gave it, it happened by
divine providence that the child smiled at the man who had received it;
and when he perceived this, a feeling of compassion prevented him from
killing it, and having this compassion he delivered it to the next man,
and he to the third. Thus it passed through the hands of all the ten,
delivered from one to another, since none of them could bring himself to
destroy its life. So they gave the child back to its mother and went
out; and then standing by the doors they abused and found fault with one
another, laying blame especially on the one who had first received the
child, because he had not done according to that which had been
resolved; until at last after some time they determined again to enter
and all to take a share in the murder. (d) From the offspring of Aëtion
however it was destined that evils should spring up for Corinth: for
Labda was listening to all this as she stood close by the door, and
fearing lest they should change their mind and take the child a second
time and kill it, she carried it and concealed it in the place which
seemed to her the least likely to be discovered, that is to say a
corn-chest, 84 feeling sure that if they should return and come to a
search, they were likely to examine everything: and this in fact
happened. So when they had come, and searching had failed to find it,
they thought it best to return and say to those who had sent them that
they had done all that which they had been charged by them to do. (e)
They then having departed said this; and after this the son of Aëtion
grew, and because he had escaped this danger, the name of Kypselos was
given him as a surname derived from the corn-chest. Then when Kypselos
had grown to manhood and was seeking divination, a two-edged 85 answer
was given him at Delphi, placing trust in which he made an attempt upon
Corinth and obtained possession of it. Now the answer was as follows:


 "'Happy is this man's lot of a truth, who enters my dwelling,
  Offspring of Aëtion, he shall rule in famous Corinthos,
  Kypselos, he and his sons, but his children's children no longer.'

Such was the oracle: and Kypselos when he became despot was a man of
this character,--many of the Corinthians he drove into exile, many he
deprived of their wealth, and very many more of their lives. (f) And
when he had reigned for thirty years and had brought his life to a
prosperous end, his son Periander became his successor in the despotism.
Now Periander at first was milder than his father; but after he had had
dealings through messengers with Thrasybulos the despot of Miletos, he
became far more murderous even than Kypselos. For he sent a messenger to
Thrasybulos and asked what settlement of affairs was the safest for him
to make, in order that he might best govern his State: and Thrasybulos
led forth the messenger who had come from Periander out of the city, and
entered into a field of growing corn; and as he passed through the crop
of corn, while inquiring and asking questions repeatedly 86 of the
messenger about the occasion of his coming from Corinth, he kept cutting
off the heads of those ears of corn which he saw higher than the rest;
and as he cut off their heads he cast them away, until he had destroyed
in this manner the finest and richest part of the crop. So having passed
through the place and having suggested no word of counsel, he dismissed
the messenger. When the messenger returned to Corinth, Periander was
anxious to hear the counsel which had been given; but he said that
Thrasybulos had given him no counsel, and added that he wondered at the
deed of Periander in sending him to such a man, for the man was out of
his senses and a waster of his own goods,--relating at the same time
that which he had seen Thrasybulos do. (g) So Periander, understanding
that which had been done and perceiving that Thrasybulos counselled him
to put to death those who were eminent among his subjects, began then to
display all manner of evil treatment to the citizens of the State; for
whatsoever Kypselos had left undone in killing and driving into exile,
this Periander completed. And in one day he stripped all the wives of
the Corinthians of their clothing on account of his own wife Melissa.
For when he had sent messengers to the Thesprotians on the river Acheron
to ask the Oracle of the dead about a deposit made with him by a
guest-friend, Melissa appeared and said she would not tell in what place
the deposit was laid, for she was cold and had no clothes, since those
which he had buried with her were of no use to her, not having been
burnt; and this, she said, would be an evidence to him that she was
speaking the truth, namely that when the oven was cold, Periander had
put his loaves into it. When the report of this was brought back to
Periander, the token made him believe, because he had had commerce with
Melissa after she was dead; and straightway after receiving the message
he caused proclamation to be made that all the wives of the Corinthians
should come out to the temple of Hera. They accordingly went as to a
festival in their fairest adornment; and he having set the spearmen of
his guard in ambush, stripped them all alike, both the free women and
their attendant; and having gathered together all their clothes in a
place dug out, he set fire to them, praying at the same time to Melissa.
Then after he had done this and had sent a second time, the apparition
of Melissa told him in what spot he had laid the deposit entrusted to
him by his guest-friend.

"Such a thing, ye must know, Lacedemonians, is despotism, and such are
its deeds: and we Corinthians marvelled much at first when we saw that
ye were sending for Hippias, and now we marvel even more because ye say
these things; and we adjure you, calling upon the gods of Hellas, not
to establish despotisms in the cities. If however ye will not cease from
your design, but endeavour to restore Hippias contrary to that which is
just, know that the Corinthians at least do not give their consent to
that which ye do."

93. Socles being the envoy of Corinth thus spoke, and Hippias made
answer to him, calling to witness the same gods as he, that assuredly
the Corinthians would more than all others regret the loss of the sons
of Peisistratos, when the appointed days should have come for them to
be troubled by the Athenians. Thus Hippias made answer, being acquainted
with the oracles more exactly than any other man: but the rest of the
allies, who for a time had restrained themselves and kept silence, when
they heard Socles speak freely, gave utterance every one of them to
that which they felt, and adopted the opinion of the Corinthian envoy,
adjuring the Lacedemonians not to do any violence to a city of Hellas.

94. Thus was this brought to an end: and Hippias being dismissed from
thence had Anthemus offered to him by Amyntas king of the Macedonians
and Iolcos by the Thessalians. He however accepted neither of these, but
retired again to Sigeion; which city Peisistratos had taken by force
of arms from the Mytilenians, and having got possession of it, had
appointed his own natural son Hegesistratos, born of an Argive woman, to
be despot of it: he however did not without a struggle keep possession
of that which he received from Peisistratos; for the Mytilenians and
Athenians carried on war for a long time, having their strongholds
respectively at Achilleion and at Sigeion, the one side demanding that
the place be restored to them, and the Athenians on the other hand not
admitting this demand, but proving by argument that the Aiolians had
no better claim to the territory of Ilion than they and the rest of the
Hellenes, as many as joined with Menelaos in exacting vengeance for the
rape of Helen.

95. Now while these carried on the war, besides many other things of
various kinds which occurred in the battles, once when a fight took
place and the Athenians were conquering, Alcaios the poet, taking to
flight, escaped indeed himself, but the Athenians retained possession of
his arms and hung them up on the walls of the temple of Athene which
is at Sigeion. About this matter Alcaios composed a song and sent it to
Mytilene, reporting therein his misadventure to one Melanippos, who was
his friend. Finally Periander the son of Kypselos made peace between the
Athenians and the Mytilenians, 87 for to him they referred the matter
as arbitrator; and he made peace between them on the condition that each
should continue to occupy that territory which they then possessed.

96. Sigeion then in this matter had come under the rule of the
Athenians. And when Hippias had returned to Asia from Lacedemon, he
set everything in motion, stirring up enmity between the Athenians and
Artaphrenes, and using every means to secure that Athens should come
under the rule of himself and of Dareios. Hippias, I say, was thus
engaged; and the Athenians meanwhile hearing of these things sent envoys
to Sardis, and endeavoured to prevent the Persians from following the
suggestions of the exiled Athenians. Artaphrenes however commanded
them, if they desired to be preserved from ruin, to receive Hippias back
again. This proposal the Athenians were not by any means disposed to
accept when it was reported; and as they did not accept this, it became
at once a commonly received opinion among them that they were enemies of
the Persians.

97. While they had these thoughts and had been set at enmity with the
Persians, at this very time Aristagoras the Milesian, ordered away from
Sparta by Cleomenes the Lacedemonian, arrived at Athens; for this
was the city which had most power of all the rest besides Sparta. And
Aristagoras came forward before the assembly of the people and said the
same things as he had said at Sparta about the wealth which there was in
Asia, and about the Persian manner of making war, how they used neither
shield nor spear and were easy to overcome. Thus I say he said, and
also he added this, namely that the Milesians were colonists from the
Athenians, and that it was reasonable that the Athenians should rescue
them, since they had such great power; and there was nothing which he
did not promise, being very urgent in his request, until at last he
persuaded them: for it would seem that it is easier to deceive many than
one, seeing that, though he did not prove able to deceive Cleomenes the
Lacedemonian by himself, yet he did this to thirty thousand Athenians.
The Athenians then, I say, being persuaded, voted a resolution to
despatch twenty ships to help the Ionians, and appointed to command them
Melanthios one of their citizens, who was in all things highly reputed.
These ships proved to be the beginning of evils for the Hellenes and the
Barbarians.

98. Aristagoras however sailed on before and came to Miletos; and then
having devised a plan from which no advantage was likely to come for the
Ionians (nor indeed was he doing what he did with a view to that, but
in order to vex king Dareios), he sent a man to Phrygia to the Paionians
who had been taken captive by Megabazos from the river Strymon, and who
were dwelling in a district and village of Phrygia apart by themselves;
and when the messenger came to the Paionians he spoke these words:
"Paionians, Aristagoras the despot of Miletos sent me to offer to you
salvation, if ye shall be willing to do as he says; for now all Ionia
has revolted from the king and ye have an opportunity of coming safe to
your own land: to reach the sea shall be your concern, and after this it
shall be thenceforth ours." The Paionians hearing this received it as
a most welcome proposal, and taking with them their children and their
women they began a flight to the sea; some of them however were struck
with fear and remained in the place where they were. Having come to the
coast the Paionians crossed over thence to Chios, and when they were
already in Chios there arrived in their track a large body of Persian
horsemen pursuing the Paionians. These, as they did not overtake them,
sent over to Chios to bid the Paionians return back: the Paionians
however did not accept their proposal, but the men of Chios conveyed
them from Chios to Lesbos, and the Lesbians brought them to Doriscos,
and thence they proceeded by land and came to Paionia.

99. Aristagoras meanwhile, when the Athenians had arrived with twenty
ships, bringing with them also five triremes of the Eretrians, joined
the expedition not for the sake of the Athenians but of the Milesians
themselves, to repay them a debt which they owed (for the Milesians in
former times had borne with the Eretrians the burden of all that war
which they had with the Chalkidians at the time when the Chalkidians
on their side were helped by the Samians against the Eretrians and
Milesians),--when these, I say, had arrived and the other allies were
on the spot, Aristagoras proceeded to make a march upon Sardis. On
this march he did not go himself, but remained at Miletos and appointed
others to be in command of the Milesians, namely his brother Charopinos
and of the other citizens one Hermophantos. 8701

100. With this force then the Ionians came to Ephesos, and leaving their
ships at Coresos in the land of Ephesos, went up themselves in a large
body, taking Ephesians to guide them in their march. So they marched
along by the river Caÿster, and then when they arrived after crossing
the range of Tmolos, they took Sardis without any resistance, all except
the citadel, but the citadel Artaphrenes himself saved from capture,
having with him a considerable force of men.

101. From plundering this city after they had taken it they were
prevented by this:--the houses in Sardis were mostly built of reeds,
and even those of them which were of brick had their roofs thatched with
reeds: of these houses one was set on fire by a soldier, and forthwith
the fire going on from house to house began to spread over the whole
town. So then as the town was on fire, the Lydians and all the Persians
who were in the city being cut off from escape, since the fire was
prevailing in the extremities round about them, and not having any way
out of the town, flowed together to the market-place and to the river
Pactolos, which brings down gold-dust for them from Tmolos, flowing
through the middle of their market-place, and then runs out into the
river Hermos, and this into the sea;--to this Pactolos, I say, and to
the market-place the Lydians and Persians gathered themselves together,
and were compelled to defend themselves. The Ionians then, seeing some
of the enemy standing on their defence and others in great numbers
coming on to the attack, were struck with fear and retired to the
mountain called Tmolos, and after that at nightfall departed to go to
their ships.

102. Sardis was then destroyed by fire, and in it also the temple of the
native goddess Hybebe; which the Persians alleged afterwards as a reason
for setting on fire in return the temples in the land of the Hellenes.
However at the time of which I speak the Persians who occupied districts
within the river Halys, informed beforehand of this movement, were
gathering together and coming to the help of the Lydians; and, as it
chanced, they found when they came that the Ionians no longer were in
Sardis; but they followed closely in their track and came up with them
at Ephesos: and the Ionians stood indeed against them in array, but
when they joined battle they had very much the worse; and besides other
persons of note whom the Persians slaughtered, there fell also Eualkides
commander of the Eretrians, a man who had won wreaths in contests of
the games and who was much celebrated by Simonides of Keos: and those of
them who survived the battle dispersed to their various cities.

103. Thus then they fought at that time; and after the battle the
Athenians left the Ionians together, and when Aristagoras was urgent
in calling upon them by messengers for assistance, they said that
they would not help them: the Ionians, however, though deprived of the
alliance of the Athenians, none the less continued to prepare for the
war with the king, so great had been the offences already committed by
them against Dareios. They sailed moreover to the Hellespont and brought
under their power Byzantion and all the other cities which are in those
parts; and then having sailed forth out of the Hellespont, they gained
in addition the most part of Caria to be in alliance with them: for even
Caunos, which before was not willing to be their ally, then, after they
had burnt Sardis, was added to them also.

104. The Cyprians too, excepting those of Amathus, were added
voluntarily to their alliance; for these also had revolted from the
Medes in the following manner:--there was one Onesilos, younger brother
of Gorgos king of Salamis, and son of Chersis, the son of Siromos, the
son of Euelthon. This man in former times too had been wont often to
advise Gorgos to make revolt from the king, and at this time, when
he heard that the Ionians had revolted, he pressed him very hard and
endeavoured to urge him to it. Since however he could not persuade
Gorgos, Onesilos watched for a time when he had gone forth out of the
city of Salamis, and then together with the men of his own faction he
shut him out of the gates. Gorgos accordingly being robbed of the city
went for refuge to the Medes, and Onesilos was ruler of Salamis and
endeavoured to persuade all the men of Cyprus to join him in revolt. The
others then he persuaded; but since those of Amathus were not willing to
do as he desired, he sat down before their city and besieged it.

105. Onesilos then was besieging Amathus; and meanwhile, when it was
reported to king Dareios that Sardis had been captured and burnt by the
Athenians and the Ionians together, and that the leader of the league
for being about these things 88 was the Milesian Aristagoras, it is said
that at first being informed of this he made no account of the Ionians,
because he knew that they at all events would not escape unpunished for
their revolt, but he inquired into who the Athenians were; and when
he had been informed, he asked for his bow, and having received it
and placed an arrow upon the string, he discharged it upwards towards
heaven, and as he shot into the air he said: "Zeus, that it may be
granted me to take vengeance upon the Athenians!" Having so said he
charged one of his attendants, that when dinner was set before the king
he should say always three times: "Master, remember the Athenians."

106. When he had given this charge, he called into his presence
Histiaios the Milesian, whom Dareios had now been keeping with him for a
long time, and said: "I am informed, Histiaios, that thy deputy, to whom
thou didst depute the government of Miletos, has made rebellion against
me; for he brought in men against me from the other continent and
persuaded the Ionians also,--who shall pay the penalty to me for that
which they did,--these, I say, he persuaded to go together with them,
and thus he robbed me of Sardis. Now therefore how thinkest thou that
this is well? and how without thy counsels was anything of this kind
done? Take heed lest thou afterwards find reason to blame thyself for
this." Histiaios replied: "O king, what manner of speech is this that
thou hast uttered, saying that I counselled a matter from which it was
likely that any vexation would grow for thee, either great or small?
What have I to seek for in addition to that which I have, that I should
do these things; and of what am I in want? for I have everything that
thou hast, and I am thought worthy by thee to hear all thy counsels.
Nay, but if my deputy is indeed acting in any such manner as thou
hast said, be assured that he has done it merely on his own account. I
however, for my part, do not even admit the report to be true, that the
Milesians and my deputy are acting in any rebellious fashion against thy
power: but if it prove that they are indeed doing anything of that kind,
and if that which thou hast heard, O king, be the truth, learn then what
a thing thou didst in removing me away from the sea-coast; for it seems
that the Ionians, when I had gone out of the sight of their eyes, did
that which they had long had a desire to do; whereas if I had been in
Ionia, not a city would have made the least movement. Now therefore as
quickly as possible let me set forth to go to Ionia, that I may order
all these matters for thee as they were before, and deliver into thy
hands this deputy of Miletos who contrived these things: and when I have
done this after thy mind, I swear by the gods of the royal house that I
will not put off from me the tunic which I wear when I go down to Ionia,
until I have made Sardinia tributary to thee, which is the largest of
all islands."

107. Thus saying Histiaios endeavoured to deceive the king, and
Dareios was persuaded and let him go, charging him, when he should have
accomplished that which he had promised, to return to him again at Susa.

108. In the meantime, while the news about Sardis was going up to the
king, and while Dareios, after doing that which he did with the bow,
came to speech with Histiaios, and Histiaios having been let go by
Dareios was making his journey to the sea-coast,--during all that time
the events were happening which here follow.--As Onesilos of Salamis
was besieging those of Amathus, it was reported to him that Artybios
a Persian, bringing with him in ships a large Persian army, was to be
expected shortly to arrive in Cyprus. Being informed of this, Onesilos
sent heralds to different places in Ionia to summon the Ionians to his
assistance; and they took counsel together and came without delay with a
large force. Now the Ionians arrived in Cyprus just at the time when the
Persians having crossed over in ships from Kilikia were proceeding by
land to attack Salamis, while the Phenicians with the ships were sailing
round the headland which is called the "Keys of Cyprus."

109. This being the case, the despots of Cyprus called together the
commanders of the Ionians and said: "Ionians, we of Cyprus give you
a choice which enemy ye will rather fight with, the Persians or the
Phenicians: for if ye will rather array yourselves on land and make
trial of the Persians in fight, it is time now for you to disembark from
your ships and array yourselves on the land, and for us to embark in
your ships to contend against the Phenicians; but if on the other hand
ye will rather make trial of the Phenicians,--whichever of these two ye
shall choose, ye must endeavour that, so far as it rests with you, both
Ionia and Cyprus shall be free." To this the Ionians replied: "We were
sent out by the common authority of the Ionians to guard the sea, and
not to deliver our ships to the Cyprians and ourselves fight with the
Persians on land. We therefore will endeavour to do good service in that
place to which we were appointed; and ye must call to mind all the evils
which ye suffered from the Medes, when ye were in slavery to them, and
prove yourselves good men."

110. The Ionians made answer in these words; and afterwards, when the
Persians had come to the plain of Salamis, the kings of the Cyprians set
in order their array, choosing the best part of the troops of Salamis
and of Soloi to be arrayed against the Persians and setting the other
Cyprians against the rest of the enemy's troops; and against Artybios,
the commander of the Persians, Onesilos took up his place in the array
by his own free choice.

111. Now Artybios was riding a horse which had been trained to rear
up against a hoplite. Onesilos accordingly being informed of this, and
having a shield-bearer, by race of Caria, who was of very good repute
as a soldier and full of courage besides, 89 said to this man: "I am
informed that the horse of Artybios rears upright and works both with
his feet and his mouth against any whom he is brought to attack. Do thou
therefore consider the matter, and tell me forthwith which of the two
thou wilt rather watch for and strike, the horse or Artybios himself."
To this his attendant replied: "O king, I am ready to do both or either
of these two things, and in every case to do that which thou shalt
appoint for me; but I will declare to thee the way in which I think it
will be most suitable 90 for thy condition. I say that it is right for
one who is king and commander to fight with a king and commander; for if
thou shalt slay the commander of the enemy, it turns to great glory for
thee; and again, if he shall slay thee, which heaven forbid, even death
when it is at the hands of a worthy foe is but half to be lamented: but
for us who are under thy command it is suitable to fight with the others
who are under his command and with his horse: and of the tricks of the
horse have thou no fear at all, for I engage to thee that after this
at least he shall never stand against any man more." Thus he spoke; and
shortly afterwards the opposed forces joined battle both on land and
with their ships.

112. On that day the Ionians for their part greatly distinguished
themselves and overcame the Phenicians, and of them the Samians were
best: and meanwhile on land, when the armies met, they came to close
quarters and fought; and as regards the two commanders, what happened
was this:--when Artybios came to fight with Onesilos sitting upon his
horse, Onesilos, as he had concerted with his shield-bearer, struck at
Artybios himself, when he came to fight with him; and when the horse put
its hoofs against the shield of Onesilos, then the Carian struck with a
falchion 91 and smote off the horse's feet.

113. So Artybios the commander of the Persians fell there on the spot
together with his horse: and while the others also were fighting,
Stesenor the despot of Curion deserted them, having with him a
large force of men,--now these Curians are said to be settlers
from Argos,--and when the Curians had deserted, forthwith also the
war-chariots of the men of Salamis proceeded to do the same as the
Curians. When these things took place, the Persians had the advantage
over the Cyprians; and after their army had been put to rout, many
others fell and among them Onesilos the son of Chersis, he who brought
about the revolt of the Cyprians, and also the king of the Solians,
Aristokypros the son of Philokypros,--that Philokypros whom Solon the
Athenian, when he came to Cyprus, commended in verse above all other
despots.

114. So the men of Amathus cut off the head of Onesilos, because he had
besieged them; and having brought it to Amathus they hung it over the
gate of the city: and as the head hung there, when it had now become a
hollow, a swarm of bees entered into it and filled it with honeycomb.
This having so come to pass, the Amathusians consulted an Oracle about
the head, and they received an answer bidding them take it down and bury
it and sacrifice to Onesilos every year as a hero; and if they did this,
it would go better with them.

115. The Amathusians accordingly continued to do so even to my time. But
the Ionians who had fought the sea-fight in Cyprus, when they perceived
that the fortunes of Onesilos were ruined and that the cities of the
Cyprians were besieged, except Salamis, and that this city had been
delivered over by the Salaminians to Gorgos the former king,--as soon as
they perceived this, the Ionians sailed away back to Ionia. Now of the
cities in Cyprus Soloi held out for the longest time under the siege;
and the Persians took it in the fifth month by undermining the wall
round.

116. The Cyprians then, after they had made themselves free for one
year, had again been reduced to slavery afresh: and meanwhile Daurises,
who was married to a daughter of Dareios, and Hymaies and Otanes, who
were also Persian commanders and were married also to daughters
of Dareios, after they had pursued those Ionians who had made the
expedition to Sardis and defeating them in battle had driven them
by force to their ships,--after this distributed the cities amongst
themselves and proceeded to sack them.

117. Daurises directed his march to the cities on the Hellespont, and he
took Dardanos and Abydos and Percote and Lampsacos and Paisos, of these
he took on each day one; and as he was marching from Paisos against the
city of Parion, the report came that the Carians had made common cause
with the Ionians and were in revolt from the Persians. He turned back
therefore from the Hellespont and marched his army upon Caria. 118.
And, as it chanced, a report of this was brought to the Carians before
Daurises arrived; and the Carians being informed of it gathered together
at the place which is called the "White Pillars" and at the river
Marsyas, which flows from the region of Idrias and runs out into the
Maiander. When the Carians had been gathered together there, among many
other counsels which were given, the best, as it seems to me, was that
of Pixodaros the son of Mausolos, a man of Kindye, who was married to
the daughter of the king of the Kilikians, Syennesis. The opinion
of this man was to the effect that the Carians should cross over the
Maiander and engage battle with the Persians having the river at their
backs, in order that the Carians, not being able to fly backwards and
being compelled to remain where they were, might prove themselves even
better men in fight than they naturally would. This opinion did not
prevail; but they resolved that the Persians rather than themselves
should have the Maiander at their backs, evidently 92 in order that if
there should be a flight of the Persians and they should be worsted in
the battle, they might never return home, but might fall into the river.

119. After this, when the Persians had come and had crossed the
Maiander, the Carians engaged with the Persians on the river Marsyas and
fought a battle which was obstinately contested and lasted long; but at
length they were worsted by superior numbers: and of the Persians there
fell as many as two thousand, but of the Carians ten thousand. Then
those of them who escaped were shut up in Labraunda 93 within
the sanctuary of Zeus Stratios, which is a large sacred grove of
plane-trees; now the Carians are the only men we know who offer
sacrifices to Zeus Stratios. These men then, being shut up there, were
taking counsel together about their safety, whether they would fare
better if they delivered themselves over to the Persians or if they left
Asia altogether.

120. And while they were thus taking counsel, there came to their aid
the Milesians and their allies. Then the Carians dismissed the plans
which they were before considering and prepared to renew the war again
from the beginning: and when the Persians came to attack them, they
engaged with them and fought a battle, and they were worsted yet more
completely than before; and while many were slain of all parties, 94 the
Milesians suffered most.

121. Then afterwards the Carians repaired this loss and retrieved their
defeat; for being informed that the Persians had set forth to march upon
their cities, they laid an ambush on the road which is by Pedasos, 95
and the Persians falling into it by night were destroyed both they and
their commanders, namely Daurises and Amorges and Sisimakes; and with
them died also Myrsos the son of Gyges. Of this ambush the leader was
Heracleides the son of Ibanollis, a man of Mylasa.

122. These then of the Persians were thus destroyed; and meanwhile
Hymaies, who was another of those who pursued after the Ionians that had
made the expedition to Sardis, directed his march to the Propontis and
took Kios in Mysia; and having conquered this city, when he was informed
that Daurises had left the Hellespont and was marching towards Caria, he
left the Propontis and led his army to the Hellespont: and he conquered
all the Aiolians who occupy the district of Ilion, and also the
Gergithes, who were left behind as a remnant of the ancient Teucrians.
While conquering these tribes Hymaies himself ended his life by sickness
in the land of Troas.

123. He thus brought his life to an end; and Artaphrenes the governor
of the province of Sardis was appointed with Otanes the third of the
commanders to make the expedition against Ionia and that part of Aiolia
which bordered upon it. Of Ionia these took the city of Clazomenai, and
of the Aiolians Kyme.

124. While the cities were thus being taken, Aristagoras the Milesian,
being, as he proved in this instance, not of very distinguished courage,
since after having disturbed Ionia and made preparation of great matters
96 he counselled running away when he saw these things, (moreover it
had become clear to him that it was impossible to overcome king
Dareios),--he, I say, having regard to these things, called together
those of his own party and took counsel with them, saying that it was
better that there should be a refuge prepared for them, in case that
they should after all be driven out from Miletos, and proposing the
question whether he should lead them from thence to Sardinia, to form
a colony there, or to Myrkinos in the land of the Edonians, which
Histiaios had been fortifying, having received it as a gift from
Dareios. This was the question proposed by Aristagoras.

125. Now the opinion of Hecataios the son of Hegesander the historian
97 was that he should not take a colony to either of these places, but
build a wall of defence for himself in the island of Leros and keep
still, if he should be forced to leave Miletos; and afterwards with this
for his starting point he would be able to return to Miletos.

126. This was the counsel of Hecataios; but Aristagoras was most
inclined to go forth to Myrkinos. He therefore entrusted the government
of Miletos to Pythagoras, a man of repute among the citizens, and he
himself sailed away to Thrace, taking with him every one who desired to
go; and he took possession of the region for which he had set out.
But starting from this to make war, he perished by the hands of the
Thracians, that is both Aristagoras himself and his army, when he was
encamped about a certain city and the Thracians desired to go out from
it under a truce.

*****


