BOOK VI. THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED ERATO

1. Aristagoras accordingly, after having caused Ionia to revolt, thus
brought his life to an end; and meanwhile Histiaios the despot of
Miletos, having been let go by Dareios had arrived at Sardis: and when
he came from Susa, Artaphrenes the governor of Sardis asked him for what
reason he supposed the Ionians had revolted; and he said that he could
not tell, and moreover he expressed wonder at that which had happened,
pretending that he knew nothing of the state of affairs. Then
Artaphrenes seeing that he was using dissimulation said, having
knowledge of the truth about the revolt: "Thus it is with thee,
Histiaios, about these matters,--this shoe was stitched by thee, and put
on by Aristagoras.".

2. Thus said Artaphrenes with reference to the revolt; and Histiaios
fearing Artaphrenes because he understood the matter, ran away the
next night at nightfall and went to the sea-coast, having deceived king
Dareios, seeing that he had engaged to subdue Sardinia the largest of
islands, and instead of that he was endeavouring to take upon himself
leadership of the Ionians in the war against Dareios. Then having
crossed over to Chios he was put in bonds by the Chians, being accused
by them of working for a change of their State by suggestion of Dareios.
When however the Chians learnt the whole story and heard that he was an
enemy to the king, they released him..

3. Then Histiaios, being asked by the Ionians for what reason he had so
urgently charged Aristagoras to revolt from the king and had wrought so
great an evil for the Ionians, did not by any means declare to them
that which had been in truth the cause, but reported to them that king
Dareios had resolved to remove the Phenicians from their land and to
settle them in Ionia, and the Ionians in Phenicia; and for this reason,
he said, he had given the charge. Thus he attempted to alarm the
Ionians, although the king had never resolved to do so at all.

4. After this Histiaios acting through a messenger, namely Hermippos
a man of Atarneus, sent papers to the Persians who were at Sardis,
implying that he had already talked matters over with them about a
revolt: and Hermippos did not deliver them to those to whom he was sent,
but bore the papers and put them into the hands of Artaphrenes. He then,
perceiving all that was being done, bade Hermippos bear the papers sent
by Histiaios and deliver them to those to whom he was sent to bear
them, and to deliver to him the replies sent back by the Persians to
Histiaios. These things having been discovered, Artaphrenes upon that
put to death many of the Persians.

5. As regards Sardis therefore there was confusion of the design; and
when Histiaios had been disappointed of this hope, the Chians attempted
to restore him to Miletos at the request of Histiaios himself.
The Milesians, however, who had been rejoiced before to be rid of
Aristagoras, were by no means eager to receive another despot into their
land, seeing that they had tasted of liberty: and in fact Histiaios,
attempting to return to Miletos by force and under cover of night, was
wounded in the thigh by one of the Milesians. He then, being repulsed
from his own city, returned to Chios; and thence, as he could not
persuade the Chians to give him ships, he crossed over to Mytilene and
endeavoured to persuade the Lesbians to give him ships. So they manned
eight triremes and sailed with Histiaios to Byzantion, and stationing
themselves there they captured the ships which sailed out of the Pontus,
excepting where the crews of them said that they were ready to do the
bidding of Histiaios.

6. While Histiaios and the men of Mytilene were acting thus, a large
army both of sea and land forces was threatening to attack Miletos
itself; for the commanders of the Persians had joined together to form
one single army and were marching upon Miletos, considering the other
towns of less account. Of their naval force the most zealous were the
Phenicians, and with them also served the Cyprians, who had just been
subdued, and the Kilikians and Egyptians..

7. These, I say, were advancing upon Miletos and the rest of Ionia; and
meanwhile the Ionians being informed of this were sending deputies 1
chosen from themselves to the Panionion. 2 When these had arrived at
that place and took counsel together, they resolved not to gather a
land-army to oppose the Persians, but that the Milesians should defend
their walls by themselves, and that the Ionians should man their fleet,
leaving out not one of their ships, and having done so should assemble
as soon as possible at Lade, to fight a sea-battle in defence of
Miletos. Now Lade is a small island lying opposite the city of the
Milesians..

8. Then the Ionians manned their ships and came thither, and with them
also those Aiolians who inhabit Lesbos; and they were drawn up in
order thus:--the extremity of the line towards the East was held by the
Milesians themselves, who furnished eighty ships; next to them were
the Prienians with twelve ships and the men of Myus with three; next to
those of Myus were the Teians with seventeen ships, and after the
Teians the Chians with a hundred; after these were stationed the men
of Erythrai and of Phocaia, the former furnishing eight ships and the
latter three; next to the Phocaians were the Lesbians with seventy
ships, and last, holding the extremity of the line towards the West,
were stationed the Samians with sixty ships. Of all these the total
number proved to be three hundred and fifty-three triremes..

9. These were the ships of the Ionians; and of the Barbarians the number
of ships was six hundred. When these too were come to the Milesian coast
and their whole land-army was also there, then the commanders of the
Persians, being informed of the number of the Ionian ships, were struck
with fear lest they should be unable to overcome them, and thus on the
one hand should not be able to conquer Miletos from not having command
of the sea, and at the same time should run a risk of being punished by
Dareios. Reflecting upon these things they gathered together the despots
of the Ionians who were exiles with the Medes, having been deposed from
their governments by Aristagoras the Milesian, and who chanced to be
then joining in the expedition against Miletos,--of these men they
called together those who were present and spoke to them as follows:
"Ionians, now let each one of you show himself a benefactor of the
king's house, that is to say, let each one of you endeavour to detach
his own countrymen from the body of the alliance: and make your
proposals promising at the same time that they shall suffer nothing
unpleasant on account of the revolt, and neither their temples nor their
private houses shall be burnt, nor shall they have any worse treatment
than they had before this; but if they will not do so, but will by all
means enter into a contest with us, threaten them and tell them this,
which in truth shall happen to them, namely that if they are worsted in
the fight they shall be reduced to slavery, and we shall make their sons
eunuchs, and their maidens we shall remove to Bactria, and deliver their
land to others.".

10. They thus spoke; and the despots of Ionia sent each one by night
to his own people announcing to them this. The Ionians however, that
is those to whom these messages came, continued obstinate and would not
accept the thought of treason to their cause; and each people thought
that to them alone the Persians were sending this message.

11. This happened as soon as the Persians came to Miletos; and after
this the Ionians being gathered together at Lade held meetings; and
others no doubt also made speeches to them, but especially the Phocaian
commander Dionysios, who said as follows: "Seeing that our affairs are
set upon the razor's edge, Ionians, whether we shall be free or slaves,
and slaves too to be dealt with as runaways, now therefore if ye shall
be willing to take upon yourselves hardships, ye will have labour for
the time being, but ye will be able to overcome the enemy and be free;
whereas if ye continue to be self-indulgent and without discipline, I
have no hope for you that ye will not pay the penalty to the king for
your revolt. Nay, but do as I say, and deliver yourselves over to me;
and I engage, if the gods grant equal conditions, that either the
enemy will not fight with us, or that fighting he shall be greatly
discomfited.".

12. Hearing this the Ionians delivered themselves to Dionysios; and he
used to bring the ships out every day in single file, 3 that he might
practise the rowers by making the ships break through one another's
line, 4 and that he might get the fighting-men in the ships under arms;
an then for the rest of the day he would keep the ships at anchor; and
thus he gave the Ionians work to do during the whole day. For seven
days then they submitted and did that which he commanded; but on the
day after these the Ionians, being unaccustomed to such toils and
being exhausted with hard work and hot sun, spoke to one another thus:
"Against which of the deities have we offended, that we thus fill up the
measure of evil? for surely we have delivered ourselves to a Phocaian,
an impostor, who furnishes but three ships: and he has taken us into
his hands and maltreats us with evil dealing from which we can never
recover; and many of us in fact have fallen into sicknesses, and many
others, it may be expected, will suffer the same thing shortly; and for
us it is better to endure anything else in the world rather than these
ills, and to undergo the slavery which will come upon us, whatever that
shall be, rather than to be oppressed by that which we have now. Come,
let us not obey him after this any more." So they said, and forthwith
after this every one refused to obey him, and they pitched their tents
in the island like an army, and kept in the shade, and would not go on
board their ships or practise any exercises.

13. Perceiving this which was being done by the Ionians, the commanders
of the Samians then at length accepted from Aiakes the son of Syloson
those proposals which Aiakes sent before at the bidding of the Persians,
asking them to leave the alliance of the Ionians; the Samians, I say,
accepted these proposals, perceiving that there was great want of
discipline on the part of the Ionians, while at the same time it was
clear to them that it was impossible to overcome the power of the king;
and they well knew also that even if they should overcome the present
naval force of Dareios, 5 another would be upon them five times as
large. Having found an occasion 6 then, so soon as they saw that the
Ionians refused to be serviceable, they counted it gain for themselves
to save their temples and their private property. Now Aiakes, from whom
the Samians accepted the proposals, was the son of Syloson, the son of
Aiakes, and being despot of Samos he had been deprived of his rule by
Aristagoras the Milesian, like the other despots of Ionia..

14. So when the Phenicians sailed to the attack, the Ionians also put
out their ships from shore against them, sailing in single file: and
when they came near and engaged battle with one another, as regards what
followed I am not able exactly to record which of the Ionians showed
themselves cowards or good men in this sea-fight, for they throw blame
upon one another. The Samians however, it is said, according to their
agreement with Aiakes put up their sails then and set forth from their
place in the line to sail back to Samos, excepting only eleven ships:
of these the captains stayed in their places and took part in the
sea-fight, refusing to obey the commanders of their division; and the
public authority of the Samians granted them on account of this to have
their names written up on a pillar with their fathers' names also, 601
as having proved themselves good men; and this pillar exists still in
the market-place. Then the Lesbians also, when they saw that those next
them in order were taking to flight, did the same things as the Samians
had done, and so also most of the Ionians did the very same thing..

15. Of those which remained in their places in the sea-fight the Chians
suffered very severely, 7 since they displayed brilliant deeds of valour
and refused to play the coward. These furnished, as was before said,
a hundred ships and in each of them forty picked men of their citizens
served as fighting-men; 8 and when they saw the greater number of their
allies deserting them, they did not think fit to behave like the
cowards among them, but left along with a few only of their allies they
continued to fight and kept breaking through the enemy's line; until at
last, after they had conquered many ships of the enemy, they lost the
greater number of their own..

16. The Chians then with the remainder of their ships fled away to
their own land; but those of the Chians whose ships were disabled by the
damage which they had received, being pursued fled for refuge to Mycale;
and their ships they ran ashore there and left them behind, while the
men proceeded over the mainland on foot: and when the Chians had entered
the Ephesian territory on their way, then since 801 they came into it by
night and at a time when a festival of Thesmophoria was being celebrated
by the women of the place, the Ephesians, not having heard beforehand
how it was with the Chians and seeing that an armed body had entered
their land, supposed certainly that they were robbers and had a design
upon the women; so they came out to the rescue in a body and slew the
Chians.

17. Such was the fortune which befell these men: but Dionysios the
Phocaian, when he perceived that the cause of the Ionians was ruined,
after having taken three ships of the enemy sailed away, not to Phocaia
any more, for he knew well that it would be reduced to slavery together
with the rest of Ionia, and he sailed forthwith straight to Phenicia;
and having there sunk merchant ships and taken a great quantity of
goods, he sailed thence to Sicily. Then with that for his starting-point
he became a freebooter, not plundering any Hellenes, but Carthaginians
and Tyrsenians only.

18. The Persians, then, being conquerors of the Ionians in the
sea-fight, besieged Miletos by land and sea, undermining the walls and
bringing against it all manner of engines; and they took it completely 9
in the sixth year from the revolt of Aristagoras, and reduced the people
to slavery; so that the disaster agreed with the oracle which had been
uttered with reference to Miletos..

19. For when the Argives were inquiring at Delphi about the safety of
their city, there was given to them an oracle which applied to both,
that is to say, part of it had reference to the Argives themselves,
while that which was added afterwards referred to the Milesians. The
part of it which had reference to the Argives I will record when I reach
that place in the history, 10 but that which the Oracle uttered with
reference to the Milesians, who were not there present, is as follows:


 "And at that time, O Miletos, of evil deeds the contriver,
  Thou shalt be made for many a glorious gift and a banquet:
  Then shall thy wives be compelled to wash the feet of the long-haired,
  And in Didyma then my shrine shall be tended by others."

At the time of which I speak these things came upon the Milesians, since
most of the men were killed by the Persians, who are long-haired, and
the women and children were dealt with as slaves; and the temple at
Didyma, with the sacred building and the sanctuary of the Oracle, was
first plundered and then burnt. Of the things in this temple I have made
mention frequently in other parts of the history. 11.

20. After this the Milesians who had been taken prisoner were conducted
to Susa; and king Dareios did to them no other evil, but settled them
upon the Sea called Erythraian, in the city of Ampe, by which the Tigris
flows when it runs out into the sea. Of the Milesian land the Persians
themselves kept the surroundings of the city and the plain, but the
heights they gave to the Carians of Pedasa for a possession.

21. When the Milesians suffered this treatment from the Persians, the
men of Sybaris, who were dwelling in Laos and Skidros, being deprived of
their own city, did not repay like with like: for when Sybaris was taken
by the men of Croton, the Milesians all from youth upwards shaved their
heads and put on great mourning: for these cities were more than all
others of which we know bound together by ties of friendship. Not like
the Sybarites were the Athenians; for these made it clear that they were
grieved at the capture of Miletos, both in many other ways and also by
this, that when Phrynichos had composed a drama called the "Capture of
Miletos" and had put it on the stage, the body of spectators fell to
weeping, and the Athenians moreover fined the poet a thousand drachmas
on the ground that he had reminded them of their own calamities; and
they ordered also that no one in future should represent this drama.

22. Miletos then had been stripped bare of its former inhabitants: but
of the Samians they who had substance were by no means satisfied with
that which had been concerted by the commanders of their fleet with the
Medes; and taking counsel forthwith after the sea-fight it seemed good
to them, before their despot Aiakes arrived in the country, to sail away
and make a colony, and not to stay behind and be slaves of the Medes
and of Aiakes: for just at this time the people of Zancle in Sicily
were sending messengers to Ionia and inviting the Ionians to come to the
"Fair Strand," 1101 desiring there to found a city of Ionians. Now this
which is called the Fair Strand is in the land of the Sikelians and on
that side of Sicily which lies towards Tyrsenia. So when these gave the
invitation, the Samians alone of all the Ionians set forth, having with
them those of the Milesians who had escaped: and in the course of this
matter it happened as follows:--

23. The Samians as they made their way towards Sicily reached Locroi
Epizephyroi, and at the same time the people of Zancle, both themselves
and their king, whose name was Skythes, were encamped about a city
of the Sikelians, desiring to conquer it. Perceiving these things,
Anaxilaos the despot of Rhegion, being then at variance with those of
Zancle, communicated with the Samians and persuaded them that they ought
to leave the Fair Strand alone, to which they were sailing, and take
possession of Zancle instead, since it was left now without men to
defend it. The Samians accordingly did as he said and took possession of
Zancle; and upon this the men of Zancle, being informed that their city
was possessed by an enemy, set out to rescue it, and invited Hippocrates
the despot of Gela to help them, for he was their ally. When however
Hippocrates also with his army had come up to their rescue, first he put
Skythes the ruler of the Zanclaians in fetters, on the ground that he
had been the cause of the city being lost, and together with him his
brother Pythogenes, and sent them away to the town of Incyos; 12 then he
betrayed the cause of the remaining Zanclaians by coming to terms with
the Samians and exchanging oaths with them; and in return for this it
had been promised by the Samians that Hippocrates should receive as his
share the half of all the movable goods in the city and of the slaves,
and the whole of the property in the fields round. So the greater number
of the Zanclaians he put in bonds and kept himself as slaves, but the
chief men of them, three hundred in number, he gave to the Samians to
put to death; which however the Samians did not do.

24. Now Skythes the ruler of the Zanclaians escaped from Incyos to
Himera, and thence he came to Asia and went up to the court of Dareios:
and Dareios accounted him the most righteous of all the men who had come
up to him from Hellas; for he obtained leave of the king and went away
to Sicily, and again came back from Sicily to the king; and at last he
brought his life to an end among the Persians in old age and possessing
great wealth. The Samians then, having got rid of the rule of the Medes,
had gained for themselves without labour the fair city of Zancle.

25. After the sea-battle which was fought for Miletos, the Phenicians by
the command of the Persians restored to Samos Aiakes the son of Syloson,
since he had been to them of much service and had done for them great
things; and the Samians alone of all who revolted from Dareios, because
of the desertion of their ships which were in the sea-fight, 13 had
neither their city nor their temples burnt. Then after the capture of
Miletos the Persians forthwith got possession of Caria, some of the
cities having submitted to their power voluntarily, while others of them
they brought over by force.

26. Thus it came to pass as regards these matters: and meanwhile
Histiaios the Milesian, who was at Byzantion and was seizing the
merchant vessels of the Ionians as they sailed forth out of the Pontus,
received the report of that which had happened about Miletos. Upon that
he entrusted the matters which had to do with the Hellespont to Bisaltes
the son of Apollophanes, a man of Abydos, while he himself with the
Lesbians sailed to Chios; and when a body of the Chians who were on
guard did not allow him to approach, he fought with them at that spot in
the Chian land which is called the "Hollows." 14 Histiaios then not only
slew many of these, but also, taking Polichne of the Chians as his base,
he conquered with the help of the Lesbians the remainder of the Chians
as well, since they had suffered great loss by the sea-fight..

27. And heaven is wont perhaps to give signs beforehand whenever great
evils are about to happen to a city or a race of men; for to the Chians
also before these events remarkable signs had come. In the first place
when they had sent to Delphi a chorus of a hundred youths, two only
returned home, the remaining ninety-eight of them having been seized by
a plague and carried off; and then secondly in their city about the same
time, that is shortly before the sea-fight, as some children were being
taught 15 in school the roof fell in upon them, so that of a hundred
and twenty children only one escaped. These signs God showed to them
beforehand; and after this the sea-fight came upon them and brought
their State down upon its knees; and as the Chians had suffered great
loss, he without difficulty effected the conquest of them.

28. Thence Histiaios made an expedition against Thasos, taking with him
a large force of Ionians and Aiolians; and while he was encamped about
the town of Thasos, a report came to him that the Phenicians were
sailing up from Miletos to conquer the rest of Ionia. Being informed of
this he left Thasos unconquered and himself hastened to Lesbos, taking
with him his whole army. Then, as his army was in want of food, 16 he
crossed over from Lesbos to reap the corn in Atarneus and also that in
the plain of the Caïcos, which belonged to the Mysians. In these parts
there chanced to be a Persian named Harpagos commanding a considerable
force; and this man fought a battle with him after he had landed, and
he took Histiaios himself prisoner and destroyed the greater part of his
army..

29. And Histiaios was taken prisoner in the following manner:--As the
Hellenes were fighting with the Persians at Malene in the district of
Atarneus, after they had been engaged in close combat for a long time,
the cavalry at length charged and fell upon the Hellenes; and the
cavalry in fact decided the battle. 17 So when the Hellenes had been
turned to flight, Histiaios trusting that he would not be put to death
by the king on account of his present fault, conceived a love of life,
so that when he was being caught in his flight by a Persian and was
about to be run through by him in the moment of his capture, he spoke
in Persian and made himself known, saying that he was Histiaios the
Milesian..

30. If then upon being taken prisoner he had been brought to king
Dareios, he would not, as I think, have suffered any harm, but Dareios
would have forgiven the crime with which he was charged; as it was,
however, for this very reason and in order that he might not escape
from punishment and again become powerful with the king, Artaphrenes
the governor of Sardis and Harpagos who had captured him, when he had
reached Sardis on his way to the king, put him to death there and then,
and his body they impaled, but embalmed his head and brought it up to
Dareios at Susa. Dareios having been informed of this, found fault
with those who had done so, because they had not brought him up to his
presence alive; and he bade wash the head of Histiaios and bestow upon
it proper care, and then bury it, as that of one who had been greatly a
benefactor both of the king himself and of the Persians.

31. Thus it happened about Histiaios; and meanwhile the Persian fleet,
after wintering near Miletos, when it put to sea again in the following
year conquered without difficulty the islands lying near the mainland,
Chios, Lesbos, and Tenedos; and whenever they took one of the islands,
the Barbarians, as each was conquered, swept the inhabitants off it; 18
and this they do in the following manner:--they extend themselves from
the sea on the North to the sea on the South, each man having hold
of the hand of the next, and then they pass through the whole island
hunting the people out of it. They took also the Ionian cities on the
mainland in the same manner, except that they did not sweep off the
inhabitants thus, for it was not possible..

32. Then the commanders of the Persians proved not false to the threats
with which they had threatened the Ionians when these were encamped
opposite to them: for in fact when they conquered the cities, they chose
out the most comely of the boys and castrated them, making eunuchs of
them, and the fairest of the maidens they carried off by force to the
king; and not only this, but they also burnt the cities together with
the temples. Thus for the third time had the Ionians been reduced
to slavery, first by the Lydians and then twice in succession by the
Persians.

33. Departing from Ionia the fleet proceeded to conquer all the places
of the Hellespont on the left as one sails in, for those on the right
had been subdued already by the Persians themselves, approaching them by
land. Now the cities of the Hellespont in Europe are these:--first comes
the Chersonese, in which there are many cities, then Perinthos, the
strongholds of the Thracian border, Selymbria, and Byzantion. The people
of Byzantion and those of Calchedon opposite did not even wait for
the coming of the Persian ships, but had left their own land first and
departed, going within the Euxine; and there they settled in the city
of Mesambria. 19 So the Phenicians, having burnt these places which have
been mentioned, directed their course next to Proconnesos and Artake;
and when they had delivered these also to the flames, they sailed back
to the Chersonese to destroy the remaining cities which they had not
sacked when they touched there before: but against Kyzicos they did
not sail at all; for the men of Kyzicos even before the time when the
Phenicians sailed in had submitted to the king of their own accord, and
had made terms with Oibares the son of Megabazos, the Persian governor
at Daskyleion. 20.

34. In the Chersonese then the Phenicians made themselves masters of all
the other cities except the city of Cardia. Of these cities up to that
time Miltiades the son of Kimon, the son of Stesagoras, had been despot,
Miltiades the son of Kypselos having obtained this government in the
manner which here follows:--The inhabitants of this Chersonese were
Dolonkian Thracians; and these Dolonkians, being hard pressed in war by
the Apsinthians, sent their kings to Delphi to consult the Oracle about
the war. And the Pythian prophetess answered them that they must bring
into their land as founder of a settlement the man who should first
offer them hospitality as they returned from the temple. The Dolonkians
then passed along the Sacred Road through the land of the Phokians and
of the Boeotians, and as no man invited them, they turned aside and came
to Athens..

35. Now at that time in Athens the government was held by Peisistratos,
but Miltiades also the son of Kypselos had some power, who belonged to
a family which kept four-horse chariot teams, and who was descended
originally from Aiacos and Egina, though in more recent times his family
was Athenian, Philaios the son of Ajax having been the first of his
house who became an Athenian. This Miltiades was sitting in the entrance
of his own dwelling, and seeing the Dolonkians going by with dress that
was not of the native Athenian fashion and with spears, he shouted to
them; and when they approached, he offered them lodging and hospitality.
They then having accepted and having been entertained by him, proceeded
to declare all the utterances of the Oracle; and having declared it they
asked him to do as the god had said: and Miltiades when he heard it
was at once disposed to agree, because he was vexed by the rule of
Peisistratos and desired to be removed out of the way. He set out
therefore forthwith to Delphi to inquire of the Oracle whether he should
do that which the Dolonkians asked of him:.

36, and as the Pythian prophetess also bade him do so, Miltiades the
son of Kypselos, who had before this been victor at Olympia with a
four-horse chariot, now taking with him of the Athenians everyone who
desired to share in the expedition, sailed with the Dolonkians and took
possession of the land: and they who had invited him to come to them
made him despot over them. First then he made a wall across the isthmus
of the Chersonese from the city of Cardia to Pactye, in order that the
Apsinthians might not be able to invade the land and do them damage.
Now the number of furlongs 21 across the isthmus at this place
is six-and-thirty, and from this isthmus the Chersonese within is
altogether four hundred and twenty furlongs in length..

37. Having made a wall then across the neck of the Chersonese and having
in this manner repelled the Apsinthians, Miltiades made war upon the
people of Lampsacos first of all others; and the people of Lampsacos
laid an ambush and took him prisoner. Now Miltiades had come to be a
friend 22 of Croesus the Lydian; and Croesus accordingly, being informed
of this event, sent and commanded the people of Lampsacos to let
Miltiades go; otherwise he threatened to destroy them utterly like a
pine-tree. 23 Then when the people of Lampsacos were perplexed in their
counsels as to what that saying should mean with which Croesus had
threatened them, namely that he would destroy them utterly like a
pine-tree, at length one of the elder men with difficulty perceived the
truth, and said that a pine alone of all trees when it has been cut
down does not put forth any further growth but perishes, being utterly
destroyed. The people of Lampsacos therefore fearing Croesus loosed
Miltiades and let him go..

38. He then escaped by means of Croesus, but afterwards he brought his
life to an end leaving no son to succeed him, but passing over his rule
and his possessions to Stesagoras, who was the son of Kimon, his brother
on the mother's side: 24 and the people of the Chersonese still offer
sacrifices to him after his death as it is usual to do to a founder, and
hold in his honour a contest of horse-races and athletic exercises, in
which none of the men of Lampsacos are allowed to contend. After this
there was war with those of Lampsacos; and it happened to Stesagoras
also that he died without leaving a son, having been struck on the head
with an axe in the City Hall by a man who pretended to be a deserter,
but who proved himself to be in fact an enemy and a rather hot one
moreover..

39. Then after Stesagoras also had ended his life in this manner,
Miltiades son of Kimon and brother of that Stesagoras who was dead, was
sent in a trireme to the Chersonese to take possession of the government
by the sons of Peisistratos, who had dealt well with him at Athens also,
pretending that they had had no share in the death of his father Kimon,
of which in another part of the history I will set forth how it came
to pass. 25 Now Miltiades, when he came to the Chersonese, kept himself
within his house, paying honours in all appearance 26 to the memory
of his brother Stesagoras; and the chief men of the inhabitants of the
Chersonese in every place, being informed of this, gathered themselves
together from all the cities and came in a body to condole with him, and
when they had come they were laid in bonds by him. Miltiades then was
in possession of the Chersonese, supporting a body of five hundred
mercenary troops; and he married the daughter of Oloros the king of the
Thracians, who was named Hegesipyle.

40. Now this Miltiades son of Kimon had at the time of which we speak
but lately returned 27 to the Chersonese; and after he had returned,
there befell him other misfortunes worse than those which had befallen
him already; for two years before this he had been a fugitive out of
the land from the Scythians, since the nomad Scythians provoked by king
Dareios had joined all in a body and marched as far as this Chersonese,
and Miltiades had not awaited their attack but had become a fugitive
from the Chersonese, until at last the Scythians departed and the
Dolonkians brought him back again. These things happened two years
before the calamities which now oppressed him:.

41, and now, being informed that the Phenicians were at Tenedos, he
filled five triremes with the property which he had at hand and sailed
away for Athens. And having set out from the city of Cardia he was
sailing through the gulf of Melas; and as he passed along by the shore
of the Chersonese, the Phenicians fell in with his ships, and while
Miltiades himself with four of his ships escaped to Imbros, the fifth of
his ships was captured in the pursuit by the Phenicians. Of this ship
it chanced that Metiochos the eldest of the sons of Miltiades was in
command, not born of the daughter of Oloros the Thracian, but of another
woman. Him the Phenicians captured together with his ship; and being
informed about him, that he was the son of Miltiades, they brought him
up to the king, supposing that they would lay up for themselves a great
obligation; because it was Miltiades who had declared as his opinion to
the Ionians that they should do as the Scythians said, at that time when
the Scythians requested them to break up the bridge of boats and sail
away to their own land. Dareios however, when the Phenicians brought up
to him Metiochos the son of Miltiades, did Metiochos no harm but on the
contrary very much good; for he gave him a house and possessions and
a Persian wife, by whom he had children born who have been ranked as
Persians. Miltiades meanwhile came from Imbros to Athens.

42. In the course of this year there was done by the Persians nothing
more which tended to strife with the Ionians, but these things which
follow were done in this year very much to their advantage.--Artaphrenes
the governor of Sardis sent for envoys from all the cities and compelled
the Ionians to make agreements among themselves, so that they might
give satisfaction for wrongs and not plunder one another's land. This
he compelled them to do, and also he measured their territories by
parasangs,--that is the name which the Persians give to the length
of thirty furlongs, 28--he measured, I say, by these, and appointed
a certain amount of tribute for each people, which continues still
unaltered from that time even to my own days, as it was appointed by
Artaphrenes; and the tribute was appointed to be nearly of the same
amount for each as it had been before..

43. These were things which tended to peace for the Ionians; but at the
beginning of the spring, the other commanders having all been removed
by the king, Mardonios the son of Gobryas came down to the sea, bringing
with him a very large land-army and a very large naval force, being a
young man and lately married to Artozostra daughter of king Dareios.
When Mardonios leading this army came to Kilikia, he embarked on board
a ship himself and proceeded together with the other ships, while other
leaders led the land-army to the Hellespont. Mardonios however sailing
along the coast of Asia came to Ionia: and here I shall relate a thing
which will be a great marvel to those of the Hellenes who do not believe
that to the seven men of the Persians Otanes declared as his opinion
that the Persians ought to have popular rule; 29 for Mardonios deposed
all the despots of the Ionians and established popular governments in
the cities. Having so done he hastened on to the Hellespont; and when
there was collected a vast number of ships and a large land-army, they
crossed over the Hellespont in the ships and began to make their way
through Europe, and their way was directed against Eretria and Athens..

44. These, I say, furnished them the pretence for the expedition,
but they had it in their minds to subdue as many as they could of the
Hellenic cities; and in the first place they subdued with their ships
the Thasians, who did not even raise a hand to defend themselves: then
with the land-army they gained the Macedonians to be their servants in
addition to those whom they had already; for all the nations on the East
of the Macedonians 30 had become subject to them already before this.
Crossing over then from Thasos to the opposite coast, they proceeded
on their way near the land as far as Acanthos, and then starting from
Acanthos they attempted to get round Mount Athos; but as they sailed
round, there fell upon them a violent North Wind, against which they
could do nothing, and handled them very roughly, casting away very many
of their ships on Mount Athos. It is said indeed that the number of the
ships destroyed was three hundred, 3001, and more than twenty thousand
men; for as this sea which is about Athos is very full of sea monsters,
some were seized by these and so perished, while others were dashed
against the rocks; and some of them did not know how to swim and
perished for that cause, others again by reason of cold..

45. Thus fared the fleet; and meanwhile Mardonios and the land-army
while encamping in Macedonia were attacked in the night by the Brygian
Thracians, and many of them were slain by the Brygians and Mardonios
himself was wounded. However not even these escaped being enslaved by
the Persians, for Mardonios did not depart from that region until he had
made them subject. But when he had subdued these, he proceeded to lead
his army back, since he had suffered great loss with his land-army in
fighting against the Brygians and with his fleet in going round Athos.
So this expedition departed back to Asia having gained no honour by its
contests.

46. In the next year after this Dareios first sent a messenger to the
men of Thasos, who had been accused by their neighbours of planning
revolt, and bade them take away the wall around their town and bring
their ships to Abdera. The Thasians in fact, as they had been besieged
by Histiaios the Milesian and at the same time had large revenues coming
in, were using their money in building ships of war and in surrounding
their city with a stronger wall. Now the revenues came to them from the
mainland and from the mines: from the gold-mines in Scapte Hyle 31 there
came in generally eighty talents a year, and from those in Thasos itself
a smaller amount than this but so much that in general the Thasians,
without taxes upon the produce of their soil, had a revenue from the
mainland and from the mines amounting yearly to two hundred talents, and
when the amount was highest, to three hundred..

47. I myself saw these mines, and by much the most marvellous of
them were those which the Phenicians discovered, who made the first
settlement in this island in company with Thasos; and the island had the
name which it now has from this Thasos the Phenician. These Phenician
mines are in that part of Thasos which is between the places called
Ainyra and Koinyra and opposite Samothrake, where there is a great
mountain which has been all turned up in the search for metal. Thus it
is with this matter: and the Thasians on the command of the king both
razed their walls and brought all their ships to Abdera.

48. After this Dareios began to make trial of the Hellenes, what they
meant to do, whether to make war with him or to deliver themselves up.
He sent abroad heralds therefore, and appointed them to go some to one
place and others to another throughout Hellas, bidding them demand earth
and water for the king. These, I say, he sent to Hellas; and meanwhile
he was sending abroad other heralds to his own tributary cities which
lay upon the sea-coast, and he bade them have ships of war built and
also vessels to carry horses..

49. They then were engaged in preparing these things; and meanwhile
when the heralds had come to Hellas, many of those who dwelt upon the
mainland gave that for which the Persian made demand, 32 and all those
who dwelt in the islands did so, to whomsoever they came to make their
demand. The islanders, I say, gave earth and water to Dareios, and among
them also those of Egina, and when these had done so, the Athenians went
forthwith urgent against them, supposing that the Eginetans had given
with hostile purpose against themselves, in order to make an expedition
against them in combination with the Persians; and also they were glad
to get hold of an occasion against them. Accordingly they went backward
and forwards to Sparta and accused the Eginetans of that which they had
done, as having proved themselves traitors to Hellas..

50. In consequence of this accusation Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides,
king of the Spartans, crossed over to Egina meaning to seize those of
the Eginetans who were the most guilty; but as he was attempting
to seize them, certain of the Eginetans opposed him, and among them
especially Crios the son of Polycritos, who said that he should not with
impunity carry off a single Eginetan, for he was doing this (said he)
without authority from the Spartan State, having been persuaded to it by
the Athenians with money; otherwise he would have come and seized them
in company with the other king: and this he said by reason of a message
received from Demaratos. Cleomenes then as he departed from Egina, asked
Crios 33 what was his name, and he told him the truth; and Cleomenes
said to him: "Surely now, O Ram, thou must cover over thy horns with
bronze for thou wilt shortly have a great trouble to contend with."

51. Meanwhile Demaratos the son of Ariston was staying behind in Sparta
and bringing charges against Cleomenes, he also being king of the
Spartans but of the inferior house; which however is inferior in no
other way (for it is descended from the same ancestor), but the house of
Eurysthenes has always been honoured more, apparently because he was the
elder brother..

52. For the Lacedemonians, who herein agree with none of the poets, say
that Aristodemos the son of Aristomachos, the son of Cleodaios, the
son of Hyllos, being their king, led them himself (and not the sons of
Aristodemos) to this land which they now possess. Then after no long
time the wife of Aristodemos, whose name was Argeia,--she was the
daughter, they say, of Autesion, the son of Tisamenes, the son of
Thersander, the son of Polyneikes,--she, it is said, brought forth
twins; and Aristodemos lived but to see his children and then ended his
life by sickness. So the Lacedemonians of that time resolved according
to established custom to make the elder of the children their king; but
they did not know which of them they should take, because they were like
one another and of equal size; and when they were not able to make out,
or even before this, they inquired of their mother; and she said
that even she herself did not know one from the other. She said this,
although she knew in truth very well, because she desired that by some
means both might be made kings. The Lacedemonians then were in a strait;
and being in a strait they sent to Delphi to inquire what they should do
in the matter. And the Pythian prophetess bade them regard both children
as their kings, but honour most the first in age. 34 The prophetess,
they say, thus gave answer to them; and when the Lacedemonians were at a
loss none the less how to find out the elder of them, a Messenian
whose name was Panites made a suggestion to them: this Panites, I say,
suggested to the Lacedemonians that they should watch the mother and see
which of the children she washed and fed before the other; and if she
was seen to do this always in the same order, then they would have all
that they were seeking and desiring to find out, but if she too was
uncertain and did it in a different order at different times, it would
be plain to them that even she had no more knowledge than any other,
and they must turn to some other way. Then the Spartans following
the suggestion of the Messenian watched the mother of the sons of
Aristodemos and found that she gave honour thus to the first-born both
in feeding and in washing; for she did not know with that design she was
being watched. They took therefore the child which was honoured by its
mother and brought it up as the first-born in the public hall, 35 and
to it was given the name of Eurysthenes, while the other was called
Procles. These, when they had grown up, both themselves were at
variance, they say, with one another, though they were brothers,
throughout the whole time of their lives, and their descendants also
continued after the same manner.

53. This is the report given by the Lacedemonians alone of all the
Hellenes; but this which follows I write in accordance with that which
is reported by the Hellenes generally,--I mean that the names of these
kings of the Dorians are rightly enumerated by the Hellenes up to
Perseus the son of Danae (leaving the god out of account), 36 and proved
to be of Hellenic race; for even from that time they were reckoned as
Hellenes. I said "up to Perseus" and did not take the descent from a yet
higher point, because there is no name mentioned of a mortal father for
Perseus, as Amphitryon is for Heracles. Therefore with reason, as is
evident, I have said "rightly up to Perseus"; but if one enumerates
their ancestors in succession going back from Danae the daughter of
Acrisios, the rulers of the Dorians will prove to be Egyptians by direct
descent..

54. Thus I have traced the descent according to the account given by the
Hellenes; but as the story is reported which the Persians tell, Perseus
himself was an Assyrian and became a Hellene, whereas the ancestors of
Perseus were not Hellenes; and as for the ancestors of Acrisios, who
(according to this account) belonged not to Perseus in any way by
kinship, they say that these were, as the Hellenes report, Egyptians..

55. Let it suffice to have said so much about these matters; and as to
the question how and by what exploits being Egyptians they received the
sceptres of royalty over the Dorians, we will omit these things, since
others have told about them; but the things with which other narrators
have not dealt, of these I will make mention.

56. These are the royal rights which have been given by the Spartans
to their kings, namely, two priesthoods, of Zeus Lakedaimon and Zeus
Uranios; 37 and the right of making war against whatsoever land they
please, and that no man of the Spartans shall hinder this right, or
if he do, he shall be subject to the curse; and that when they go on
expeditions the kings shall go out first and return last; that a hundred
picked men shall be their guard upon expeditions; and that they shall
use in their goings forth to war as many cattle as they desire, and take
both the hides and the backs of all that are sacrificed..

57. These are their privileges in war; and in peace moreover things have
been assigned to them as follows:--if any sacrifice is performed at the
public charge, it is the privilege of the kings to sit down at the feast
before all others, and that the attendants shall begin with them first,
and serve to each of them a portion of everything double of that which
is given to the other guests, and that they shall have the first pouring
of libations and the hides of the animals slain in sacrifice; that on
every new moon and seventh day of the month there shall be delivered at
the public charge to each one of these a full-grown victim in the temple
of Apollo, and a measure 38 of barley-groats and a Laconian "quarter"
39 of wine; and that at all the games they shall have seats of honour
specially set apart for them: moreover it is their privilege to appoint
as protectors of strangers 40 whomsoever they will of the citizens, and
to choose each two "Pythians:" now the Pythians are men sent to consult
the god at Delphi, and they eat with the kings at the public charge. And
if the kings do not come to the dinner, it is the rule that there shall
be sent out for them to their houses two quarts 41 of barley-groats for
each one and half a pint 42 of wine; but if they are present, double
shares of everything shall be given them, and moreover they shall be
honoured in this same manner when they have been invited to dinner by
private persons. The kings also, it is ordained, shall have charge of
the oracles which are given, but the Pythians also shall have knowledge
of them. It is the rule moreover that the kings alone give decision on
the following cases only, that is to say, about the maiden who inherits
her father's property, namely who ought to have her, if her father have
not betrothed her to any one, and about public ways; also if any man
desires to adopt a son, he must do it in presence of the kings: and it
is ordained that they shall sit in council with the Senators, who are in
number eight-and-twenty, and if they do not come, those of the Senators
who are most closely related to them shall have the privileges of the
kings and give two votes besides their own, making three in all. 4201.

58. These rights have been assigned to the kings for their lifetime by
the Spartan State; and after they are dead these which follow:--horsemen
go round and announce that which has happened throughout the whole of
the Laconian land, and in the city women go about and strike upon
a copper kettle. Whenever this happens so, two free persons of each
household must go into mourning, a man and a woman, and for those who
fail to do this great penalties are appointed. Now the custom of the
Lacedemonians about the deaths of their kings is the same as that of the
Barbarians who dwell in Asia, for most of the Barbarians practise the
same customs as regards the death of their kings. Whensoever a king of
the Lacedemonians is dead, then from the whole territory of Lacedemon,
not reckoning the Spartans, a certain fixed number of the "dwellers
round" 43 are compelled to go to the funeral ceremony:

59. and when there have been gathered together of these and of the
Helots and of the Spartans themselves many thousands in the same place,
with their women intermingled, they beat their foreheads with a good
will and make lamentation without stint, saying that this one who has
died last of their kings was the best of all: and whenever any of their
kings has been killed in war, they prepare an image to represent him,
laid upon a couch with fair coverings, and carry it out to be buried.
Then after they have buried him, no assembly is held among them for ten
days, nor is there any meeting for choice of magistrates, but they have
mourning during these days. In another respect too these resemble the
Persians; that is to say, when the king is dead and another is appointed
king, this king who is newly coming in sets free any man of the Spartans
who was a debtor to the king or to the State; while among the Persians
the king who comes to the throne remits to all the cities the arrears of
tribute which are due.

60. In the following point also the Lacedemonians resemble the
Egyptians; that is to say, their heralds and fluteplayers and cooks
inherit the crafts of their fathers, and a fluteplayer is the son of a
fluteplayer, a cook of a cook, and a herald of a herald; other men do
not lay hands upon the office because they have loud and clear voices,
and so shut them out of it, but they practise their craft by inheritance
from their fathers.

61. Thus are these things done: and at this time of which we speak, 44
while Cleomenes was in Egina doing deeds 45 which were for the common
service of Hellas, Demaratos brought charges against him, not so much
because he cared for the Eginetans as because he felt envy and jealousy
of him. Then Cleomenes, after he returned from Egina, planned to depose
Demaratos from being king, making an attempt upon him on account of this
matter which follows:--Ariston being king in Sparta and having married
two wives, yet had no children born to him; and since he did not
acknowledge that he himself was the cause of this, he married a third
wife; and he married her thus:--he had a friend, a man of the Spartans,
to whom of all the citizens Ariston was most inclined; and it chanced
that this man had a wife who was of all the women in Sparta the fairest
by far, and one too who had become the fairest from having been the
foulest. For as she was mean in her aspect, her nurse, considering that
she was the daughter of wealthy persons and was of uncomely aspect, and
seeing moreover that her parents were troubled by it,--perceiving I say
these things, her nurse devised as follows:--every day she bore her to
the temple of Helen, which is in the place called Therapne, lying above
the temple of Phoebus; and whenever the nurse bore her thither, she
placed her before the image and prayed the goddess to deliver the child
from her unshapeliness. And once as the nurse was going away out of the
temple, it is said that a woman appeared to her, and having appeared
asked her what she was bearing in her arms; and she told her that she
was bearing a child; upon which the other bade her show the child to
her, but she refused, for it had been forbidden to her by the parents to
show it to any one: but the woman continued to urge her by all means to
show it to her. So then perceiving that the woman earnestly desired to
see it, the nurse showed her the child. Then the woman stroking the head
of the child said that she should be the fairest of all the women in
Sparta; and from that day her aspect was changed. Afterwards when she
came to the age for marriage, she was married to Agetos the son of
Alkeides, this friend of Ariston of whom we spoke..

