62. Now Ariston it seems was ever stung by the desire of this woman, and
accordingly he contrived as follows:--he made an engagement himself with
his comrade, whose wife this woman was, that he would give him as a gift
one thing of his own possessions, whatsoever he should choose, and he
bade his comrade make return to him in similar fashion. He therefore,
fearing nothing for his wife, because he saw that Ariston also had
a wife, agreed to this; and on these terms they imposed oaths on one
another. After this Ariston on his part gave that which Agetos had
chosen from the treasures of Ariston, whatever the thing was; and he
himself, seeking to obtain from him the like return, endeavoured then
to take away the wife of his comrade from him: and he said that he
consented to give anything else except this one thing only, but at
length being compelled by the oath and by the treacherous deception, 46
he allowed her to be taken away from him..

63. Thus had Ariston brought into his house the third wife, having
dismissed the second: and this wife, not having fulfilled the ten months
47 but in a shorter period of time, bore him that Demaratos of whom we
were speaking; and one of his servants reported to him as he was sitting
in council 48 with the Ephors, that a son had been born to him. He then,
knowing the time when he took to him his wife, and reckoning the months
upon his fingers, said, denying with an oath, "The child would not
be mine." This the Ephors heard, but they thought it a matter of no
importance at the moment; and the child grew up and Ariston repented of
that which he had said, for he thought Demaratos was certainly his
own son; and he gave him the name "Demaratos" for this reason, namely
because before these things took place the Spartan people all in a body
49 had made a vow 50 praying that a son might be born to Ariston, as one
who was pre-eminent in renown over all the kings who had ever arisen in
Sparta.

64. For this reason the name Demaratos 51 was given to him. And as time
went on Ariston died, and Demaratos obtained the kingdom: but it was
fated apparently that these things should become known and should cause
Demaratos to be deposed from the kingdom; and therefore 52 Demaratos
came to be at variance greatly with Cleomenes both at the former time
when he withdrew his army from Eleusis, and also now especially, when
Cleomenes had crossed over to take those of the Eginetans who had gone
over to the Medes..

65. Cleomenes then, being anxious to take vengeance on him, concerted
matters with Leotychides the son of Menares, the son of Agis, who was of
the same house as Demaratos, under condition that if he should set
him up as king instead of Demaratos, he would go with him against the
Eginetans. Now Leotychides had become a bitter foe of Demaratos on
account of this matter which follows:--Leotychides had betrothed himself
to Percalos the daughter of Chilon son of Demarmenos; and Demaratos
plotted against him and deprived Leotychides of his marriage, carrying
off Percalos himself beforehand, and getting her for his wife. Thus
had arisen the enmity of Leotychides against Demaratos; and now by the
instigation of Cleomenes Leotychides deposed against Demaratos, saying
that he was not rightfully reigning over the Spartans, not being a son
of Ariston: and after this deposition he prosecuted a suit against him,
recalling the old saying which Ariston uttered at the time when his
servant reported to him that a son was born to him, and he reckoning up
the months denied with an oath, saying that it was not his. Taking his
stand upon this utterance, Leotychides proceeded to prove that Demaratos
was not born of Ariston nor was rightfully reigning over Sparta; and he
produced as witnesses those Ephors who chanced then to have been sitting
with Ariston in council and to have heard him say this..

66. At last, as there was contention about those matters, the Spartans
resolved to ask the Oracle at Delphi whether Demaratos was the son of
Ariston. The question then having been referred by the arrangement of
Cleomenes to the Pythian prophetess, thereupon Cleomenes gained over to
his side Cobon the son of Aristophantos, who had most power among the
Delphians, and Cobin persuaded Perialla the prophetess of the Oracle
53 to say that which Cleomenes desired to have said. Thus the Pythian
prophetess, when those who were sent to consult the god asked her their
question, gave decision that Demaratos was not the son of Ariston.
Afterwards however these things became known, and both Cobon went into
exile from Delphi and Perialla the prophetess of the Oracle was removed
from her office.

67. With regard to the deposing of Demaratos from the kingdom it
happened thus: but Demaratos became an exile from Sparta to the Medes
on account of a reproach which here follows:--After he had been deposed
from the kingdom Demaratos was holding a public office to which he had
been elected. Now it was the time of the Gymnopaidiai; and as Demaratos
was a spectator of them, Leotychides, who had now become king himself
instead of Demaratos, sent his attendant and asked Demaratos in mockery
and insult what kind of a thing it was to be a magistrate after having
been king; and he vexed at the question made answer and said that he
himself had now had experience of both, but Leotychides had not; this
question however, he said, would be the beginning either of countless
evil or countless good fortune for the Lacedemonians. Having thus said,
he veiled his head and went forth out of the theatre to his own house;
and forthwith he made preparations and sacrificed an ox to Zeus, and
after having sacrificed he called his mother..

68. Then when his mother had come, he put into her hands some of the
inner parts 54 of the victim, and besought her, saying as follows:
"Mother, I beseech thee, appealing to the other gods and above all to
this Zeus the guardian of the household, 55 to tell me the truth, who is
really and truly my father. For Leotychides spoke in his contention
with me, saying that thou didst come to Ariston with child by thy former
husband; and others besides, reporting that which is doubtless an idle
tale, 56 say that thou didst go in to one of the servants, namely the
keeper of the asses, and that I am his son. I therefore entreat thee by
the gods to tell me the truth; for if thou hast done any of these things
which are reported, thou hast not done them alone, but with many other
women; and the report is commonly believed in Sparta that there was not
in Ariston seed which should beget children; for if so, then his former
wives also would have borne children.".

69. Thus he spoke, and she made answer as follows: "My son, since thou
dost beseech me with entreaties to speak the truth, the whole truth
shall be told to thee. When Ariston had brought me into his house, on
the third night 57 there came to me an apparition in the likeness of
Ariston, and having lain with me it put upon me the garlands which it
had on; and the apparition straitway departed, and after this Ariston
came; and when he saw me with garlands, he asked who it was who had
given me them; and I said that he had given them, but he did not admit
it; and I began to take oath of it, saying that he did not well to deny
it, for he had come (I said) a short time before and had lain with me
and given me the garlands. Then Ariston, seeing that I made oath of it,
perceived that the matter was of the gods; and first the garlands were
found to be from the hero-temple which stands by the outer door of the
house, which they call the temple of Astrabacos, 58 and secondly the
diviners gave answer that it was this same hero. Thus, my son, thou hast
all, as much as thou desirest to learn; for either thou art begotten
of this hero and the hero Astrabacos is thy father, or Ariston is thy
father, for on that night I conceived thee: but as to that wherein thy
foes most take hold of thee, saying that Ariston himself, when thy birth
was announced to him, in the hearing of many declared that thou wert
not his son, because the time, the ten months namely, had not yet been
fulfilled, in ignorance of such matters he cast forth that saying;
for women bring forth children both at the ninth month and also at the
seventh, and not all after they have completed ten months; and I bore
thee, my son, at the seventh month: and Ariston himself also perceived
after no long time that he had uttered this saying in folly. Do not thou
then accept any other reports about thy begetting, for thou hast heard
in all the full truth; but to Leotychides and to those who report these
things may their wives bear children by keepers of asses!"

70. Thus she spoke; and he, having learnt that which he desired to
learn, took supplies for travelling and set forth to go to Elis,
pretending that he was going to Delphi to consult the Oracle: but the
Lacedemonians, suspecting that he was attempting to escape, pursued
after him; and it chanced that before they came Demaratos had passed
over to Zakynthos from Elis; and the Lacedemonians crossing over after
him laid hands on his person and carried away his attendants from him.
Afterwards however, since those of Zakynthos refused to give him up, he
passed over from thence to Asia, to the presence of king Dareios; and
Dareios both received him with great honour as a guest, and also gave
him land and cities. Thus Demaratos had come to Asia, and such was the
fortune which he had had, having been distinguished in the estimation of
the Lacedemonians 59 in many other ways both by deeds and by counsels,
and especially having gained for them an Olympic victory with the
four-horse chariot, being the only one who achieved this of all the
kings who ever arose in Sparta.

71. Demaratos being deposed, Leotychides the son of Menares succeeded to
the kingdom; and he had born to him a son Zeuxidemos, whom some of the
Spartans called Kyniscos. This Zeuxidemos did not become king of
Sparta, for he died before Leotychides, leaving a son Archidemos: and
Leotychides having lost Zeuxidemos married a second wife Eurydame, the
sister of Menios and daughter of Diactorides, by whom he had no male
issue, but a daughter Lampito, whom Archidemos the son of Zeuxidemos
took in marriage, she being given to him by Leotychides..

72. Leotychides however did not himself 60 live to old age in Sparta,
but paid a retribution for Demaratos as follows:--he went as commander
of the Lacedemonians to invade Thessaly, and when he might have reduced
all to subjection, he accepted gifts of money amounting to a large sum;
and being taken in the act there in the camp, as he was sitting upon a
glove full of money, he was brought to trial and banished from Sparta,
and his house was razed to the ground. So he went into exile to Tegea
and ended his life there..

73. These things happened later; but at this time, when Cleomenes had
brought to a successful issue the affair which concerned Demaratos,
forthwith he took with him Leotychides and went against the Eginetans,
being very greatly enraged with them because of their insults towards
him. So the Eginetans on their part, since both the kings had come
against them, thought fit no longer to resist; and the Spartans selected
ten men who were the most considerable among the Eginetans both by
wealth and by birth, and took them away as prisoners, and among
others also Crios 61 the son of Polycritos and Casambos the son of
Aristocrates, who had the greatest power among them; and having taken
these away to the land of Attica, they deposited them as a charge with
the Athenians, who were the bitterest enemies of the Eginetans.

74. After this Cleomenes, since it had become known that he had devised
evil against Demaratos, was seized by fear of the Spartans and retired
to Thessaly. Thence he came to Arcadia, and began to make mischief 62
and to combine the Arcadians against Sparta; and besides other oaths
with which he caused them to swear that they would assuredly follow him
whithersoever he should lead them, he was very desirous also to bring
the chiefs of the Arcadians to the city of Nonacris and cause them
to swear by the water of Styx; for near this city it is said by the
Arcadians 63 that there is the water of Styx, and there is in fact
something of this kind: a small stream of water is seen to trickle down
from a rock into a hollow ravine, and round the ravine runs a wall
of rough stones. Now Nonacris, where it happens that this spring is
situated, is a city of Arcadia near Pheneos..

75. The Lacedemonians, hearing that Cleomenes was acting thus, were
afraid, and proceeded to bring him back to Sparta to rule on the same
terms as before: but when he had come back, forthwith a disease of
madness seized him (who had been even before this somewhat insane 64),
and whenever he met any of the Spartans, he dashed his staff against the
man's face. And as he continued to do this and had gone quite out of his
senses, his kinsmen bound him in stocks. Then being so bound, and seeing
his warder left alone by the rest, he asked him for a knife; and the
warder not being at first willing to give it, he threatened him with
that which he would do to him afterwards if he did not; until at last
the warder fearing the threats, for he was one of the Helots, gave him a
knife. Then Cleomenes, when he had received the steel, began to
maltreat himself from the legs upwards: for he went on cutting his flesh
lengthways from the legs to the thighs and from the thighs to the loins
and flanks, until at last he came to the belly; and cutting this
into strips he died in that manner. And this happened, as most of the
Hellenes report, because he persuaded the Pythian prophetess to advise
that which was done about Demaratos; but as the Athenians alone
report, it was because when he invaded Eleusis he laid waste the sacred
enclosure of the goddesses; 65 and according to the report of the
Argives, because from their sanctuary dedicated to Argos he caused to
come down those of the Argives who had fled for refuge from the battle
and slew them, and also set fire to the grove itself, holding it in no
regard..

76. For when Cleomenes was consulting the Oracle at Delphi, the answer
was given him that he should conquer Argos; so he led the Spartans and
came to the river Erasinos, which is said to flow from the Stymphalian
lake; for this lake, they say, running out into a viewless chasm,
appears again above ground in the land of Argos; and from thence onwards
this water is called by the Argives Erasinos: having come, I say, to
this river, Cleomenes did sacrifice to it; and since the sacrifices were
not at all favourable for him to cross over, he said that he admired
the Erasinos for not betraying the men of its country, but the Argives
should not even so escape. After this he retired back from thence and
led his army down to Thyrea; and having done sacrifice to the Sea by
slaying a bull, he brought them in ships to the land of Tiryns and
Nauplia..

77. Being informed of this, the Argives came to the rescue towards the
sea; and when they had got near Tiryns and were at the place which is
called Hesipeia, 66 they encamped opposite to the Lacedemonians leaving
no very wide space between the armies. There the Argives were not afraid
of the open fighting, but only lest they should be conquered by
craft; for to this they thought referred the oracle which the Pythian
prophetess gave in common to these and to the Milesians, 67 saying as
follows:


 "But when the female at length shall conquer the male in the battle,
  Conquer and drive him forth, and glory shall gain among Argives,
  Then many wives of the Argives shall tear both cheeks in their mourning;
  So that a man shall say some time, of the men that came after,
  'Quelled by the spear it perished, the three-coiled terrible serpent,'

The conjunction of all these things caused fear to the Argives, and
with a view to this they resolved to make use of the enemy's herald;
and having so resolved they proceeded to do as follows:--whenever the
Spartan herald proclaimed anything to the Lacedemonians, the Argives
also did that same thing..

78. So Cleomenes, perceiving that the Argives were doing whatever
the herald of the Lacedemonians proclaimed, passed the word to the
Lacedemonians that when the herald should proclaim that they were to
get breakfast, then they should take up their arms and go to attack the
Argives. This was carried out even so by the Lacedemonians; for as the
Argives were getting breakfast according to the herald's proclamation,
they attacked them; and many of them they slew, but many more yet took
refuge in the sacred grove of Argos, and upon these they kept watch,
sitting round about the place. Then Cleomenes did this which follows:--

79. He had with him deserters, and getting information by inquiring of
these, he sent a herald and summoned forth those of the Argives who were
shut up in the sanctuary, mentioning each by name; and he summoned
them forth saying that he had received their ransom. Now among the
Peloponnesians ransom is two pounds weight of silver 68 appointed to be
paid for each prisoner. So Cleomenes summoned forth about fifty of the
Argives one by one and slew them; and it chanced that the rest who were
in the enclosure did not perceive that this was being done; for since
the grove was thick, those within did not see how it fared with those
who were without, at least until one of them climbed up a tree and saw
from above that which was being done. Accordingly they then no longer
came forth when they were called.

80. So Cleomenes thereupon ordered all the Helots to pile up brushwood
round the sacred grove; and they obeying, he set fire to the grove. And
when it was now burning, he asked one of the deserters to what god the
grove was sacred, and the man replied that it was sacred to Argos. When
he heard that, he groaned aloud and said, "Apollo who utterest oracles,
surely thou hast greatly deceived me, saying that I should conquer
Argos: I conjecture that the oracle has had its fulfilment for me
already.".

81. After this Cleomenes sent away the greater part of his army to go
back to Sparta, but he himself took a thousand of the best men and went
to the temple of Hera to sacrifice: and when he wished to sacrifice upon
the altar, the priest forbade him, saying that it was not permitted
by religious rule for a stranger to sacrifice in that place. Cleomenes
however bade the Helots take away the priest from the altar and scourge
him, and he himself offered the sacrifice. Having so done he returned
back to Sparta;.

82, and after his return his opponents brought him up before the Ephors,
saying that he had received gifts and therefore had not conquered Argos,
when he might easily have conquered it. He said to them,--but whether
he was speaking falsely or whether truly I am not able with certainty to
say,--however that may be, he spoke and said that when he had conquered
the sanctuary of Argos, it seemed to him that the oracle of the god had
had its fulfilment for him; therefore he did not think it right to make
an attempt on the city, at least until he should have had recourse to
sacrifice, and should have learnt whether the deity 69 permitted him or
whether she stood opposed to him: and as he was sacrificing for augury
70 in the temple of Hera, a flame of fire blazed forth from the breasts
of the image; and thus he knew the certainty of the matter, namely that
he would not conquer Argos: for if fire had blazed forth from the head
of the image, he would have been conqueror of the city from top to
bottom, 71 but since it blazed from the breasts, everything had been
accomplished for him which the god desired should come to pass. Thus
speaking he seemed to the Spartans to speak credibly and reasonably, and
he easily escaped his pursuers. 72

83. Argos however was so bereft of men that their slaves took possession
of all the State, ruling and managing it until the sons of those who had
perished grew to be men. Then these, endeavouring to gain Argos back
to themselves, cast them out; and the slaves being driven forth gained
possession of Tiryns by fighting. Now for a time these two parties had
friendly relations with one another; but afterwards there came to the
slaves a prophet named Cleander, by race a Phigalian from Arcadia: this
man persuaded the slaves to attack their masters, and in consequence
of this there was war between them for a long time, until at last with
difficulty the Argives overcame them.

84. The Argives then say that this was the reason why Cleomenes went mad
and had an evil end: but the Spartans themselves say that Cleomenes was
not driven mad by any divine power, but that he had become a drinker of
unmixed wine from having associated with Scythians, and that he went mad
in consequence of this: for the nomad Scythians, they say, when Dareios
had made invasion of their land, desired eagerly after this to take
vengeance upon him; and they sent to Sparta and tried to make an
alliance, and to arrange that while the Scythians themselves attempted
an invasion of Media by the way of the river Phasis, the Spartans should
set forth from Ephesos and go up inland, and then that they should meet
in one place: and they say that Cleomenes when the Scythians had
come for this purpose, associated with them largely, and that thus
associating more than was fit, he learnt the practice of drinking wine
unmixed with water; and for this cause (as the Spartans think) he went
mad. Thenceforth, as they say themselves, when they desire to drink
stronger wine, they say "Fill up in Scythian fashion." 73 Thus the
Spartans report about Cleomenes; but to me it seems that this was a
retribution which Cleomenes paid for Demaratos.

85. Now when the Eginetans heard that Cleomenes had met his end, they
sent messengers to Sparta to denounce Leotychides for the matter of the
hostages which were being kept at Athens: and the Lacedemonians caused
a court to assemble and judged that the Eginetans had been dealt with
outrageously by Leotychides; and they condemned him to be taken to Egina
and delivered up in place of the men who were being kept at Athens. Then
when the Eginetans were about to take Leotychides, Theasides the son
of Leoprepes, a man of repute in Sparta, said to them: "What are ye
proposing 74 to do, men of Egina? Do ye mean to take away the king of
the Spartans, thus delivered up to you by his fellow-citizens? If the
Spartans now being in anger have decided so, beware lest at some future
time, if ye do this, they bring an evil upon your land which may destroy
it." Hearing this the Eginetans abstained from taking him; but they came
to an agreement that Leotychides should accompany them to Athens and
restore the men to the Eginetans.

86. When however Leotychides came to Athens and asked for the deposit
back, the Athenians, not being willing to give up the hostages, produced
pretexts for refusing, and alleged that two kings had deposited them
and they did not think it right to give them back to the one without the
other: so since the Athenians said that they would not give them back,
Leotychides spoke to them as follows:

(a) "Athenians, do whichever thing ye yourselves desire; for ye know
that if ye give them up, ye do that which religion commands, and if ye
refuse to give them up, ye do the opposite of this: but I desire to tell
you what kind of a thing came to pass once in Sparta about a deposit. We
Spartans report that there was in Lacedemon about two generations before
my time on Glaucos the son of Epikydes. This man we say attained the
highest merit in all things besides, and especially he was well reported
of by all who at that time dwelt in Lacedemon for his uprightness: and
we relate that in due time 75 it happened to him thus:--a man of Miletos
came to Sparta and desired to have speech with him, alleging the reasons
which follow: 'I am a Milesian,' he said, 'and I am come hither desiring
to have benefit from thy uprightness, Glaucos; for as there was much
report of thy uprightness throughout all the rest of Hellas and also in
Ionia, I considered with myself that Ionia is ever in danger, whereas
Peloponnesus is safely established, and also that we never see wealth
continue in the possession of the same persons long;--reflecting, I say,
on these things and taking counsel with myself, I resolved to turn into
money the half of my possessions, and to place it with thee, being well
assured that if it were placed with thee I should have it safe. Do
thou therefore, I pray thee, receive the money, and take and keep these
tallies; and whosoever shall ask for the money back having the tokens
answering to these, to him do thou restore it.' (b) The stranger who had
come from Miletos said so much; and Glaucos accepted the deposit on the
terms proposed. Then after a long time had gone by, there came to Sparta
the sons of him who had deposited the money with Glaucos; and they came
to speech with Glaucos, and producing the tokens asked for the money to
be given back: but he repulsed them answering them again thus: 'I do not
remember the matter, nor does my mind bring back to me any knowledge of
those things whereof ye speak; but I desire to recollect and do all that
is just; for if I received it, I desire to restore it honestly; and if
on the other hand I did not receive it at all, I will act towards you
in accordance with the customs of the Hellenes: 76 therefore I defer
the settling of the matter with you for three months from now.' (c) The
Milesians accordingly went away grieved, for they supposed that they had
been robbed of the money; but Glaucos set forth to Delphi to consult the
Oracle: and when he inquired of the Oracle whether he should rob them
of the money by an oath, the Pythian prophetess rebuked him with these
lines:


  "'Glaucos, thou, Epikydes' son, yea, this for the moment,
   This, to conquer their word by an oath and to rob, is more gainful.
   Swear, since the lot of death waits also for him who swears truly.
   But know thou that Oath has a son, one nameless and handless and
   footless, Yet without feet he pursues, without hands he seizes, and
   wholly He shall destroy the race and the house of the man who offendeth.
   But for the man who swears truly his race is the better hereafter.'

Having heard this Glaucos entreated that the god would pardon him for
that which he had said, but the prophetess said that to make trial of
the god and to do the deed were things equivalent. (d) Glaucos then,
having sent for the Milesians, gave back to them the money: but the
reason for which, O Athenians, I set forth to relate to you this story,
shall now be told. At the present time there is no descendant of Glaucos
existing, nor any hearth which is esteemed to be that of Glaucos, but he
has been utterly destroyed and rooted up out of Sparta. Thus it is
good not even to entertain a thought about a deposit other than that of
restoring it, when they who made it ask for it again."

87. When Leotychides had thus spoken, since not even so were the
Athenians willing to listen to him, he departed back; and the Eginetans,
before paying the penalty for their former wrongs wherein they
did outrage to the Athenians to please the Thebans, 77 acted as
follows:--complaining of the conduct of the Athenians and thinking that
they were being wronged, they made preparations to avenge themselves
upon the Athenians; and since the Athenians were celebrating a
four-yearly festival 78 at Sunion, they lay in wait for the sacred ship
which was sent to it and took it, the vessel being full of men who were
the first among the Athenians; and having taken it they laid the men in
bonds..

88. The Athenians after they had suffered this wrong from the Eginetans
no longer delayed to contrive all things possible to their hurt.
And there was 79 in Egina a man of repute, one Nicodromos the son of
Cnithos: 80 this man had cause of complaint against the Eginetans for
having before this driven him forth out of the island; and hearing now
that the Athenians had resolved to do mischief to the Eginetans, he
agreed with the Athenians to deliver up Egina to them, telling them on
what day he would make his attempt and by what day it would be necessary
for them to come to his assistance..

89. After this Nicodromos, according as he had agreed with the
Athenians, seized that which is called the old city, but the Athenians
did not come to his support at the proper time; for, as it chanced, they
had not ships sufficient to fight with the Eginetans; so while they were
asking the Corinthians to lend them ships, during this time their cause
went to ruin. The Corinthians however, being at this time exceedingly
friendly with them, gave the Athenians twenty ships at their request;
and these they gave by selling them at five drachmas apiece, for by the
law it was not permitted to give them as a free gift. Having taken these
ships of which I speak and also their own, the Athenians with seventy
ships manned in all sailed to Egina, and they were later by one day than
the time agreed..

90. Nicodromos meanwhile, as the Athenians did not come to his support
at the proper time, embarked in a ship and escaped from Egina, and
with him also went others of the Eginetans; and the Athenians gave them
Sunion to dwell in, starting from whence these men continued to plunder
the Eginetans who were in the island..

91. This happened afterwards: but at the time of which we speak the
well-to-do class among the Eginetans prevailed over the men of the
people, who had risen against them in combination with Nicodromos, and
then having got them into their power they were bringing their prisoners
forth to execution. From this there came upon them a curse which they
were not able to expiate by sacrifice, though they devised against it
all they could; but they were driven forth from the island before the
goddess became propitious to them. For they had taken as prisoners
seven hundred of the men of the people and were bringing them forth to
execution, when one of them escaped from his bonds and fled for refuge
to the entrance of the temple of Demeter the Giver of Laws, 81 and he
took hold of the latch of the door and clung to it; and when they found
that they could not drag him from it by pulling him away, they cut off
his hands and so carried him off, and those hands remained clinging to
the latch of the door..

92. Thus did the Eginetans to one another: and when the Athenians came,
they fought against them with seventy ships, and being worsted in
the sea-fight they called to their assistance the same whom they had
summoned before, namely the Argives. These would no longer come to their
help, having cause of complaint because the ships of Egina compelled
by Cleomenes had put in to the land of Argos and their crews had landed
with the Lacedemonians; with whom also had landed men from ships of
Sikyon in this same invasion: and as a penalty for this there was laid
upon them by the Argives a fine of a thousand talents, five hundred
for each State. The Sikyonians accordingly, acknowledging that they had
committed a wrong, had made an agreement to pay a hundred talents and be
free from the penalty; the Eginetans however did not acknowledge their
wrong, but were more stubborn. For this reason then, when they made
request, none of the Argives now came to their help at the charge of the
State, but volunteers came to the number of a thousand; and their
leader was a commander named Eurybates, a man who had practised the five
contests. 82 Of these men the greater number never returned back,
but were slain by the Athenians in Egina; and the commander himself,
Eurybates, fighting in single combat 83 killed in this manner three men
and was himself slain by the fourth, Sophanes namely of Dekeleia.

93. The Eginetans however engaged in contest with the Athenians in
ships, when these were in disorder, and defeated them; and they took of
them four ships together with their crews.

94. So the Athenians were at war with the Eginetans; and meanwhile the
Persian was carrying forward his design, since he was put in mind ever
by his servant to remember the Athenians, and also because of the
sons of Peisistratos were near at hand and brought charges continually
against the Athenians, while at the same time Dareios himself wished to
take hold of this pretext and subdue those nations of Hellas which
had not given him earth and water. Mardonios then, since he had fared
miserably in his expedition, he removed from his command; and appointing
other generals to command he despatched them against Eretria and
Athens, namely Datis, who was a Mede by race, and Artaphrenes the son
of Artaphrenes, a nephew of the king: and he sent them forth with the
charge to reduce Athens and Eretria to slavery and to bring the slaves
back into his presence..

95. When these who had been appointed to command came in their march
from the king to the Aleïan plain in Kilikia, taking with them a large
and well-equipped land-army, then while they were encamping there,
the whole naval armament came up, which had been appointed for several
nations to furnish; and there came to them also the ships for carrying
horses, which in the year before Dareios had ordered his tributaries to
make ready. In these they placed their horses, and having embarked the
land-army in the ships they sailed for Ionia with six hundred triremes.
After this they did not keep their ships coasting along the mainland
towards the Hellespont and Thrace, but they started from Samos and made
their voyage by the Icarian Sea 84 and between the islands; because, as
I think, they feared more than all else the voyage round Athos, seeing
that in the former year 85 while making the passage by this way they had
come to great disaster. Moreover also Naxos compelled them, since it had
not been conquered at the former time. 86.

96. And when they had arrived at Naxos, coming against it from the
Icarian Sea (for it was against Naxos first that the Persians intended
to make expedition, remembering the former events), the Naxians departed
forthwith fleeing to the mountains, and did not await their attack; but
the Persians made slaves of those of them whom they caught and set fire
to both the temples and the town. Having so done they put out to sea to
attack the other islands.

97. While these were doing thus, the Delians also had left Delos and
fled away to Tenos; and when the armament was sailing in thither, Datis
sailed on before and did not allow the ships to anchor at the island of
Delos, but at Rhenaia on the other side of the channel; and he himself,
having found out by inquiry where the men of Delos were, sent a herald
and addressed them thus: "Holy men, why are ye fled away and departed,
having judged of me that which is not convenient? for even I of myself
have wisdom at least so far, and moreover it has been thus commanded me
by the king, not to harm at all that land in which the two divinities
were born, neither the land itself nor the inhabitants of it. Now
therefore return to your own possessions and dwell in your island." Thus
he proclaimed by a herald to the Delians; and after this he piled up and
burned upon the altar three hundred talents' weight of frankincense.

98. Datis having done these things sailed away with his army to fight
against Eretria first, taking with him both Ionians and Aiolians; and
after he had put out to sea from thence, Delos was moved, not having
been shaken (as the Delians reported to me) either before that time
or since that down to my own time; and this no doubt the god 8601
manifested as a portent to men of the evils that were about to be;
for in the time of Dareios the son of Hystaspes and Xerxes the son of
Dareios and Artoxerxes the son of Xerxes, three generations following
upon one another, there happened more evils to Hellas than during the
twenty other generations which came before Dareios, some of the evils
coming to it from the Persians, and others from the leaders themselves
of Hellas warring together for supremacy. Thus it was not unreasonable
that Delos should be moved, which was before unmoved. [And in an oracle
it was thus written about it: 87


 "Delos too will I move, unmoved though it hath been aforetime."]

Now in the Hellenic tongue the names which have been mentioned have this
meaning--Dareios means "compeller," 88 Xerxes "warrior," 89 Artoxerxes
"great warrior." 90 Thus then might the Hellenes rightly call these
kings in their own tongue.

99. The Barbarians then, when they had departed from Delos, touched at
the islands as they went, and from them received additional forces and
took sons of the islanders as hostages: and when in sailing round about
the islands they put in also to Carystos, seeing that the Carystians
would neither give them hostages nor consent to join in an expedition
against cities that were their neighbours, meaning Eretria and Athens,
they began to besiege them and to ravage their land; until at last the
Carystians also came over to the will of the Persians..

100. The Eretrians meanwhile being informed that the armament of the
Persians was sailing to attack them, requested the Athenians to help
them; and the Athenians did not refuse their support, but gave as
helpers those four thousand to whom had been allotted the land of the
wealthy 91 Chalkidians. The Eretrians however, as it turned out, had no
sound plan of action, for while they sent for the Athenians, they had
in their minds two different designs: some of them, that is, proposed
to leave the city and go to the heights of Euboea; while others of them,
expecting to win gain for themselves from the Persian, were preparing to
surrender the place. Having got knowledge of how things were as regards
both these plans, Aischines the son of Nothon, one of the leaders of
the Eretrians, told the whole condition of their affairs to those of the
Athenians who had come, and entreated them to depart and go to their own
land, that they might not also perish. So the Athenians did according to
this counsel given to them by Aischines..

101. And while these passed over to Oropos and saved themselves, the
Persians sailed on and brought their ships to land about Temenos
and Chioreai and Aigilea in the Eretrian territory; and having taken
possession of these places, 9101 forthwith they began to disembark their
horses and prepared to advance against the enemy. The Eretrians however
did not intend to come forth against them and fight; but their endeavour
was if possible to hold out by defending their walls, since the counsel
prevailed not to leave the city. Then a violent assault was made upon
the wall, and for six days there fell many on both sides; but on the
seventh day Euphorbos the son of Alkimachos and Philagros the son
of Kyneos, men of repute among the citizens, gave up the city to the
Persians. These having entered the city plundered and set fire to the
temples in retribution for the temples which were burned at Sardis, and
also reduced the people to slavery according to the commands of Dareios.

102. Having got Eretria into their power, they stayed a few days and
then sailed for the land of Attica, pressing on 92 hard and supposing
that the Athenians would do the same as the Eretrians had done. And
since Marathon was the most convenient place in Attica for horsemen
to act and was also very near to Eretria, therefore Hippias the son of
Peisistratos was guiding them thither..

103. When the Athenians had information of this, they too went to
Marathon to the rescue of their land; and they were led by ten generals,
of whom the tenth was Miltiades, whose father Kimon of Stesagoras had
been compelled to go into exile from Athens because of Peisistratos the
son of Hippocrates: and while he was in exile it was his fortune to win
a victory at the Olympic games with a four-horse chariot, wherein, as
it happened, he did the same thing as his half-brother Miltiades 93
had done, who had the same mother as he. Then afterwards in the next
succeeding Olympic games he gained a victory with the same mares and
allowed Peisistratos to be proclaimed as victor; and having resigned to
him the victory he returned to his own native land under an agreement
for peace. Then after he had won with the same mares at another Olympic
festival, it was his hap to be slain by the sons of Peisistratos,
Peisistratos himself being no longer alive. These killed him near the
City Hall, having set men to lie in wait for him by night; and the
burial-place of Kimon is in the outskirts of the city, on the other side
of the road which is called the way through Coile, and just opposite him
those mares are buried which won in three Olympic games. This same
thing was done also by the mares belonging to Euagoras the Laconian,
but besides these by none others. Now the elder of the sons of Kimon,
Stesagoras, was at that time being brought up in the house of his
father's brother Miltiades in the Chersonese, while the younger son
was being brought up at Athens with Kimon himself, having been named
Miltiades after Miltiades the settler of the Chersonese..

104. This Miltiades then at the time of which we speak had come from the
Chersonese and was a general of the Athenians, after escaping death in
two forms; for not only did the Phenicians, who had pursued after him as
far as Imbros, endeavour earnestly to take him and bring him up to the
presence of the king, but also after this, when he had escaped from
these and had come to his own native land and seemed to be in safety
from that time forth, his opponents, who had laid wait for him there,
brought him up before a court and prosecuted him for his despotism in
the Chersonese. Having escaped these also, he had then been appointed a
general of the Athenians, being elected by the people.

105. First of all, while they were still in the city, the generals sent
off to Sparta a herald, namely Pheidippides 94 an Athenian and for the
rest a runner of long day-courses and one who practised this as his
profession. With this man, as Pheidippides himself said and as he made
report to the Athenians, Pan chanced to meet by mount Parthenion, which
is above Tegea; and calling aloud the name of Pheidippides, Pan bade him
report to the Athenians and ask for what reason they had no care of him,
though he was well disposed to the Athenians and had been serviceable to
them on many occasions before that time, and would be so also yet again.
Believing that this tale was true, the Athenians, when their affairs had
been now prosperously settled, established under the Acropolis a temple
of Pan; and in consequence of this message they propitiate him with
sacrifice offered every year and with a torch-race..

106. However at that time, the time namely when he said that Pan
appeared to him, this Pheidippides having been sent by the generals was
in Sparta on the next day after that on which he left the city of
the Athenians; and when he had come to the magistrates he said:
"Lacedemonians, the Athenians make request of you to come to their help
and not to allow a city most anciently established among the Hellenes to
fall into slavery by the means of Barbarians; for even now Eretria has
been enslaved, and Hellas has become the weaker by a city of renown."
He, as I say, reported to them that with which he had been charged,
and it pleased them well to come to help the Athenians; but it was
impossible for them to do so at once, since they did not desire to break
their law; for it was the ninth day of the month, and on the ninth day
they said they would not go forth, nor until the circle of the moon
should be full. 95

107. These men were waiting for the full moon: and meanwhile Hippias
the son of Peisistratos was guiding the Barbarians in to Marathon, after
having seen on the night that was just past a vision in his sleep of
this kind,--it seemed to Hippias that he lay with his own mother. He
conjectured then from the dream that he should return to Athens and
recover his rule, and then bring his life to an end in old age in his
own land. From the dream, I say, he conjectured this; and after this, as
he guided them in, first he disembarked the slaves from Eretria on the
island belonging to the Styrians, called Aigleia; 96 and then, as the
ships came in to shore at Marathon, he moored them there, and after
the Barbarians had come from their ships to land, he was engaged in
disposing them in their places. While he was ordering these things, it
came upon him to sneeze and cough more violently than was his wont. Then
since he was advanced in years, most of his teeth were shaken thereby,
and one of these teeth he cast forth by the violence of the cough: 97
and the tooth having fallen from him upon the sand, he was very
desirous to find it; since however the tooth was not to be found when he
searched, he groaned aloud and said to those who were by him: "This land
is not ours, nor shall we be able to make it subject to us; but so much
part in it as belonged to me the tooth possesses."

108. Hippias then conjectured that his vision had been thus fulfilled:
and meanwhile, after the Athenians had been drawn up in the sacred
enclosure of Heracles, there joined them the Plataians coming to their
help in a body: for the Plataians had given themselves to the Athenians,
and the Athenians before this time undertook many toils on behalf of
them; and this was the manner in which they gave themselves:--Being
oppressed by the Thebans, the Plataians at first desired to
give themselves to Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides and to the
Lacedemonians, who chanced to come thither; but these did not accept
them, and said to them as follows: "We dwell too far off, and such
support as ours would be to you but cold comfort; for ye might many
times be reduced to slavery before any of us had information of it: but
we counsel you rather to give yourselves to the Athenians, who are both
neighbours and also not bad helpers." Thus the Lacedemonians counselled,
not so much on account of their goodwill to the Plataians as because
they desired that the Athenians should have trouble by being involved in
a conflict with the Boetians. The Lacedemonians, I say, thus counselled
the men of Plataia; and they did not fail to follow their counsel, but
when the Athenians were doing sacrifice to the twelve gods, they sat
down as suppliants at the altar and so gave themselves. Then the Thebans
having been informed of these things marched against the Plataians, and
the Athenians came to their assistance: and as they were about to join
battle, the Corinthians did not permit them to do so, but being by
chance there, they reconciled their strife; and both parties having put
the matter into their hands, they laid down boundaries for the land,
with the condition that the Thebans should leave those of the Boeotians
alone who did not desire to be reckoned with the other Boeotians. The
Corinthians having given this decision departed; but as the Athenians
were going back, the Boeotians attacked them, and having attacked them
they were worsted in the fight. Upon that the Athenians passed beyond
the boundaries which the Corinthians had set to be for the Plataians,
and they made the river Asopos itself to be the boundary of the Thebans
towards the land of Plataia and towards the district of Hysiai. The
Plataians then had given themselves to the Athenians in the manner which
has been said, and at this time they came to Marathon to bring them
help.

109. Now the opinions of the generals of the Athenians were divided,
and the one party urged that they should not fight a battle, seeing that
they were too few to fight with the army of the Medes, while the others,
and among them Miltiades, advised that they should do so: and when they
were divided and the worse opinion was like to prevail, then, since he
who had been chosen by lot 98 to be polemarch of the Athenians had a
vote in addition to the ten (for in old times the Athenians gave
the polemarch an equal vote with the generals) and at that time the
polemarch was Callimachos of the deme of Aphidnai, to him came Miltiades
and said as follows: "With thee now it rests, Callimachos, either to
bring Athens under slavery, or by making her free to leave behind
thee for all the time that men shall live a memorial such as not even
Harmodios and Aristogeiton have left. For now the Athenians have come
to a danger the greatest to which they have ever come since they were
a people; and on the one hand, if they submit to the Medes, it is
determined what they shall suffer, being delivered over to Hippias,
while on the other hand, if this city shall gain the victory, it may
become the first of the cities of Hellas. How this may happen and how it
comes to thee of all men 99 to have the decision of these matters, I
am now about to tell. Of us the generals, who are ten in number, the
opinions are divided, the one party urging that we fight a battle and
the others that we do not fight. Now if we do not, I expect that some
great spirit of discord will fall upon the minds of the Athenians and
so shake them that they shall go over to the Medes; but if we fight a
battle before any unsoundness appear in any part of the Athenian people,
then we are able to gain the victory in the fight, if the gods grant
equal conditions. These things then all belong to thee and depend
on thee; for if thou attach thyself to my opinions, thou hast both a
fatherland which is free and a native city which shall be the first
among the cities of Hellas; but if thou choose the opinion of those who
are earnest against fighting, thou shalt have the opposite of those good
things of which I told thee.".

110. Thus speaking Miltiades gained Callimachos to his side; and the
opinion of the polemarch being added, it was thus determined to fight
a battle. After this, those generals whose opinion was in favour of
fighting, as the turn of each one of them to command for the day 100
came round, gave over their command to Miltiades; and he, accepting
it, would not however yet bring about a battle, until his own turn to
command had come..

111. And when it came round to him, then the Athenians were drawn up for
battle in the order which here follows:--On the right wing the polemarch
Callimachos was leader (for the custom of the Athenians then was this,
that the polemarch should have the right wing); and he leading, next
after him came the tribes in order as they were numbered one after
another, and last were drawn up the Plataians occupying the left wing:
for 101 ever since this battle, when the Athenians offer sacrifices in
the solemn assemblies 102 which are made at the four-yearly festivals,
103 the herald of the Athenians prays thus, "that blessings 104 may come
to the Athenians and to the Plataians both." On this occasion however,
when the Athenians were being drawn up at Marathon something of this
kind was done:--their army being made equal in length of front to that
of the Medes, came to drawn up in the middle with a depth of but few
ranks, and here their army was weakest, while each wing was strengthened
with numbers..

112. And when they had been arranged in their places and the sacrifices
proved favourable, then the Athenians were let go, and they set forth at
a run to attack the Barbarians. Now the space between the armies was not
less than eight furlongs: 105 and the Persians seeing them advancing
to the attack at a run, made preparations to receive them; and in their
minds they charged the Athenians with madness which must be fatal,
seeing that they were few and yet were pressing forwards at a run,
having neither cavalry nor archers. 106 Such was the thought of the
Barbarians; but the Athenians when all in a body they had joined in
combat with the Barbarians, fought in a memorable fashion: for they were
the first of all the Hellenes about whom we know who went to attack the
enemy at a run, and they were the first also who endured to face the
Median garments and the men who wore them, whereas up to this time the
very name of the Medes was to the Hellenes a terror to hear..

113. Now while they fought in Marathon, much time passed by; and in the
centre of the army, where the Persians themselves and the Sacans were
drawn up, the Barbarians were winning,--here, I say, the Barbarians had
broken the ranks of their opponents and were pursuing them inland, but
on both wings the Athenians and the Plataians severally were winning
the victory; and being victorious they left that part of the Barbarians
which had been routed to fly without molestation, and bringing together
the two wings they fought with those who had broken their centre, and
the Athenians were victorious. So they followed after the Persians as
they fled, slaughtering them, until they came to the sea; and then they
called for fire and began to take hold of the ships..

114. In this part of the work was slain the polemarch Callimachos
after having proved himself a good man, and also one of the generals,
Stesilaos the son of Thrasylaos, was killed; and besides this Kynegeiros
the son of Euphorion while taking hold 107 there of the ornament at
the stern of a ship had his hand cut off with an axe and fell; and many
others also of the Athenians who were men of note were killed..

115. Seven of the ships the Athenians got possession of in this manner,
but with the rest the Barbarians pushed off from land, and after taking
the captives from Eretria off the island where they had left them,
they sailed round Sunion, purposing to arrive at the city before the
Athenians. And an accusation became current among the Athenians to the
effect that they formed this design by contrivance of the Alcmaionidai;
for these, it was said, having concerted matters with the Persians,
displayed to them a shield when they had now embarked in their ships..

116. These then, I say, were sailing round Sunion; and meanwhile the
Athenians came to the rescue back to the city as speedily as they could,
and they arrived there before the Barbarians came; and having arrived
from the temple of Heracles at Marathon they encamped at another temple
of Heracles, namely that which is in Kynosarges. The Barbarians however
came and lay with their ships in the sea which is off Phaleron, (for
this was then the seaport of the Athenians), they anchored their ships,
I say, off this place, and then proceeded to sail back to Asia.

117. In this fight at Marathon there were slain of the Barbarians about
six thousand four hundred men, and of the Athenians a hundred and ninety
and two. Such was the number which fell on both sides; and it happened
also that a marvel occurred there of this kind:--an Athenian, Epizelos
the son of Cuphagoras, while fighting in the close combat and proving
himself a good man, was deprived of the sight of his eyes, neither
having received a blow in any part of his body nor having been hit with
a missile, and for the rest of his life from this time he continued to
be blind: and I was informed that he used to tell about that which had
happened to him a tale of this kind, namely that it seemed to him that a
tall man in full armour stood against him, whose beard overshadowed his
whole shield; and this apparition passed him by, but killed his comrade
who stood next to him. Thus, as I was informed, Epizelos told the tale.

118. Datis, however, as he was going with his army to Asia, when he had
come to Myconos saw a vision in his sleep; and of what nature the vision
was it is not reported, but as soon as day dawned he caused a search to
be made of the ships, and finding in a Phenician ship an image of Apollo
overlaid with gold, he inquired from whence it had been carried off.
Then having been informed from what temple it came, he sailed in his
own ship to Delos: and finding that the Delians had returned then to
the island, he deposited the image in the temple and charged the men of
Delos to convey it back to Delion in the territory of the Thebans, which
is situated by the sea-coast just opposite Chalkis. Datis having given
this charge sailed away: the Delians however did not convey the statue
back, but after an interval of twenty years the Thebans themselves
brought it to Delion by reason of an oracle..

119. Now as to those Eretrians who had been reduced to slavery, Datis
and Artaphrenes, when they reached Asia in their voyage, brought them
up to Susa; and king Dareios, though he had great anger against the
Eretrians before they were made captive, because the Eretrians had done
wrong to him unprovoked, yet when he saw that they had been brought up
to him and were in his power, he did them no more evil, but established
them as settlers in the Kissian land upon one of his own domains, of
which the name is Ardericca: and this is distant two hundred and ten
furlongs from Susa and forty from the well which produces things of
three different kinds; for they draw from it asphalt, salt and oil, in
the manner which here follows:--the liquid is drawn with a swipe, to
which there is fastened half a skin instead of a bucket, and a man
strikes this down into it and draws up, and then pours it into a
cistern, from which it runs through into another vessel, taking three
separate ways. The asphalt and the salt become solid at once, and the
oil 108 which is called by the Persians rhadinake, is black and gives
out a disagreeable smell. Here king Dareios established the Eretrians
as settlers; and even to my time they continued to occupy this land,
keeping still their former language. Thus it happened with regard to the
Eretrians.

120. Of the Lacedemonians there came to Athens two thousand after the
full moon, making great haste to be in time, so that they arrived in
Attica on the third day after leaving Sparta: and though they had come
too late for the battle, yet they desired to behold the Medes; and
accordingly they went out to Marathon and looked at the bodies of the
slain: then afterwards they departed home, commending the Athenians and
the work which they had done.

121. Now it is a cause of wonder to me, and I do not accept the report,
that the Alcmaionidai could ever have displayed to the Persians a shield
by a previous understanding, with the desire that the Athenians
should be under the Barbarians and under Hippias; seeing that they are
evidently proved to have been haters of despots as much or more than
Callias the son of Phainippos and father of Hipponicos, while Callias
for his part was the only man of all the Athenians who dared, when
Peisistratos was driven out of Athens, to buy his goods offered for sale
by the State, and in other ways also he contrived against him everything
that was most hostile:

122. Of this Callias it is fitting that every one should have
remembrance for many reasons: first because of that which has been
before said, namely that he was a man of excellence in freeing his
country; and then also for that which he did at the Olympic games,
wherein he gained a victory in the horse-race and was second in the
chariot-race, and he had before this been a victor at the Pythian games,
so that he was distinguished in the sight of all Hellenes by the sums
which he expended; and finally because he showed himself a man of such
liberality towards his daughters, who were three in number; for
when they came to be of ripe age for marriage, he gave them a most
magnificent dowry and also indulged their inclinations; for whomsoever
of all the Athenians each one of them desired to choose as a husband for
herself, to that man he gave her.] 109.

123, and similarly, 110 the Alcmaionidai were haters of despots equally
or more 111 than he. Therefore this is a cause of wonder to me, and I do
not admit the accusation that these they were who displayed the shield;
seeing that they were in exile from the despots during their whole time,
and that by their contrivance the sons of Peisistratos gave up their
rule. Thus it follows that they were the men who set Athens free much
more than Harmodios and Aristogeiton, as I judge: for these my slaying
Hipparchos exasperated the rest of the family of Peisistratos, and
did not at all cause the others to cease from their despotism; but the
Alcmaionidai did evidently set Athens free, at least if these were in
truth the men who persuaded the Pythian prophetess to signify to the
Lacedemonians that they should set Athens free, as I have set forth
before..

124. It may be said however that they had some cause of complaint
against the people of the Athenians, and therefore endeavoured to betray
their native city. But on the contrary there were no men in greater
repute than they, among the Athenians at least, nor who had been more
highly honoured. Thus it is not reasonable to suppose that by them a
shield should have been displayed for any such purpose. A shield was
displayed, however; that cannot be denied, for it was done: but as to
who it was who displayed it, I am not able to say more than this.

125. Now the family of Alcmaionidai was distinguished in Athens in the
earliest times also, and from the time of Alcmaion and of Megacles after
him they became very greatly distinguished. For first Alcmaion the son
of Megacles showed himself a helper of the Lydians from Sardis who came
from Croesus to the Oracle at Delphi, and assisted them with zeal; and
Croesus having heard from the Lydians who went to the Oracle that
this man did him service, sent for him to Sardis; and when he came, he
offered to give him a gift of as much gold as he could carry away at
once upon his own person. With a view to this gift, its nature being
such, Alcmaion made preparations and used appliances as follows:--he put
on a large tunic leaving a deep fold in the tunic to hang down in front,
and he draw on his feet the widest boots which he could find, and so
went to the treasury to which they conducted him. Then he fell upon a
heap of gold-dust, and first he packed in by the side of his legs so
much of the gold as his boots would contain, and then he filled the
whole fold of the tunic with the gold and sprinkled some of the gold
dust on the hair of his head and took some into his mouth, and having so
done he came forth out of the treasury, with difficulty dragging along
his boots and resembling anything in the world rather than a man; for
his mouth was stuffed full, and every part of him was swelled out: and
upon Croesus came laughter when he saw him, and he not only gave him all
that, but also presented him in addition with more not inferior in
value to that. Thus this house became exceedingly wealthy, and thus the
Alcmaion of whom I speak became a breeder of chariot-horses and won a
victory at Olympia..

126. Then in the next generation after this, Cleisthenes the despot of
Sikyon exalted the family, so that it became of much more note among
the Hellenes than it had been formerly. For Cleisthenes the son of
Arisonymos, the son of Myron, the son of Andreas, had a daughter whose
name was Agariste; and as to her he formed a desire to find out the best
man of all the Hellenes and to assign her to him in marriage. So when
the Olympic games were being held and Cleisthenes was victor in them
with a four-horse chariot, he caused a proclamation to be made, that
whosoever of the Hellenes thought himself worthy to be the son-in-law of
Cleisthenes should come on the sixtieth day, or before that if he would,
to Sikyon; for Cleisthenes intended to conclude the marriage within a
year, reckoning from the sixtieth day. Then all those of the Hellenes
who had pride either in themselves or in their high descent, 112 came
as wooers, and for them Cleisthenes had a running-course and a
wrestling-place made and kept them expressly for their use..

127. From Italy came Smindyrides the son of Hippocrates of Sybaris, who
of all men on earth reached the highest point of luxury (now Sybaris at
this time was in the height of its prosperity), and Damasos of Siris,
the son of that Amyris who was called the Wise; these came from Italy:
from the Ionian gulf came Amphimnestos the son of Epistrophos of
Epidamnos, this man from the Ionian gulf: from Aitolia came Males, the
brother of that Titormos who surpassed all the Hellenes in strength and
who fled from the presence of men to the furthest extremities of the
Aitolian land: from Peloponnesus, Leokedes the son of Pheidon the despot
of the Argives, that Pheidon who established for the Peloponnesians
the measures which they use, and who went beyond all other Hellenes in
wanton insolence, since he removed from their place the presidents of
the games appointed by the Eleians and himself presided over the
games at Olympia,--his son, I say, and Amiantos the son of Lycurgos an
Arcadian from Trapezus, and Laphanes an Azanian from the city of Paios,
son of that Euphorion who (according to the story told in Arcadia)
received the Dioscuroi as guests in his house and from thenceforth was
wont to entertain all men who came, and Onomastos the son of Agaios
of Elis; these, I say, came from Peloponnesus itself: from Athens came
Megacles the son of that Alcmaion who went to Croesus, and besides him
Hippocleides the son of Tisander, one who surpassed the other Athenians
in wealth and in comeliness of form: from Eretria, which at that time
was flourishing, came Lysanias, he alone from Euboea: from Thessalia
came Diactorides of Crannon, one of the family of the Scopadai: and from
the Molossians, Alcon..

128. So many in number did the wooers prove to be: and when these had
come by the appointed day, Cleisthenes first inquired of their native
countries and of the descent of each one, and then keeping them for a
year he made trial continually both of their manly virtue and of
their disposition, training and temper, associating both with each one
separately and with the whole number together: and he made trial of them
both by bringing out to bodily exercises those of them who were younger,
and also especially in the common feast: for during all the time that he
kept them he did everything that could be done, and at the same time he
entertained them magnificently. Now it chanced that those of the wooers
pleased him most who had come from Athens, and of these Hippocleides the
son of Tisander was rather preferred, both by reason of manly virtues
and also because he was connected by descent with the family of Kypselos
at Corinth.

129. Then when the appointed day came for the marriage banquet and for
Cleisthenes himself to declare whom he selected from the whole number,
Cleisthenes sacrificed a hundred oxen and feasted both the wooers
themselves and all the people of Sikyon; and when the dinner was over,
the wooers began to vie with one another both in music and in speeches
for the entertainment of the company; 113 and as the drinking went
forward and Hippocleides was very much holding the attention of the
others, 114 he bade the flute-player play for him a dance-measure;
and when the flute-player did so, he danced: and it so befell that he
pleased himself in his dancing, but Cleisthenes looked on at the whole
matter with suspicion. Then Hippocleides after a certain time bade one
bring in a table; and when the table came in, first he danced upon it
Laconian figures, and then also Attic, and thirdly he planted his head
upon the table and gesticulated with his legs. Cleisthenes meanwhile,
when he was dancing the first and the second time, though he abhorred
the thought that Hippocleides should now become his son-in-law, because
of his dancing and his shamelessness, yet restrained himself, not
desiring to break out in anger against him; but when he saw that he thus
gesticulated with his legs, he was no longer able to restrain himself,
but said: "Thou hast danced away thy marriage however, 115 son of
Tisander!" and Hippocleides answered and said: "Hippocleides cares not!"

130. and hence comes this saying. Then Cleisthenes caused silence to
be made, and spoke to the company as follows: "Men who are wooers of my
daughter, I commend you all, and if it were possible I would gratify
you all, neither selecting one of you to be preferred, nor rejecting the
remainder. Since however it is not possible, as I am deliberating about
one maiden only, to act so as to please all, therefore to those of you
who are rejected from this marriage I give as a gift a talent of silver
to each one for the worthy estimation ye had of me, in that ye desired
to marry from my house, and for the time of absence from your homes;
and to the son of Alcmaion, Megacles, I offer my daughter Agariste in
betrothal according to the customs of the Athenians." Thereupon Megacles
said that he accepted the betrothal, and so the marriage was determined
by Cleisthenes.

131. Thus it happened as regards the judgment of the wooers, and thus
the Alcmaionidai got renown over all Hellas. And these having been
married, there was born to them that Cleisthenes who established the
tribes and the democracy for the Athenians, he being called after the
Sikyonian Cleisthenes, his mother's father; this son, I say, was born to
Megacles, and also Hippocrates: and of Hippocrates came another
Megacles and another Agariste, called after Agariste, the daughter of
Cleisthenes, who having been married to Xanthippos the son of Ariphron
and being with child, saw a vision in her sleep, and it seemed to her
that she had brought forth a lion: then after a few days she bore to
Xanthippos Pericles.

132. After the defeat at Marathon, Miltiades, who even before was well
reputed with the Athenians, came then to be in much higher estimation:
and when he asked the Athenians for seventy ships and an army with
supplies of money, not declaring to them against what land he was
intending to make an expedition, but saying that he would enrich them
greatly if they would go with him, for he would lead them to a land of
such a kind that they would easily get from it gold in abundance,--thus
saying he asked for the ships; and the Athenians, elated by these words,
delivered them over to him..

133. Then Miltiades, when he had received the army, proceeded to sail
to Paris with the pretence that the Parians had first attacked Athens by
making expedition with triremes to Marathon in company with the Persian:
this was the pretext which he put forward, but he had also a grudge
against the Parians on account of Lysagoras the son of Tisias, who was
by race of Paros, for having accused him to Hydarnes the Persian. So
when Miltiades had arrived at the place to which he was sailing, he
began to besiege the Parians with his army, first having shut them
up within their wall; and sending in to them a herald he asked for a
hundred talents, saying that if they refused to give them, his army
should not return back 116 until it had conquered them completely. The
Parians however had no design of giving any money to Miltiades, but
contrived only how they might defend their city, devising various things
besides and also this,--wherever at any time the wall proved to be open
to attack, that point was raised when night came on to double its former
height..

134. So much of the story is reported by all the Hellenes, but as to
what followed the Parians alone report, and they say that it happened
thus:--When Miltiades was at a loss, it is said, there came a woman to
speech with him, who had been taken prisoner, a Parian by race whose
name was Timo, an under-priestess 117 of the Earth goddesses; 118 she,
they say, came into the presence of Miltiades and counselled him that if
he considered it a matter of much moment to conquer Paros, he could do
that which she should suggest to him; and upon that she told him her
meaning. He accordingly passed through to the hill which is before the
city and leapt over the fence of the temple of Demeter Giver of Laws,
119 not being able to open the door; and then having leapt over he went
on towards the sanctuary 120 with the design of doing something within,
whether it were that he meant to lay hands on some of the things which
should not be touched, or whatever else he intended to do; and when he
had reached the door, forthwith a shuddering fear came over him and he
set off to go back the same way as he came, and as he leapt down from
the wall of rough stones his thigh was dislocated, or, as others say, he
struck his knee against the wall..

135. Miltiades accordingly, being in a wretched case, set forth to sail
homewards, neither bringing wealth to the Athenians nor having added
to them the possession of Paros, but having besieged the city for
six-and-twenty days and laid waste the island: and the Parians being
informed that Timo the under-priestess of the goddesses had acted as
a guide to Miltiades, desired to take vengeance upon her for this, and
they sent messengers to Delphi to consult the god, so soon as they had
leisure from the siege; and these messengers they sent to ask whether
they should put to death the under-priestess of the goddesses, who had
been a guide to their enemies for the capture of her native city and had
revealed to Miltiades the mysteries which might not be uttered to a male
person. The Pythian prophetess however forbade them, saying that Timo
was not the true author of these things, but since it was destined that
Miltiades should end his life not well, she had appeared to guide him to
his evil fate..

136. Thus the Pythian prophetess replied to the Parians: and the
Athenians, when Miltiades had returned back from Paros, began to talk of
him, and among the rest especially Xanthippos the son of Ariphron, who
brought Miltiades up before the people claiming the penalty of death and
prosecuted him for his deception of the Athenians: and Miltiades did not
himself make his own defence, although he was present, for he was unable
to do so because his thigh was mortifying; but he lay in public view
upon a bed, while his friends made a defence for him, making mention
much both of the battle which had been fought at Marathon and of
the conquest of Lemnos, namely how he had conquered Lemnos and taken
vengeance on the Pelasgians, and had delivered it over to the Athenians:
and the people came over to his part as regards the acquittal from the
penalty of death, but they imposed a fine of fifty talents for the wrong
committed: and after this Miltiades died, his thigh having gangrened and
mortified, and the fifty talents were paid by his son Kimon.

137. Now Miltiades son of Kimon had thus taken possession of the
Lemnos:--After the Pelasgians had been cast out of Attica by the
Athenians, whether justly or unjustly,--for about this I cannot tell
except the things reported, which are these:--Hecataois on the one hand,
the son of Hegesander, said in his history that it was done unjustly;
for he said that when the Athenians saw the land which extends below
Hymettos, which they had themselves given them 121 to dwell in, as
payment for the wall built round the Acropolis in former times, when the
Athenians, I say, saw that this land was made good by cultivation, which
before was bad and worthless, they were seized with jealousy and with
longing to possess the land, and so drove them out, not alleging any
other pretext: but according to the report of the Athenians themselves
they drove them out justly; for the Pelasgians being settled under
Hymettos made this a starting-point and committed wrong against them as
follows:--the daughters and sons of the Athenians were wont ever to go
for water to the spring of Enneacrunos; for at that time neither they
nor the other Hellenes as yet had household servants; and when these
girls came, the Pelasgians in wantonness and contempt of the Athenians
would offer them violence; and it was not enough for them even to do
this, but at last they were found in the act of plotting an attack
upon the city: and the narrators say that they herein proved themselves
better men than the Pelasgians, inasmuch as when they might have slain
the Pelasgians, who had been caught plotting against them, they did not
choose to do so, but ordered them merely to depart out of the land: and
thus having departed out of the land, the Pelasgians took possession of
several older places and especially of Lemnos. The former story is that
which was reported by Hecataios, while the latter is that which is told
by the Athenians..

138. These Pelasgians then, dwelling after that in Lemnos, desired to
take vengeance on the Athenians; and having full knowledge also of the
festivals of the Athenians, they got 122 fifty-oared galleys and laid
wait for the women of the Athenians when they were keeping festival to
Artemis in Brauron; and having carried off a number of them from thence,
they departed and sailed away home, and taking the women to Lemnos they
kept them as concubines. Now when these women had children gradually
more and more, they made it their practice to teach their sons both
the Attic tongue and the manners of the Athenians. And these were not
willing to associate with the sons of the Pelasgian women, and moreover
if any of them were struck by any one of those, they all in a body came
to the rescue and helped one another. Moreover the boys claimed to
have authority over the other boys and got the better of them easily.
Perceiving these things the Pelasgians considered the matter; and when
they took counsel together, a fear came over them and they thought, if
the boys were indeed resolved now to help one another against the sons
of the legitimate wives, and were endeavouring already from the first to
have authority over them, what would they do when they were grown up to
be men? Then they determined to put to death the sons of the Athenian
women, and this they actually did; and in addition to them they slew
their mothers also. From this deed and from that which was done before
this, which the women did when they killed Thoas and the rest, who were
their own husbands, it has become a custom in Hellas that all deeds of
great cruelty should be called "Lemnian deeds.".

139. After the Pelasgians had killed their own sons and wives, the earth
did not bear fruit for them, nor did their women or their cattle bring
forth young as they did before; and being hard pressed by famine and by
childlessness, they sent to Delphi to ask for a release from the evils
which were upon them; and the Pythian prophetess bade them pay such
penalty to the Athenians as the Athenians themselves should appoint.
The Pelasgians came accordingly to Athens and professed that they were
willing to pay the penalty for all the wrong which they had done: and
the Athenians laid a couch in the fairest possible manner in the City
Hall, and having set by it a table covered with all good things, they
bade the Pelasgians deliver up to them their land in that condition.
Then the Pelasgians answered and said: "When with a North Wind in one
single day a ship shall accomplish the voyage from your land to ours,
then we will deliver it up," feeling assured that it was impossible for
this to happen, since Attica lies far away to the South of Lemnos..

140. Such were the events which happened then: and very many years
later, after the Chersonese which is by the Hellespont had come to be
under the Athenians, Miltiades the son of Kimon, when the Etesian Winds
blew steadily, accomplished the voyage in a ship from Elaius in the
Chersonese to Lemnos, and proclaimed to the Pelasgians that they should
depart out of the island, reminding them of the oracle, which the
Pelasgians had never expected would be accomplished for them. The men of
Hephaistia accordingly obeyed; but those of Myrina, not admitting that
the Chersonese was Attica, suffered a siege, until at last these also
submitted. Thus it was that the Athenians and Miltiades took possession
of Lemnos.


