BOOK VII. THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED POLYMNIA

1. Now when the report came to Dareios the son of Hystaspes of the
battle which was fought at Marathon, the king, who even before this had
been greatly exasperated with the Athenians on account of the attack
made upon Sardis, then far more than before displayed indignation, and
was far more desirous of making a march against Hellas. Accordingly
at once he sent messengers to the various cities and ordered that they
should get ready a force, appointing to each people to supply much more
than at the former time, and not only ships of war, but also horses and
provisions and transport vessels; 1 and when these commands were carried
round, all Asia was moved for three years, for all the best men were
being enlisted for the expedition against Hellas, and were making
preparations. In the fourth year however the Egyptians, who had been
reduced to subjection by Cambyses, revolted from the Persians; and then
he was even more desirous of marching against both these nations.

2. While Dareios was thus preparing to set out against Egypt and against
Athens, there arose a great strife among his sons about the supreme
power; and they said that he must not make his expeditions until he
had designated one of them to be king, according to the custom of the
Persians. For to Dareios already before he became king three sons had
been born of his former wife the daughter of Gobryas, and after he
became king four other sons of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus: of the
first the eldest was Artobazanes, and of those who had been born later,
Xerxes. These being not of the same mother were at strife with one
another, Artobazanes contending that he was the eldest of all the sons,
and that it was a custom maintained by all men that the eldest should
have the rule, and Xerxes arguing that he was the son of Atossa the
daughter of Cyrus, and that Cyrus was he who had won for the Persians
their freedom.

3. Now while Dareios did not as yet declare his judgment, it chanced
that Demaratos also, the son of Ariston, had come up to Susa at this
very same time, having been deprived of the kingdom in Sparta and having
laid upon himself a sentence of exile from Lacedemon. This man, hearing
of the difference between the sons of Dareios, came (as it is reported
of him) and counselled Xerxes to say in addition to those things which
he was wont to say, that he had been born to Dareios at the time when he
was already reigning as king and was holding the supreme power over the
Persians, while Artobazanes had been born while Dareios was still in
a private station: it was not fitting therefore nor just that another
should have the honour before him; for even in Sparta, suggested
Demaratos, this was the custom, that is to say, if some of the sons had
been born first, before their father began to reign, and another came
after, born later while he was reigning, the succession of the kingdom
belonged to him who had been born later. Xerxes accordingly made use of
the suggestion of Demaratos; and Dareios perceiving that he spoke that
which was just, designated him to be king. It is my opinion however that
even without this suggestion Xerxes would have become king, for Atossa
was all-powerful.

4. Then having designated Xerxes to the Persians as their king, Dareios
wished to go on his expeditions. However in the next year after this and
after the revolt of Egypt, it came to pass that Dareios himself died,
having been king in all six-and-thirty years; and thus he did not
succeed in taking vengeance either upon the revolted Egyptians or upon
the Athenians.

5. Dareios being dead the kingdom passed to his son Xerxes. Now Xerxes
at the first was by no means anxious to make a march against Hellas, but
against Egypt he continued to gather a force. Mardonios however, the son
of Gobryas, who was a cousin of Xerxes, being sister's son to Dareios,
was ever at his side, and having power with him more than any other
of the Persians, he kept continually to such discourse as this which
follows, saying: "Master, it is not fitting that the Athenians, after
having done to the Persians very great evil, should not pay the penalty
for that which they have done. What if thou shouldest 2 at this present
time do that which thou hast in thy hands to do; and when thou hast
tamed the land of Egypt, which has broken out insolently against us,
then do thou march an army against Athens, that a good report may be
made of thee by men, and that in future every one may beware of making
expeditions against thy land." Thus far his speech had to do with
vengeance, 3 and to this he would make addition as follows, saying
that Europe was a very fair land and bore all kinds of trees that are
cultivated for fruit, and was of excellent fertility, and such that the
king alone of all mortals was worthy to possess it.

6. These things he was wont to say, since he was one who had a desire
for perilous enterprise and wished to be himself the governor of Hellas
under the king. So in time he prevailed upon Xerxes and persuaded him to
do this; for other things also assisted him and proved helpful to him
in persuading Xerxes. In the first place there had come from Thessaly
messengers sent by the Aleuadai, who were inviting the king to come
against Hellas and were showing great zeal in his cause, (now these
Aleuadai were kings of Thessaly): and then secondly those of the sons of
Peisistratos who had come up to Susa were inviting him also, holding to
the same arguments as the Aleuadai; and moreover they offered him yet
more inducement in addition to these; for there was one Onomacritos an
Athenian, who both uttered oracles and also had collected and arranged
the oracles of Musaios; 4 and with this man they had come up, after they
had first reconciled the enmity between them. For Onomacritos had been
driven forth from Athens by Hipparchos the son of Peisistratos, having
been caught by Lasos of Hermion interpolating in the works of Musaios
an oracle to the effect that the islands which lie off Lemnos should
disappear 5 under the sea. For this reason Hipparchos drove him forth,
having before this time been very much wont to consult him. Now however
he had gone up with them; and when he had come into the presence of the
king, the sons of Peisistratos spoke of him in magnificent terms, and
he repeated some of the oracles; and if there was in them anything
which imported disaster to the Barbarians, of this he said nothing;
but choosing out of them the most fortunate things he told how it was
destined that the Hellespont should be yoked with a bridge by a Persian,
and he set forth the manner of the march. He then thus urged Xerxes with
oracles, while the sons of Peisistratos and the Aleuadai pressed him
with their advice.

7. So when Xerxes had been persuaded to make an expedition against
Hellas, then in the next year after the death of Dareios he made a march
first against those who had revolted. Having subdued these and having
reduced all Egypt to slavery much greater than it had suffered in the
reign of Dareios, he entrusted the government of it to Achaimenes his
own brother, a son of Dareios. Now this Achaimenes being a governor of
Egypt was slain afterwards by Inaros the son of Psammetichos, a Libyan.

8. Xerxes then after the conquest of Egypt, being about to take in hand
the expedition against Athens, summoned a chosen assembly of the best
men among the Persians, that he might both learn their opinions and
himself in the presence of all declare that which he intended to do;
and when they were assembled, Xerxes spoke to them as follows: (a)
"Persians, I shall not be the first to establish this custom in your
nation, but having received it from others I shall follow it: for as I
am informed by those who are older than myself, we never yet have kept
quiet since we received this supremacy in succession to the Medes, when
Cyrus overthrew Astyages; but God thus leads us, and for ourselves tends
to good that we are busied about many things. Now about the nations
which Cyrus and Cambyses and my father Dareios subdued and added to
their possessions there is no need for me to speak, since ye know well:
and as for me, from the day when I received by inheritance this throne
upon which I sit 6 I carefully considered always how in this honourable
place I might not fall short of those who have been before me, nor
add less power to the dominion of the Persians: and thus carefully
considering I find a way by which not only glory may be won by us,
together with a land not less in extent nor worse than that which we now
possess, (and indeed more varied in its productions), but also vengeance
and retribution may be brought about. Wherefore I have assembled you
together now, in order that I may communicate to you that which I have
it in my mind to do. (b) I design to yoke the Hellespont with a bridge,
and to march an army through Europe against Hellas, in order that I may
take vengeance on the Athenians for all the things which they have done
both to the Persians and to my father. Ye saw how my father Dareios also
was purposing to make an expedition against these men; but he has ended
his life and did not succeed in taking vengeance upon them. I however,
on behalf of him and also of the other Persians, will not cease until I
have conquered Athens and burnt it with fire; seeing that they did wrong
unprovoked to me and to my father. First they went to Sardis, having
come with Aristagoras the Milesian our slave, and they set fire to the
sacred groves and the temples; and then secondly, what things they did
to us when we disembarked in their land, at the time when Datis and
Artaphrenes were commanders of our army, ye all know well, as I think.
7 (c) For these reasons 8 I have resolved to make an expedition against
them, and reckoning I find in the matter so many good things as ye shall
hear:--if we shall subdue these and the neighbours of these, who dwell
in the land of Pelops the Phrygian, we shall cause the Persian land to
have the same boundaries as the heaven of Zeus; since in truth upon no
land will the sun look down which borders ours, but I with your help
shall make all the lands into one land, having passed through the whole
extent of Europe. For I am informed that things are so, namely that
there is no city of men nor any race of human beings remaining, which
will be able to come to a contest with us, when those whom I just now
mentioned have been removed out of the way. Thus both those who have
committed wrong against us will have the yoke of slavery, and also those
who have not committed wrong. (d) And ye will please me best if ye do
this:--whensoever I shall signify to you the time at which ye ought to
come, ye must appear every one of you with zeal for the service; and
whosoever shall come with a force best equipped, to him I will give
gifts such as are accounted in our land to be the most honourable.
Thus must these things be done: but that I may not seem to you to be
following my own counsel alone, I propose the matter for discussion,
bidding any one of you who desires it, declare his opinion."

9. Having thus spoken he ceased; and after him Mardonios said: "Master,
thou dost surpass not only all the Persians who were before thee, but
also those who shall come after, since thou didst not only attain in
thy words to that which is best and truest as regards other matters, but
also thou wilt not permit the Ionians who dwell in Europe to make a mock
of us, having no just right to do so: for a strange thing it would
be if, when we have subdued and kept as our servants Sacans, Indians,
Ethiopians, Assyrians, and other nations many in number and great, who
have done no wrong to the Persians, because we desired to add to our
dominions, we should not take vengeance on the Hellenes who committed
wrong against us unprovoked. (a) Of what should we be afraid?--what
gathering of numbers, or what resources of money? for their manner of
fight we know, and as for their resources, we know that they are feeble;
and we have moreover subdued already their sons, those I mean who are
settled in our land and are called Ionians, Aiolians, and Dorians.
Moreover I myself formerly made trial of marching against these men,
being commanded thereto by thy father; and although I marched as far as
Macedonia, and fell but little short of coming to Athens itself, no man
came to oppose me in fight. (b) And yet it is true that the Hellenes
make wars, but (as I am informed) very much without wise consideration,
by reason of obstinacy and want of skill: for when they have proclaimed
war upon one another, they find out first the fairest and smoothest
place, and to this they come down and fight; so that even the victors
depart from the fight with great loss, and as to the vanquished, of them
I make no mention at all, for they are utterly destroyed. They ought
however, being men who speak the same language, to make use of heralds
and messengers and so to take up their differences and settle them in
any way rather than by battles; but if they must absolutely war with one
another, they ought to find out each of them that place in which they
themselves are hardest to overcome, and here to make their trial.
Therefore the Hellenes, since they use no good way, when I had marched
as far as the land of Macedonia, did not come to the resolution of
fighting with me. (c) Who then is likely to set himself against thee,
O king, offering war, when thou art leading both all the multitudes of
Asia and the whole number of the ships? I for my part am of opinion that
the power of the Hellenes has not attained to such a pitch of boldness:
but if after all I should prove to be deceived in my judgment, and they
stirred up by inconsiderate folly should come to battle with us, they
would learn that we are the best of all men in the matters of war.
However that may be, let not anything be left untried; for nothing comes
of itself, but from trial all things are wont to come to men."

10. Mardonios having thus smoothed over the resolution expressed by
Xerxes had ceased speaking: and when the other Persians were silent and
did not venture to declare an opinion contrary to that which had been
proposed, then Artabanos the son of Hystaspes, being father's brother to
Xerxes and having reliance upon that, spoke as follows: (a) "O king,
if opinions opposed to one another be not spoken, it is not possible to
select the better in making the choice, but one must accept that which
has been spoken; if however opposite opinions be uttered, this is
possible; just as we do not distinguish the gold which is free from
alloy when it is alone by itself, but when we rub it on the touchstone
in comparison with other gold, then we distinguish that which is
the better. Now I gave advice to thy father Dareios also, who was my
brother, not to march against the Scythians, men who occupied no abiding
city in any part of the earth. He however, expecting that he would
subdue the Scythians who were nomads, did not listen to me; but he made
a march and came back from it with the loss of many good men of his
army. But thou, O king, art intending to march against men who are much
better than the Scythians, men who are reported to be excellent both by
sea and on land: and the thing which is to be feared in this matter it
is right that I should declare to thee. (b) Thou sayest that thou wilt
yoke the Hellespont with a bridge and march an army through Europe to
Hellas. Now supposing it chance that we are 9 worsted either by land or
by sea, or even both, for the men are reported to be valiant in fight,
(and we may judge for ourselves that it is so, since the Athenians
by themselves destroyed that great army which came with Datis and
Artaphrenes to the Attic land),--suppose however that they do not
succeed in both, yet if they shall attack with their ships and conquer
in a sea-fight, and then sail to the Hellespont and break up the bridge,
this of itself, O king, will prove to be a great peril. (c) Not however
by any native wisdom of my own do I conjecture that this might happen:
I am conjecturing only such a misfortune as all but came upon us at the
former time, when thy father, having yoked the Bosphorus of Thracia and
made a bridge over the river Ister, had crossed over to go against the
Scythians. At that time the Scythians used every means of entreaty
to persuade the Ionians to break up the passage, to whom it had been
entrusted to guard the bridges of the Ister. At that time, if Histiaios
the despot of Miletos had followed the opinion of the other despots and
had not made opposition to them, the power of the Persians would have
been brought to an end. Yet it is a fearful thing even to hear it
reported that the whole power of the king had come to depend upon one
human creature. 10 (d) Do not thou therefore propose to go into any
such danger when there is no need, but do as I say:--at the present time
dissolve this assembly; and afterwards at whatever time it shall seem
good to thee, when thou hast considered prudently with thyself, proclaim
that which seems to thee best: for good counsel I hold to be a very
great gain; since even if anything shall prove adverse, the counsel
which has been taken is no less good, though it has been defeated by
fortune; while he who took counsel badly at first, if good fortune
should go with him has lighted on a prize by chance, but none the
less for that his counsel was bad. (e) Thou seest how God strikes with
thunderbolts the creatures which stand above the rest and suffers them
not to make a proud show; while those which are small do not provoke
him to jealousy: thou seest also how he hurls his darts ever at those
buildings which are the highest and those trees likewise; for God is
wont to cut short all those things which stand out above the rest. Thus
also a numerous army is destroyed by one of few men in some such manner
as this, namely when God having become jealous of them casts upon them
panic or thundering from heaven, then they are destroyed utterly and
not as their worth deserves; for God suffers not any other to have high
thoughts save only himself. (f) Moreover the hastening of any matter
breeds disasters, whence great losses are wont to be produced; but in
waiting there are many good things contained, as to which, if they
do not appear to be good at first, yet one will find them to be so in
course of time. (g) To thee, O king, I give this counsel: but thou son
of Gobryas, Mardonios, cease speaking foolish words about the Hellenes,
since they in no way deserve to be spoken of with slight; for by
uttering slander against the Hellenes thou art stirring the king himself
to make an expedition, and it is to this very end that I think thou art
straining all thy endeavour. Let not this be so; for slander is a most
grievous thing: in it the wrongdoers are two, and the person who suffers
wrong is one. The slanderer does a wrong in that he speaks against
one who is not present, the other in that he is persuaded of the thing
before he gets certain knowledge of it, and he who is not present when
the words are spoken suffers wrong in the matter thus,--both because he
has been slandered by the one and because he has been believed to be
bad by the other. (h) However, if it be absolutely needful to make an
expedition against these men, come, let the king himself remain behind
in the abodes of the Persians, and let us both set to the wager our
sons; and then do thou lead an army by thyself, choosing for thyself
the men whom thou desirest, and taking an army as large as thou thinkest
good: and if matters turn out for the king as thou sayest, let my sons
be slain and let me also be slain in addition to them; but if in the way
which I predict, let thy sons suffer this, and with them thyself also,
if thou shalt return back. But if thou art not willing to undergo this
proof, but wilt by all means lead an army against Hellas, then I say
that those who are left behind in this land will hear 11 that Mardonios,
after having done a great mischief to the Persians, is torn by dogs and
birds, either in the land of the Athenians, or else perchance thou wilt
be in the land of the Lacedemonians (unless indeed this should have come
to pass even before that upon the way), and that thou hast at length
been made aware against what kind of men thou art persuading the king to
march."

11. Artabanos thus spoke; and Xerxes enraged by it made answer as
follows: "Artabanos, thou art my father's brother, and this shall save
thee from receiving any recompense such as thy foolish words deserve.
Yet I attach to thee this dishonour, seeing that thou art a coward and
spiritless, namely that thou do not march with me against Hellas, but
remain here together with the women; and I, even without thy help,
will accomplish all the things which I said: for I would I might not be
descended from Dareios, the son of Hystaspes, the son of Arsames, the
son of Ariaramnes, the son of Teïspes, or from Cyrus, 12 the son of
Cambyses, the son of Teïspes, the son of Achaimenes, if I take not
vengeance on the Athenians; since I know well that if we shall keep
quiet, yet they will not do so, but will again 13 march against our
land, if we may judge by the deeds which have been done by them to begin
with, since they both set fire to Sardis and marched upon Asia. It is
not possible therefore that either side should retire from the quarrel,
but the question before us is whether we shall do or whether we shall
suffer; whether all these regions shall come to be under the Hellenes
or all those under the Persians: for in our hostility there is no middle
course. It follows then now that it is well for us, having suffered
wrong first, to take revenge, that I may find out also what is this
terrible thing which I shall suffer if I lead an army against these
men,--men whom Pelops the Phrygian, who was the slave of my forefathers,
so subdued that even to the present day both the men themselves and
their land are called after the name of him who subdued them."

12. Thus far was it spoken then; but afterwards when darkness came on,
the opinion of Artabanos tormented Xerxes continually; and making night
his counsellor he found that it was by no means to his advantage to make
the march against Hellas. So when he had thus made a new resolve, he
fell asleep, and in the night he saw, as is reported by the Persians, a
vision as follows:--Xerxes thought that a man tall and comely of shape
came and stood by him and said: "Art thou indeed changing thy counsel,
O Persian, of leading an expedition against Hellas, now that thou hast
made proclamation that the Persians shall collect an army? Thou dost not
well in changing thy counsel, nor will he who is here present with thee
excuse thee from it; 1301 but as thou didst take counsel in the day to
do, by that way go."

13. After he had said this, Xerxes thought that he who had spoken flew
away; and when day had dawned he made no account of this dream, but
gathered together the Persians whom he had assembled also the former
time and said to them these words: "Persians, pardon me that I make
quick changes in my counsel; for in judgment not yet am I come to my
prime, and they who advise me to do the things which I said, do not
for any long time leave me to myself. However, although at first when
I heard the opinion of Artabanos my youthful impulses burst out, 14 so
that I cast out unseemly words 15 against a man older than myself; yet
now I acknowledge that he is right, and I shall follow his opinion.
Consider then I have changed my resolve to march against Hellas, and do
ye remain still."

14. The Persians accordingly when they heard this were rejoiced and made
obeisance: but when night had come on, the same dream again came and
stood by Xerxes as he lay asleep and said: "Son of Dareios, it is
manifest then that thou hast resigned this expedition before the
assembly of the Persians, and that thou hast made no account of my
words, as if thou hadst heard them from no one at all. Now therefore be
well assured of this:--if thou do not make thy march forthwith, there
shall thence spring up for thee this result, namely that, as thou didst
in short time become great and mighty, so also thou shalt speedily be
again brought low."

15. Xerxes then, being very greatly disturbed by fear of the vision,
started up from his bed and sent a messenger to summon Artabanos; to
whom when he came Xerxes spoke thus: "Artabanos, at the first I was
not discreet, when I spoke to thee foolish words on account of thy good
counsel; but after no long time I changed my mind and perceived that I
ought to do these things which thou didst suggest to me. I am not able
however to do them, although I desire it; for indeed, now that I have
turned about and changed my mind, a dream appears haunting me and by no
means approving that I should do so; and just now it has left me even
with a threat. If therefore it is God who sends it to me, and it is his
absolute will and pleasure that an army should go against Hellas, this
same dream will fly to thee also, laying upon thee a charge such as it
has laid upon me; and it occurs to my mind that this might happen thus,
namely if thou shouldst take all my attire and put it on, and then seat
thyself on my throne, and after that lie down to sleep in my bed."

16. Xerxes spoke to him thus; and Artabanos was not willing to obey the
command at first, since he did not think himself worthy to sit upon
the royal throne; but at last being urged further he did that which was
commanded, first having spoken these words: (a) "It is equally good in
my judgment, O king, whether a man has wisdom himself or is willing to
follow the counsel of him who speaks well: and thou, who hast attained
to both these good things, art caused to err by the communications of
evil men; just as they say that the Sea, which is of all things the
most useful to men, is by blasts of winds falling upon it prevented from
doing according to its own nature. I however, when I was evil spoken of
by thee, was not so much stung with pain for this, as because, when
two opinions were laid before the Persians, the one tending to increase
wanton insolence and the other tending to check it and saying that it
was a bad thing to teach the soul to endeavour always to have something
more than the present possession,--because, I say, when such opinions as
these were laid before us, thou didst choose that one which was the more
dangerous both for thyself and for the Persians. (b) And now that
thou hast turned to the better counsel, thou sayest that when thou art
disposed to let go the expedition against the Hellenes, a dream haunts
thee sent by some god, which forbids thee to abandon thy enterprise.
Nay, but here too thou dost err, my son, since this is not of the Deity;
16 for the dreams of sleep which come roaming about to men, are of such
nature as I shall inform thee, being by many years older than thou. The
visions of dreams are wont to hover above us 17 in such form 18 for the
most part as the things of which we were thinking during the day; and we
in the days preceding were very much occupied with this campaign. (c) If
however after all this is not such a thing as I interpret it to be, but
is something which is concerned with God, thou hast summed the matter up
in that which thou hast said: let it appear, as thou sayest, to me also,
as to thee, and give commands. But supposing that it desires to appear
to me at all, it is not bound to appear to me any the more if I have thy
garments on me than if I have my own, nor any more if I take my rest in
thy bed than if I am in thy own; for assuredly this thing, whatever
it may be, which appears to thee in thy sleep, is not so foolish as
to suppose, when it sees me, that it is thou, judging so because the
garments are thine. That however which we must find out now is this,
namely if it will hold me in no account, and not think fit to appear to
me, whether I have my own garments or whether I have thine, but continue
still to haunt thee; 19 for if it shall indeed haunt thee perpetually,
I shall myself also be disposed to say that it is of the Deity. But if
thou hast resolved that it shall be so, and it is not possible to turn
aside this thy resolution, but I must go to sleep in thy bed, then let
it appear to me also, when I perform these things: but until then I
shall hold to the opinion which I now have."

17. Having thus said Artabanos, expecting that he would prove that
Xerxes was speaking folly, did that which was commanded him; and having
put on the garments of Xerxes and seated himself in the royal throne,
he afterwards went to bed: and when he had fallen asleep, the same dream
came to him which used to come to Xerxes, and standing over Artabanos
spoke these words: "Art thou indeed he who endeavours to dissuade Xerxes
from making a march against Hellas, pretending to have a care of him?
However, neither in the future nor now at the present shalt thou escape
unpunished for trying to turn away that which is destined to come to
pass: and as for Xerxes, that which he must suffer if he disobeys, hath
been shown already to the man himself."

18. Thus it seemed to Artabanos that the dream threatened him, and at
the same time was just about to burn out his eyes with hot irons; and
with a loud cry he started up from his bed, and sitting down beside
Xerxes he related to him throughout the vision of the dream, and then
said to him as follows: "I, O king, as one who has seen before now many
great things brought to their fall by things less, urged thee not to
yield in all things to the inclination of thy youth, since I knew that
it was evil to have desire after many things; remembering on the one
hand the march of Cyrus against the Massagetai, what fortune it had, and
also that of Cambyses against the Ethiopians; and being myself one who
took part with Dareios in the campaign against the Scythians. Knowing
these things I had the opinion that thou wert to be envied of all men,
so long as thou shouldest keep still. Since however there comes a divine
impulse, and, as it seems, a destruction sent by heaven is taking hold
of the Hellenes, I for my part am both changed in myself and also I
reverse my opinions; and do thou signify to the Persians the message
which is sent to thee from God, bidding them follow the commands which
were given by thee at first with regard to the preparations to be
made; and endeavour that on thy side nothing may be wanting, since God
delivers the matter into thy hands." These things having been said, both
were excited to confidence by the vision, and so soon as it became
day, Xerxes communicated the matter to the Persians, and Artabanos,
who before was the only man who came forward to dissuade him, now came
forward to urge on the design.

19. Xerxes being thus desirous to make the expedition, there came to
him after this a third vision in his sleep, which the Magians, when they
heard it, explained to have reference to the dominion of the whole Earth
and to mean that all men should be subject to him; and the vision was
this:--Xerxes thought that he had been crowned with a wreath of an
olive-branch and that the shoots growing from the olive-tree covered
the whole Earth; and after that, the wreath, placed as it was about his
head, disappeared. When the Magians had thus interpreted the vision,
forthwith every man of the Persians who had been assembled together
departed to his own province and was zealous by all means to perform the
commands, desiring each one to receive for himself the gifts which
had been proposed: and thus Xerxes was gathering his army together,
searching every region of the continent.

20. During four full years from the conquest of Egypt he was preparing
the army and the things that were of service for the army, and in the
course of the fifth year 20 he began his campaign with a host of great
multitude. For of all the armies of which we have knowledge this proved
to be by far the greatest; so that neither that led by Dareios against
the Scythians appears anything as compared with it, nor the Scythian
host, when the Scythians pursuing the Kimmerians made invasion of the
Median land and subdued and occupied nearly all the upper parts of Asia,
for which invasion afterwards Dareios attempted to take vengeance,
nor that led by the sons of Atreus to Ilion, to judge by that which is
reported of their expedition, nor that of the Mysians and Teucrians,
before the Trojan war, who passed over into Europe by the Bosphorus and
not only subdued all the Thracians, but came down also as far as the
Ionian Sea 21 and marched southwards to the river Peneios.

21. All these expeditions put together, with others, if there be any,
added to them, 22 are not equal to this one alone. For what nation
did Xerxes not lead out of Asia against Hellas? and what water was not
exhausted, being drunk by his host, except only the great rivers?
For some supplied ships, and others were appointed to serve in the
land-army; to some it was appointed to furnish cavalry, and to others
vessels to carry horses, while they served in the expedition themselves
also; 23 others were ordered to furnish ships of war for the bridges,
and others again ships with provisions.

22. Then in the first place, since the former fleet had suffered
disaster in sailing round Athos, preparations had been going on for
about three years past with regard to Athos: for triremes lay at anchor
at Elaius in the Chersonese, and with this for their starting point men
of all nations belonging to the army worked at digging, compelled by
the lash; and the men went to the work regularly in succession: moreover
those who dwelt round about Athos worked also at the digging: and
Bubares the son of Megabazos and Artachaies the son of Artaios, Persians
both, were set over the work. Now Athos is a mountain great and famous,
running down to the sea and inhabited by men: and where the mountain
ends on the side of the mainland the place is like a peninsula with an
isthmus about twelve furlongs 24 across. Here it is plain land or hills
of no great size, extending from the sea of the Acanthians to that which
lies off Torone; and on this isthmus, where Athos ends, is situated a
Hellenic city called Sane: moreover there are others beyond Sane 25 and
within the peninsula of Athos, all which at this time the Persian had
resolved to make into cities of an island and no longer of the mainland;
these are, Dion, Olophyxos, Acrothoon, Thyssos, Cleonai.

23. These are the cities which occupy Athos: and they dug as follows,
the country being divided among the Barbarians by nations for the
work:--at the city of Sane they drew a straight line across the isthmus,
and when the channel became deep, those who stood lowest dug, while
others delivered the earth as it was dug out to other men who stood
above, as upon steps, and they again to others when it was received,
until they came to those that were highest; and these bore it away and
cast it forth. Now the others except the Phenicians had double toil by
the breaking down of the steep edges of their excavation; for since they
endeavoured to make the opening at the top and that at the bottom both
of the same measure, some such thing was likely to result, as they
worked: but the Phenicians, who are apt to show ability in their works
generally, did so in this work also; for when they had had assigned
to them by lot so much as fell to their share, they proceeded to dig,
making the opening of the excavation at the top twice as wide as the
channel itself was to be; and as the work went forward, they kept
contracting the width; so that, when they came to the bottom, their work
was made of equal width with that of the others. Now there is a meadow
there, in which there was made for them a market and a place for buying
and selling; and great quantities of corn came for them regularly from
Asia, ready ground.

24. It seems to me, making conjecture of this work, that Xerxes when
he ordered this to be dug was moved by a love of magnificence and by
a desire to make a display of his power and to leave a memorial behind
him; for though they might have drawn the ships across the isthmus with
no great labour, he bade them dig a channel for the sea of such breadth
that two triremes might sail through, propelled side by side. To these
same men to whom the digging had been appointed, it was appointed also
to make a bridge over the river Strymon, yoking together the banks.

25. These things were being done by Xerxes thus; and meanwhile he caused
ropes also to be prepared for the bridges, made of papyrus and of white
flax, 26 appointing this to the Phenicians and Egyptians; and also he
was making preparations to store provisions for his army on the way,
that neither the army itself nor the baggage animals might suffer from
scarcity, as they made their march against Hellas. Accordingly, when he
had learnt by inquiry of the various places, he bade them make stores
where it was most convenient, carrying supplies to different parts by
merchant ships and ferry-boats from all the countries of Asia. So they
conveyed the greater part of the corn 27 to the place which is called
Leuke Acte in Thrace, while others conveyed stores to Tyrodiza of the
Perinthians, others to Doriscos, others to Eïon on the Strymon, and
others to Macedonia, the work being distributed between them.

26. During the time that these were working at the task which had been
proposed to them, the whole land-army had been assembled together and
was marching with Xerxes to Sardis, setting forth from Critalla in
Cappadokia; for there it had been ordered that the whole army should
assemble, which was to go with Xerxes himself by the land: but which of
the governors of provinces brought the best equipped force and received
from the king the gifts proposed, I am not able to say, for I do not
know that they even came to a competition in this matter. Then after
they had crossed the river Halys and had entered Phrygia, marching
through this land they came to Kelainai, where the springs of the river
Maiander come up, and also those of another river not less than the
Maiander, whose name is Catarractes; 28 this rises in the market-place
itself of Kelainai and runs into the Maiander: and here also is hanging
up in the city the skin of Marsyas the Silenos, which is said by the
Phrygians to have been flayed off and hung up by Apollo.

27. In this city Pythios the son of Atys, a Lydian, was waiting for the
king and entertained his whole army, as well as Xerxes himself, with
the most magnificent hospitality: moreover he professed himself ready
to supply money for the war. So when Pythios offered money, Xerxes asked
those of the Persians who were present, who Pythios was and how much
money he possessed, that he made this offer. They said: "O king, this is
he who presented thy father Dareios with the golden plane-tree and the
golden vine; and even now he is in wealth the first of all men of whom
we know, excepting thee only."

28. Marvelling at the conclusion of these words Xerxes himself asked of
Pythios then, how much money he had; and he said: "O king, I will not
conceal the truth from thee, nor will I allege as an excuse that I do
not know my own substance, but I will enumerate it to thee exactly,
since I know the truth: for as soon as I heard that thou wert coming
down to the Sea of Hellas, desiring to give thee money for the war I
ascertained the truth, and calculating I found that I had of silver two
thousand talents, and of gold four hundred myriads 29 of daric staters
30 all but seven thousand: and with this money I present thee. For
myself I have sufficient livelihood from my slaves and from my estates
of land."

29. Thus he said; and Xerxes was pleased by the things which he had
spoken, and replied: "Lydian host, ever since I went forth from the
Persian land I have encountered no man up to this time who was desirous
to entertain my army, or who came into my presence and made offer of his
own free will to contribute money to me for the war, except only thee:
and thou not only didst entertain my army magnificently, but also now
dost make offer of great sums of money. To thee therefore in return I
give these rewards,--I make thee my guest-friend, and I will complete
for thee the four hundred myriads of staters by giving from myself the
seven thousand, in order that thy four hundred myriads may not fall
short by seven thousand, but thou mayest have a full sum in thy
reckoning, completed thus by me. Keep possession of that which thou hast
got for thyself, and be sure to act always thus; for if thou doest so,
thou wilt have no cause to repent either at the time or afterwards."

30. Having thus said and having accomplished his promise, he continued
his march onwards; and passing by a city of the Phrygians called Anaua
and a lake whence salt is obtained, he came to Colossai, a great city
of Phrygia, where the river Lycos falls into an opening of the earth and
disappears from view, and then after an interval of about five furlongs
it comes up to view again, and this river also flows into the Maiander.
Setting forth from Colossai towards the boundaries of the Phrygians and
Lydians, the army arrived at the city of Kydrara, where a pillar 3001
is fixed, set up by Croesus, which declares by an inscription that the
boundaries are there.

31. From Phrygia then he entered Lydia; and here the road parts into
two, and that which goes to the left leads towards Caria, while that
which goes to the right leads to Sardis; and travelling by this latter
road one must needs cross the river Maiander and pass by the city
of Callatebos, where men live whose trade it is to make honey of the
tamarisk-tree and of wheat-flour. By this road went Xerxes and found a
plane-tree, to which for its beauty he gave an adornment of gold, and
appointed that some one should have charge of it always in undying
succession; 31 and on the next day he came to the city of the Lydians.

32. Having come to Sardis he proceeded first to send heralds to Hellas,
to ask for earth and water, and also to give notice beforehand to
prepare meals for the king; except that he sent neither to Athens nor
Lacedemon to ask for earth, but to all the other States: and the reason
why he sent the second time to ask for earth and water was this,--as
many as had not given at the former time to Dareios when he sent, these
he thought would certainly give now by reason of their fear: this matter
it was about which he desired to have certain knowledge, and he sent
accordingly.

33. After this he made his preparations intending to march to Abydos:
and meanwhile they were bridging over the Hellespont from Asia to
Europe. Now there is in the Chersonese of the Hellespont between the
city of Sestos and Madytos, a broad foreland 32 running down into
the sea right opposite Abydos; this is the place where no long time
afterwards the Athenians under the command of Xanthippos the son of
Ariphron, having taken Artaÿctes a Persian, who was the governor of
Sestos, nailed him alive to a board with hands and feet extended (he was
the man who was wont to take women with him to the temple of Protesilaos
at Elaius and to do things there which are not lawful).

34. To this foreland they on whom this work was laid were making their
bridges, starting from Abydos, the Phenicians constructing the one with
ropes of white flax, and the Egyptians the other, which was made with
papyrus rope. Now from Abydos to the opposite shore is a distance of
seven furlongs. But when the strait had been bridged over, a great storm
came on and dashed together all the work that had been made and broke it
up. Then when Xerxes heard it he was exceedingly enraged, and bade them
scourge the Hellespont with three hundred strokes of the lash and let
down into the sea a pair of fetters. Nay, I have heard further that he
sent branders also with them to brand the Hellespont. However this
may be, he enjoined them, as they were beating, to say Barbarian and
presumptuous words as follows: "Thou bitter water, thy master lays upon
thee this penalty, because thou didst wrong him not having suffered any
wrong from him: and Xerxes the king will pass over thee whether thou be
willing or no; but with right, as it seems, no man doeth sacrifice to
thee, seeing that thou art a treacherous 33 and briny stream." The sea
he enjoined them to chastise thus, and also he bade them cut off the
heads of those who were appointed to have charge over the bridging of
the Hellespont.

36. Thus then the men did, to whom this ungracious office belonged; and
meanwhile other chief-constructors proceeded to make the bridges;
and thus they made them:--They put together fifty-oared galleys and
triremes, three hundred and sixty to be under the bridge towards the
Euxine Sea, and three hundred and fourteen to be under the other, the
vessels lying in the direction of the stream of the Hellespont (though
crosswise in respect to the Pontus), to support the tension of the
ropes. 34 They placed them together thus, and let down very large
anchors, those on the one side 35 towards the Pontus because of the
winds which blow from within outwards, and on the other side, towards
the West and the Egean, because of the South-East 36 and South Winds.
They left also an opening for a passage through, so that any who wished
might be able to sail into the Pontus with small vessels, 37 and also
from the Pontus outwards. Having thus done, they proceeded to stretch
tight the ropes, straining them with wooden windlasses, not now
appointing the two kinds of rope to be used apart from one another, but
assigning to each bridge two ropes of white flax and four of the papyrus
ropes. The thickness and beauty of make was the same for both, but the
flaxen ropes were heavier in proportion, 38 and of this rope a cubit
weighed one talent. When the passage was bridged over, they sawed up
logs of wood, and making them equal in length to the breadth of the
bridge they laid them above the stretched ropes, and having set them
thus in order they again fastened them above. 39 When this was done,
they carried on brushwood, and having set the brushwood also in place,
they carried on to it earth; and when they had stamped down the
earth firmly, they built a barrier along on each side, so that the
baggage-animals and horses might not be frightened by looking out over
the sea.

37. When the construction of the bridges had been finished, and the
works about Athos, both the embankments about the mouths of the channel,
which were made because of the breaking of the sea upon the beach, that
the mouths of it might not be filled up, and the channel itself, were
reported to be fully completed, then, after they had passed the winter
at Sardis, the army set forth from thence fully equipped, at the
beginning of spring, to march to Abydos; and when it had just set forth,
the Sun left his place in the heaven and was invisible, though there was
no gathering of clouds and the sky was perfectly clear; and instead of
day it became night. When Xerxes saw and perceived this, it became a
matter of concern to him; and he asked the Magians what the appearance
meant to portend. These declared that the god was foreshowing to the
Hellenes a leaving 40 of their cities, saying that the Sun was the
foreshower of events for the Hellenes, but the Moon for the Persians.
Having been thus informed, Xerxes proceeded on the march with very great
joy.

38. Then as he was leading forth his army on its march, Pythios the
Lydian, being alarmed by the appearance in the heavens and elated by
the gifts which he had received, came to Xerxes, and said as follows:
"Master, I would desire to receive from thee a certain thing at my
request, which, as it chances, is for thee an easy thing to grant, but
a great thing for me, if I obtain it." Then Xerxes, thinking that his
request would be for anything rather than that which he actually asked,
said that he would grant it, and bade him speak and say what he desired.
He then, when he heard this, was encouraged, and spoke these words:
"Master, I have, as it chances, five sons, and it is their fortune to
be all going together with thee on the march against Hellas. Do thou,
therefore, O king, have compassion upon me, who have come to so great
an age, and release from serving in the expedition one of my sons,
the eldest, in order that he may be caretaker both of myself and of
my wealth: but the other four take with thyself, and after thou hast
accomplished that which thou hast in thy mind, mayest thou have a safe
return home."

38. Then Xerxes was exceedingly angry and made answer with these words:
"Thou wretched man, dost thou dare, when I am going on a march myself
against Hellas, and am taking my sons and my brothers and my relations
and friends, dost thou dare to make any mention of a son of thine,
seeing that thou art my slave, who ought to have been accompanying me
thyself with thy whole household and thy wife as well? Now therefore
be assured of this, that the passionate spirit of man dwells within the
ears; and when it has heard good things, it fills the body with delight,
but when it has heard the opposite things to this, it swells up with
anger. As then thou canst not boast of having surpassed the king in
conferring benefits formerly, when thou didst to us good deeds and
madest offer to do more of the same kind, so now that thou hast turned
to shamelessness, thou shalt receive not thy desert but less than thou
deservest: for thy gifts of hospitality shall rescue from death thyself
and the four others of thy sons, but thou shalt pay the penalty with the
life of the one to whom thou dost cling most." Having answered thus, he
forthwith commanded those to whom it was appointed to do these things,
to find out the eldest of the sons of Pythios and to cut him in two in
the middle; and having cut him in two, to dispose the halves, one on
the right hand of the road and the other on the left, and that the army
should pass between them by this way.

40. When these had so done, the army proceeded to pass between; and
first the baggage-bearers led the way together with their horses, and
after these the host composed of all kinds of nations mingled together
without distinction: and when more than the half had gone by, an
interval was left and these were separated from the king. For before
him went first a thousand horsemen, chosen out of all the Persians; and
after them a thousand spearmen chosen also from all the Persians, having
the points of their spears turned down to the ground; and then ten
sacred horses, called "Nesaian," 41 with the fairest possible trappings.
Now the horses are called Nesaian for this reason:--there is a wide
plain in the land of Media which is called the Nesaian plain, and this
plain produces the great horses of which I speak. Behind these ten
horses the sacred chariot of Zeus was appointed to go, which was drawn
by eight white horses; and behind the horses again followed on foot a
charioteer holding the reins, for no human creature mounts upon the seat
of that chariot. Then behind this came Xerxes himself in a chariot drawn
by Nesaian horses, and by the side of him rode a charioteer, whose name
was Patiramphes, son of Otanes a Persian.

41. Thus did Xerxes march forth out of Sardis; and he used to change,
whenever he was so disposed, from the chariot to a carriage. And behind
him went spearmen, the best and most noble of the Persians, a thousand
in number, holding their spear-points in the customary way; 42 and after
them another thousand horsemen chosen out from the Persians; and after
the horsemen ten thousand men chosen out from the remainder of the
Persians. This body went on foot; and of these a thousand had upon their
spears pomegranates of gold instead of the spikes at the butt-end, and
these enclosed the others round, while the remaining nine thousand were
within these and had silver pomegranates. And those also had golden
pomegranates who had their spear-points turned towards the earth, while
those who followed next after Xerxes had golden apples. Then to follow
the ten thousand there was appointed a body of ten thousand Persian
cavalry; and after the cavalry there was an interval of as much as two
furlongs. Then the rest of the host came marching without distinction.

42. So the army proceeded on its march from Lydia to the river Caïcos
and the land of Mysia; and then setting forth from the Caïcos and
keeping the mountain of Cane on the left hand, it marched through the
region of Atarneus to the city of Carene. From this it went through the
plain of Thebe, passing by the cities of Adramytteion and Antandros of
the Pelasgians; and taking mount Ida on the left hand, it came on to the
land of Ilion. And first, when it had stopped for the night close under
mount Ida, thunder and bolts of lightning fell upon it, and destroyed
here in this place a very large number of men. 43

