43. Then when the army had come to the river Scamander,--which of all
rivers to which they had come, since they set forth from Sardis and
undertook their march, was the first of which the stream failed and
was not sufficient for the drinking of the army and of the animals
with it,--when, I say, Xerxes had come to this river, he went up to the
Citadel of Priam, 44 having a desire to see it; and having seen it
and learnt by inquiry of all those matters severally, he sacrificed a
thousand heifers to Athene of Ilion, and the Magians poured libations in
honour of the heroes: and after they had done this, a fear fell upon
the army in the night. Then at break of day he set forth from thence,
keeping on his left hand the cities of Rhoition and Ophryneion and
Dardanos, which last borders upon Abydos, and having on the right hand
the Gergith Teucrians.

44. When Xerxes had come into the midst of Abydos, 45 he had a desire to
see all the army; and there had been made purposely for him beforehand
upon a hill in this place a raised seat of white stone, 46 which the
people of Abydos had built at the command of the king given beforehand.
There he took his seat, and looking down upon the shore he gazed both
upon the land-army and the ships; and gazing upon them he had a longing
to see a contest take place between the ships; and when it had taken
place and the Phenicians of Sidon were victorious, he was delighted both
with the contest and with the whole armament.

45. And seeing all the Hellespont covered over with the ships, and all
the shores and the plains of Abydos full of men, then Xerxes pronounced
himself a happy man, and after that he fell to weeping.

46. Artabanos his uncle therefore perceiving him,--the same who at
first boldly declared his opinion advising Xerxes not to march against
Hellas,--this man, I say, having observed that Xerxes wept, asked as
follows: "O king, how far different from one another are the things
which thou hast done now and a short while before now! for having
pronounced thyself a happy man, thou art now shedding tears." He said:
"Yea, for after I had reckoned up, it came into my mind to feel pity at
the thought how brief was the whole life of man, seeing that of these
multitudes not one will be alive when a hundred years have gone by." He
then made answer and said: "To another evil more pitiful than this we
are made subject in the course of our life; for in the period of life,
short as it is, no man, either of these here or of others, is made by
nature so happy, that there will not come to him many times, and not
once only, the desire to be dead rather than to live; for misfortunes
falling upon us and diseases disturbing our happiness make the time
of life, though short indeed, seem long: thus, since life is full of
trouble, death has become the most acceptable refuge for man; and God,
having given him to taste of the sweetness of life, is discovered in
this matter to be full of jealousy."

47. Xerxes made answer saying: "Artabanos, of human life, which is such
as thou dost define it to be, let us cease to speak, and do not remember
evils when we have good things in hand: but do thou declare to me
this:--If the vision of the dream had not appeared with so much
evidence, wouldest thou still be holding thy former opinion,
endeavouring to prevent me from marching against Hellas, or wouldest
thou have changed from it? Come, tell me this exactly." He answered
saying: "O king, may the vision of the dream which appeared have such
fulfilment as we both desire! but I am even to this moment full of
apprehension and cannot contain myself, taking into account many things
besides, and also seeing that two things, which are the greatest things
of all, are utterly hostile to thee."

48. To this Xerxes made answer in these words: "Thou strangest of men,
47 of what nature are these two things which thou sayest are utterly
hostile to me? Is it that the land-army is to be found fault with in
the matter of numbers, and that the army of the Hellenes appears to thee
likely to be many times as large as ours? or dost thou think that our
fleet will fall short of theirs? or even that both of these things
together will prove true? For if thou thinkest that in these respects
our power is deficient, one might make gathering at once of another
force."

49. Then he made answer and said: "O king, neither with this army would
any one who has understanding find fault, nor with the number of the
ships; and indeed if thou shalt assemble more, the two things of which
I speak will be made thereby yet more hostile: and these two things
are--the land and the sea. For neither in the sea is there, as I
suppose, a harbour anywhere large enough to receive this fleet of thine,
if a storm should arise, and to ensure the safety of the ships till it
be over; and yet not one alone 48 ought this harbour to be, but there
should be such harbours along the whole coast of the continent by which
thou sailest; and if there are not harbours to receive thy ships, know
that accidents will rule men and not men the accidents. Now having told
thee of one of the two things, I am about to tell thee of the other. The
land, I say, becomes hostile to thee in this way:--if nothing shall
come to oppose thee, the land is hostile to thee by so much the more
in proportion as thou shalt advance more, ever stealing on further and
further, 49 for there is no satiety of good fortune felt by men:
and this I say, that with no one to stand against thee the country
traversed, growing more and more as time goes on, will produce for
thee famine. Man, however, will be in the best condition, if when he is
taking counsel he feels fear, reckoning to suffer everything that can
possibly come, but in doing the deed he is bold."

50. Xerxes made answer in these words: "Artabanos, reasonably dost thou
set forth these matters; but do not thou fear everything nor reckon
equally for everything: for if thou shouldest set thyself with regard to
all matters which come on at any time, to reckon for everything equally,
thou wouldest never perform any deed. It is better to have good courage
about everything and to suffer half the evils which threaten, than to
have fear beforehand about everything and not to suffer any evil at all:
and if, while contending against everything which is said, thou omit to
declare the course which is safe, thou dost incur in these matters the
reproach of failure equally with him who says the opposite to this. This
then, I say, is evenly balanced: but how should one who is but man know
the course which is safe? I think, in no way. To those then who choose
to act, for the most part gain is wont to come; but to those who reckon
for everything and shrink back, it is not much wont to come. Thou seest
the power of the Persians, to what great might it has advanced: if then
those who came to be kings before me had had opinions like to thine, or,
though not having such opinions, had had such counsellors as thou, thou
wouldest never have seen it brought forward to this point. As it is
however, by running risks they conducted it on to this: for great power
is in general gained by running great risks. We therefore, following
their example, are making our march now during the fairest season of the
year; and after we have subdued all Europe we shall return back home,
neither having met with famine anywhere nor having suffered any other
thing which is unpleasant. For first we march bearing with us ourselves
great store of food, and secondly we shall possess the corn-crops of all
the peoples to whose land and nation we come; and we are making a march
now against men who plough the soil, and not against nomad tribes."

51. After this Artabanos said: "O king, since thou dost urge us not to
have fear of anything, do thou I pray thee accept a counsel from me;
for when speaking of many things it is necessary to extend speech to a
greater length. Cyrus the son of Cambyses subdued all Ionia except the
Athenians, so that it was tributary to the Persians. These men therefore
I counsel thee by no means to lead against their parent stock, seeing
that even without these we are able to get the advantage over our
enemies. For supposing that they go with us, either they must prove
themselves doers of great wrong, if they join in reducing their mother
city to slavery, or doers of great right, if they join in freeing her:
now if they show themselves doers of great wrong, they bring us no
very large gain in addition; but if they show themselves doers of great
right, they are able then to cause much damage to thy army. Therefore
lay to heart also the ancient saying, how well it has been said that at
the first beginning of things the end does not completely appear."

52. To this Xerxes made answer: "Artabanos, of all the opinions which
thou hast uttered, thou art mistaken most of all in this; seeing that
thou fearest lest the Ionians should change side, about whom we have a
most sure proof, of which thou art a witness thyself and also the
rest are witnesses who went with Dareios on his march against the
Scythians,--namely this, that the whole Persian army then came to be
dependent upon these men, whether they would destroy or whether they
would save it, and they displayed righteous dealing and trustworthiness,
and nought at all that was unfriendly. Besides this, seeing that they
have left children and wives and wealth in our land, we must not even
imagine that they will make any rebellion. 50 Fear not then this thing
either, but have a good heart and keep safe my house and my government;
for to thee of all men I entrust my sceptre of rule."

53. Having thus spoken and having sent Artabanos back to Susa, next
Xerxes summoned to his presence the men of most repute among the
Persians, and when they were come before him, he spoke to them as
follows: "Persians, I assembled you together desiring this of you, that
ye should show yourselves good men and should not disgrace the deeds
done in former times by the Persians, which are great and glorious; but
let us each one of us by himself, and all together also, be zealous in
our enterprise; for this which we labour for is a common good for all.
And I exhort you that ye preserve in the war without relaxing your
efforts, because, as I am informed, we are marching against good men,
and if we shall overcome them, there will not be any other army of
men which will ever stand against us. Now therefore let us begin the
crossing, after having made prayer to those gods who have the Persians
51 for their allotted charge."

54. During this day then they were making preparation to cross over; and
on the next day they waited for the Sun, desiring to see him rise, and
in the meantime they offered all kinds of incense upon the bridges and
strewed the way with branches of myrtle. Then, as the Sun was rising,
Xerxes made libation from a golden cup into the sea, and prayed to the
Sun, that no accident might befall him such as should cause him to cease
from subduing Europe, until he had come to its furthest limits. After
having thus prayed he threw the cup into the Hellespont and with it a
golden mixing-bowl and a Persian sword, which they call akinakes: but
whether he cast them into the sea as an offering dedicated to the
Sun, or whether he had repented of his scourging of the Hellespont and
desired to present a gift to the sea as amends for this, I cannot for
certain say.

55. When Xerxes had done this, they proceeded to cross over, the whole
army both the footmen and the horsemen going by one bridge, namely that
which was on the side of the Pontus, while the baggage-animals and the
attendants went over the other, which was towards the Egean. First the
ten thousand Persians led the way, all with wreaths, and after them came
the mixed body of the army made up of all kinds of nations: these on
that day; and on the next day, first the horsemen and those who had
their spear-points turned downwards, these also wearing wreaths; and
after them the sacred horses and the sacred chariot, and then Xerxes
himself and the spear-bearers and the thousand horsemen; and after them
the rest of the army. In the meantime the ships also put out from shore
and went over to the opposite side. I have heard however another account
which says that the king crossed over the very last of all.

56. When Xerxes had crossed over into Europe, he gazed upon the army
crossing under the lash; and his army crossed over in seven days and
seven nights, going on continuously without any pause. Then, it is said,
after Xerxes had now crossed over the Hellespont, a man of that coast
exclaimed: "Why, O Zeus, in the likeness of a Persian man and taking for
thyself the name of Xerxes instead of Zeus, art thou proposing to
lay waste Hellas, taking with thee all the nations of men? for it was
possible for thee to do so even without the help of these."

57. When all had crossed over, after they had set forth on their way
a great portent appeared to them, of which Xerxes made no account,
although it was easy to conjecture its meaning,--a mare gave birth to a
hare. Now the meaning of this was easy to conjecture in this way, namely
that Xerxes was about to march an army against Hellas very proudly and
magnificently, but would come back again to the place whence he came,
running for his life. There happened also a portent of another kind
while he was still at Sardis,--a mule brought forth young and gave birth
to a mule which had organs of generation of two kinds, both those of the
male and those of the female, and those of the male were above. Xerxes
however made no account of either of these portents, but proceeded on
his way, and with him the land-army.

58. The fleet meanwhile was sailing out of the Hellespont and coasting
along, going in the opposite direction to the land-army; for the fleet
was sailing towards the West, making for the promontory of Sarpedon, to
which it had been ordered beforehand to go, and there wait for the army;
but the land-army meanwhile was making its march towards the East and
the sunrising, through the Chersonese, keeping on its right the tomb of
Helle the daughter of Athamas, and on its left the city of Cardia, and
marching through the midst of a town the name of which is Agora. 52
Thence bending round the gulf called Melas and having crossed over the
river Melas, the stream of which did not suffice at this time for the
army but failed,--having crossed, I say, this river, from which the gulf
also has its name, it went on Westwards, passing by Ainos a city of the
Aiolians, and by the lake Stentoris, until at last it came to Doriscos.

59. Now Doriscos is a sea-beach and plain of great extent in Thrace, and
through it flows the great river Hebros: here a royal fortress had been
built, the same which is now called Doriscos, and a garrison of Persians
had been established in it by Dareios, ever since the time when he went
on his march against the Scythians. It seemed then to Xerxes that the
place was convenient to order his army and to number it throughout, and
so he proceeded to do. The commanders of the ships at the bidding of
Xerxes had brought all their ships, when they arrived at Doriscos, up
to the sea-beach which adjoins Doriscos, on which there is situated
both Sale a city of the Samothrakians, and also Zone, and of which the
extreme point is the promontory of Serreion, which is well known; and
the region belonged in ancient time to the Kikonians. To this beach then
they had brought in their ships, and having drawn them up on land they
were letting them get dry: and during this time he proceeded to number
the army at Doriscos.

60. Now of the number which each separate nation supplied I am not able
to give certain information, for this is not reported by any persons;
but of the whole land-army taken together the number proved to be one
hundred and seventy myriads: 53 and they numbered them throughout in
the following manner:--they gathered together in one place a body of
ten thousand men, and packing them together 54 as closely as they could,
they drew a circle round outside: and thus having drawn a circle round
and having let the ten thousand men go from it, they built a wall of
rough stones round the circumference of the circle, rising to the height
of a man's navel. Having made this, they caused others to go into the
space which had been built round, until they had in this manner numbered
them all throughout: and after they had numbered them, they ordered them
separately by nations.

61. Now those who served were as follows:--The Persians with this
equipment:--about their heads they had soft 55 felt caps called tiaras,
and about their body tunics of various colours with sleeves, presenting
the appearance of iron scales like those of a fish, 56 and about the
legs trousers; and instead of the ordinary shields they had shields of
wicker-work, 57 under which hung quivers; and they had short spears and
large bows and arrows of reed, and moreover daggers hanging by the right
thigh from the girdle: and they acknowledged as their commander Otanes
the father of Amestris the wife of Xerxes. Now these were called by the
Hellenes in ancient time Kephenes; by themselves however and by their
neighbours they were called Artaians: but when Perseus, the son of
Danae and Zeus, came to Kepheus the son of Belos 58 and took to wife
his daughter Andromeda, there was born to them a son to whom he gave
the name Perses, and this son he left behind there, for it chanced that
Kepheus had no male offspring: after him therefore this race was named.

62. The Medes served in the expedition equipped in precisely the same
manner; for this equipment is in fact Median and not Persian: and the
Medes acknowledged as their commander Tigranes an Achaimenid. These
in ancient time used to be generally called Arians; but when Medea the
Colchian came from Athens to these Arians, they also changed their name.
Thus the Medes themselves report about themselves. The Kissians served
with equipment in other respects like that of the Persians, but instead
of the felt caps they wore fillets: 59and of the Kissians Anaphes
the son of Otanes was commander. The Hyrcanians were armed like the
Persians, acknowledging as their leader Megapanos, the same who after
these events became governor of Babylon.

63. The Assyrians served with helmets about their heads made of bronze
or plaited in a Barbarian style which it is not easy to describe; and
they had shields and spears, and daggers like the Egyptian knives, 60
and moreover they had wooden clubs with knobs of iron, and corslets of
linen. These are by the Hellenes called Syrians, but by the Barbarians
they have been called always 61 Assyrians: [among these were the
Chaldeans]: 62 and the commander of them was Otaspes the son of
Artachaies.

64. The Bactrians served wearing about their heads nearly the same
covering as the Medes, and having native bows of reed and short spears.
The Scaran Scythians had about their heads caps 63 which were carried
up to a point and set upright and stiff; and they wore trousers, and
carried native bows and daggers, and besides this axes of the kind
called sagaris. These were called Amyrgian Sacans, being in fact
Scythians; for the Persians call all the Scythians Sacans: and of the
Bactrians and Sacans the commander was Hystaspes, the son of Dareios and
of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus.

65. The Indians wore garments made of tree-wool, and they had bows
of reed and arrows of reed with iron points. Thus were the Indians
equipped; and serving with the rest they had been assigned to
Pharnazathres the son of Artabates.

66. The Arians 64 were equipped with Median bows, and in other respects
like the Bactrians: and of the Arians Sisamnes the son of Hydarnes was
in command. The Parthians and Chorasmians and Sogdians and Gandarians
and Dadicans served with the same equipment as the Bactrians. Of these
the commanders were, Artabazos the son of Pharnakes of the Parthians and
Chorasmians, Azanes the son of Artaios of the Sogdians, and Artyphios
the son of Artabanos of the Gandarians and Dadicans. The Caspians
served wearing coats of skin 65 and having native bows of reed and short
swords: 66 thus were these equipped; and they acknowledged as their
leader Ariomardos the brother of Artyphios. The Sarangians were
conspicuous among the rest by wearing dyed garments; and they had
boots reaching up to the knee, and Median bows and spears: of these
the commander was Pherendates the son of Megabazos. The Pactyans
were wearers of skin coats 67 and had native bows and daggers: these
acknowledged as their commander Artaÿntes the son of Ithamitres.

68. The Utians and Mycans and Paricanians were equipped like the
Pactyans: of these the commanders were, Arsamenes the son of Dareios
of the Utians and Mycans, and of the Paricanians Siromitres the son of
Oiobazos.

69. The Arabians wore loose mantles 68 girt up, and they carried
at their right side bows that bent backward 69 of great length. The
Ethiopians had skins of leopards and lions tied upon them, and bows made
of a slip 70 of palm-wood, which were of great length, not less than
four cubits, and for them small arrows of reed with a sharpened stone at
the head instead of iron, the same stone with which they engrave seals:
in addition to this they had spears, and on them was the sharpened horn
of a gazelle by way of a spear-head, and they had also clubs with knobs
upon them. Of their body they used to smear over half with white, 71
when they went into battle, and the other half with red. 72 Of the
Arabians and the Ethiopians who dwelt above Egypt the commander was
Arsames, the son of Dareios and of Artystone, the daughter of Cyrus,
whom Dareios loved most of all his wives, and had an image made of her
of beaten gold.

70. Of the Ethiopians above Egypt and of the Arabians the commander, I
say, was Arsames; but the Ethiopians from the direction of the sunrising
(for the Ethiopians were in two bodies) had been appointed to serve with
the Indians, being in no way different from the other Ethiopians, but in
their language and in the nature of their hair only; for the Ethiopians
from the East are straight-haired, but those of Libya have hair more
thick and woolly than that of any other men. These Ethiopians from Asia
were armed for the most part like the Indians, but they had upon their
heads the skin of a horse's forehead flayed off with the ears and the
mane, and the mane served instead of a crest, while they had the ears of
the horse set up straight and stiff: and instead of shields they used to
make defences to hold before themselves of the skins of cranes.

71. The Libyans went with equipments of leather, and they used javelins
burnt at the point. These acknowledged as their commander Massages the
son of Oarizos.

72. The Paphlagonians served with plaited helmets upon their heads,
small shields, and spears of no great size, and also javelins and
daggers; and about their feet native boots reaching up to the middle of
the shin. The Ligyans and Matienians and Mariandynoi and Syrians served
with the same equipment as the Paphlagonians: these Syrians are called
by the Persians Cappadokians. Of the Paphlagonians and Matienians the
commander was Dotos the son of Megasidros, and of the Mariandynoi and
Lygians and Syrians, Gobryas, who was the son of Dareios and Artystone.

73. The Phrygians had an equipment very like that of the Paphlagonians
with some slight difference. Now the Phrygians, as the Macedonians say,
used to be called Brigians during the time that they were natives of
Europe and dwelt with the Macedonians; but after they had changed into
Asia, with their country they changed also their name and were called
Phrygians. The Armenians were armed just like the Phrygians, being
settlers from the Phrygians. Of these two together the commander was
Artochmes, who was married to a daughter of Dareios.

74. The Lydians had arms very closely resembling those of the Hellenes.
Now the Lydians were in old time called Medonians, and they were named
again after Lydos the son of Atys, changing their former name. The
Mysians had upon their heads native helmets, and they bore small shields
and used javelins burnt at the point. These are settlers from the
Lydians, and from mount Olympos they are called Olympienoi. Of
the Lydians and Mysians the commander was Artaphrenes the son of
Artaphrenes, he who invaded Marathon together with Datis.

75. The Thracians served having fox-skins upon their heads and tunics
about their body, with loose mantles of various colours thrown round
over them; and about their feet and lower part of the leg they wore
boots of deer-skin; and besides this they had javelins and round
bucklers and small daggers. These when they had crossed over into Asia
came to be called Bithynians, but formerly they were called, as they
themselves report, Strymonians, since they dwelt upon the river Strymon;
and they say that they were driven out of their abode by the Teucrians
and Mysians. Of the Thracians who lived in Asia the commander was
Bassakes the son of Artabanos.

76.... 73 and they had small shields of raw ox-hide, and each man
carried two hunting-spears of Lykian workmanship. 74 On their heads they
wore helmets of bronze, and to the helmets the ears and horns of an ox
were attached, in bronze, and upon them also there were crests; and the
lower part of their legs was wrapped round with red-coloured strips of
cloth. Among these men there is an Oracle of Ares.

77. The Meonian Cabelians, who are called Lasonians, had the same
equipment as the Kilikians, and what this was I shall explain when in
the course of the catalogue I come to the array of the Kilikians. The
Milyans had short spears, and their garments were fastened on with
buckles; some of them had Lykian bows, and about their heads they had
caps made of leather. Of all these Badres the son of Hystanes was in
command.

78. The Moschoi had wooden caps upon their heads, and shields and small
spears, on which long points were set. The Tibarenians and Macronians
and Mossynoicoi served with equipment like that of the Moschoi, and
these were arrayed together under the following commanders,--the Moschoi
and Tibarenians under Ariomardos, who was the son of Dareios and
of Parmys, the daughter of Smerdis son of Cyrus; the Macronians and
Mossynoicoi under Artaÿctes the son of Cherasmis, who was governor of
Sestos on the Hellespont.

79. The Mares wore on their heads native helmets of plaited work, and
had small shields of hide and javelins; and the Colchians wore wooden
helmets about their heads, and had small shields of raw ox-hide and
short spears, and also knives. Of the Mares and Colchians the commander
was Pharandates the son of Teaspis. The Alarodians and Saspeirians
served armed like the Colchians; and of these the commander was
Masistios the son of Siromitres.

80. The island tribes which came with the army from the Erythraian Sea,
belonging to the islands in which the king settles those who are called
the "Removed," 75 had clothing and arms very like those of the Medes. Of
these islanders the commander was Mardontes the son of Bagaios, who in
the year after these events was a commander of the army at Mykale and
lost his life in the battle.

81. These were the nations which served in the campaign by land and had
been appointed to be among the foot-soldiers. Of this army those who
have been mentioned were commanders; and they were the men who sit it in
order by divisions and numbered it and appointed commanders of thousands
and commanders of tens of thousands, but the commanders of hundreds and
of tens were appointed by the commanders of ten thousands; and there
were others who were leaders of divisions and nations.

82. These, I say, who have been mentioned were commanders of the army;
and over these and over the whole army together that went on foot there
were in command Mardonios the son of Gobryas, Tritantaichmes the son of
that Artabanos who gave the opinion that they should not make the march
against Hellas, Smerdomenes the son of Otanes (both these being sons of
brothers of Dareios and so cousins of Xerxes), 76 Masistes the son of
Dareios and Atossa, Gergis the son of Ariazos, and Megabyzos the son of
Zopyros.

83. These were generals of the whole together that went on foot,
excepting the ten thousand; and of these ten thousand chosen Persians
the general was Hydarnes the son of Hydarnes; and these Persians
were called "Immortals," because, if any one of them made the number
incomplete, being overcome either by death or disease, another man was
chosen to his place, and they were never either more or fewer than
ten thousand. Now of all the nations, the Persians showed the greatest
splendour of ornament and were themselves the best men. They had
equipment such as has been mentioned, and besides this they were
conspicuous among the rest for great quantity of gold freely used; and
they took with them carriages, and in them concubines and a multitude
of attendants well furnished; and provisions for them apart from the
soldiers were borne by camels and beasts of burden.

84. The nations who serve as cavalry are these; not all however supplied
cavalry, but only as many as here follow:--the Persians equipped in the
same manner as their foot-soldiers, except that upon their heads some of
them had beaten-work of metal, either bronze or iron.

85. There are also certain nomads called Sagartians, Persian in race
and in language and having a dress which is midway between that of the
Persians and that of the Pactyans. These furnished eight thousand horse,
and they are not accustomed to have any arms either of bronze or of iron
excepting daggers, but they use ropes twisted of thongs, and trust to
these when they go into war: and the manner of fighting of these men is
as follows:--when they come to conflict with the enemy, they throw the
ropes with nooses at the end of them, and whatsoever the man catches by
the throw, 77 whether horse or man, he draws to himself, and they being
entangled in toils are thus destroyed.

86. This is the manner of fighting of these men, and they were arrayed
next to the Persians. The Medes had the same equipment as their men
on foot, and the Kissians likewise. The Indians were armed in the same
manner as those of them who served on foot, and they both rode horses
78 and drove chariots, in which were harnessed horses or wild asses. The
Bactrians were equipped in the same way as those who served on foot,
and the Caspians likewise. The Libyans too were equipped like those who
served on foot, and these also all drove chariots. So too the Caspians
79 and Paricanians were equipped like those who served on foot, and they
all rode on camels, which in swiftness were not inferior to horses.

87. These nations alone served 80 as cavalry, and the number of the
cavalry proved to be eight myriads, 81 apart from the camels and the
chariots. Now the rest of the cavalry was arrayed in squadrons, but the
Arabians were placed after them and last of all, for the horses could
not endure the camels, and therefore they were placed last, in order
that the horses might not be frightened.

88. The commanders of the cavalry were Harmamithras and Tithaios sons of
Datis, but the third, Pharnuches, who was in command of the horse with
them, had been left behind at Sardis sick: for as they were setting
forth from Sardis, an accident befell him of an unwished-for kind,--as
he was riding, a dog ran up under his horse's feet, and the horse
not having seen it beforehand was frightened, and rearing up he threw
Pharnuches off his back, who falling vomited blood, and his sickness
turned to a consumption. To the horse however they forthwith at the
first did as he commanded, that is to say, the servants led him away
to the place where he had thrown his master and cut off his legs at the
knees. Thus was Pharnuches removed from his command.

89. Of the triremes the number proved to be one thousand two hundred and
seven, and these were they who furnished them:--the Phenicians, together
with the Syrians 82 who dwell in Palestine furnished three hundred;
and they were equipped thus, that is to say, they had about their heads
leathern caps made very nearly in the Hellenic fashion, and they wore
corslets of linen, and had shields without rims and javelins. These
Phenicians dwelt in ancient time, as they themselves report, upon the
Erythraian Sea, and thence they passed over and dwell in the country
along the sea coast of Syria; and this part of Syria and all as far as
Egypt is called Palestine. The Egyptians furnished two hundred ships:
these men had about their heads helmets of plaited work, and they had
hollow shields with the rims large, and spears for sea-fighting, and
large axes: 83 the greater number of them wore corslets, and they had
large knives.

90. These men were thus equipped; and the Cyprians furnished a hundred
and fifty ships, being themselves equipped as follows,--their kings had
their heads wound round with fillets, 84 and the rest had tunics, 85
but in other respects they were like the Hellenes. Among these there
are various races as follows,--some of them are from Salamis and Athens,
others from Arcadia, others from Kythnos, others again from Phenicia and
others from Ethiopia, as the Cyprians themselves report.

91. The Kilikians furnished a hundred ships; and these again had about
their heads native helmets, and for shields they carried targets made of
raw ox-hide: they wore tunics 86 of wool and each man had two javelins
and a sword, this last being made very like the Egyptian knives. These
in old time were called Hypachaians, and they got their later name from
Kilix the son of Agenor, a Phenician. The Pamphylians furnished thirty
ships and were equipped in Hellenic arms. These Pamphylians are of those
who were dispersed from Troy together with Amphilochos and Calchas.

92. The Lykians furnished fifty ships; and they were wearers of corslets
and greaves, and had bows of cornel-wood and arrows of reeds without
feathers and javelins and a goat-skin hanging over their shoulders, and
about their heads felt caps wreathed round with feathers; also they had
daggers and falchions. 87 The Lykians were formerly called Termilai,
being originally of Crete, and they got their later name from Lycos the
son of Pandion, an Athenian.

93. The Dorians of Asia furnished thirty ships; and these had Hellenic
arms and were originally from the Peloponnese. The Carians supplied
seventy ships; and they were equipped in other respects like Hellenes
but they had also falchions and daggers. What was the former name of
these has been told in the first part of the history. 88

94. The Ionians furnished a hundred ships, and were equipped
like Hellenes. Now the Ionians, so long time as they dwelt in the
Peloponnese, in the land which is now called Achaia, and before the
time when Danaos and Xuthos came to the Peloponnese, were called, as the
Hellenes report, Pelasgians of the Coast-land, 89 and then Ionians after
Ion the son of Xuthos.

95. The islanders furnished seventeen ships, and were armed like
Hellenes, this also being a Pelasgian race, though afterwards it came to
be called Ionian by the same rule as the Ionians of the twelve cities,
who came from Athens. The Aiolians supplied sixty ships; and these were
equipped like Hellenes and used to be called Pelasgians in the old time,
as the Hellenes report. The Hellespontians, excepting those of Abydos
(for the men of Abydos had been appointed by the king to stay in their
place and be guards of the bridges), the rest, I say, of those who
served in the expedition from the Pontus furnished a hundred ships,
and were equipped like Hellenes: these are colonists of the Ionians and
Dorians.

96. In all the ships there served as fighting-men Persians, Medes, or
Sacans;: and of the ships, those which sailed best were furnished by the
Phenicians, and of the Phenicians the best by the men of Sidon. Over all
these men and also over those of them who were appointed to serve in the
land-army, there were for each tribe native chieftains, of whom, since I
am not compelled by the course of the inquiry, I make no mention by the
way; for in the first place the chieftains of each separate nation were
not persons worthy of mention, and then moreover within each nation
there were as many chieftains as there were cities. These went with the
expedition too not as commanders, but like the others serving as slaves;
for the generals who had the absolute power and commanded the various
nations, that is to say those who were Persians, having already been
mentioned by me.

97. Of the naval force the following were commanders,--Ariabignes the
son of Dareios, Prexaspes the son of Aspathines, Megabazos the son of
Megabates, and Achaimenes the son of Dareios; that is to say, of the
Ionian and Carian force Ariabignes, who was the son of Dareios and of
the daughter of Gobryas; of the Egyptians Achaimenes was commander,
being brother of Xerxes by both parents; and of the rest of the armament
the other two were in command: and galleys of thirty oars and of fifty
oars, and light vessels, 90 and long 91 ships to carry horses had been
assembled together, as it proved, to the number of three thousand.

98. Of those who sailed in the ships the men of most note after the
commanders were these,--of Sidon, Tetramnestos son of Anysos; of
Tyre, Matten 92 son of Siromos; or Arados, Merbalos son of Agbalos; of
Kilikia, Syennesis son of Oromedon; of Lykia, Kyberniscos son of Sicas;
of Cyprus, Gorgos son of Chersis and Timonax son of Timagoras; of Caria,
Histiaios son of Tymnes, Pigres son of Hysseldomos, 93 and Damasithymos
son of Candaules.

99. Of the rest of the officers I make no mention by the way (since I am
not bound to do so), but only of Artemisia, at whom I marvel most that
she joined the expedition against Hellas, being a woman; for after her
husband died, she holding the power herself, although she had a son
who was a young man, went on the expedition impelled by high spirit
and manly courage, no necessity being laid upon her. Now her name, as I
said, was Artemisia and she was the daughter of Lygdamis, and by descent
she was of Halicarnassos on the side of her father, but of Crete by her
mother. She was ruler of the men of Halicarnassos and Cos and Nisyros
and Calydna, furnishing five ships; and she furnished ships which were
of all the fleet reputed the best after those of the Sidonians, and
of all his allies she set forth the best counsels to the king. Of the
States of which I said that she was leader I declare the people to be
all of Dorian race, those of Halicarnassos being Troizenians, and the
rest Epidaurians. So far then I have spoken of the naval force.

100. Then when Xerxes had numbered the army, and it had been arranged in
divisions, he had a mind to drive through it himself and inspect it: and
afterwards he proceeded so to do; and driving through in a chariot
by each nation, he inquired about them and his scribes wrote down the
names, until he had gone from end to end both of the horse and of the
foot. When he had done this, the ships were drawn down into the sea,
and Xerxes changing from his chariot to a ship of Sidon sat down under a
golden canopy and sailed along by the prows of the ships, asking of all
just as he had done with the land-army, and having the answers written
down. And the captains had taken their ships out to a distance of about
four hundred feet from the beach and were staying them there, all having
turned the prows of the ships towards the shore in an even line 94 and
having armed all the fighting-men as for war; and he inspected them
sailing within, between the prows of the ships and the beach.

101. Now when he had sailed through these and had disembarked from his
ship, he sent for Demaratos the son of Ariston, who was marching
with him against Hellas; and having called him he asked as follows:
"Demaratos, now it is my pleasure to ask thee somewhat which I desire
to know. Thou art not only a Hellene, but also, as I am informed both
by thee and by the other Hellenes who come to speech with me, of a city
which is neither the least nor the feeblest of Hellas. Now therefore
declare to me this, namely whether the Hellenes will endure to raise
hands against me: for, as I suppose, even if all the Hellenes and
the remaining nations who dwell towards the West should be gathered
together, they are not strong enough in fight to endure my attack,
supposing them to be my enemies. 95 I desire however to be informed also
of thy opinion, what thou sayest about these matters." He inquired thus,
and the other made answer and said: "O king, shall I utter the truth
in speaking to thee, or that which will give pleasure?" and he bade
him utter the truth, saying that he should suffer nothing unpleasant in
consequence of this, any more than he suffered before.

102. When Demaratos heard this, he spoke as follows: "O king, since thou
biddest me by all means utter the truth, and so speak as one who shall
not be afterwards convicted by thee of having spoken falsely, I say
this:--with Hellas poverty is ever an inbred growth, while valour is one
that has been brought in, being acquired by intelligence and the force
of law; and of it Hellas makes use ever to avert from herself not only
poverty but also servitude to a master. Now I commend all the Hellenes
who are settled in those Dorian lands, but this which I am about to say
has regard not to all, but to the Lacedemonians alone: of these I say,
first that it is not possible that they will ever accept thy terms,
which carry with them servitude for Hellas; and next I say that they
will stand against thee in fight, even if all the other Hellenes shall
be of thy party: and as for numbers, ask now how many they are, that
they are able to do this; for whether it chances that a thousand of them
have come out into the field, these will fight with thee, or if there be
less than this, or again if there be more."

103. Xerxes hearing this laughed, and said: "Demaratos, what a speech is
this which thou hast uttered, saying that a thousand men will fight with
this vast army! Come tell me this:--thou sayest that thou wert thyself
king of these men; wilt thou therefore consent forthwith to fight with
ten men? and yet if your State is such throughout as thou dost describe
it, thou their king ought by your laws to stand in array against double
as many as another man; that is to say, if each of them is a match for
ten men of my army, I expect of thee that thou shouldest be a match for
twenty. Thus would be confirmed the report which is made by thee: but if
ye, who boast thus greatly are such men and in size so great only as
the Hellenes who come commonly to speech with me, thyself included, then
beware lest this which has been spoken prove but an empty vaunt. For
come, let me examine it by all that is probable: how could a thousand or
ten thousand or even fifty thousand, at least if they were all equally
free and were not ruled by one man, stand against so great an army?
since, as thou knowest, we shall be more than a thousand coming about
each one of them, supposing them to be in number five thousand. If
indeed they were ruled by one man after our fashion, they might perhaps
from fear of him become braver than it was their nature to be, or they
might go compelled by the lash to fight with greater numbers, being
themselves fewer in number; but if left at liberty, they would do
neither of these things: and I for my part suppose that, even if equally
matched in numbers, the Hellenes would hardly dare to fight with the
Persians taken alone. With us however this of which thou speakest is
found in single men, 96 not indeed often, but rarely; for there are
Persians of my spearmen who will consent to fight with three men of the
Hellenes at once: but thou hast had no experience of these things and
therefore thou speakest very much at random."

104. To this Demaratos replied: "O king, from the first I was sure that
if I uttered the truth I should not speak that which was pleasing to
thee; since however thou didst compel me to speak the very truth, I told
thee of the matters which concern the Spartans. And yet how I am at this
present time attached to them by affection thou knowest better than any;
seeing that first they took away from me the rank and privileges which
came to me from my fathers, and then also they have caused me to be
without native land and an exile; but thy father took me up and gave
me livelihood and a house to dwell in. Surely it is not to be supposed
likely that the prudent man will thrust aside friendliness which is
offered to him, but rather that he will accept it with full contentment.
97 And I do not profess that I am able to fight either with ten men or
with two, nay, if I had my will, I would not even fight with one; but if
there were necessity or if the cause which urged me to the combat were
a great one, I would fight most willingly with one of these men who says
that he is a match for three of the Hellenes. So also the Lacedemonians
are not inferior to any men when fighting one by one, and they are the
best of all men when fighting in a body: for though free, yet they are
not free in all things, for over them is set Law as a master, whom they
fear much more even than thy people fear thee. It is certain at least
that they do whatsoever that master commands; and he commands ever the
same thing, that is to say, he bids them not flee out of battle from
any multitude of men, but stay in their post and win the victory or lose
their life. But if when I say these things I seem to thee to be speaking
at random, of other things for the future I prefer to be silent; and
at this time I spake only because I was compelled. May it come to pass
however according to thy mind, O king."

105. He thus made answer, and Xerxes turned the matter to laughter
and felt no anger, but dismissed him with kindness. Then after he had
conversed with him, and had appointed Mascames son of Megadostes to
be governor at this place Doriscos, removing the governor who had been
appointed by Dareios, Xerxes marched forth his army through Thrace to
invade Hellas.

106. And Mascames, whom he left behind here, proved to be a man of such
qualities that to him alone Xerxes used to send gifts, considering him
the best of all the men whom either he himself or Dareios had appointed
to be governors,--he used to send him gifts, I say, every year, and so
also did Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes to the descendants of Mascames.
For even before this march governors had been appointed in Thrace and
everywhere about the Hellespont; and these all, both those in Thrace and
in the Hellespont, were conquered by the Hellenes after this expedition,
except only the one who was at Doriscos; but Mascames at Doriscos none
were ever 98 able to conquer, though many tried. For this reason the
gifts are sent continually for him from the king who reigns over the
Persians.

107. Of those however who were conquered by the Hellenes Xerxes did not
consider any to be a good man except only Boges, who was at Eïon: him
he never ceased commending, and he honoured very highly his children who
survived him in the land of Persia. For in truth Boges proved himself
worthy of great commendation, seeing that when he was besieged by the
Athenians under Kimon the son of Miltiades, though he might have gone
forth under a truce and so returned home to Asia, he preferred not to
do this, for fear that the king should that it was by cowardice that he
survived; and he continued to hold out till the last. Then when there
was no longer any supply of provisions within the wall, he heaped
together a great pyre, and he cut the throats of his children, his wife,
his concubines and his servants, and threw them into the fire; and after
this he scattered all the gold and silver in the city from the wall into
the river Strymon, and having so done he threw himself into the fire.
Thus he is justly commended even to this present time by the Persians.

108. Xerxes from Doriscos was proceeding onwards to invade Hellas; and
as he went he compelled those who successively came in his way, to join
his march: for the whole country as far as Thessaly had been reduced to
subjection, as has been set forth by me before, and was tributary under
the king, having been subdued by Megabazos and afterwards by Mardonios.
And he passed in his march from Doriscos first by the Samothrakian
strongholds, of which that which is situated furthest towards the West
is a city called Mesambria. Next to this follows Stryme, a city of the
Thasians, and midway between them flows the river Lisos, which at this
time did not suffice when supplying its water to the army of Xerxes, but
the stream failed. This country was in old time called Gallaïke, but now
Briantike; however by strict justice this also belongs to the Kikonians.

109. Having crossed over the bed of the river Lisos after it had been
dried up, he passed by these Hellenic cities, namely Maroneia, Dicaia
and Abdera. These I say he passed by, and also the following lakes of
note lying near them,--the Ismarian lake, lying between Maroneia and
Stryme; the Bistonian lake near Dicaia, into which two rivers pour their
waters, the Trauos 99 and the Compsantos; 100 and at Abdera no lake
indeed of any note was passed by Xerxes, but the river Nestos, which
flows there into the sea. Then after passing these places he went by the
cities of the mainland, 101 near one of which there is, as it chances,
a lake of somewhere about thirty furlongs in circumference, abounding in
fish and very brackish; this the baggage-animals alone dried up, being
watered at it: and the name of this city is Pistyros. 102

110. These cities, I say, lying by the sea coast and belonging to
Hellenes, he passed by, leaving them on the left hand; and the tribes of
Thracians through whose country he marched were as follows, namely
the Paitians, Kikonians, Bistonians, Sapaians, Dersaians, Edonians,
Satrians. Of these they who were settled along the sea coast accompanied
him with their ships, and those of them who dwelt inland and have been
enumerated by me, were compelled to accompany him on land, except the
Satrians:

111, the Satrians however never yet became obedient to any man, so far
as we know, but they remain up to my time still free, alone of all the
Thracians; for they dwell in lofty mountains, which are covered with
forest of all kinds and with snow, and also they are very skilful in
war. These are they who possess the Oracle of Dionysos; which Oracle is
on their most lofty mountains. Of the Satrians those who act as prophets
103 of the temple are the Bessians; it is a prophetess 104 who utters
the oracles, as at Delphi; and beyond this there is nothing further of a
remarkable character. 105

112. Xerxes having passed over the land which has been spoken of, next
after this passed the strongholds of the Pierians, of which the name
of the one is Phagres and of the other Pergamos. By this way, I say,
he made his march, going close by the walls of these, and keeping Mount
Pangaion on the right hand, which is both great and lofty and in which
are mines both of gold and of silver possessed by the Pierians and
Odomantians, and especially by the Satrians.

113. Thus passing by the Paionians, Doberians and Paioplians, who dwell
beyond Pangaion towards the North Wind, he went on Westwards, until at
last he came to the river Strymon and the city of Eïon, of which,
so long as he lived, Boges was commander, the same about whom I was
speaking a short time back. This country about Mount Pangaion is called
Phyllis, and it extends Westwards to the river Angites, which flows into
the Strymon, and Southwards it stretches to the Strymon itself; and at
this river the Magians sacrificed for good omens, slaying white horses.

114. Having done this and many other things in addition to this, as
charms for the river, at the Nine Ways 106 in the land of the Edonians,
they proceeded by the bridges, for they had found the Strymon already
yoked with bridges; and being informed that this place was called the
Nine Ways, they buried alive in it that number of boys and maidens,
children of the natives of the place. Now burying alive is a Persian
custom; for I am informed that Amestris also, the wife of Xerxes, when
she had grown old, made return for her own life to the god who is said
to be beneath the earth by burying twice seven children of Persians who
were men of renown.

115. As the army proceeded on its march from the Strymon, it found after
this a sea-beach stretching towards the setting of the sun, and passed
by the Hellenic city, Argilos, which was there placed. This region and
that which lies above it is called Bisaltia. Thence, keeping on the left
hand the gulf which lies of Posideion, he went through the plain which
is called the plain of Syleus, passing by Stageiros a Hellenic city, and
so came to Acanthos, taking with him as he went each one of these tribes
and also of those who dwell about Mount Pangaion, just as he did those
whom I enumerated before, having the men who dwelt along the sea coast
to serve in the ships and those who dwelt inland to accompany him on
foot. This road by which Xerxes the king marched his army, the Thracians
do not disturb nor sow crops over, but pay very great reverence to it
down to my own time.

116. Then when he had come to Acanthos, Xerxes proclaimed a
guest-friendship with the people of Acanthos and also presented them
with the Median dress 107 and commended them, perceiving that they were
zealous to serve him in the war and hearing of that which had been dug.

117. And while Xerxes was in Acanthos, it happened that he who had
been set over the making of the channel, Artachaies by name, died of
sickness, a man who was highly esteemed by Xerxes and belonged to
the Achaimenid family; also he was in stature the tallest of all the
Persians, falling short by only four fingers of being five royal cubits
108 in height, and he had a voice the loudest of all men; so that Xerxes
was greatly grieved at the loss of him, and carried him forth and buried
him with great honour, and the whole army joined in throwing up a mound
for him. To this Artachaies the Acanthians by the bidding of an oracle
do sacrifice as a hero, calling upon his name in worship.

118. King Xerxes, I say, was greatly grieved at the loss of Artachaies:
and meanwhile the Hellenes who were entertaining his army and providing
Xerxes with dinners had been brought to utter ruin, so that they were
being driven from house and home; seeing that when the Thasians, for
example, entertained the army of Xerxes and provided him with a dinner
on behalf of their towns upon the mainland, Antipater the son of Orgeus,
who had been appointed for this purpose, a man of repute among the
citizens equal to the best, reported that four hundred talents of silver
had been spent upon the dinner.

