119. Just so or nearly so in the other cities also those who were set
over the business reported the reckoning to be: for the dinner was
given as follows, having been ordered a long time beforehand, and being
counted by them a matter of great importance:--In the first place,
so soon as they heard of it from the heralds who carried round the
proclamation, the citizens in the various cities distributed corn among
their several households, and all continued to make wheat and barley
meal for many months; then they fed cattle, finding out and obtaining
the finest animals for a high price; and they kept birds both of the
land and of the water, in cages or in pools, all for the entertainment
of the army. Then again they had drinking-cups and mixing-bowls made of
gold and of silver, and all the other things which are placed upon the
table: these were made for the king himself and for those who ate at his
table; but for the rest of the army only the things appointed for food
were provided. Then whenever the army came to any place, there was a
tent pitched ready wherein Xerxes himself made his stay, while the rest
of the army remained out in the open air; and when it came to be time
for dinner, then the entertainers had labour; but the others, after they
had been satiated with food and had spent the night there, on the next
day tore up the tent and taking with them all the movable furniture
proceeded on their march, leaving nothing, but carrying all away with
them.

120. Then was uttered a word well spoken by Megacreon, a man of Abdera,
who advised those of Abdera to go in a body, both themselves and their
wives, to their temples, and to sit down as suppliants of the gods,
entreating them that for the future also they would ward off from them
the half of the evils which threatened; and he bade them feel great
thankfulness to the gods for the past events, because king Xerxes had
not thought good to take food twice in each day; for if it had been
ordered to them beforehand to prepare breakfast also in like manner as
the dinner, it would have remained for the men of Abdera either not
to await the coming of Xerxes, or if they stayed, to be crushed by
misfortune more than any other men upon the Earth.

121. They then, I say, though hard put to it, yet were performing that
which was appointed to them; and from Acanthos Xerxes, after having
commanded the generals to wait for the fleet at Therma, let the ships
take their course apart from himself, (now this Therma is that which is
situated on the Thermaic gulf, from which also this gulf has its name);
and thus he did because he was informed that this was the shortest way:
for from Doriscos as far as Acanthos the army had been making its march
thus:--Xerxes had divided the whole land-army into three divisions, and
one of them he had set to go along the sea accompanying the fleet, of
which division Mardonios and Masistes were commanders; another third
of the army had been appointed to go by the inland way, and of this the
generals in command were Tritantaichmes and Gergis; and meanwhile the
third of the subdivisions, with which Xerxes himself went, marched in
the middle between them, and acknowledged as its commanders Smerdomenes
and Megabyzos.

122. The fleet, when it was let go by Xerxes and had sailed right
through the channel made in Athos (which went across to the gulf on
which are situated the cities of Assa, Piloros, Singos and Sarte),
having taken up a contingent from these cities also, sailed thence
with a free course to the Thermaïc gulf, and turning round Ampelos the
headland of Torone, it left on one side the following Hellenic cities,
from which it took up contingents of ships and men, namely Torone,
Galepsos, Sermyle, Mekyberna, Olynthos: this region is called Sithonia.

123. And the fleet of Xerxes, cutting across from the headland of
Ampelos to that of Canastron, which runs out furthest to sea of all
Pallene, took up there contingents of ships and men from Potidaia,
Aphytis, Neapolis, Aige, Therambo, Skione, Mende and Sane, for these are
the cities which occupy the region which now is called Pallene, but was
formerly called Phlegra. Then sailing along the coast of this country
also the fleet continued its course towards the place which has been
mentioned before, taking up contingents also from the cities which come
next after Pallene and border upon the Thermaïc gulf; and the names
of them are these,--Lipaxos, Combreia, Lisai, Gigonos, Campsa, Smila,
Aineia; and the region in which these cities are is called even to
the present day Crossaia. Then sailing from Aineia, with which name I
brought to an end the list of the cities, at once the fleet came into
the Thermaïc gulf and to the region of Mygdonia, and so it arrived at
the aforesaid Therma and at the cities of Sindos and Chalestra upon the
river Axios. This river is the boundary between the land of Mygdonia
and Bottiaia, of which district the narrow region which lies on the sea
coast is occupied by the cities of Ichnai and Pella.

124. Now while his naval force was encamped about the river Axios an the
city of Therma and the cities which lie between these two, waiting for
the coming of the king, Xerxes and the land-army were proceeding from
Acanthos, cutting through the middle by the shortest way 109 with a view
to reaching Therma: and he was proceeding through Paionia and Crestonia
to the river Cheidoros, 110 which beginning from the land of the
Crestonians, runs through the region of Mygdonia and comes out alongside
of the marsh which is by the river Axios.

125. As he was proceeding by this way, lions attacked the camels which
carried his provisions; for the lions used to come down regularly by
night, leaving their own haunts, but they touched nothing else, neither
beast of burden nor man, but killed the camels only: and I marvel what
was the cause, and what was it that impelled the lions to abstain from
all else and to attack the camels only, creatures which they had never
seen before, and of which they had had no experience.

126. Now there are in these parts both many lions and also wild oxen,
those that have the very large horns which are often brought into
Hellas: and the limit within which these lions are found is on the one
side the river Nestos, which flows through Abdera, and on the other the
Achelos, which flows through Acarnania; for neither do the East of the
Nestos, in any part of Europe before you come to this, would you see a
lion, nor again in the remaining part of the continent to the West of
the Acheloos, but they are produced in the middle space between these
rivers.

127. When Xerxes had reached Therma he established the army there; and
his army encamping there occupied of the land along by the sea no less
than this,--beginning from the city of Therma and from Mygdonia it
extended as far as the river Lydias and the Haliacmon, which form the
boundary between the lands of Bottiaia and Macedonia, mingling their
waters together in one and the same stream. The Barbarians, I say, were
encamped in these regions; and of the rivers which have been enumerated,
only the river Cheidoros flowing from the Crestonian land was
insufficient for the drinking of the army and failed in its stream.

128. Then Xerxes seeing from Therma the mountains of Thessaly, Olympos
and Ossa, that they were of very great height, and being informed that
in the midst between them there was a narrow channel, through which
flows the Peneios, and hearing also that by this way there was a good
road leading to Thessaly, formed a desire to sail thither and look at
the outlet of the Peneios, because he was meaning to march by the upper
road, through the land of the Macedonians who dwell inland, until he
came to the Perraibians, passing by the city of Gonnos; for by this way
he was informed that it was safest to go. And having formed this desire,
so also he proceeded to do; that is, he embarked in a Sidonian ship, the
same in which he used always to embark when he wished to do anything of
this kind, and he displayed a signal for the others to put out to sea
also, leaving there the land-army. Then when Xerxes had looked at the
outlet of the Peneios, he was possessed by great wonder, and summoning
his guides he asked them whether it was possible to turn the river aside
and bring it out to the sea by another way.

129. Now it is said that Thessaly was in old time a lake, being enclosed
on all sides by very lofty mountains: for the parts of it which lie
towards the East are shut in by the ranges of Pelion and Ossa, which
join one another in their lower slopes, the parts towards the North
Wind by Olympos, those towards the West by Pindos and those towards
the mid-day and the South Wind by Othrys; and the region in the midst,
between these mountains which have been named, is Thessaly, forming as
it were a hollow. Whereas then many rivers flow into it and among them
these five of most note, namely Peneios, Apidanos, Onochonos, Enipeus
and Pamisos, these, which collect their waters from the mountains that
enclose Thessaly round, and flow into this plain, with names separate
each one, having their outflow into the sea by one channel and that a
narrow one, first mingling their waters all together in one and the
same stream; and so soon as they are mingled together, from that point
onwards the Peneios prevails with its name over the rest and causes
the others to lose their separate names. And it is said that in
ancient time, there not being yet this channel and outflow between the
mountains, these rivers, and besides these rivers the lake Boibeïs also,
had no names as they have now, but by their waters they made Thessaly
to be all sea. The Thessalians themselves say that Poseidon made the
channel through which the Peneios flows; and reasonably they report
it thus, because whosoever believes that it is Poseidon who shakes the
Earth and that the partings asunder produced by earthquake are the work
of this god, would say, if he saw this, that it was made by Poseidon;
for the parting asunder of the mountains is the work of an earthquake,
as is evident to me.

130. So the guides, when Xerxes asked whether there was any other
possible outlet to the sea for the Peneios, said with exact knowledge
of the truth: "O king, for this river there is no other outgoing which
extends to the sea, but this alone; for all Thessaly is circled about
with mountains as with a crown." To this Xerxes is said to have replied:
"The Thessalians then are prudent men. This it appears was that which
they desired to guard against in good time 111 when they changed their
counsel, 112 reflecting on this especially besides other things, namely
that they had a country which, it appears, is easy to conquer and may
quickly be taken: for it would have been necessary only to let the
river flow over their land by making an embankment to keep it from going
through the narrow channel and so diverting the course by which now it
flows, in order to put all Thessaly under water except the mountains."
This he said in reference to the sons of Aleuas, because they, being
Thessalians, were the first of the Hellenes who gave themselves over to
the king; for Xerxes thought that they offered him friendship on behalf
of their whole nation. Having said thus and having looked at the place,
he sailed back to Therma.

131. He then was staying in the region of Pieria many days, for the road
over the mountains of Macedonia was being cut meanwhile by a third part
of his army, that all the host might pass over by this way into the land
of the Perraibians: and now the heralds returned who had been sent to
Hellas to demand the gift of earth, some empty-handed and others bearing
earth and water.

132. And among those who gave that which was demanded were the
following, namely the Thessalians, Dolopians, Enianians, 113
Perraibians, Locrians, Megnesians, Malians, Achaians of Phthiotis, and
Thebans, with the rest of the Boeotians also excepting the Thespians and
Plataians. Against these the Hellenes who took up war with the Barbarian
made an oath; and the oath was this,--that whosoever being Hellenes had
given themselves over to the Persian, not being compelled, these, if
their own affairs should come to a good conclusion, they would dedicate
as an offering 114 to the god at Delphi.

133. Thus ran the oath which was taken by the Hellenes: Xerxes however
had not sent to Athens or to Sparta heralds to demand the gift of earth,
and for this reason, namely because at the former time when Dareios had
sent for this very purpose, the one people threw the men who made the
demand into the pit 115 and the others into a well, and bade them take
from thence earth and water and bear them to the king. For this reason
Xerxes did not send men to make this demand. And what evil thing 116
came upon the Athenians for having done this to the heralds, I am not
able to say, except indeed that their land and city were laid waste; but
I do not think that this happened for that cause:

134, on the Lacedemonians however the wrath fell of Talthybios, the
herald of Agamemnon; for in Sparta there is a temple of Talthybios, and
there are also descendants of Talthybios called Talthybiads, to whom
have been given as a right all the missions of heralds which go from
Sparta; and after this event it was not possible for the Spartans when
they sacrificed to obtain favourable omens. This was the case with them
for a long time; and as the Lacedemonians were grieved and regarded it
as a great misfortune, and general assemblies were repeatedly gathered
together and proclamation made, asking if any one of the Lacedemonians
was willing to die for Sparta, at length Sperthias the son of Aneristos
and Bulis the son of Nicolaos, Spartans of noble birth and in wealth
attaining to the first rank, voluntarily submitted to pay the penalty to
Xerxes for the heralds of Dareios which had perished at Sparta. Thus the
Spartans sent these to the Medes to be put to death.

135. And not only the courage then shown by these men is worthy of
admiration, but also the following sayings in addition: for as they were
on their way to Susa they came to Hydarnes (now Hydarnes was a Persian
by race and commander of those who dwelt on the sea coasts of Asia), and
he offered them hospitality and entertained them; and while they were
his guests he asked them as follows: "Lacedemonians, why is it that ye
flee from becoming friends to the king? for ye may see that the king
knows how to honour good men, when ye look at me and at my fortunes. So
also ye, Lacedemonians, if ye gave yourselves to the king, since ye have
the reputation with him already of being good men, would have rule each
one of you over Hellenic land by the gift of the king." To this they
made answer thus: "Hydarnes, thy counsel with regard to us is not
equally balanced, 117 for thou givest counsel having made trial indeed
of the one thing, but being without experience of the other: thou
knowest well what it is to be a slave, but thou hast never yet made
trial of freedom, whether it is pleasant to the taste or no; for if thou
shouldest make trial of it, thou wouldest then counsel us to fight for
it not with spears only but also with axes."

136. Thus they answered Hydarnes; and then, after they had gone up to
Susa and had come into the presence of the king, first when the spearmen
of the guard commanded them and endeavoured to compel them by force to
do obeisance to the king by falling down before him, they said that they
would not do any such deed, though they should be pushed down by them
head foremost; for it was not their custom to do obeisance to a man,
and it was not for this that they had come. Then when they had resisted
this, next they spoke these words or words to this effect: "O king of
the Medes, the Lacedemonians sent us in place of the heralds who were
slain in Sparta, to pay the penalty for their lives." When they said
this, Xerxes moved by a spirit of magnanimity replied that he would
not be like the Lacedemonians; for they had violated the rules which
prevailed among all men by slaying heralds, but he would not do that
himself which he blamed them for having done, nor would he free the
Lacedemonians from their guilt by slaying these in return.

137. Thus the wrath of Talthybios ceased for the time being, even though
the Spartans had done no more than this and although Sperthias and Bulis
returned back to Sparta; but a long time after this it was roused
again during the war between the Peloponnesians and Athenians, as the
Lacedemonians report. This I perceive to have been most evidently
the act of the Deity: for in that the wrath of Talthybios fell upon
messengers and did not cease until it had been fully satisfied, so much
was but in accordance with justice; but that it happened to come upon
the sons of these men who went up to the king on account of the wrath,
namely upon Nicolaos the son of Bulis and Aneristos the son of Sperthias
(the same who conquered the men of Halieis, who came from Tiryns, by
sailing into their harbour with a merchant ship filled with fighting
men),--by this it is evident to me that the matter came to pass by
the act of the Deity caused by this wrath. For these men, sent by the
Lacedemonians as envoys to Asia, having been betrayed by Sitalkes the
son of Teres king of the Thracians and by Nymphodoros the son of Pythes
a man of Abdera, were captured at Bisanthe on the Hellespont; and
then having been carried away to Attica they were put to death by
the Athenians, and with them also Aristeas the son of Adeimantos the
Corinthian. These things happened many years after the expedition of the
king; and I return now to the former narrative.

138. Now the march of the king's army was in name against Athens, but in
fact it was going against all Hellas: and the Hellenes being informed of
this long before were not all equally affected by it; for some of them
having given earth and water to the Persian had confidence, supposing
that they would suffer no hurt from the Barbarian; while others not
having given were in great terror, seeing that there were not ships
existing in Hellas which were capable as regards number of receiving the
invader in fight, and seeing that the greater part of the States were
not willing to take up the war, but adopted readily the side of the
Medes.

139. And here I am compelled by necessity to declare an opinion which in
the eyes of most men would seem to be invidious, but nevertheless I will
not abstain from saying that which I see evidently to be the truth. If
the Athenians had been seized with fear of the danger which threatened
them and had left their land, 118 or again, without leaving their land,
had stayed and given themselves up to Xerxes, none would have made any
attempt by sea to oppose the king. If then none had opposed Xerxes by
sea, it would have happened on the land somewhat thus:--even if
many tunics of walls 119 had been thrown across the Isthmus by the
Peloponnesians, the Lacedemonians would have been deserted by their
allies, not voluntarily but of necessity, since these would have been
conquered city after city by the naval force of the Barbarian, and so
they would have been left alone: and having been left alone and having
displayed great deeds of valour, they would have met their death nobly.
Either they would have suffered this fate, or before this, seeing the
other Hellenes also taking the side of the Medes, they would have made
an agreement with Xerxes; and thus in either case Hellas would have come
to be under the rule of the Persians: for as to the good to be got from
the walls thrown across the Isthmus, I am unable to discover what it
would have been, when the king had command of the sea. As it is however,
if a man should say that the Athenians proved to be the saviours of
Hellas, he would not fail to hit the truth; for to whichever side these
turned, to that the balance was likely to incline: and these were they
who, preferring that Hellas should continue to exist in freedom, roused
up all of Hellas which remained, so much, that is, as had not gone over
to the Medes, and (after the gods at least) these were they who repelled
the king. Nor did fearful oracles, which came from Delphi and cast them
into dread, induce them to leave Hellas, but they stayed behind and
endured to receive the invader of their land.

140. For the Athenians had sent men to Delphi to inquire and were
preparing to consult the Oracle; and after these had performed the usual
rites in the sacred precincts, when they had entered the sanctuary 120
and were sitting down there, the Pythian prophetess, whose name was
Aristonike, uttered to them this oracle:


   "Why do ye sit, O ye wretched? Flee thou 121 to the uttermost
   limits, Leaving thy home and the heights of the wheel-round city
   behind thee! Lo, there remaineth now nor the head nor the body in
   safety,--Neither the feet below nor the hands nor the middle are
   left thee,--All are destroyed 122 together; for fire and the
   passionate War-god, 123 Urging the Syrian 124 car to speed, doth
   hurl them 125 to ruin. Not thine alone, he shall cause many more
   great strongholds to perish, Yes, many temples of gods to the
   ravening fire shall deliver,--Temples which stand now surely with
   sweat of their terror down-streaming, Quaking with dread; and lo!
   from the topmost roof to the pavement Dark blood trickles,
   forecasting the dire unavoidable evil. Forth with you, forth from
   the shrine, and steep your soul in the sorrow!" 126

141. Hearing this the men who had been sent by the Athenians to consult
the Oracle were very greatly distressed; and as they were despairing by
reason of the evil which had been prophesied to them, Timon the son of
Androbulos, a man of the Delphians in reputation equal to the first,
counselled them to take a suppliant's bough and to approach the second
time and consult the Oracle as suppliants. The Athenians did as he
advised and said: "Lord, 127 we pray thee utter to us some better oracle
about our native land, having respect to these suppliant boughs which we
have come to thee bearing; otherwise surely we will not depart away from
the sanctuary, but will remain here where we are now, even until we
bring our lives to an end." When they spoke these words, the prophetess
gave them a second oracle as follows:


   "Pallas cannot prevail to appease great Zeus in Olympos, Though she
   with words very many and wiles close-woven entreat him. But I will
   tell thee this more, and will clench it with steel adamantine: Then
   when all else shall be taken, whatever the boundary 128 of Kecrops
   Holdeth within, and the dark ravines of divinest Kithairon, A
   bulwark of wood at the last Zeus grants to the Trito-born goddess
   Sole to remain unwasted, which thee and thy children shall profit.
   Stay thou not there for the horsemen to come and the footmen
   unnumbered; Stay thou not still for the host from the mainland to
   come, but retire thee, Turning thy back to the foe, for yet thou
   shalt face him hereafter. Salamis, thou the divine, thou shalt cause
   sons of women to perish, Or when the grain 129 is scattered or
   when it is gathered together."

142. This seemed to them to be (as in truth it was) a milder utterance
than the former one; therefore they had it written down and departed
with it to Athens: and when the messengers after their return made
report to the people, many various opinions were expressed by persons
inquiring into the meaning of the oracle, and among them these, standing
most in opposition to one another:--some of the elder men said they
thought that the god had prophesied to them that the Acropolis should
survive; for the Acropolis of the Athenians was in old time fenced with
a thorn hedge; and they conjectured accordingly that this saying about
the "bulwark of wood" referred to the fence: others on the contrary said
that the god meant by this their ships, and they advised to leave all
else and get ready these. Now they who said that the ships were the
bulwark of wood were shaken in their interpretation by the two last
verses which the prophetess uttered:


 "Salamis, thou the divine, thou shalt cause sons of women to perish,
  Or when the grain is scattered or when it is gathered together."

In reference to these verses the opinions of those who said that the
ships were the bulwark of wood were disturbed; for the interpreters of
oracles took these to mean that it was fated for them, having got ready
for a sea-fight, to suffer defeat round about Salamis.

143. Now there was one man of the Athenians who had lately been coming
forward to take a place among the first, whose name was Themistocles,
called son of Neocles. This man said that the interpreters of oracles
did not make right conjecture of the whole, and he spoke as follows,
saying that if these words that had been uttered referred really to the
Athenians, he did not think it would have been so mildly expressed in
the oracle, but rather thus, "Salamis, thou the merciless," instead of
"Salamis, thou the divine," at least if its settlers were destined to
perish round about it: but in truth the oracle had been spoken by the
god with reference to the enemy, if one understood it rightly, and not
to the Athenians: therefore he counselled them to get ready to fight a
battle by sea, for in this was their bulwark of wood. When Themistocles
declared his opinion thus, the Athenians judged that this was to be
preferred by them rather than the advice of the interpreters of oracles,
who bade them not make ready for a sea-fight, nor in short raise their
hands at all in opposition, but leave the land of Attica and settle in
some other.

144. Another opinion too of Themistocles before this one proved the best
at the right moment, when the Athenians, having got large sums of money
in the public treasury, which had come in to them from the mines which
are at Laureion, were intending to share it among themselves, taking
each in turn the sum of ten drachmas. Then Themistocles persuaded the
Athenians to give up this plan of division and to make for themselves
with this money two hundred ships for the war, meaning by that the war
with the Eginetans: for this war having arisen 130 proved in fact the
salvation of Hellas at that time, by compelling the Athenians to become
a naval power. And the ships, not having been used for the purpose for
which they had been made, thus proved of service at need to Hellas.
These ships then, I say, the Athenians had already, having built them
beforehand, and it was necessary in addition to these to construct
others. They resolved then, when they took counsel after the oracle was
given, to receive the Barbarian invading Hellas with their ships in full
force, following the commands of the god, in combination with those of
the Hellenes who were willing to join them.

145. These oracles had been given before to the Athenians: and when
those Hellenes who had the better mind about Hellas 131 came together to
one place, and considered their affairs and interchanged assurances with
one another, then deliberating together they thought it well first of
all things to reconcile the enmities and bring to an end the wars which
they had with one another. Now there were wars engaged 132 between
others also, and especially between the Athenians and the Eginetans.
After this, being informed that Xerxes was with his army at Sardis, they
determined to send spies to Asia to make observation of the power of
the king; and moreover they resolved to send envoys to Argos to form an
alliance against the Persian, and to send others to Sicily to Gelon
the son of Deinomenes and also to Corcyra, to urge them to come to the
assistance of Hellas, and others again to Crete; for they made it their
aim that if possible the Hellenic race might unite in one, and that they
might join all together and act towards the same end, since dangers were
threatening all the Hellenes equally. Now the power of Gelon was said to
be great, far greater than any other Hellenic power.

146. When they had thus resolved, they reconciled their enmities and
then sent first three men as spies to Asia. These having come to Sardis
and having got knowledge about the king's army, were discovered, and
after having been examined by the generals of the land-army were being
led off to die. For these men, I say, death had been determined; but
Xerxes, being informed of this, found fault with the decision of the
generals and sent some of the spearmen of his guard, enjoining them, if
they should find the spies yet alive, to bring them to his presence. So
having found them yet surviving they brought them into the presence of
the king; and upon that Xerxes, being informed for what purpose they
had come, commanded the spearmen to lead them round and to show them the
whole army both foot and horse, and when they should have had their fill
of looking at these things, to let them go unhurt to whatsoever land
they desired.

147. Such was the command which he gave, adding at the same time this
saying, namely that if the spies had been put to death, the Hellenes
would not have been informed beforehand of his power, how far beyond
description it was; while on the other hand by putting to death three
men they would not very greatly have damaged the enemy; but when these
returned back to Hellas, he thought it likely that the Hellenes, hearing
of his power, would deliver up their freedom to him themselves, before
the expedition took place which was being set in motion; and thus there
would be no need for them to have the labour of marching an army against
them. This opinion of his is like his manner of thinking at other times;
133 for when Xerxes was in Abydos, he saw vessels which carried corn
from the Pontus sailing out through the Hellespont on their way to Egina
and the Peloponnese. Those then who sat by his side, being informed that
the ships belonged to the enemy, were prepared to capture them, and were
looking to the king to see when he would give the word; but Xerxes asked
about them whither the men were sailing, and they replied: "Master, to
thy foes, conveying to them corn": he then made answer and said: "Are we
not also sailing to the same place as these men, furnished with corn as
well as with other things necessary? How then do these wrong us, since
they are conveying provisions for our use?"

148. The spies then, having thus looked at everything and after that
having been dismissed, returned back to Europe: and meanwhile those
of the Hellenes who had sworn alliance against the Persian, after the
sending forth of the spies proceeded to send envoys next to Argos. Now
the Argives report that the matters concerning themselves took place
as follows:--They were informed, they say, at the very first of the
movement which was being set on foot by the Barbarian against Hellas;
and having been informed of this and perceiving that the Hellenes would
endeavour to get their alliance against the Persians, they had sent
messengers to inquire of the god at Delphi, and to ask how they should
act in order that it might be best for themselves: because lately there
had been slain of them six thousand men by the Lacedemonians and by
Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides, 134 and this in fact was the reason
that they were sending to inquire: and when they inquired, the Pythian
prophetess made answer to them as follows:


 "Thou to thy neighbours a foe, by the gods immortal beloved,
  Keep thou thy spear 135 within bounds, and sit well-guarded behind it:
  Guard well the head, and the head shall preserve the limbs and the body."

Thus, they say, the Pythian prophetess had replied to them before this;
and afterwards when the messengers of the Hellenes came, as I said, to
Argos, they entered the Council-chamber and spoke that which had been
enjoined to them; and to that which was said the Council replied that
the Argives were ready to do as they were requested, on condition that
they got peace made with the Lacedemonians for thirty years and that
they had half the leadership of the whole confederacy: and yet by
strict right (they said) the whole leadership fell to their share, but
nevertheless it was sufficient for them to have half.

149. Thus they report that the Council made answer, although the oracle
forbade them to make the alliance with the Hellenes; and they were
anxious, they say, that a truce from hostilities for thirty years should
be made, although they feared the oracle, in order, as they allege, that
their sons might grow to manhood in these years; whereas if a truce did
not exist, they had fear that, supposing another disaster should come
upon them in fighting against the Persian in addition to that which had
befallen them already, they might be for all future time subject to
the Lacedemonians. To that which was spoken by the Council those of the
envoys who were of Sparta replied, that as to the truce they would refer
the matter to their public assembly, 136 but as to the leadership they
had themselves been commissioned to make reply, and did in fact say
this, namely that they had two kings, while the Argives had one; and it
was not possible to remove either of the two who were of Sparta from the
leadership, but there was nothing to prevent the Argive king from having
an equal vote with each of their two. Then, say the Argives, they could
not endure the grasping selfishness of the Spartans, but chose to
be ruled by the Barbarians rather than to yield at all to the
Lacedemonians; and they gave notice to the envoys to depart out of the
territory of the Argives before sunset, or, if not, they would be dealt
with as enemies.

150. The Argives themselves report so much about these matters: but
there is another story reported in Hellas to the effect that Xerxes
sent a herald to Argos before he set forth to make an expedition against
Hellas, and this herald, they say, when he had come, spoke as follows:
"Men of Argos, king Xerxes says to you these things:--We hold that
Perses, from whom we are descended, was the son of Perseus, the son of
Danae, and was born of the daughter of Kepheus, Andromeda; and according
to this it would seem that we are descended from you. It is not fitting
then that we should go forth on an expedition against those from whom we
trace our descent, nor that ye should set yourselves in opposition to us
by rendering assistance to others; but it is fitting that ye keep still
and remain by yourselves: for if things happen according to my mind,
I shall not esteem any people to be of greater consequence than you."
Having heard this the Argives, it is said, considered it a great matter;
and therefore at first they made no offer of help nor did they ask for
any share; but afterwards, when the Hellenes tried to get them on their
side, then, since they knew well that the Lacedemonians would not give
them a share in the command, they asked for this merely in order that
they might have a pretext for remaining still.

151. Also some of the Hellenes report that the following event, in
agreement with this account, came to pass many years after these
things:--there happened, they say, to be in Susa the city of Memnon 137
envoys of the Athenians come about some other matter, namely Callias the
son of Hipponicos and the others who went up with him; and the Argives
at that very time had also sent envoys to Susa, and these asked
Artoxerxes the son of Xerxes, whether the friendship which they had
formed with Xerxes still remained unbroken, if they themselves desired
to maintain it, 138 or whether they were esteemed by him to be enemies;
and king Artoxerxes said that it most certainly remained unbroken, and
that there was no city which he considered to be more his friend than
Argos.

152. Now whether Xerxes did indeed send a herald to Argos saying that
which has been reported, and whether envoys of the Argives who had gone
up to Susa inquired of Artoxerxes concerning friendship, I am not able
to say for certain; nor do I declare any opinion about the matters in
question other than that which the Argives themselves report: but I know
this much, that if all the nations of men should bring together into one
place the evils which they have suffered themselves, desiring to make
exchange with their neighbours, each people of them, when they had
examined closely the evils suffered by their fellows, would gladly carry
away back with them those which they had brought. 139 Thus it is not the
Argives who have acted most basely of all. I however am bound to report
that which is reported, though I am not bound altogether to believe
it; and let this saying be considered to hold good as regards every
narrative in the history: for I must add that this also is reported,
namely that the Argives were actually those who invited the Persian to
invade Hellas, because their war with the Lacedemonians had had an evil
issue, being willing to suffer anything whatever rather than the trouble
which was then upon them.

153. That which concerns the Argives has now been said: and meanwhile
envoys had come to Sicily from the allies, to confer with Gelon, among
whom was also Syagros from the Lacedemonians. Now the ancestor of this
Gelon, he who was at Gela as a settler, 140 was a native of the island
of Telos, which lies off Triopion; and when Gela was founded by the
Lindians of Rhodes and by Antiphemos, he was not left behind. Then in
course of time his descendants became and continued to be priests of the
mysteries of the Earth goddesses, 141 an office which was acquired by
Telines one of their ancestors in the following manner:--certain of the
men of Gela, being worsted in a party struggle, had fled to Mactorion,
the city which stands above Gela: these men Telines brought back to Gela
from exile with no force of men but only with the sacred rites of these
goddesses; but from whom he received them, or whether he obtained them
for himself, 142 this I am not able to say; trusting in these
however, he brought the men back from exile, on the condition that his
descendants should be priests of the mysteries of the goddesses. To me
it has caused wonder also that Telines should have been able to perform
so great a deed, considering that which I am told; for such deeds, I
think, are not apt to proceed from every man, but from one who has a
brave spirit and manly vigour, whereas Telines is said by the dwellers
in Sicily to have been on the contrary a man of effeminate character and
rather poor spirit.

154. He then had thus obtained the privilege of which I speak: and when
Cleander the son of Pantares brought his life to an end, having been
despot of Gela for seven years and being killed at last by Sabyllos a
man of Gela, then Hippocrates succeeded to the monarchy, who was
brother of Cleander. And while Hippocrates was despot, Gelon, who was a
descendant of Telines the priest of the mysteries, was spearman of the
guard 143 to Hippocrates with many others and among them Ainesidemos the
son of Pataicos. Then after no long time he was appointed by reason
of valour to be commander of the whole cavalry; for when Hippocrates
besieged successively the cities of Callipolis, Naxos, Zancle, Leontini,
and also Syracuse and many towns of the Barbarians, in these wars Gelon
showed himself a most brilliant warrior; and of the cities which I
just now mentioned, not one except Syracuse escaped being reduced to
subjection by Hippocrates: the Syracusans however, after they had been
defeated in battle at the river Eloros, were rescued by the Corinthians
and Corcyreans; these rescued them and brought the quarrel to a
settlement on this condition, namely that the Syracusans should deliver
up Camarina to Hippocrates. Now Camarina used in ancient time to belong
to the men of Syracuse.

155. Then when it was the fate of Hippocrates also, after having been
despot for the same number of years as his brother Cleander, to be
killed at the city of Hybla, whither he had gone on an expedition
against the Sikelians, then Gelon made a pretence of helping the sons
of Hippocrates, Eucleides and Cleander, when the citizens were no longer
willing to submit; but actually, when he had been victorious in a battle
over the men of Gela, he robbed the sons of Hippocrates of the power and
was ruler himself. After this stroke of fortune Gelon restored those of
the Syracusans who were called "land-holders," 144 after they had been
driven into exile by the common people and by their own slaves, who
were called Kyllyrians, 145 these, I say, he restored from the city of
Casmene to Syracuse, and so got possession of this last city also, for
the common people of Syracuse, when Gelon came against them, delivered
up to him their city and themselves.

156. So after he had received Syracuse into his power, he made less
account of Gela, of which he was ruler also in addition, and he gave
it in charge to Hieron his brother, while he proceeded to strengthen
Syracuse. So forthwith that city rose and shot up to prosperity; for in
the first place he brought all those of Camarina to Syracuse and made
them citizens, and razed to the ground the city of Camarina; then
secondly he did the same to more than half of the men of Gela, as he had
done to those of Camarina: and as regards the Megarians of Sicily, when
they were besieged and had surrendered by capitulation, the well-to-do
men 146 of them, though they had stirred up war with him and expected
to be put to death for this reason, he brought to Syracuse and made them
citizens, but the common people of the Megarians, who had no share in
the guilt of this war and did not expect that they would suffer any
evil, these also he brought to Syracuse and sold them as slaves to be
carried away from Sicily: and the same thing he did moreover to the men
of Euboia in Sicily, making a distinction between them: and he dealt
thus with these two cities because he thought that a body of commons was
a most unpleasant element in the State.

157. In the manner then which has been described Gelon had become a
powerful despot; and at this time when the envoys of the Hellenes had
arrived at Syracuse, they came to speech with him and said as follows:
"The Lacedemonians and their allies sent us to get thee to be on our
side against the Barbarian; for we suppose that thou art certainly
informed of him who is about to invade Hellas, namely that a Persian
is designing to bridge over the Hellespont, and to make an expedition
against Hellas, leading against us out of Asia all the armies of the
East, under colour of marching upon Athens, but in fact meaning to bring
all Hellas to subjection under him. Do thou therefore, seeing that 147
thou hast attained to a great power and hast no small portion of Hellas
for thy share, being the ruler of Sicily, come to the assistance of
those who are endeavouring to free Hellas, and join in making her free;
for if all Hellas be gathered together in one, it forms a great body,
and we are made a match in fight for those who are coming against us;
but if some of us go over to the enemy and others are not willing to
help, and the sound portion of Hellas is consequently small, there is at
once in this a danger that all Hellas may fall to ruin. For do not thou
hope that if the Persian shall overcome us in battle he will not come
to thee, but guard thyself against this beforehand; for in coming to
our assistance thou art helping thyself; and the matter which is wisely
planned has for the most part a good issue afterwards."

158. The envoys spoke thus; and Gelon was very vehement with them,
speaking to them as follows: "Hellenes, a selfish speech is this, with
which ye have ventured to come and invite me to be your ally against the
Barbarian; whereas ye yourselves, when I in former time requested of you
to join with me in fighting against an army of Barbarians, contention
having arisen between me and the Carthaginians, and when I charged you
to exact vengeance of the men of Egesta for the death of Dorieos the son
of Anaxandrides, 148 while at the same time I offered to help in setting
free the trading-places, from which great advantages and gains have
been reaped by you,--ye, I say, then neither for my own sake came to my
assistance, nor in order to exact vengeance for the death of Dorieos;
and, so far as ye are concerned, all these parts are even now under the
rule of Barbarians. But since it turned out well for us and came to a
better issue, now that the war has come round and reached you, there has
at last arisen in your minds a recollection of Gelon. However, though I
have met with contempt at your hands, I will not act like you; but I am
prepared to come to your assistance, supplying two hundred triremes
and twenty thousand hoplites, with two thousand horsemen, two thousand
bowmen, two thousand slingers and two thousand light-armed men to run
beside the horsemen; and moreover I will undertake to supply corn for
the whole army of the Hellenes, until we have finished the war. These
things I engage to supply on this condition, namely that I shall be
commander and leader of the Hellenes against the Barbarian; but on any
other condition I will neither come myself nor will I send others."

159. Hearing this Syagros could not contain himself but spoke these
words: "Deeply, I trow, would Agamemnon son of Pelops lament, 149 if he
heard that the Spartans had had the leadership taken away from them by
Gelon and by the Syracusans. Nay, but make thou no further mention of
this condition, namely that we should deliver the leadership to thee;
but if thou art desirous to come to the assistance of Hellas, know that
thou wilt be under the command of the Lacedemonians; and if thou dost
indeed claim not to be under command, come not thou to our help at all."

160. To this Gelon, seeing that the speech of Syagros was adverse, set
forth to them his last proposal thus: "Stranger from Sparta, reproaches
sinking into the heart of a man are wont to rouse his spirit in anger
against them; thou however, though thou hast uttered insults against me
in thy speech, wilt not bring me to show myself unseemly in my reply.
But whereas ye so strongly lay claim to the leadership, it were fitting
that I should lay claim to it more than ye, seeing that I am the leader
of an army many times as large and of ships many more. Since however
this condition is so distasteful to you, 150 we will recede somewhat
from our former proposal. Suppose that ye should be leaders of
the land-army and I of the fleet; or if it pleases you to lead the
sea-forces, I am willing to be leader of those on land; and either ye
must be contented with these terms or go away without the alliance which
I have to give."

161. Gelon, I say, made these offers, and the envoy of the Athenians,
answering before that of the Lacedemonians, replied to him as follows:
"O king of the Syracusans, it was not of a leader that Hellas was in
want when it sent us to thee, but of an army. Thou however dost not set
before us the hope that thou wilt send an army, except thou have the
leadership of Hellas; and thou art striving how thou mayest become
commander of the armies of Hellas. So long then as it was thy demand to
be leader of the whole army of the Hellenes, it was sufficient for us
Athenians to keep silence, knowing that the Lacedemonian would be able
to make defence even for us both; but now, since being repulsed from the
demand for the whole thou art requesting to be commander of the naval
force, we tell that thus it is:--not even if the Lacedemonian shall
permit thee to be commander of it, will we permit thee; for this at
least is our own, if the Lacedemonians do not themselves desire to have
it. With these, if they desire to be the leaders, we do not contend;
but none others beside ourselves shall we permit to be in command of
the ships: for then to no purpose should we be possessors of a
sea-force larger than any other which belongs to the Hellenes, if, being
Athenians, we should yield the leadership to Syracusans, we who boast of
a race which is the most ancient of all and who are of all the Hellenes
the only people who have not changed from one land to another; to whom
also belonged a man whom Homer the Epic poet said was the best of all
who came to Ilion in drawing up an army and setting it in array. 151
Thus we are not justly to be reproached if we say these things."

162. To this Gelon made answer thus: "Stranger of Athens, it would seem
that ye have the commanders, but that ye will not have the men to be
commanded. Since then ye will not at all give way, but desire to
have the whole, it were well that ye should depart home as quickly as
possible and report to the Hellenes that the spring has been taken out
of their year." Now this is the meaning of the saying:--evidently the
spring is the noblest part of the year; and so he meant to say that
his army was the noblest part of the army of the Hellenes: for Hellas
therefore, deprived of his alliance, it was, he said, as if the spring
had been taken out of the year. 152

163. The envoys of the Hellenes, having thus had conference with Gelon,
sailed away; and Gelon upon this, fearing on the one hand about the
Hellenes, lest they should not be able to overcome the Barbarian, and
on the other hand considering it monstrous and not to be endured that
he should come to Peloponnesus and be under the command of the
Lacedemonians, seeing that he was despot of Sicily, gave up the thought
of this way and followed another: for so soon as he was informed that
the Persian had crossed over the Hellespont, he sent Cadmos the son of
Skythes, a man of Cos, with three fifty-oared galleys to Delphi, bearing
large sums of money and friendly proposals, to wait there and see how
the battle would fall out: and if the Barbarian should be victorious,
he was to give him the money and also to offer him earth and water
from those over whom Gelon had rule; but if the Hellenes should be
victorious, he was bidden to bring it back.

164. Now this Cadmos before these events, having received from his
father in a prosperous state the government 153 of the people of Cos,
had voluntarily and with no danger threatening, but moved merely by
uprightness of nature, placed the government in the hands of the people
of Cos 154 and had departed to Sicily, where he took from 155 the
Samians and newly colonised the city of Zancle, which had changed its
name to Messene. This same Cadmos, having come thither in such manner
as I have said, Gelon was now sending, having selected him on account of
the integrity which in other matters he had himself found to be in him;
and this man, in addition to the other upright acts which had been done
by him, left also this to be remembered, which was not the least of
them: for having got into his hands that great sum of money which Gelon
entrusted to his charge, though he might have taken possession of it
himself he did not choose to do so; but when the Hellenes had got the
better in the sea-fight and Xerxes had marched away and departed, he
also returned to Sicily bringing back with him the whole sum of money.

165. The story which here follows is also reported by those who dwell in
Sicily, namely that, even though he was to be under the command of the
Lacedemonians, Gelon would have come to the assistance of the Hellenes,
but that Terillos, the son of Crinippos and despot of Himera, having
been driven out of Himera by Theron the son of Ainesidemos 156 the ruler
of the Agrigentines, was just at this very time bringing in an army
of Phenicians, Libyans, Iberians, Ligurians, Elisycans, Sardinians and
Corsicans, to the number of thirty myriads, 157 with Amilcas the son of
Annon king of the Carthaginians as their commander, whom Terillos had
persuaded partly by reason of his own guest-friendship, and especially
by the zealous assistance of Anaxilaos the son of Cretines, who was
despot of Rhegion, and who to help his father-in-law endeavoured to
bring in Amilcas to Sicily, and had given him his sons as hostages;
for Anaxilaos was married to the daughter of Terillos, whose name was
Kydippe. Thus it was, they say, that Gelon was not able to come to the
assistance of the Hellenes, and sent therefore the money to Delphi.

166. In addition to this they report also that, as it happened, Gelon
and Theron were victorious over Amilcas the Carthaginian on the very
same day when the Hellenes were victorious at Salamis over the Persian.
And this Amilcas, who was a Carthaginian on the father's side but on
the mother's Syracusan, and who had become king of the Carthaginians by
merit, when the engagement took place and he was being worsted in the
battle, disappeared, as I am informed; for neither alive nor dead did he
appear again anywhere upon the earth, though Gelon used all diligence in
the search for him.

167. Moreover there is also this story reported by the Carthaginians
themselves, who therein relate that which is probable in itself, namely
that while the Barbarians fought with the Hellenes in Sicily from the
early morning till late in the afternoon (for to such a length the
combat is said to have been protracted), during this time Amilcas was
remaining in the camp and was making sacrifices to get good omens of
success, offering whole bodies of victims upon a great pyre: and when he
saw that there was a rout of his own army, he being then, as it chanced,
in the act of pouring a libation over the victims, threw himself into
the fire, and thus he was burnt up and disappeared. Amilcas then having
disappeared, whether it was in such a manner as this, as it is reported
by the Phenicians, or in some other way, 159 the Carthaginians both
offer sacrifices to him now, and also they made memorials of him then in
all the cities of their colonies, and the greatest in Carthage itself.

168. So far of the affairs of Sicily: and as for the Corcyreans, they
made answer to the envoys as follows, afterwards acting as I shall tell:
for the same men who had gone to Sicily endeavoured also to obtain the
help of these, saying the same things which they said to Gelon; and
the Corcyreans at the time engaged to send a force and to help in the
defence, declaring that they must not permit Hellas to be ruined without
an effort on their part, for if it should suffer disaster, they would
be reduced to subjection from the very first day; but they must give
assistance so far as lay in their power. Thus speciously they made
reply; but when the time came to send help, they manned sixty ships,
having other intentions in their minds, and after making much difficulty
they put out to sea and reached Peloponnese; and then near Pylos and
Tainaron in the land of the Lacedemonians they kept their ships at
anchor, waiting, as Gelon did, to see how the war would turn out: for
they did not expect that the Hellenes would overcome, but thought that
the Persian would gain the victory over them with ease and be ruler of
all Hellas. Accordingly they were acting of set purpose, in order that
they might be able to say to the Persian some such words as these: "O
king, when the Hellenes endeavoured to obtain our help for this war,
we, who have a power which is not the smallest of all, and could have
supplied a contingent of ships in number not the smallest, but after the
Athenians the largest, did not choose to oppose thee or to do anything
which was not to thy mind." By speaking thus they hoped that they would
obtain some advantage over the rest, and so it would have happened, as
I am of opinion: while they had for the Hellenes an excuse ready made,
that namely of which they actually made use: for when the Hellenes
reproached them because they did not come to help, they said that they
had manned sixty triremes, but had not been able to get past Malea
owing to the Etesian Winds; therefore it was that they had not come to
Salamis, nor was it by any want of courage on their part that they had
been left of the sea-fight.

