BOOK VIII. THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED URANIA

1. Those of the Hellenes who had been appointed to serve in the fleet
were these:—the Athenians furnished a hundred and twenty-seven ships,
and the Plataians moved by valour and zeal for the service, although
they had had no practice in seamanship, yet joined with the Athenians in
manning their ships. The Corinthians furnished forty ships, the
Megarians twenty; the Chalkidians manned twenty ships with which the
Athenians furnished them; 1 the Eginetans furnished eighteen ships, the
Sikyonians twelve, the Lacedemonians ten, the Epidaurians eight, the
Eretrians seven, the Troizenians five, the Styrians two, the Keïans two
ships 2 and two fifty-oared galleys, while the Locrians of Opus came
also to the assistance of the rest with seven fifty-oared galleys.

2. These were those who joined in the expedition to Artemision, and I
have mentioned them according to the number 3 of the ships which they
severally supplied: so the number of the ships which were assembled
at Artemision was (apart from the fifty-oared galleys) two hundred and
seventy-one: and the commander who had the supreme power was furnished
by the Spartans, namely Eurybiades son of Eurycleides, since the allies
said that they would not follow the lead of the Athenians, but unless a
Lacedemonian were leader they would break up the expedition which was to
be made:

3, for it had come to be said at first, even before they sent to Sicily
to obtain allies, that the fleet ought to be placed in the charge of the
Athenians. So as the allies opposed this, the Athenians yielded, having
it much at heart that Hellas should be saved, and perceiving that if
they should have disagreement with one another about the leadership,
Hellas would perish: and herein they judged rightly, for disagreement
between those of the same race is worse than war undertaken with one
consent by as much as war is worse than peace. Being assured then of
this truth, they did not contend, but gave way for so long time as they
were urgently in need of the allies; and that this was so their conduct
proved; for when, after repelling the Persian from themselves, they were
now contending for his land and no longer for their own, they alleged
the insolence of Pausanias as a pretext and took away the leadership
from the Lacedemonians. This however took place afterwards.

4. But at this time these Hellenes also who had come to Artemision, 4
when they saw that a great number of ships had put in to Aphetai and
that everything was filled with their armament, were struck with fear,
because the fortunes of the Barbarians had different issue from
that which they expected, and they deliberated about retreating from
Artemision to the inner parts of Hellas. And the Euboeans perceiving
that they were so deliberating, asked Eurybiades to stay there by them
for a short time, until they should have removed out of their land their
children, and their households; and as they did not persuade him, they
went elsewhere and persuaded Themistocles the commander of the Athenians
by a payment of thirty talents, the condition being that the fleet
should stay and fight the sea-battle in front of Euboea.

5. Themistocles then caused the Hellenes to stay in the following
manner:—to Eurybiades he imparted five talents of the sum with the
pretence that he was giving it from himself; and when Eurybiades had
been persuaded by him to change his resolution, Adeimantos son of
Okytos, the Corinthian commander, was the only one of all the others who
still made a struggle, saying that he would sail away from Artemision
and would not stay with the others: to him therefore Themistocles said
with an oath: "Thou at least shalt not leave us, for I will give thee
greater gifts than the king of the Medes would send to thee, if thou
shouldest desert thy allies." Thus he spoke, and at the same time he
sent to the ship of Adeimantos three talents of silver. So these all 5
had been persuaded by gifts to change their resolution, and at the same
time the request of the Euboeans had been gratified and Themistocles
himself gained money; and it was not known that he had the rest of the
money, but those who received a share of this money were fully persuaded
that it had come from the Athenian State for this purpose.

6. Thus they remained in Euboea and fought a sea-battle; and it came to
pass as follows:—when the Barbarians had arrived at Aphetai about the
beginning of the afternoon, having been informed even before they came
that a few ships of the Hellenes were stationed about Artemision and now
seeing them for themselves, they were eager to attack them, to see if
they could capture them. Now they did not think it good yet to sail
against them directly for this reason,—for fear namely that the
Hellenes, when they saw them sailing against them, should set forth to
take flight and darkness should come upon them in their flight; and so
they were likely (thought the Persians) 6 to get away; whereas it was
right, according to their calculation, that not even the fire-bearer 7
should escape and save his life.

7. With a view to this then they contrived as follows:—of the whole
number of their ships they parted off two hundred and sent them round
to sail by Caphereus and round Geriastos to the Euripos, going outside
Skiathos so that they might not be sighted by the enemy as they sailed
round Euboea: and their purpose was that with these coming up by that
way, and blocking the enemies' retreat, and themselves advancing against
them directly, they might surround them on all sides. Having formed this
plan they proceeded to send off the ships which were appointed for this,
and they themselves had no design of attacking the Hellenes on that day
nor until the signal agreed upon should be displayed to them by those
who were sailing round, to show that they had arrived. These ships, I
say, they were sending round, and meanwhile they were numbering the rest
at Aphetai.

8. During this time, while these were numbering their ships, it happened
thus:—there was in that camp a man of Skione named Skyllias, as a diver
the best of all the men of that time, who also in the shipwreck which
took place by Pelion had saved for the Persians many of their goods and
many of them also he had acquired for himself: this Skyllias it appears
had had an intention even before this of deserting to the side of the
Hellenes, but it had not been possible for him to do so then. In what
manner after this attempt he did actually come to the Hellenes, I am not
able to say with certainty, but I marvel if the tale is true which is
reported; for it is said that he dived into the sea at Aphetai and did
not come up till he reached Artemision, having traversed here somewhere
about eighty furlongs through the sea. Now there are told about this man
several other tales which seem likely to be false, but some also which
are true: about this matter however let it be stated as my opinion that
he came to Artemision in a boat. Then when he had come, he forthwith
informed the commanders about the shipwreck, how it had come to pass,
and of the ships which had been sent away to go round Euboea.

9. Hearing this the Hellenes considered the matter with one another; and
after many things had been spoken, the prevailing opinion was that
they should remain there that day and encamp on shore, and then, when
midnight was past, they should set forth and go to meet those ships
which were sailing round. After this however, as no one sailed out
to attack them, they waited for the coming of the late hours of the
afternoon and sailed out themselves to attack the Barbarians, desiring
to make a trial both of their manner of fighting and of the trick of
breaking their line. 8

10. And seeing them sailing thus against them with few ships, not only
the others in the army of Xerxes but also their commanders judged them
to be moved by mere madness, and they themselves also put out their
ships to sea, supposing that they would easily capture them: and their
expectation was reasonable enough, since they saw that the ships of the
Hellenes were few, while theirs were many times as numerous and sailed
better. Setting their mind then on this, they came round and enclosed
them in the middle. Then so many of the Ionians as were kindly disposed
to the Hellenes and were serving in the expedition against their will,
counted it a matter of great grief to themselves when they saw them
being surrounded and felt assured that not one of them would return
home, so feeble did they think the power of the Hellenes to be; while
those to whom that which was happening was a source of pleasure, were
vying with one another, each one endeavouring to be the first to take an
Athenian ship and receive gifts from the king: for in their camps there
was more report of the Athenians than of any others.

11. The Hellenes meanwhile, when the signal was given, first set
themselves with prows facing the Barbarians and drew the sterns of their
ships together in the middle; and when the signal was given a second
time, although shut off in a small space and prow against prow, 9 they
set to work vigorously; and they captured thirty ships of the Barbarians
and also Philaon the son of Chersis, the brother of Gorgos kind of the
Salaminians, who was a man of great repute in the army. Now the first of
the Hellenes who captured a ship of the enemy was an Athenian, Lycomedes
the son of Aischraios, and he received the prize for valour. So these,
as they were contending in this sea-fight with doubtful result,
were parted from one another by the coming on of night. The Hellenes
accordingly sailed away to Artemision and the Barbarians to Aphetai,
the contest having been widely different from their expectation. In this
sea-fight Antidoros of Lemnos alone of the Hellenes who were with the
king deserted to the side of the Hellenes, and the Athenians on account
of this deed gave him a piece of land in Salamis.

12. When the darkness had come on, although the season was the middle of
summer, yet there came on very abundant rain, which lasted through the
whole of the night, with crashing thunder 10 from Mount Pelion; and
the dead bodies and pieces of wreck were cast up at Aphetai and became
entangled round the prows of the ships and struck against the blades of
the oars: and the men of the army who were there, hearing these things
became afraid, expecting that they would certainly perish, to such
troubles had they come; for before they had had even breathing space
after the shipwreck and the storm which had arisen off Mount Pelion,
there had come upon them a hard sea-fight, and after the sea-fight a
violent storm of rain and strong streams rushing to the sea and crashing
thunder.

13. These then had such a night as I have said; and meanwhile those of
them who had been appointed to sail round Euboea experienced the very
same night, but against them it raged much more fiercely, inasmuch as it
fell upon them while they were making their course in the open sea. And
the end of it proved distressful 11 to them; for when the storm and
the rain together came upon them as they sailed, being then off the
"Hollows" of Euboea, 12 they were borne by the wind not knowing by what
way they were carried, and were cast away upon the rocks. And all this
was being brought about by God in order that the Persian force might be
made more equal to that of the Hellenes and might not be by very much
the larger.

14. These then, I say, were perishing about the Hollows of Euboea, and
meanwhile the Barbarians at Aphetai, when day had dawned upon them, of
which they were glad, were keeping their ships quiet, and were satisfied
in their evil plight to remain still for the present time; but to the
Hellenes there came as a reinforcement three-and-fifty Athenian ships.
The coming of these gave them more courage, and at the same time they
were encouraged also by a report that those of the Barbarians who had
been sailing round Euboea had all been destroyed by the storm that had
taken place. They waited then for the same time of day as before, and
then they sailed and fell upon some Kilikian ships; and having destroyed
these, they sailed away when the darkness came on, and returned to
Artemision.

15. On the third day the commanders of the Barbarians, being exceedingly
indignant that so small a number of ships should thus do them damage,
and fearing what Xerxes might do, did not wait this time for the
Hellenes to begin the fight, but passed the word of command and put out
their ships to sea about the middle of the day. Now it so happened that
these battles at sea and the battles on land at Thermopylai took place
on the same days; and for those who fought by sea the whole aim of the
fighting was concerned with the channel of Euripos, just as the aim of
Leonidas and of his band was to guard the pass: the Hellenes accordingly
exhorted one another not to let the Barbarians go by into Hellas; while
these cheered one another on to destroy the fleet of the Hellenes and to
get possession of the straits.

16. Now while the forces of Xerxes were sailing in order towards them,
the Hellenes kept quiet at Artemision; and the Barbarians, having made a
crescent of their ships that they might enclose them, were endeavouring
to surround them. Then the Hellenes put out to sea and engaged with
them; and in this battle the two sides were nearly equal to one another;
for the fleet of Xerxes by reason of its great size and numbers suffered
damage from itself, since the ships were thrown into confusion and ran
into one another: nevertheless it stood out and did not give way,
for they disdained to be turned to flight by so few ships. Many ships
therefore of the Hellenes were destroyed and many men perished, but many
more ships and men of the Barbarians. Thus contending they parted and
went each to their own place.

17. In this sea-fight the Egyptians did best of the men who fought
for Xerxes; and these, besides other great deeds which they displayed,
captured five ships of the Hellenes together with their crews: while of
the Hellenes those who did best on this day were the Athenians, and of
the Athenians Cleinias the son of Alkibiades, who was serving with two
hundred man and a ship of his own, furnishing the expense at his own
proper cost.

18. Having parted, both sides gladly hastened to their moorings; and
after they had separated and got away out of the sea-fight, although the
Hellenes had possession of the bodies of the dead and of the wrecks
of the ships, yet having suffered severely 13 (and especially
the Athenians, of whose ships half had been disabled), they were
deliberating now about retreating to the inner parts of Hellas.

19. Themistocles however had conceived that if there should be detached
from the force of the Barbarians the Ionian and Carian nations, they
would be able to overcome the rest; and when the people of Euboea were
driving their flocks down to that sea, 14 he assembled the generals and
said to them that he thought he had a device by which he hoped to cause
the best of the king's allies to leave him. This matter he revealed to
that extent only; and with regard to their present circumstances, he
said that they must do as follows:—every one must slaughter of the
flocks of the Euboeans as many as he wanted, for it was better that
their army should have them than the enemy; moreover he advised that
each one should command his own men to kindle a fire: and as for the
time of their departure he would see to it in such wise that they should
come safe to Hellas. This they were content to do, and forthwith when
they had kindled a fire they turned their attention to the flocks.

20. For in fact the Euboeans, neglecting the oracle of Bakis as if it
had no meaning at all, had neither carried away anything from their land
nor laid in any store of provisions with a view to war coming upon them,
and by their conduct moreover they had brought trouble upon themselves.
15 For the oracle uttered by Bakis about these matters runs as follows:


 "Mark, when a man, a Barbarian, shall yoke the Sea with papyrus,
  Then do thou plan to remove the loud-bleating goats from Euboea."

In the evils which at this time were either upon them or soon to be
expected they might feel not a little sorry that they had paid no
attention to these lines.

21. While these were thus engaged, there came to them the scout from
Trachis: for there was at Artemision a scout named Polyas, by birth
of Antikyra, to whom it had been appointed, if the fleet should be
disabled, 16 to signify this to those at Thermopylai, and he had a
vessel equipped and ready for this purpose; and similarly there was with
Leonidas Abronichos son of Lysicles, an Athenian, ready to carry news to
those at Artemision with a thirty-oared galley, if any disaster should
happen to the land-army. This Abronichos then had arrived, and he
proceeded to signify to them that which had come to pass about Leonidas
and his army; and then when they were informed of it no longer put off
their retreat, but set forth in the order in which they were severally
posted, the Corinthians first and the Athenians last.

22. Themistocles however selected those ships of the Athenians which
sailed best, and went round to the springs of drinking-water, cutting
inscriptions on the stones there, which the Ionians read when they
came to Artemision on the following day. These inscriptions ran thus:
"Ionians, ye act not rightly in making expedition against the fathers of
your race and endeavouring to enslave Hellas. Best of all were it that
ye should come and be on our side; but if that may not be done by you,
stand aside even now from the combat against us and ask the Carians to
do the same as ye. If however neither of these two things is possible
to be done, and ye are bound down by too strong compulsion to be able
to make revolt, then in the action, when we engage battle, be purposely
slack, remember that ye are descended from us and that our quarrel with
the Barbarian took its rise at the first from you." Themistocles wrote
thus, having, as I suppose, two things together in his mind, namely that
either the inscriptions might elude the notice of the king and cause
the Ionians to change and come over to the side on which he was, or
that having been reported and denounced to Xerxes they might cause the
Ionians to be distrusted by him, and so he might keep them apart from
the sea-fights.

23. Themistocles then had set these inscriptions: and to the Barbarians
there came immediately after these things a man of Histaia in a boat
bringing word of the retreat of the Hellenes from Artemision. They
however, not believing it, kept the messenger under guard and sent
swift-sailing ships to look on before. Then these having reported
the facts, at last as daylight was spreading over the sky, the whole
armament sailed in a body to Artemision; and having stayed at this place
till mid-day, after this they sailed to Histaia, and there arrived they
took possession of the city of Histaia and overran all the villages
which lie along the coast in the region of Ellopia, which is the land of
Histaia.

24. While they were there, Xerxes, after he had made his dispositions
with regard to the bodies of the dead, sent a herald to the fleet: and
the dispositions which he made beforehand were as follows:—for all those
of his army who were lying dead at Thermopylai, (and there were as many
as twenty thousand in all), with the exception of about a thousand whom
he left, he dug trenches and buried them, laying over them leaves and
heaping earth upon them, that they might not be seen by the men of the
fleet. Then when the herald had gone over to Histaia, he gathered an
assembly of the whole force and spoke these words: "Allies, king Xerxes
grants permission to any one of you who desires it, to leave his post
and to come and see how he fights against those most senseless men who
looked to overcome the power of the king."

25. When the herald had proclaimed this, then boats were of all things
most in request, so many were they who desired to see this sight; and
when they had passed over they went through the dead bodies and looked
at them: and every one supposed that those who were lying there were all
Lacedemonians or Thespians, though the Helots also were among those that
they saw: however, they who had passed over did not fail to perceive
that Xerxes had done that which I mentioned about the bodies of his own
dead; for in truth it was a thing to cause laughter even: on the one
side there were seen a thousand dead bodies lying, while the others
lay all gathered together in the same place, four thousand 17 of them.
During this day then they busied themselves with looking, and on the day
after this they sailed back to the ships at Histaia, while Xerxes and
his army set forth upon their march.

26. There had come also to them a few deserters from Arcadia, men in
want of livelihood and desiring to be employed. These the Persians
brought into the king's presence and inquired about the Hellenes, what
they were doing; and one man it was who asked them this for all the
rest. They told them that the Hellenes were keeping the Olympic festival
and were looking on at a contest of athletics and horsemanship. He then
inquired again, what was the prize proposed to them, for the sake of
which they contended; and they told them of the wreath of olive which is
given. Then Tigranes 18 the son of Artabanos uttered a thought which
was most noble, though thereby he incurred from the king the reproach
of cowardice: for hearing that the prize was a wreath and not money, he
could not endure to keep silence, but in the presence of all he spoke
these words: "Ah! Mardonios, what kind of men are these against whom
thou hast brought us to fight, who make their contest not for money but
for honour!" Thus was it spoken by this man.

27. In the meantime, so soon as the disaster at Thermopylai had come
about, the Thessalians sent a herald forthwith to the Phokians, against
whom they had a grudge always, but especially because of the latest
disaster which they had suffered: for when both the Thessalians
themselves and their allies had invaded the Phokian land not many
years before this expedition of the king, they had been defeated by the
Phokians and handled by them roughly. For the Phokians had been shut up
in Mount Parnassos having with them a soothsayer, Tellias the Eleian;
and this Tellias contrived for them a device of the following kind:—he
took six hundred men, the best of the Phokians, and whitened them over
with chalk, both themselves and their armour, and then he attacked the
Thessalians by night, telling the Phokians beforehand to slay every
man whom they should see not coloured over with white. So not only the
sentinels of the Thessalians, who saw these first, were terrified by
them, supposing it to be something portentous and other than it was,
but also after the sentinels the main body of their army; so that the
Phokians remained in possession of four thousand bodies of slain men and
shields; of which last they dedicated half at Abai and half at Delphi;
and from the tithe of booty got by this battle were made the large
statues which are contending for the tripod in front of the temple 19
at Delphi, and others similar to these are dedicated as an offering at
Abai.

28. Thus had the Phokians done to the Thessalian footmen, when they were
besieged by them; and they had done irreparable hurt to their cavalry
also, when this had invaded their land: for in the pass which is
by Hyampolis they had dug a great trench and laid down in it empty
wine-jars; and then having carried earth and laid it on the top and
made it like the rest of the ground, they waited for the Thessalians to
invade their land. These supposing that they would make short work with
the Phokians, 20 riding in full course fell upon the wine-jars; and
there the legs of their horses were utterly crippled.

29. Bearing then a grudge for both of these things, the Thessalians sent
a herald and addressed them thus: "Phokians, we advise you to be more
disposed now to change your minds and to admit that ye are not on a
level with us: for in former times among the Hellenes, so long as it
pleased us to be on that side, we always had the preference over you,
and now we have such great power with the Barbarian that it rests with
us to cause you to be deprived of your land and to be sold into slavery
also. We however, though we have all the power in our hands, do not bear
malice, but let there be paid to us fifty talents of silver in return
for this, and we will engage to avert the dangers which threaten to come
upon your land."

30. Thus the Thessalians proposed to them; for the Phokians alone of
all the people in those parts were not taking the side of the Medes,
and this for no other reason, as I conjecture, but only because of their
enmity with the Thessalians; and if the Thessalians had supported the
cause of the Hellenes, I am of opinion that the Phokians would have been
on the side of the Medes. When the Thessalians proposed this, they said
that they would not give the money, and that it was open to them to take
the Median side just as much as the Thessalians, if they desired it for
other reasons; but they would not with their own will be traitors to
Hellas.

31. When these words were reported, then the Thessalians, moved with
anger against the Phokians, became guides to the Barbarian to show him
the way: and from the land of Trachis they entered Doris; for a narrow
strip 21 of the Dorian territory extends this way, about thirty furlongs
in breadth, lying between Malis and Phokis, the region which was in
ancient time called Dryopis; this land is the mother-country of the
Dorians in Peloponnese. Now the Barbarians did not lay waste this land
of Doris when they entered it, for the people of it were taking the side
of the Medes, and also the Thessalians did not desire it.

32. When however from Doris they entered Phokis, they did not indeed
capture the Phokians themselves; for some of them had gone up to the
heights of Parnassos,—and that summit of Parnassos is very convenient to
receive a large number, which lies by itself near the city of Neon, the
name of it being Tithorea,—to this, I say, some of them had carried up
their goods and gone up themselves; but most of them had conveyed their
goods out to the Ozolian Locrians, to the city of Amphissa, which is
situated above the Crissaian plain. The Barbarians however overran the
whole land of Phokis, for so the Thessalians led their army, and all
that they came to as they marched they burned or cut down, and delivered
to the flames both the cities and the temples:

33, for they laid everything waste, proceeding this way by the river
Kephisos, and they destroyed the city of Drymos by fire, and also
the following, namely Charadra, Erochos, Tethronion, Amphikaia, Neon,
Pedieis, Triteis, Elateia, Hyampolis, Parapotamioi and Abai, at which
last-named place there was a temple of Apollo, wealthy and furnished
with treasuries and votive offerings in abundance; and there was then,
as there is even now, the seat of an Oracle there: this temple they
plundered and burnt. Some also of the Phokians they pursued and captured
upon the mountains, and some women they did to death by repeated
outrage.

34. Passing by Parapotamioi the Barbarians came to Panopeus, and from
this point onwards their army was separated and went different ways. The
largest and strongest part of the army, proceeding with Xerxes himself
against Athens, entered the land of the Boeotians, coming into the
territory of Orchomenos. Now the general body of the Boeotians was
taking the side of the Medes, and their cities were being kept by
Macedonians appointed for each, who had been sent by Alexander; and they
were keeping them this aim, namely in order to make it plain to Xerxes
that the Boeotians were disposed to be on the side of the Medes.

35. These, I say, of the Barbarians took their way in this direction;
but others of them with guides had set forth to go to the temple at
Delphi, keeping Parnassos on their right hand: and all the parts of
Phokis over which these marched they ravaged; for they set fire to
the towns of Panopeus and Daulis and Aiolis. And for this reason they
marched in that direction, parted off from the rest of the army, namely
in order that they might plunder the temple at Delphi and deliver over
the treasures there to king Xerxes: and Xerxes was well acquainted with
all that there was in it of any account, better, I am told, than with
the things which he had left in his own house at home, seeing that many
constantly reported of them, and especially of the votive offerings of
Croesus the son of Alyattes.

36. Meanwhile the Delphians, having been informed of this, had been
brought to extreme fear; and being in great terror they consulted the
Oracle about the sacred things, whether they should bury them in the
earth or carry them forth to another land; but the god forbade them to
meddle with these, saying that he was able by himself to take care of
his own. Hearing this they began to take thought for themselves, and
they sent their children and women over to Achaia on the other side
of the sea, while most of the men themselves ascended up towards the
summits of Parnassos and carried their property to the Corykian cave,
while others departed for refuge to Amphissa of the Locrians. In short
the Delphians had all left the town excepting sixty men and the prophet
of the Oracle. 22

37. When the Barbarians had come near and could see the temple, then the
prophet, whose name was Akeratos, saw before the cell 23 arms lying
laid out, having been brought forth out of the sanctuary, 24 which were
sacred and on which it was not permitted to any man to lay hands. He
then was going to announce the portent to those of the Delphians who
were still there, but when the Barbarians pressing onwards came opposite
the temple of Athene Pronaia, there happened to them in addition
portents yet greater than that which had come to pass before: for though
that too was a marvel, that arms of war should appear of themselves laid
forth outside the cell, yet this, which happened straightway after that,
is worthy of marvel even beyond all other prodigies. When the Barbarians
in their approach were opposite the temple of Athene Pronaia, at this
point of time from the heaven there fell thunderbolts upon them, and
from Parnassos two crags were broken away and rushed down upon them with
a great crashing noise falling upon many of them, while from the temple
of Pronaia there was heard a shout, and a battle-cry was raised.

38. All these things having come together, there fell fear upon the
Barbarians; and the Delphians having perceived that they were flying,
came down after them and slew a great number of them; and those who
survived fled straight to Boeotia. These who returned of the Barbarians
reported, as I am informed, that in addition to this which we have said
they saw also other miraculous things; for two men (they said) in
full armour and of stature more than human followed them slaying and
pursuing.

39. These two the Delphians say were the native heroes Phylacos and
Autonoös, whose sacred enclosures are about the temple, that of Phylacos
being close by the side of the road above the temple of Pronaia and that
of Autonoös near Castalia under the peak called Hyampeia. Moreover the
rocks which fell from Parnassos were still preserved even to my time,
lying in the sacred enclosure of Athene Pronaia, into which they fell
when they rushed through the ranks of the Barbarians. Such departure had
these men from the temple.

40. Meanwhile the fleet of the Hellenes after leaving Artemision put in
to land at Salamis at the request of the Athenians: and for this reason
the Athenians requested them to put in to Salamis, namely in order that
they might remove out of Attica to a place of safety their children
and their wives, and also deliberate what they would have to do; for in
their present case they meant to take counsel afresh, because they had
been deceived in their expectation. For they had thought to find the
Peloponnesians in full force waiting for the Barbarians in Boeotia; they
found however nothing of this, but they were informed on the contrary
that the Peloponnesians were fortifying the Isthmus with a wall, valuing
above all things the safety of the Peloponnese and keeping this in
guard; and that they were disposed to let all else go. Being informed of
this, the Athenians therefore made request of them to put in to Salamis.
41. The others then put in their ships to land at Salamis, but the
Athenians went over to their own land; and after their coming they made
a proclamation that every one of the Athenians should endeavour to save
his children and household as best he could. So the greater number sent
them to Troizen, but others to Egina, and others to Salamis, and they
were urgent to put these out of danger, both because they desired
to obey the oracle and also especially for another reason, which was
this:—the Athenians say that a great serpent lives in the temple 25
and guards the Acropolis; and they not only say this, but also they
set forth for it monthly offerings, as if it were really there; and the
offering consists of a honey-cake. This honey-cake, which before
used always to be consumed, was at this time left untouched. When the
priestess had signified this, the Athenians left the city much more and
with greater eagerness than before, seeing that the goddess also had (as
they supposed) left the Acropolis. Then when all their belongings had
been removed out of danger, they sailed to the encampment of the fleet.

42. When those who came from Artemision had put their ships in to land
at Salamis, the remainder of the naval force of the Hellenes, being
informed of this, came over gradually to join them 26 from Troizen:
for they had been ordered beforehand to assemble at Pogon, which is the
harbour of the Troizenians. There were assembled accordingly now many
more ships than those which were in the sea-fight at Artemision, and
from more cities. Over the whole was set as admiral the same man as at
Artemision, namely Eurybiades the son of Eurycleides, a Spartan but not
of the royal house; the Athenians however supplied by far the greatest
number of ships and those which sailed the best.

43. The following were those who joined the muster:—From Peloponnese the
Lacedemonians furnishing sixteen ships, the Corinthians furnishing the
same complement as at Artemision, the Sikyonians furnishing fifteen
ships, the Epidaurians ten, the Troizenians five, the men of Hermion
2601 three, these all, except the Hermionians, being of Doric and
Makednian 27 race and having made their last migration from Erineos
and Pindos and the land of Dryopis; 28 but the people of Hermion are
Dryopians, driven out by Heracles and the Malians from the land which is
now called Doris.

44. These were the Peloponnesians who joined the fleet, and those of
the mainland outside the Peloponnese were as follows:—the Athenians,
furnishing a number larger than all the rest, 29 namely one hundred and
eighty ships, and serving alone, since the Plataians did not take
part with the Athenians in the sea-fight at Salamis, because when the
Hellenes were departing from Artemision and come near Chalkis, the
Plataians disembarked on the opposite shore of Boeotia and proceeded to
the removal of their households. So being engaged in saving these,
they had been left behind. As for the Athenians, in the time when
the Pelasgians occupied that which is now called Hellas, they were
Pelasgians, being named Cranaoi, and in the time of king Kecrops they
came to be called Kecropidai; then when Erechtheus had succeeded to his
power, they had their name changed to Athenians; and after Ion the son
of Xuthos became commander 30 of the Athenians, they got the name from
him of Ionians.

45. The Megarians furnished the same complement as at Artermision; the
Amprakiots came to the assistance of the rest with seven ships, and the
Leucadians with three, these being by race Dorians from Corinth.

46. Of the islanders the Eginetans furnished thirty; these had also
other ships manned, but with them they were guarding their own land,
while with the thirty which sailed best they joined in the sea-fight at
Salamis. Now the Eginetans are Dorians from Epidauros, and their
island had formerly the name of Oinone. After the Eginetans came the
Chalkidians with the twenty ships which were at Artemision, and
the Eretrians with their seven: these are Ionians. Next the Keïans,
furnishing the same as before and being by race Ionians from Athens. The
Naxians furnished four ships, they having been sent out by the citizens
of their State to join the Persians, like the other islanders; but
neglecting these commands they had come to the Hellenes, urged thereto
by Democritos, a man of repute among the citizens and at that time
commander of a trireme. Now the Naxians are Ionians coming originally
from Athens. The Styrians furnished the same ships as at Artemision, and
the men of Kythnos one ship and one fifty-oared galley, these both being
Dryopians. Also the Seriphians, the Siphnians and the Melians served
with the rest; for they alone of the islanders had not given earth and
water to the Barbarian.

47. These all who have been named dwelt inside the land of the
Thesprotians and the river Acheron; for the Thesprotians border upon the
land of the Amprakiots and Leucadians, and these were they who came from
the greatest distance to serve: but of those who dwell outside these
limits the men of Croton were the only people who came to the assistance
of Hellas in her danger; and these sent one ship, of whom the commander
was Phaÿlos, a man who had three times won victories at the Pythian
games. Now the men of Croton are by descent Achaians.

48. All the rest who served in the fleet furnished triremes, but the
Melians, Siphnian and Seriphians fifty-oared galleys: the Melians,
who are by descent from Lacedemon, furnished two, the Siphnians and
Seriphians, who are Ionians from Athens, each one. And the whole number
of the ships, apart from the fifty-oared galleys, was three hundred and
seventy-eight. 31

49. When the commanders had assembled at Salamis from the States
which have been mentioned, they began to deliberate, Eurybiades having
proposed that any one who desired it should declare his opinion as
to where he thought it most convenient to fight a sea-battle in those
regions of which they had command; for Attica had already been let go,
and he was now proposing the question about the other regions. And the
opinions of the speakers for the most part agreed that they should
sail to the Isthmus and there fight a sea-battle in defence of the
Peloponnese, arguing that if they should be defeated in the sea-battle,
supposing them to be at Salamis they would be blockaded in an island,
where no help would come to them, but at the Isthmus they would be able
to land where their own men were.

50. While the commanders from the Peloponnese argued thus, an Athenian
had come in reporting that the Barbarians were arrived in Attica and
that all the land was being laid waste with fire. For the army which
directed its march through Boeotia in company with Xerxes, after it had
burnt the city of the Thespians (the inhabitants having left it and gone
to the Peloponnese) and that of the Plataians likewise, had now come
to Athens and was laying waste everything in those regions. Now he had
burnt Thespiai 3101 and Plataia because he was informed by the Thebans
that these were not taking the side of the Medes.

51. So in three months from the crossing of the Hellespont, whence the
Barbarians began their march, after having stayed there one month while
they crossed over into Europe, they had reached Attica, in the year when
Calliades was archon of the Athenians. And they took the lower city,
which was deserted, and then they found that there were still a few
Athenians left in the temple, either stewards of the temple or needy
persons, who had barred the entrance to the Acropolis with doors and
with a palisade of timber and endeavoured to defend themselves against
the attacks of the enemy, being men who had not gone out to Salamis
partly because of their poverty, and also because they thought that
they alone had discovered the meaning of the oracle which the Pythian
prophetess had uttered to them, namely that the "bulwark of wood" should
be impregnable, and supposed that this was in fact the safe refuge
according to the oracle, and not the ships.

52. So the Persians taking their post upon the rising ground opposite
the Acropolis, which the Athenians call the Hill of Ares, 32 proceeded
to besiege them in this fashion, that is they put tow round about their
arrows and lighted it, and then shot them against the palisade. The
Athenians who were besieged continued to defend themselves nevertheless,
although they had come to the extremity of distress and their palisade
had played them false; nor would they accept proposals for surrender,
when the sons of Peisistratos brought them forward: but endeavouring to
defend themselves they contrived several contrivances against the enemy,
and among the rest they rolled down large stones when the Barbarians
approached the gates; so that for a long time Xerxes was in a
difficulty, not being able to capture them.

53. In time however there appeared for the Barbarians a way of approach
after their difficulties, since by the oracle it was destined that all
of Attica which is on the mainland should come to be under the Persians.
Thus then it happened that on the front side 33 of the Acropolis behind
the gates and the way up to the entrance, in a place where no one was
keeping guard, nor would one have supposed that any man could ascend by
this way, here men ascended by the temple of Aglauros the daughter
of Kecrops, although indeed the place is precipitous: and when the
Athenians saw that they had ascended up to the Acropolis, some of them
threw themselves down from the wall and perished, while others took
refuge in the sanctuary 34 of the temple. Then those of the Persians
who had ascended went first to the gates, and after opening these they
proceeded to kill the suppliants; and when all had been slain by them,
they plundered the temple and set fire to the whole of the Acropolis.

54. Then Xerxes, having fully taken possession of Athens, sent to Susa
a mounted messenger to report to Artabanos the good success which they
had. And on the next day after sending the herald he called together the
exiles of the Athenians who were accompanying him, and bade them go
up to the Acropolis and sacrifice the victims after their own manner;
whether it was that he had seen some vision of a dream which caused him
to give this command, or whether perchance he had a scruple in his
mind because he had set fire to the temple. The Athenian exiles did
accordingly that which was commanded them:

55, and the reason why I made mention of this I will here declare:—there
is in this Acropolis a temple 35 of Erechtheus, who is said to have been
born of the Earth, and in this there is an olive-tree and a sea, which
(according to the story told by the Athenians) Poseidon and Athene,
when they contended for the land, set as witnesses of themselves. Now
it happened to this olive-tree to be set on fire with the rest of the
temple by the Barbarians; and on the next day after the conflagration
those of the Athenians who were commanded by the king to offer
sacrifice, saw when they had gone up to the temple that a shoot had run
up from the stock of the tree about a cubit in length. These then made
report of this.

56. The Hellenes meanwhile at Salamis, when it was announced to them how
it had been as regards the Acropolis of the Athenians, were disturbed so
greatly that some of the commanders did not even wait for the question
to be decided which had been proposed, but began to go hastily to their
ships and to put up their sails, meaning to make off with speed; and by
those of them who remained behind it was finally decided to fight at
sea in defence of the Isthmus. So night came on, and they having been
dismissed from the council were going to their ships:

57, and when Themistocles had come to his ship, Mnesiphilos an Athenian
asked him what they had resolved; and being informed by him that it had
been determined to take out the ships to the Isthmus and fight a battle
by sea in defence of the Peloponnese, he said: "Then, if they set sail
with the ships from Salamis, thou wilt not fight any more sea-battles
at all for the fatherland, for they will all take their way to their
several cities and neither Eurybiades nor any other man will be able
to detain them or to prevent the fleet from being dispersed: and Hellas
will perish by reason of evil counsels. But if there by any means, go
thou and try to unsettle that which has been resolved, if perchance thou
mayest persuade Eurybiades to change his plans, so as to stay here."

58. This advice very much commended itself to Themistocles; and without
making any answer he went to the ship of Eurybiades. Having come thither
he said that he desired to communicate to him a matter which concerned
the common good; and Eurybiades bade him come into his ship and speak,
if he desired to say anything. Then Themistocles sitting down beside
him repeated to him all those things which he had heard Mnesiphilos say,
making as if they were his own thoughts, and adding to them many others;
until at last by urgent request he persuaded him to come out of his ship
and gather the commanders to the council.

59. So when they were gathered together, before Eurybiades proposed
the discussion of the things for which he had assembled the commanders,
Themistocles spoke with much vehemence 36 being very eager to gain his
end; and as he was speaking, the Corinthian commander, Adeimantos the
son of Okytos, said: "Themistocles, at the games those who stand forth
for the contest before the due time are beaten with rods." He justifying
himself said: "Yes, but those who remain behind are not crowned."

60. At that time he made answer mildly to the Corinthian; and to
Eurybiades he said not now any of those things which he had said before,
to the effect that if they should set sail from Salamis they would
disperse in different directions; for it was not seemly for him to bring
charges against the allies in their presence: but he held to another way
of reasoning, saying: "Now it is in thy power to save Hellas, if
thou wilt follow my advice, which is to stay here and here to fight a
sea-battle, and if thou wilt not follow the advice of those among these
men who bid thee remove the ships to the Isthmus. For hear both ways,
and then set them in comparison. If thou engage battle at the Isthmus,
thou wilt fight in an open sea, into which it is by no means convenient
for us that we go to fight, seeing that we have ships which are heavier
and fewer in number than those of the enemy. Then secondly thou wilt
give up to destruction Salamis and Megara and Egina, even if we have
success in all else; for with their fleet will come also the land-army,
and thus thou wilt thyself lead them to the Peloponnese and wilt risk
the safety of all Hellas. If however thou shalt do as I say, thou wilt
find therein all the advantages which I shall tell thee of:—in the first
place by engaging in a narrow place with few ships against many, if the
fighting has that issue which it is reasonable to expect, we shall have
very much the better; for to fight a sea-fight in a narrow space is for
our advantage, but to fight in a wide open space is for theirs. Then
again Salamis will be preserved, whither our children and our wives
have been removed for safety; and moreover there is this also secured
thereby, to which ye are most of all attached, namely that by remaining
here thou wilt fight in defence of the Peloponnese as much as if
the fight were at the Isthmus; and thou wilt not lead the enemy to
Peloponnese, if thou art wise. Then if that which I expect come to pass
and we gain a victory with our ships, the Barbarians will not come to
you at the Isthmus nor will they advance further than Attica, but they
will retire in disorder; and we shall be the gainers by the preservation
of Megara and Egina and Salamis, at which place too an oracle tells us
that we shall get the victory over our enemies. 37 Now when men take
counsel reasonably for themselves, reasonable issues are wont as a rule
to come, but if they do not take counsel reasonably, then God is not
wont generally to attach himself to the judgment of men."

61. When Themistocles thus spoke, the Corinthian Adeimantos inveighed
against him for the second time, bidding him to be silent because he
had no native land, and urging Eurybiades not to put to the vote
the proposal of one who was a citizen of no city; for he said that
Themistocles might bring opinions before the council if he could show a
city belonging to him, but otherwise not. This objection he made against
him because Athens had been taken and was held by the enemy. Then
Themistocles said many evil things of him and of the Corinthians both,
and declared also that he himself and his countrymen had in truth a city
and a land larger than that of the Corinthians, so long as they had two
hundred ships fully manned; for none of the Hellenes would be able to
repel the Athenians if they came to fight against them.

62. Signifying this he turned then to Eurybiades and spoke yet more
urgently: "If thou wilt remain here, and remaining here wilt show
thyself a good man, well; but if not, thou wilt bring about the
overthrow of Hellas, for upon the ships depends all our power in the
war. Nay, but do as I advise. If, however, thou shalt not do so, we
shall forthwith take up our households and voyage to Siris in Italy,
which is ours already of old and the oracles say that it is destined
to be colonised by us; and ye, when ye are left alone and deprived of
allies such as we are, will remember my words."

63. When Themistocles thus spoke, Eurybiades was persuaded to change his
mind; and, as I think, he changed his mind chiefly from fear lest the
Athenians should depart and leave them, if he should take the ships to
the Isthmus; for if the Athenians left them and departed, the rest would
be no longer able to fight with the enemy. He chose then this counsel,
to stay in that place and decide matters there by a sea-fight.

64. Thus those at Salamis, after having skirmished with one another in
speech, were making preparations for a sea-fight there, since Eurybiades
had so determined: and as day was coming on, at the same time when the
sun rose there was an earthquake felt both on the land and on the sea:
and they determined to pray to the gods and to call upon the sons of
Aiacos to be their helpers. And as they had determined, so also they
did; for when they had prayed to all the gods, they called Ajax and
Telamon to their help from Salamis, where the fleet was, 38 and sent
a ship to Egina to bring Aiacos himself and the rest of the sons of
Aiacos.

65. Moreover Dicaios the son of Theokydes, an Athenian, who was an exile
and had become of great repute among the Medes at this time, declared
that when the Attic land was being ravaged by the land-army of Xerxes,
having been deserted by the Athenians, he happened then to be in company
with Demaratos the Lacedemonian in the Thriasian plain; and he saw a
cloud of dust going up from Eleusis, as if made by a company of about
thirty thousand men, and they wondered at the cloud of dust, by what men
it was caused. Then forthwith they heard a sound of voices, and Dicaios
perceived that the sound was the mystic cry Iacchos; but Demaratos,
having no knowledge of the sacred rites which are done at Eleusis, asked
him what this was that uttered the sound, and he said: "Demaratos, it
cannot be but that some great destruction is about to come to the army
of the king: for as to this, it is very manifest, seeing that Attica is
deserted, that this which utters the sound is of the gods, and that it
is going from Eleusis to help the Athenians and their allies: if then it
shall come down in the Peloponnese, there is danger for the king himself
and for the army which is upon the mainland, but if it shall direct
its course towards the ships which are at Salamis, the king will be in
danger of losing his fleet. This feast the Athenians celebrate every
year to the Mother and the Daughter; 39 and he that desires it, both of
them and of the other Hellenes, is initiated in the mysteries; and the
sound of voices which thou hearest is the cry Iacchos which they utter
at this feast." To this Demaratos said: "Keep silence and tell not this
tale to any other man; for if these words of thine be reported to the
king, thou wilt surely lose thy head, and neither I nor any other man
upon earth will be able to save thee: but keep thou quiet, and about
this expedition the gods will provide." He then thus advised, and after
the cloud of dust and the sound of voices there came a mist which was
borne aloft and carried towards Salamis to the camp of the Hellenes: and
thus they learnt (said he) that the fleet of Xerxes was destined to be
destroyed. Such was the report made by Dicaios the son of Theodykes,
appealing to Demaratos and others also as witnesses.

66. Meanwhile those who were appointed to serve in the fleet of Xerxes,
having gazed in Trachis upon the disaster of the Lacedemonians and
having passed over from thence to Histiaia, after staying three days
sailed through Euripos, and in other three days they had reached
Phaleron. And, as I suppose, they made their attack upon Athens not
fewer in number both by land and sea than when they had arrived at
Sepias and at Thermopylai: for against those of them who perished by
reason of the storm and those who were slain at Thermopylai and in the
sea-fights at Artemision, I will set those who at that time were not
yet accompanying the king, the Malians, Dorians, Locrians, and Boeotians
(who accompanied him in a body, except the Thespians and Plataians),
and moreover those of Carystos, Andros, and Tenos, with all the other
islanders except the five cities of which I mentioned the names before;
for the more the Persian advanced towards the centre of Hellas, the more
nations accompanied him.

67. So then, when all these had come to Athens except the Parians (now
the Parians had remained behind at Kythnos waiting to see how the war
would turn out),—when all the rest, I say, had come to Phaleron, then
Xerxes himself came down to the ships desiring to visit them and to
learn the opinions of those who sailed in them: and when he had come and
was set in a conspicuous place, then those who were despots of their own
nations or commanders of divisions being sent for came before him from
their ships, and took their seats as the king had assigned rank to each
one, first the king of Sidon, then he of Tyre, and after them the
rest: and when they were seated in due order, Xerxes sent Mardonios and
inquired, making trial of each one, whether he should fight a battle by
sea.

