68. So when Mardonios went round asking them, beginning with the king of
Sidon, the others gave their opinions all to the same effect, advising
him to fight a battle by sea, but Artemisia spoke these words:—(a) "Tell
the king I pray thee, Mardonios, that I, who have proved myself not to
be the worst in the sea-fights which have been fought near Euboea, and
have displayed deeds not inferior to those of others, speak to him thus:
Master, it is right that I set forth the opinion which I really have,
and say that which I happen to think best for thy cause: and this I
say,—spare thy ships and do not make a sea-fight; for the men are as
much stronger than thy men by sea, as men are stronger than women. And
why must thou needs run the risk of sea-battles? Hast thou not Athens in
thy possession, for the sake of which thou didst set forth on thy march,
and also the rest of Hellas? and no man stands in thy way to resist, but
those who did stand against thee came off as it was fitting that
they should. (b) Now the manner in which I think the affairs of thy
adversaries will have their issue, I will declare. If thou do not
hasten to make a sea-fight, but keep thy ships here by the land, either
remaining here thyself or even advancing on to the Peloponnese, that
which thou hast come to do, O master, will easily be effected; for the
Hellenes are not able to hold out against thee for any long time, but
thou wilt soon disperse them and they will take flight to their several
cities: since neither have they provisions with them in this island, as
I am informed, nor is it probable that if thou shalt march thy land-army
against the Peloponnese, they who have come from thence will remain
still; for these will have no care to fight a battle in defence of
Athens. (c) If however thou hasten to fight forthwith, I fear that
damage done to the fleet may ruin the land-army also. Moreover, O king,
consider also this, that the servants of good men are apt to grow bad,
but those of bad men good; and thou, who art of all men the best, hast
bad servants, namely those who are reckoned as allies, Egyptians and
Cyprians and Kilikians and Pamphylians, in whom there is no profit."

69. When she thus spoke to Mardonios, those who were friendly to
Artemisia were grieved at her words, supposing that she would suffer
some evil from the king because she urged him not to fight at sea; while
those who had envy and jealousy of her, because she had been honoured
above all the allies, were rejoiced at the opposition, 40 supposing
that she would now be ruined. When however the opinions were reported
to Xerxes, he was greatly pleased with the opinion of Artemisia; and
whereas even before this he thought her excellent, he commended her
now yet more. Nevertheless he gave orders to follow the advice of the
greater number, thinking that when they fought by Euboea they were
purposely slack, because he was not himself present with them, whereas
now he had made himself ready to look on while they fought a sea-battle.

70. So when they passed the word to put out to sea, they brought their
ships out to Salamis and quietly ranged themselves along the shore in
their several positions. At that time the daylight was not sufficient
for them to engage battle, for night had come on; but they made their
preparations to fight on the following day. Meanwhile the Hellenes
were possessed by fear and dismay, especially those who were from
Peloponnese: and these were dismayed because remaining in Salamis they
were to fight a battle on behalf of the land of the Athenians, and being
defeated they would be cut off from escape and blockaded in an island,
leaving their own land unguarded. And indeed the land-army of the
Barbarians was marching forward during that very night towards the
Peloponnese.

71. Yet every means had been taken that the Barbarians might not be able
to enter Peloponnesus by land: for as soon as the Peloponnesians heard
that Leonidas and his company had perished at Thermopylai, they came
together quickly from the cities and took post at the Isthmus, and
over them was set as commander Cleombrotos, the son of Anaxandrides and
brother of Leonidas. These being posted at the Isthmus had destroyed the
Skironian way, and after this (having so determined in counsel with one
another) they began to build a wall across the Isthmus; and as they were
many myriads 41 and every man joined in the work, the work proceeded
fast; for stones and bricks and pieces of timber and baskets full of
sand were carried to it continually, and they who had thus come to help
paused not at all in their work either by night or by day.

72. Now those of the Hellenes who came in full force to the Isthmus to
help their country were these,—the Lacedemonians, the Arcadians of every
division, the Eleians, Corinthians, Sikyonians, Epidaurians, Phliasians,
Troizenians and Hermionians. These were they who came to the help of
Hellas in her danger and who had apprehension for her, while the rest
of the Peloponnesians showed no care: and the Olympic and Carneian
festivals had by this time gone by.

73. Now Peloponnesus is inhabited by seven races; and of these, two are
natives of the soil and are settled now in the place where they dwelt of
old, namely the Arcadians and the Kynurians; and one race, that of the
Achaians, though it did not remove from the Peloponnese, yet removed in
former time from its own land and dwells now in that which was not its
own. The remaining races, four in number, have come in from without,
namely the Dorians, Aitolians, Dryopians and Lemnians. Of the Dorians
there are many cities and of great renown; of the Aitolians, Elis
alone; of the Dryopians, Hermion 42 and Asine, which latter is opposite
Cardamyle in the Laconian land; and of the Lemnians, all the Paroreatai.
The Kynurians, who are natives of the soil, seem alone to be Ionians,
but they have become Dorians completely because they are subject to the
Argives and by lapse of time, being originally citizens of Orneai or
the dwellers in the country round Orneai. 43 Of these seven nations the
remaining cities, except those which I enumerated just now, stood aside
and did nothing; and if one may be allowed to speak freely, in thus
standing aside they were in fact taking the side of the Medes.

74. Those at the Isthmus were struggling with the labour which I have
said, since now they were running a course in which their very being was
at stake, and they did not look to have any brilliant success with their
ships: while those who were at Salamis, though informed of this
work, were yet dismayed, not fearing so much for themselves as for
Peloponnesus. For some time then they spoke of it in private, one
man standing by another, and they marvelled at the ill-counsel of
Eurybiades; but at last it broke out publicly. A meeting accordingly was
held, and much was spoken about the same points as before, some saying
that they ought to sail away to Peloponnesus and run the risk in defence
of that, and not stay and fight for a land which had been captured by
the enemy, while the Athenians, Eginetans and Megarians urged that they
should stay there and defend themselves.

75. Then Themistocles, when his opinion was like to be defeated by the
Peloponnesians, secretly went forth from the assembly, and having gone
out he sent a man to the encampment of the Medes in a boat, charging him
with that which he must say: this man's name was Sikinnos, and he was
a servant of Themistocles and tutor to his children; and after these
events Themistocles entered him as a Thespian citizen, when the
Thespians were admitting new citizens, and made him a wealthy man. He at
this time came with a boat and said to the commanders of the Barbarians
these words: "The commander of the Athenians sent me privately without
the knowledge of the other Hellenes (for, as it chances, he is disposed
to the cause of the king, and desires rather that your side should gain
the victory than that of the Hellenes), to inform you that the Hellenes
are planning to take flight, having been struck with dismay; and now it
is possible for you to execute a most noble work, if ye do not permit
them to flee away: for they are not of one mind with one another and
they will not stand against you in fight, but ye shall see them fighting
a battle by sea with one another, those who are disposed to your side
against those who are not."

76. He then having signified to them this, departed out of the way; and
they, thinking that the message deserved credit, landed first a large
number of Persians in the small island of Psyttaleia, which lies between
Salamis and the mainland; and then, as midnight came on, they put out
the Western wing of their fleet to sea, circling round towards Salamis,
and also those stationed about Keos and Kynosura put out their ships
to sea; and they occupied all the passage with their ships as far as
Munychia. And for this reason they put out their ships, namely in order
that the Hellenes might not even be permitted to get away, but being cut
off in Salamis might pay the penalty for the contests at Artemision:
and they disembarked men of the Persians on the small island called
Psyttaleia for this reason, namely that when the fight should take
place, these might save the men of one side and destroy those of the
other, since there especially it was likely that the men and the wrecks
of ships would be cast up on shore, for the island lay in the way of the
sea-fight which was to be. These things they did in silence, that the
enemy might not have information of them.

77. They then were making their preparations thus in the night without
having taken any sleep at all: and with regard to oracles, I am not able
to make objections against them that they are not true, for I do not
desire to attempt to overthrow the credit of them when they speak
clearly, looking at such matters as these which here follow:


 "But when with ships they shall join the sacred strand of the goddess,
  Artemis golden-sword-girded, and thee, wave-washed Kynosura,
  Urged by a maddening hope, 44 having given rich Athens to plunder,
  Then shall Justice divine quell Riot, of Insolence first-born, 45
  Longing to overthrow all things 46 and terribly panting for bloodhshed:
  Brass shall encounter with brass, and Ares the sea shall empurple,
  Tinging its waves with the blood: then a day of freedom for Hellas
  Cometh from wide-seeing Zeus 47 and from Victory, lady and mother." 48

Looking to such things as this, and when Bakis speaks so clearly, I do
not venture myself to make any objections about oracles, nor can I admit
them from others.

78. Now between the commanders that were at Salamis there came to be
great contention of speech and they did not yet know that the Barbarians
were surrounding them with their ships, but they thought that they were
still in their place as they saw them disposed in the day.

79. Then while the commanders were engaged in strife, there came over
from Egina Aristeides the son of Lysimachos, an Athenian who had been
ostracised by the people, a man whom I hold (according to that which
I hear of his character) to have been the best and most upright of all
Athenians. This man came into the council and called forth Themistocles,
who was to him not a friend, but an enemy to the last degree; but
because of the greatness of the present troubles he let those matters be
forgotten and called him forth, desiring to communicate with him. Now he
had heard beforehand that the Peloponnesians were pressing to take
the ships away to the Isthmus. So when Themistocles came forth to him,
Aristeides spoke these words: "Both at other times when occasion arises,
and also especially at this time we ought to carry on rivalry as to
which of us shall do more service to our country. And I tell thee now
that it is indifferent whether the Peloponnesians say many words or few
about sailing away from hence; for having been myself an eye-witness I
tell thee that now not even if the Corinthians and Eurybiades himself
desire to sail out, will they be able; for we are encompassed round by
the enemy. Go thou in then, and signify this to them."

80. He made answer as follows: "Thou advisest very well, 49 and also
the news which thou hast brought is good, since thou art come having
witnessed with thine own eyes that which I desired might come to pass:
for know that this which is being done by the Medes is of my suggestion;
because, when the Hellenes would not come to a battle of their own will,
it was necessary to bring them over to us against their will. Do thou
however, since thou art come bearing good news, thyself report it to
them; for if I say these things, I shall be thought to speak that which
I have myself invented, and I shall not persuade them, but they will
think that the Barbarians are not doing so. Do thou thyself however come
forward to speak, and declare to them how things are; and when thou hast
declared this, if they are persuaded, that will be the best thing, but
if this is not credible to them, it will be the same thing so far as
concerns us, for they will no longer be able to take to flight, if we
are encompassed on all sides, as thou sayest."

81. Aristeides accordingly came forward and told them this, saying that
he had come from Egina and had with difficulty escaped without being
perceived by those who were blockading them; for the whole encampment of
the Hellenes was encompassed by the ships of Xerxes; and he counselled
them to get ready to defend themselves. He then having thus spoken
retired, and among them again there arose dispute, for the greater
number of the commanders did not believe that which was reported to
them:

82. and while these were doubting, there came a trireme manned by
Tenians, deserting from the enemy, of which the commander was Panaitios
the son of Sosimenes, which brought them the whole truth. For this deed
the Tenians were inscribed at Delphi on the tripod among those who had
conquered the Barbarians. With the ship which deserted at Salamis and
the Lemnian ship which deserted before and came to Artemision, the naval
force of the Hellenes was completed to the number of three hundred and
eighty ships, for before this two ships were yet wanting to make up this
number.

83. The Hellenes then, since they believed that which was said by the
Tenians, were preparing for a sea-fight: and as the dawn appeared, they
made an assembly of those who fought on board the ships 50 and addressed
them, Themistocles making a speech which was eloquent beyond the rest;
and the substance of it was to set forth all that is better as opposed
to that which is worse, of the several things which arise in the nature
and constitution of man; and having exhorted them to choose the better,
51 and thus having wound up his speech, he bade them embark in their
ships. These then proceeded to embark, and there came in meanwhile the
trireme from Egina which had gone away to bring the sons of Aiacos.

84. Then the Hellenes put out all their ships, and while they were
putting out from shore, the Barbarians attacked them forthwith. Now
the other Hellenes began backing their ships and were about to run them
aground, but Ameinias of Pallene, an Athenian, put forth with his ship
and charged one of the enemy; and his ship being entangled in combat and
the men not being able to get away, the others joined in the fight to
assist Ameinias. The Athenians say that the beginning of the battle was
made thus, but the Eginetans say that the ship which went away to Egina
to bring the sons of Aiacos was that which began the fight. It is also
reported that an apparition of a woman was seen by them, and that having
appeared she encouraged them to the fight so that the whole of the army
of the Hellenes heard it, first having reproached them in these words:
"Madmen, 52 how far will ye yet back your ships?"

85. Opposite the Athenians had been ranged the Phenicians, for these
occupied the wing towards Eleusis and the West, and opposite the
Lacedemonians were the Ionians, who occupied the wing which extended to
the East and to Piræus. Of them however a few were purposely slack
in the fight according to the injunctions of Themistocles, 53 but
the greater number were not so. I might mention now the names of many
captains of ships who destroyed ships of the Hellenes, but I will make
no use of their names except in the case of Theomestor, the son of
Androdamas and Phylacos the son of Histiaios, of Samos both: and
for this reason I make mention of these and not of the rest, because
Theomestor on account of this deed became despot of Samos, appointed by
the Persians, and Phylacos was recorded as a benefactor of the king
and received much land as a reward. Now the benefactors of the king are
called in the Persian tongue orosangai.

86. Thus it was with these; but the greater number of their ships were
disabled at Salamis, being destroyed some by the Athenians and others
by the Eginetans: for since the Hellenes fought in order and ranged in
their places, while the Barbarians were no longer ranged in order nor
did anything with design, it was likely that there would be some such
result as in fact followed. Yet on this day they surpassed themselves
much more than when they fought by Euboea, every one being eager
and fearing Xerxes, and each man thinking that the king was looking
especially at him.

87. As regards the rest I cannot speak of them separately, or say
precisely how the Barbarians or the Hellenes individually contended in
the fight; but with regard to Artemisia that which happened was this,
whence she gained yet more esteem than before from the king.—When the
affairs of the king had come to great confusion, at this crisis a ship
of Artemisia was being pursued by an Athenian ship; and as she was not
able to escape, for in front of her were other ships of her own side,
while her ship, as it chanced, was furthest advanced towards the enemy,
she resolved what she would do, and it proved also much to her advantage
to have done so. While she was being pursued by the Athenian ship
she charged with full career against a ship of her own side manned by
Calyndians and in which the king of the Calyndians Damasithymos was
embarked. Now, even though it be true that she had had some strife with
him before, while they were still about the Hellespont, yet I am not
able to say whether she did this by intention, or whether the Calyndian
ship happened by chance to fall in her way. Having charged against it
however and sunk it, she enjoyed good fortune and got for herself good
in two ways; for first the captain of the Athenian ship, when he saw her
charge against a ship manned by Barbarians, turned away and went after
others, supposing that the ship of Artemisia was either a Hellenic ship
or was deserting from the Barbarians and fighting for the Hellenes,

88,—first, I say, it was her fortune to have this, namely to escape and
not suffer destruction; and then secondly it happened that though she
had done mischief, she yet gained great reputation by this thing with
Xerxes. For it is said that the king looking on at the fight perceived
that her ship had charged the other; and one of those present said:
"Master, dost thou see Artemisia, how well she is fighting, and how she
sank even now a ship of the enemy?" He asked whether this was in truth
the deed of Artemisia, and they said that it was; for (they declared)
they knew very well the sign of her ship: and that which was destroyed
they thought surely was one of the enemy; for besides other things
which happened fortunately for her, as I have said, there was this also,
namely that not one of the crew of the Calyndian ship survived to become
her accuser. And Xerxes in answer to that which was said to him is
reported to have uttered these words: "My men have become women, and my
women men." Thus it is said that Xerxes spoke.

89. And meanwhile in this struggle there was slain the commander
Ariabignes, son of Dareios and brother of Xerxes, and there were slain
too many others of note of the Persians and Medes and also of the
allies; and of the Hellenes on their part a few; for since they knew
how to swim, those whose ships were destroyed and who were not slain in
hand-to-hand conflict swam over to Salamis; but of the Barbarians the
greater number perished in the sea, not being able to swim. And when
the first ships turned to flight, then it was that the largest number
perished, for those who were stationed behind, while endeavouring to
pass with their ships to the front in order that they also might display
some deed of valour for the king to see, ran into the ships of their own
side as they fled.

90. It happened also in the course of this confusion that some of the
Phenicians, whose ships had been destroyed, came to the king and accused
the Ionians, saying that by means of them their ships had been lost, and
that they had been traitors to the cause. Now it so came about that not
only the commanders of the Ionians did not lose their lives, but the
Phenicians who accused them received a reward such as I shall tell.
While these men were yet speaking thus, a Samothrakian ship charged
against an Athenian ship: and as the Athenian ship was being sunk by
it, an Eginetan ship came up against the Samothrakian vessel and ran it
down. Then the Samothrakians, being skilful javelin-throwers, by hurling
cleared off the fighting-men from the ship which had wrecked theirs and
then embarked upon it and took possession of it. This event saved the
Ionians from punishment; for when Xerxes saw that they had performed a
great exploit, he turned to the Phenicians (for he was exceedingly vexed
and disposed to find fault with all) and bade cut off their heads, in
order that they might not, after having been cowards themselves, accuse
others who were better men than they. For whensoever Xerxes (sitting
just under the mountain opposite Salamis, which is called Aigaleos) saw
any one of his own side display a deed of valour in the sea-fight, he
inquired about him who had done it, and the scribes recorded the name of
the ship's captain with that of his father and the city from whence he
came. Moreover also Ariaramnes, a Persian who was present, shared 54 the
fate of the Phenicians, being their friend. They 55 then proceeded to
deal with the Phenicians.

91. In the meantime, as the Barbarians turned to flight and were sailing
out towards Phaleron, the Eginetans waited for them in the passage and
displayed memorable actions: for while the Athenians in the confused
tumult were disabling both those ships which resisted and those which
were fleeing, the Eginetans were destroying those which attempted to
sail away; and whenever any escaped the Athenians, they went in full
course and fell among the Eginetans.

92. Then there met one another the ship of Themistocles, which was
pursuing a ship of the enemy, and that of Polycritos the son of Crios
the Eginetan. This last had charged against a ship of Sidon, the same
that had taken the Eginetan vessel which was keeping watch in advance at
Skiathos, 56 and in which sailed Pytheas the son of Ischenoös, whom
the Persians kept in their ship, all cut to pieces as he was, making a
marvel of his valour. The Sidonian ship then was captured bearing with
it this man as well as the Persians of whom I spoke, so that Pytheas
thus came safe to Egina. Now when Polycritos looked at the Athenian
vessel he recognised when he saw it the sign of the admiral's ship, and
shouting out he addressed Themistocles with mockery about the accusation
brought against the Eginetans of taking the side of the Medes, 57 and
reproached him. This taunt Polycritos threw out against Themistocles
after he had charged against the ship of Sidon. And meanwhile those
Barbarians whose ships had escaped destruction fled and came to Phaleron
to be under cover of the land-army.

93. In this sea-fight the Eginetans were of all the Hellenes the best
reported of, and next to them the Athenians; and of the individual
men the Eginetan Polycritos and the Athenians Eumenes of Anagyrus and
Ameinias of Pallene, the man who had pursued after Artemisia. Now if
he had known that Artemisia was sailing in this ship, he would not have
ceased until either he had taken her or had been taken himself; for
orders had been given to the Athenian captains, and moreover a prize was
offered of ten thousand drachmas for the man who should take her alive;
since they thought it intolerable that a woman should make an expedition
against Athens. She then, as has been said before, had made her escape;
and the others also, whose ships had escaped destruction, were at
Phaleron.

94. As regards Adeimantos the commander of the Corinthians, the
Athenians say that forthwith at the beginning when the ships were
engaging in the fight, being struck with panic and terror he put up his
sails and fled away; and the Corinthians, when they saw the admiral's
ship fleeing, departed likewise: and after this, as the story goes, when
they came in their flight opposite to the temple of Athene Skiras in
the land of Salamis, there fell in with them by divine guidance a
light vessel, 58 which no one was ever found to have sent, and which
approached the Corinthians at a time when they knew nothing of that
which was happening with the fleet. And by this it is conjectured 59
that the matter was of the Deity; for when they came near to the ships,
the men in the light vessel said these words: "Adeimantos, thou hast
turned thy ships away and hast set forth to flee, deserting the cause of
the Hellenes, while they are in truth gaining a victory and getting
the better of their foes as much as they desired." When they said this,
since Adeimantos doubted of it, they spoke a second time and said that
they might be taken as hostages and slain, if the Hellenes should prove
not to be gaining the victory. Then he turned his ship back, he and the
others with him, and they reached the camp when the work was finished.
Such is the report spread by the Athenians against these: the
Corinthians however do not allow this to be so, but hold that they were
among the first in the sea-fight; and the rest of Hellas also bears
witness on their side.

95. Aristeides moreover the son of Lysimachos, the Athenian, of whom
I made mention also shortly before this as a very good man, he in this
tumult which had arisen about Salamis did as follows:—taking with him
a number of the hoplites of Athenian race who had been ranged along the
shore of the land of Salamis, with them he disembarked on the island of
Psyttaleia; and these slew all the Persians who were in this islet.

96. When the sea-fight had been broken off, the Hellenes towed in to
Salamis so many of the wrecks as chanced to be still about there, and
held themselves ready for another sea-fight, expecting that the king
would yet make use of the ships which remained unhurt; but many of the
wrecks were taken by the West Wind and borne to that strand in Attica
which is called Colias; so as to fulfil 60 not only all that other
oracle which was spoken about this sea-fight by Bakis and Musaios, but
also especially, with reference to the wrecks cast up here, that
which had been spoken in an oracle many years before these events by
Lysistratos, an Athenian who uttered oracles, and which had not been
observed by any of the Hellenes:


 "Then shall the Colian women with firewood of oars roast barley." 61

This was destined to come to pass after the king had marched away.

97. When Xerxes perceived the disaster which had come upon him, he
feared lest some one of the Ionians should suggest to the Hellenes,
or they should themselves form the idea, to sail to the Hellespont and
break up the bridges; and so he might be cut off in Europe and run the
risk of perishing utterly: therefore he began to consider about taking
flight. He desired however that his intention should not be perceived
either by the Hellenes or by those of his own side; therefore he
attempted to construct a mole going across to Salamis, and he bound
together Phenician merchant vessels in order that they might serve him
both for a bridge and a wall, and made preparations for fighting as if
he were going to have another battle by sea. Seeing him do so, all the
rest made sure that he had got himself ready in earnest and intended to
stay and fight; but Mardonios did not fail to perceive the true meaning
of all these things, being by experience very well versed in his way of
thinking.

98. While Xerxes was doing thus, he sent a messenger to the Persians,
to announce the calamity which had come upon them. Now there is
nothing mortal which accomplishes a journey with more speed than these
messengers, so skilfully has this been invented by the Persians: for
they say that according to the number of days of which the entire
journey consists, so many horses and men are set at intervals, each man
and horse appointed for a day's journey. These neither snow nor rain nor
heat nor darkness of night prevents from accomplishing each one the task
proposed to him, with the very utmost speed. The first then rides and
delivers the message with which he is charged to the second, and the
second to the third; and after that it goes through them handed from
one to the other, 62 as in the torch-race among the Hellenes, which
they perform for Hephaistos. This kind of running of their horses the
Persians call angareion.

99. The first message then which came to Susa, announcing that Xerxes
had Athens in his possession, so greatly rejoiced the Persians who had
been left behind, that they strewed all the ways with myrtle boughs and
offered incense perpetually, and themselves continued in sacrifices and
feasting. The second message however, which came to them after this,
so greatly disturbed them that they all tore their garments and gave
themselves up to crying and lamentation without stint, laying the blame
upon Mardonios: and this the Persians did not so much because they were
grieved about the ships, as because they feared for Xerxes himself.

100. As regards the Persians this went on for all the time which
intervened, until the coming of Xerxes himself caused them to cease:
and Mardonios seeing that Xerxes was greatly troubled by reason of
the sea-fight, and suspecting that he was meaning to take flight from
Athens, considered with regard to himself that he would have to suffer
punishment for having persuaded the king to make an expedition against
Hellas, and that it was better for him to run the risk of either
subduing Hellas or ending his own life honourably, placing his safety in
suspense for a great end, 63 though his opinion was rather that he would
subdue Hellas;—he reckoned up these things, I say, and addressed his
speech to the king as follows: "Master, be not thou grieved, nor feel
great trouble on account of this thing which has come to pass; for it is
not upon a contest of timbers that all our fortunes depend, but of
men and of horses: and none of these who suppose now that all has been
achieved by them will attempt to disembark from the ships and stand
against thee, nor will any in this mainland do so; but those who did
stand against us paid the penalty. If therefore thou thinkest this good
to do, let us forthwith attempt the Peloponnese, or if thou thinkest
good to hold back, we may do that. Do not despond however, for there is
no way of escape for the Hellenes to avoid being thy slaves, after they
have first given an account of that which they did to thee both now
and at former times. Thus it were best to do; but if thou hast indeed
resolved to retire thyself and to withdraw thy army, I have another
counsel to offer for that case too. Do not thou, O king, let the
Persians be an object of laughter to the Hellenes; for none of thy
affairs have suffered by means of the Persians, nor wilt thou be able to
mention any place where we proved ourselves cowards: but if Phenicians
or Egyptians or Cyprians or Kilikians proved themselves cowards, the
calamity which followed does not belong to the Persians in any way. Now
therefore, since it is not the Persians who are guilty towards thee,
follow my counsel. If thou hast determined not to remain here, retire
thou to thine own abode, taking with thee the main body of the army,
and it must then be for me to deliver over to thee Hellas reduced to
subjection, choosing for this purpose thirty myriads 64 from the army."

101. Hearing this Xerxes was rejoiced and delighted so far as he might
be after his misfortunes, 65 and to Mardonios he said that when he had
taken counsel he would reply and say which of these two things he would
do. So when he was taking counsel with those of the Persians who
were called to be his advisers, 66 it seemed good to him to send for
Artemisia also to give him counsel, because at the former time she alone
had showed herself to have perception of that which ought to be done. So
when Artemisia had come, Xerxes removed from him all the rest, both the
Persian councillors and also the spearmen of the guard and spoke to
her thus: "Mardonios bids me stay here and make an attempt on the
Peloponnese, saying that the Persians and the land-army are not guilty
of any share in my calamity, and that they would gladly give me proof of
this. He bids me therefore either do this or, if not, he desires himself
to choose thirty myriads from the army and to deliver over to me Hellas
reduced to subjection; and he bids me withdraw with the rest of the army
to my own abode. Do thou therefore, as thou didst well advise about the
sea-fight which was fought, urging that we should not bring it on, so
also now advise me which of these things I shall do, that I may succeed
in determining well."

102. He thus consulted her, and she spoke these words: "O king, it is
hard for me to succeed in saying the best things when one asks me for
counsel; yet it seems good to me at the present that thou shouldest
retire back and leave Mardonios here, if he desires it and undertakes
to do this, together with those whom he desires to have: for on the one
hand if he subdue those whom he says that he desires to subdue, and if
those matters succeed well which he has in mind when he thus speaks, the
deed will after all be thine, master, seeing that thy slaves achieved
it: and on the other hand if the opposite shall come to pass of that
which Mardonios intends, it will be no great misfortune, seeing that
thou wilt thyself remain safe, and also the power in those parts 67
which concerns thy house: 68 for if thou shalt remain safe with thy
house, many contests many times over repeated will the Hellenes have
to pass through for their own existence. 69 Of Mardonios however, if
he suffer any disaster, no account will be made; and if the Hellenes
conquer they gain a victory which is no victory, having destroyed one
who is but thy slave. Thou however wilt retire having done that for
which thou didst make thy march, that is to say, having delivered Athens
to the fire."

103. With this advice Xerxes was greatly delighted, since she succeeded
in saying that very thing which he himself was meaning to do: for not
even if all the men and all the women in the world had been counselling
him to remain, would he have done so, as I think, so much had he been
struck with terror. He commended Artemisia therefore and sent her away
to conduct his sons to Ephesos, for there were certain bastard sons of
his which accompanied him.

104. With these sons he sent Hermotimos to have charge of them, who was
by race of Pedasa and was in the estimation of the king second to none
of the eunuchs. [Now the Pedasians dwell above Halicarnassos, and at
this Pedasa a thing happens as follows:—whenever to the whole number of
those who dwell about this city some trouble is about to come within
a certain time, then the priestess of Athene in that place gets a long
beard; and this has happened to them twice before now.

105. Of these Pedasians was Hermotimos.] 70 And this man of all persons
whom we know up to this time obtained the greatest revenge for a wrong
done to him. For he had been captured by enemies and was being sold, and
Panionios a man of Chios bought him, one who had set himself to gain his
livelihood by the most impious practices; for whenever he obtained
boys who possessed some beauty, he would make eunuchs of them, and then
taking them to Sardis or Ephesos sold them for large sums of money,
since with the Barbarians eunuchs are held to be of more value for all
matters of trust than those who are not eunuchs. Panionios then, I say,
made eunuchs of many others, since by this he got his livelihood,
and also of this man about whom I speak: and Hermotimos, being not in
everything unfortunate, was sent from Sardis to the king with other
gifts, and as time went on he came to be honoured more than all the
other eunuchs in the sight of Xerxes.

106. And when the king, being at that time in Sardis, was setting the
Persian army in motion to march against Athens, then Hermotimos, having
gone down for some business to that part of Mysia which the Chians
occupy and which is called Atarneus, found there Panionios: and having
recognised him he spoke to him many friendly words, first recounting
to him all the good things which he had by his means, and next making
promises in return for this, and saying how many good things he would do
for him, if he would bring his household and dwell in that land; so that
Panionios gladly accepting his proposals brought his children and
his wife. Then, when he had caught him together with his whole house,
Hermotimos spoke as follows: "O thou, who of all men that ever lived up
to this time didst gain thy substance by the most impious deeds, what
evil did either I myself or any of my forefathers do either to thee
or to any of thine, that thou didst make me to be that which is nought
instead of a man? Didst thou suppose that thou wouldest escape the
notice of the gods for such things as then thou didst devise? They
however following the rule of justice delivered 71 thee into my hands,
since thou hadst done impious deeds; so that thou shalt not have reason
to find fault with the penalty which shall be inflicted upon thee by
me." When he had thus reproached him, the man's sons were brought into
his presence and Panionios was compelled to make eunuchs of his own
sons, who were four in number, and being compelled he did so; and then
when he had so done, the sons were compelled to do the same thing to
him. Thus vengeance by the hands of Hermotimos 72 overtook Panionios.

107. When Xerxes had entrusted his sons to Artemisia to carry them back
to Ephesos, he called Mardonios and bade him choose of the army whom he
would, and make his deeds, if possible, correspond to his words. During
this day then things went so far; and in the night on the command of
the king the leaders of the fleet began to withdraw their ships from
Phaleron to the Hellespont, as quickly as they might each one, to guard
the bridges for the king to pass over. And when the Barbarians were
near Zoster as they sailed, then seeing the small points of rock which
stretch out to sea from this part of the mainland, they thought
that these were ships and fled for a good distance. In time however,
perceiving that they were not ships but points of rock, they assembled
together again and continued on their voyage.

108. When day dawned, the Hellenes, seeing that the land-army was
staying still in its place, supposed that the ships also were about
Phaleron; and thinking that they would fight another sea-battle, they
made preparations to repel them. When however they were informed that
the ships had departed, forthwith upon this they thought it good to
pursue after them. They pursued therefore as far as Andros, but did not
get a sight of the fleet of Xerxes; and when they had come to Andros,
they deliberated what they should do. Themistocles then declared as
his opinion that they should take their course through the islands and
pursue after the ships, and afterwards sail straight to the Hellespont
to break up the bridges; but Eurybiades expressed the opposite opinion
to this, saying that if they should break up the floating-bridges, they
would therein do 73 the greatest possible evil to Hellas: for if the
Persian should be cut off and compelled to remain in Europe, he would
endeavour not to remain still, since if he remained still, neither
could any of his affairs go forward, nor would any way of returning
home appear; but his army would perish of hunger: whereas if he made the
attempt and persevered in it, all Europe might be brought over to
him, city by city and nation by nation, the inhabitants being either
conquered 74 or surrendering on terms before they were conquered:
moreover they would have for food the crops of the Hellenes which grew
year by year. He thought however that conquered in the sea-fight the
Persian would not stay in Europe, and therefore he might be allowed to
flee until in his flight he came to his own land. Then after that they
might begin the contest for the land which belonged to the Persian. To
this opinion the commanders of the other Peloponnesians adhered also.

109. When Themistocles perceived that he would not be able to persuade
them, or at least the greater number of them, to sail to the Hellespont,
he changed his counsel 75 and turning to the Athenians (for these were
grieved most at the escape of the enemy and were anxious to sail to the
Hellespont even by themselves alone, 76 if the others were not willing)
to them he spoke as follows: "I myself also have been present before now
on many occasions, and have heard of many more, on which something
of this kind came to pass, namely that men who were forced into great
straits, after they had been defeated fought again and repaired their
former disaster: and as for us, since we have won as a prize from
fortune the existence of ourselves and of Hellas by repelling from our
land so great a cloud of men, let us not pursue enemies who flee from
us: for of these things not we were the doors, but the gods and heroes,
who grudged that one man should become king of both Asia and of Europe,
and he a man unholy and presumptuous, one who made no difference between
things sacred and things profane, 77 burning and casting down the images
of the gods, and who also scourged the Sea and let down into it fetters.
But as things are at present, it is well that we should now remain in
Hellas and look after ourselves and our households; and let each man
repair his house, and have a care for sowing his land, after he has
completely driven away the Barbarian: and then at the beginning of
the spring let us sail down towards the Hellespont and Ionia." Thus he
spoke, intending to lay up for himself a store of gratitude with the
Persian, in order that if after all any evil should come upon him at the
hands of the Athenians, he might have a place of refuge: and this was in
fact that which came to pass.

110. Themistocles then speaking thus endeavoured to deceive them, and
the Athenians followed his advice: for he had had the reputation even in
former times of being a man of ability 78 and he had now proved himself
to be in truth both able and of good judgment; therefore they were ready
in every way to follow his advice when he spoke. So when these had been
persuaded by him, forthwith after this Themistocles sent men with a
vessel, whom he trusted to keep silence, to whatever test they might be
brought, of that which he himself charged them to tell the king; and of
them Sikinnos his servant again was one. When these came to Attica, the
rest stayed behind in the ship, while Sikinnos went up to Xerxes and
spoke these words: "Themistocles the son of Neocles sent me, who is
commander of the Athenians, and of all the allies the best and ablest
man, to tell thee that Themistocles the Athenian, desiring to be of
service to thee, held back the Hellenes when they were desirous to
pursue after thy ships and to destroy the bridges on the Hellespont. Now
therefore thou mayest make thy way home quite undisturbed." They having
signified this sailed away again.

111. The Hellenes meanwhile, having resolved not to pursue after the
ships of the Barbarians further, nor to sail to the Hellespont to break
up the passage, were investing Andros intending to take it: for
the Andrians were the first of the islanders who, being asked by
Themistocles for money, refused to give it: and when Themistocles made
proposals to them and said that the Athenians had come having on their
side two great deities, Persuasion and Compulsion, and therefore they
must by all means give them money, they replied to this that not without
reason, as it now appeared, was Athens great and prosperous, since the
Athenians were well supplied with serviceable deities; but as for the
Andrians, they were poor, 79 having in this respect attained to the
greatest eminence, and there were two unprofitable deities which never
left their island but always remained attached to the place, Poverty,
namely, and Helplessness: and the Andrians being possessed of these
deities would not give money; for never could the power of the Athenians
get the better of their inability. 80

112. These, I say, having thus made answer and having refused to give
the money, were being besieged: and Themistocles not ceasing in his
desire for gain sent threatening messages to the other islands and asked
them for money by the same envoys, employing those whom he had before
sent to the king; 81 and he said that if they did not give that which
was demanded of them, he would bring the fleet of the Hellenes against
them to besiege and take them. Thus saying he collected great sums of
money from the Carystians and the Parians, who being informed how Andros
was being besieged, because it had taken the side of the Medes, and how
Themistocles was held in more regard than any of the other commanders,
sent money for fear of this. Whether any others of the islanders also
gave money I am not able to say, but I think that some others gave and
not these alone. Yet to the Carystians at least there was no respite
from the evil on this account, but the Parians escaped the attack,
because they propitiated Themistocles with money. Thus Themistocles with
Andros as his starting-point was acquiring sums of money for himself
from the men of the islands without the knowledge of the other
commanders.

113. Xerxes meanwhile with his army stayed for a few days after the
sea-fight, and then they all began to march forth towards Boeotia by the
same way by which they had come: for Mardonios thought both that it was
well for him to escort the king on his way, and also that it was now
too late in the year to carry on the war; it was better, he thought, to
winter in Thessaly and then at the beginning of spring to attempt the
Peloponnese. When he came to Thessaly, then Mardonios chose out for
himself first all those Persians who are called "Immortals," except only
their commander Hydarnes (for Hydarnes said that he would not be left
behind by the king), and after them of the other Persians those who wore
cuirasses, and the body of a thousand horse: also the Medes, Sacans,
Bactrians and Indians, foot and horsemen both. 82 These nations he chose
in the mass, 83 but from the other allies he selected by few at a time,
choosing whose who had fine appearance of those of whom he knew that
they had done good service. From the Persians he chose more than from
any other single nation, and these wore collars of twisted metal and
bracelets; and after them came the Medes, who in fact were not inferior
in number to the Persians, but only in bodily strength. The result was
that there were thirty myriads in all, including cavalry.

114. During this time, while Mardonios was selecting his army and
Xerxes was in Thessaly, there had come an oracle from Delphi to the
Lacedemonians, bidding them ask satisfaction from Xerxes for the murder
of Leonidas and accept that which should be given by him. The Spartans
therefore sent a herald as quickly as possible, who having found the
whole army still in Thessaly came into the presence of Xerxes and spoke
these words: "O king of the Medes, the Lacedemonians and the sons of
Heracles of Sparta demand of thee satisfaction for murder, because thou
didst kill their king, fighting in defence of Hellas." He laughed and
then kept silence some time, and after that pointing to Mardonios, who
happened to be standing by him, he said: "Then Mardonios here shall give
them satisfaction, such as is fitting for them to have."

115. The herald accordingly accepted the utterance and departed; and
Xerxes leaving Mardonios in Thessaly went on himself in haste to
the Hellespont and arrived at the passage where the crossing was in
five-and-thirty days, bringing back next to nothing, as one may say, 84
of his army: and whithersoever they came on the march and to whatever
nation, they seized the crops of that people and used them for
provisions; and if they found no crops, then they took the grass which
was growing up from the earth, and stripped off the bark from the trees
and plucked down the leaves and devoured them, alike of the cultivated
trees and of those growing wild; and they left nothing behind them: thus
they did by reason of famine. Then plague too seized upon the army and
dysentery, which destroyed them by the way, and some of them also who
were sick the king left behind, laying charge upon the cities where at
the time he chanced to be in his march, to take care of them and support
them: of these he left some in Thessaly, and some at Siris in Paionia,
and some in Macedonia. In these parts too he had left behind him the
sacred chariot of Zeus, when he was marching against Hellas; but on his
return he did not receive it back: for the Paionians had given it to the
Thracians, and when Xerxes asked for it again, they said that the mares
while at pasture had been carried off by the Thracians of the upper
country, who dwelt about the source of the Strymon.

116. Here also a Thracian, the king of the Bisaltians and of the
Crestonian land, did a deed of surpassing horror; for he had said that
he would not himself be subject to Xerxes with his own will and had gone
away up to Mount Rhodope, and also he had forbidden his sons to go on
the march against Hellas. They however, either because they cared not
for his command, or else because a desire came upon them to see the war,
went on the march with the Persian: and when they returned all unhurt,
being six in number, their father plucked out their eyes for this cause.

117. They then received this reward: and as to the Persians, when
passing on from Thrace they came to the passage, they crossed over the
Hellespont in haste to Abydos by means of the ships, for they did not
find the floating-bridges still stretched across but broken up by a
storm. While staying there for a time they had distributed to them an
allowance of food more abundant than they had had by the way, and from
satisfying their hunger without restraint and also from the changes of
water there died many of those in the army who had remained safe till
then. The rest arrived with Xerxes at Sardis.

118. There is also another story reported as follows, namely that when
Xerxes on his march away from Athens came to Eïon on the Strymon, from
that point he did not continue further to make marches by road, but
delivered his army to Hydarnes to lead back to the Hellespont, while he
himself embarked in a Phenician ship and set forth for Asia; and as he
sailed he was seized by a wind from the Strymon, 85 violent and raising
great waves; and since he was tossed by the storm more and more, the
ship being heavily laden (for there were upon the deck great numbers of
Persians, those namely who went with Xerxes), the king upon that falling
into fear shouted aloud and asked the pilot whether there were for them
any means of safety. He said: "Master, there are none, unless some way
be found of freeing ourselves of the excessive number of passengers."
Then it is said that Xerxes, when he heard this, spoke thus: "Persians,
now let each one of you show that he has care for the king; for my
safety, as it seems, depends upon you." He, they say, thus spoke, and
they made obeisance to him and leapt out into the sea; and so the ship
being lightened came safe to Asia. As soon as they had landed Xerxes,
they say, first presented the pilot with a wreath of gold, because he
had saved the life of the king, and then cut off his head, because he
had caused the death of many of the Persians.

119. This other story, I say, is reported about the return of Xerxes,
but I for my part can by no means believe it, either in other respects
or as regards this which is said to have happened to the Persians; for
if this which I have related had in truth been said by the pilot to
Xerxes, not one person's opinion in ten thousand will differ from mine
that the king would have done some such thing as this, that is to say,
he would have caused those who were upon the deck to go down below into
the hold, seeing that they were Persians of the highest rank among the
Persians; and of the rowers, who were Phenicians, he would have thrown
out into the sea a number equal to the number of those. In fact however,
as I have said before, he made his return to Asia together with the rest
of the army by road.

120. And this also which follows is a strong witness that it was so; for
Xerxes is known to have come to Abdera on his way back, and to have made
with them a guest-friendship and presented them with a Persian sword of
gold and a gold-spangled tiara: and as the men of Abdera themselves say
(though I for my part can by no means believe it), he loosed his girdle
for the first time during his flight back from Athens, considering
himself to be in security. Now Abdera is situated further towards the
Hellespont than the river Strymon and Eïon, from which place the story
says that he embarked in the ship.

121. The Hellenes meanwhile, when it proved that they were not able to
conquer Andros, turned towards Carystos, and having laid waste the land
of that people they departed and went to Salamis. First then for the
gods they chose out first-fruits of the spoil, and among them three
Persian triremes, one to be dedicated as an offering at the Isthmus,
which remained there still up to my time, another at Sunion, and the
third to Ajax in Salamis where they were. After this they divided the
spoil among themselves and sent the first-fruits 86 to Delphi, of which
was made a statue holding in its hand the beak of a ship and in height
measuring twelve cubits. This statue stood in the same place with the
golden statue of Alexander the Macedonian.

122. Then when the Hellenes had sent first-fruits to Delphi, they asked
the god on behalf of all whether the first-fruits which he had received
were fully sufficient and acceptable to him. He said that from the
Hellenes he had received enough, but not from the Eginetans, and from
them he demanded the offering of their prize of valour for the sea-fight
at Salamis. Hearing this the Eginetans dedicated golden stars, three in
number, upon a ship's mast of bronze, which are placed in the corner 87
close to the mixing-bowl of Croesus.

123. After the division of the spoil the Hellenes sailed to the Isthmus,
to give the prize of valour to him who of all the Hellenes had proved
himself the most worthy during this war: and when they had come thither
and the commanders distributed 88 their votes at the altar of Poseidon,
selecting from the whole number the first and the second in merit, then
every one of them gave in his vote for himself, each man thinking that
he himself had been the best; but for the second place the greater
number of votes came out in agreement, assigning that to Themistocles.
They then were left alone in their votes, while Themistocles in regard
to the second place surpassed the rest by far:

124, and although the Hellenes would not give decision of this by reason
of envy, but sailed away each to their own city without deciding, yet
Themistocles was loudly reported of and was esteemed throughout Hellas
to be the man who was the ablest 89 by far of the Hellenes: and since he
had not received honour from those who had fought at Salamis, although
he was the first in the voting, he went forthwith after this to
Lacedemon, desiring to receive honour there; and the Lacedemonians
received him well and gave him great honours. As a prize of valour they
gave to Eurybiades a wreath of olive; and for ability and skill they
gave to Themistocles also a wreath of olive, and presented him besides
with the chariot which was judged to be the best in Sparta. So having
much commended him, they escorted him on his departure with three
hundred picked men of the Spartans, the same who are called the
"horsemen," 90 as far as the boundaries of Tegea: and he is the only man
of all we know to whom the Spartans ever gave escort on his way.

125. When however he had come to Athens from Lacedemon, Timodemos of
Aphidnai, one of the opponents of Themistocles, but in other respects
not among the men of distinction, maddened by envy attacked him,
bringing forward against him his going to Lacedemon, and saying that it
was on account of Athens that he had those marks of honour which he had
from the Lacedemonians, and not on his own account. Then, as Timodemos
continued ceaselessly to repeat this, Themistocles said: "I tell thee
thus it is:—if I had been a native of Belbina 91 I should never have
been thus honoured by the Spartans; but neither wouldest thou, my
friend, for all that thou art an Athenian." So far then went these
matters.

126. Artabazos meanwhile the son of Pharnakes, a man who was held in
esteem among the Persians even before this and came to be so yet more
after the events about Plataia, was escorting the king as far as the
passage with six myriads 92 of that army which Mardonios had selected
for himself; and when the king was in Asia and Artabazos on his march
back came near to Pallene, finding that Mardonios was wintering in
Thessaly and Macedonia and was not at present urgent with him to come
and join the rest of the army, he thought it not good to pass by without
reducing the Potidaians to slavery, whom he had found in revolt: for the
men of Potidaia, when the king had marched by them and when the fleet of
the Persians had departed in flight from Salamis, had openly made revolt
from the Barbarians; and so also had the others done who occupy Pallene.

127. So upon this Artabazos began to besiege Potidaia, and suspecting
that the men of Olynthos also were intending revolt from the king, he
began to besiege this city too, which was occupied by Bottiaians who had
been driven away from the Thermaian gulf by the Macedonians. So when he
had taken these men by siege, he brought them forth to a lake and slew
them 93 there; and the city he delivered to Critobulos of Torone to have
in charge, and to the natives of Chalkidike; and thus it was that the
Chalkidians got possession of Olynthos.

128. Having taken this city Artabazos set himself to attack Potidaia
with vigour, and as he was setting himself earnestly to this work,
Timoxeinos the commander of the troops from Skione concerted with him
to give up the town by treachery. Now in what manner he did this at the
first, I for my part am not able to say, for this is not reported; at
last however it happened as follows. Whenever either Timoxeinos wrote a
paper wishing to send it to Artabazos, or Artabazos wishing to send one
to Timoxeinos, they wound it round by the finger-notches 94 of an arrow,
and then, putting feathers over the paper, they shot it to a place
agreed upon between them. It came however to be found out that
Timoxeinos was attempting by treachery to give up Potidaia; for
Artabazos, shooting an arrow at the place agreed upon, missed this spot
and struck a man of Potidaia in the shoulder; and when he was struck,
a crowd came about him, as is apt to happen when there is fighting, and
they forthwith took the arrow and having discovered the paper carried
it to the commanders. Now there was present an allied force of the other
men of Pallene also. Then when the commanders had read the paper and
discovered who was guilty of the treachery, they resolved not openly to
convict 95 Timoxeinos of treachery, for the sake of the city of Skione,
lest the men of Skione should be esteemed traitors for all time to come.

129. He then in such a manner as this had been discovered; and when
three months had gone by while Artabazos was besieging the town, there
came to be a great ebb of the sea backwards, which lasted for a long
time; and the Barbarians, seeing that shallow water had been produced,
endeavoured to get by into the peninsula of Pallene, 96 but when they
had passed through two fifth-parts of the distance, and yet three-fifths
remained, which they must pass through before they were within Pallene,
then there came upon them a great flood-tide of the sea, higher than
ever before, as the natives of the place say, though high tides come
often. So those of them who could not swim perished, and those who could
were slain by the men of Potidaia who put out to them in boats. The
cause of the high tide and flood and of that which befell the Persians
was this, as the Potidaians say, namely that these same Persians who
perished by means of the sea had committed impiety towards the temple of
Poseidon and his image in the suburb of their town; and in saying that
this was the cause, in my opinion they say well. The survivors of his
army Artabazos led away to Thessaly to join Mardonios. Thus it fared
with these who escorted the king on his way.

130. The fleet of Xerxes, so much of it as remained, when it had touched
Asia in its flight from Salamis, and had conveyed the king and his army
over from the Chersonese to Abydos, passed the winter at Kyme: and when
spring dawned upon it, it assembled early at Samos, where some of the
ships had even passed the winter; and most of the Persians and Medes
still served as fighting-men on board of them. 97 To be commanders of
them there came Mardontes the son of Bagaios, and Artaÿntes the son of
Artachaies, and with them also Ithamitres was in joint command, who was
brother's son to Artaÿntes and had been added by the choice of Artaÿntes
himself. They then, since they had suffered a heavy blow, did not
advance further up towards the West, nor did any one compel them to do
so; but they remained still in Samos and kept watch over Ionia, lest
it should revolt, having three hundred ships including those of the
Ionians; and they did not expect that the Hellenes on their part would
come to Ionia, but thought that it would satisfy them to guard their
own land, judging from the fact that they had not pursued after them
in their flight from Salamis but were well contented then to depart
homewards. As regards the sea then their spirit was broken, but on land
they thought that Mardonios would get much the advantage. So they being
at Samos were taking counsel to do some damage if they could to their
enemies, and at the same time they were listening for news how the
affairs of Mardonios would fall out.

131. The Hellenes on their part were roused both by the coming on of
spring and by the presence of Mardonios in Thessaly. Their land-army had
not yet begun to assemble, when the fleet arrived at Egina, in
number one hundred and ten ships, and the commander and admiral was
Leotychides, who was the son of Menares, the son of Hegesilaos, the son
of Hippocratides, the son of Leotychides, the son of Anaxilaos, the son
of Archidemos, the son of Anaxandriddes, the son of Theopompos, the son
of Nicander, the son of Charilaos, 98 the son of Eunomos, the son of
Polydectes, the son of Prytanis, the son of Euryphon, 99 the son of
Procles, the son of Aristodemos, the son of Aristomachos, the son of
Cleodaios, the son of Hyllos, the son of Heracles, being of the other
royal house. 100 These all, except the two 101 enumerated first
after Leotychides, had been kings of Sparta. And of the Athenians the
commander was Xanthippos the son of Ariphon.

132. When all the ships had arrived at Egina, there came Ionian envoys
to the camp of the Hellenes, who also came a short time before this to
Sparta and asked the Lacedemonians to set Ionia free; and of them
one was Herodotus the son of Basileides. These had banded themselves
together and had plotted to put to death Strattis the despot of Chios,
being originally seven in number; but when one of those who took part
with them gave information of it and they were discovered to be plotting
against him, then the remaining six escaped from Chios and came both to
Sparta and also at this time to Egina, asking the Hellenes to sail over
to Ionia: but they with difficulty brought them forward as far as Delos;
for the parts beyond this were all fearful to the Hellenes, since they
were without experience of those regions and everything seemed to them
to be filled with armed force, while their persuasion was that it was as
long a voyage to Samos as to the Pillars of Heracles. Thus at the same
time it so chanced that the Barbarians dared sail no further up towards
the West than Samos, being smitten with fear, and the Hellenes no
further down towards the East than Delos, when the Chians made request
of them. So fear was guard of the space which lay between them.

133. The Hellenes, I say, sailed to Delos; and Mardonios meanwhile had
been wintering in Thessaly. From thence he sent round a man, a native of
Europos, whose name was Mys, to the various Oracles, charging him to
go everywhere to consult, 102 wherever they 103 were permitted to make
trial of the Oracles. What he desired to find out from the Oracles when
he gave this charge, I am not able to say, for that is not reported; but
I conceive for my part that he sent to consult about his present affairs
and not about other things.

134. This Mys is known to have come to Lebadeia and to have persuaded
by payment of money one of the natives of the place to go down to
Trophonios, and also he came to the Oracle at Abai of the Phokians;
and moreover when he came for the first time to Thebes, he not only
consulted the Ismenian Apollo,—there one may consult just as at Olympia
with victims,—but also by payment he persuaded a stranger who was not
a Theban, and induced him to lie down to sleep in the temple of
Amphiaraos. In this temple no one of the Thebans is permitted to seek
divination, and that for the following reason:—Amphiaraos dealing by
oracles bade them choose which they would of these two things, either
to have him as a diviner or else as an ally in war, abstaining from the
other use; and they chose that he should be their ally in war: for this
reason it is not permitted to any of the Thebans to lie down to sleep in
that temple.

135. After this a thing which to me is a very great marvel is said by
the Thebans to have come to pass:—it seems that this man Mys of Europos,
as he journeyed round to all the Oracles, came also to the sacred
enclosure of the Ptoan Apollo. This temple is called "Ptoon," and
belongs to the Thebans, and it lies above the lake Copaïs at the foot of
the mountains, close to the town of Acraiphia. When the man called Mys
came to this temple with three men chosen from the citizens 104 in his
company, who were sent by the public authority to write down that which
the god should utter in his divination, forthwith it is said the prophet
105 of the god began to give the oracle in a Barbarian tongue; and while
those of the Thebans who accompanied him were full of wonder, hearing a
Barbarian instead of the Hellenic tongue, and did not know what to make
of the matter before them, it is said that the man of Europos, Mys,
snatched from them the tablet which they bore and wrote upon it that
which was being spoken by the prophet; and he said that the prophet was
giving his answer in the Carian tongue: and then when he had written it,
he went away and departed to Thessaly.

136. Mardonios having read that which the Oracles uttered, whatever that
was, after this sent as an envoy to Athens Alexander the son of Amyntas,
the Macedonian, both because the Persians were connected with him by
marriage, (for Gygaia the sister of Alexander and daughter of Amyntas
had been married to a Persian Bubares, 106 and from her had been born
to him that Amyntas who lived in Asia, having the name of his mother's
father, to whom the king gave Alabanda, 107 a great city of Phrygia,
to possess), and also Mardonios was sending him because he was
informed that Alexander was a public guest-friend and benefactor of the
Athenians; for by this means he thought that he would be most likely to
gain over the Athenians to his side, about whom he heard that they were
a numerous people and brave in war, and of whom he knew moreover that
these were they who more than any others had brought about the disasters
which had befallen the Persians by sea. Therefore if these should be
added to him, he thought that he should easily have command of the sea
(and this in fact would have been the case), while on land he supposed
himself to be already much superior in force. Thus he reckoned that his
power would be much greater than that of the Hellenes. Perhaps also the
Oracles told him this beforehand, counselling him to make the Athenian
his ally, and so he was sending in obedience to their advice.

137. Now of this Alexander the seventh ancestor 108 was that Perdiccas
who first became despot of the Macedonians, and that in the manner which
here follows:—From Argos there fled to the Illyrians three brothers of
the descendents of Temenos, Gauanes, Aëropos, and Perdiccas; and passing
over from the Illyrians into the upper parts of Macedonia they came
to the city of Lebaia. There they became farm-servants for pay in the
household of the king, one pasturing horses, the second oxen, and the
youngest of them, namely Perdiccas, the smaller kinds of cattle; for 109
in ancient times even those who were rulers over men 110 were poor in
money, and not the common people only; and the wife of the king cooked
for them their food herself. And whenever she baked, the loaf of the boy
their servant, namely Perdiccas, became double as large as by nature it
should be. When this happened constantly in the same manner, she told
it to her husband, and he when he heard it conceived forthwith that
this was a portent and tended to something great. He summoned the
farm-servants therefore, and gave notice to them to depart out of his
land; and they said that it was right that before they went forth they
should receive the wages which were due. Now it chanced that the sun
was shining into the house down through the opening which received the
smoke, and the king when he heard about the wages said, being infatuated
by a divine power: "I pay you then this for wages, and it is such as
ye deserve," pointing to the sunlight. So then Gauanes and Aëropos the
elder brothers stood struck with amazement when they heard this, but
the boy, who happened to have in his hand a knife, said these words: "We
accept, O king, that which thou dost give;" and he traced a line with
his knife round the sunlight on the floor of the house, and having
traced the line round he thrice drew of the sunlight into his bosom, and
after that he departed both himself and his fellows.

138. They then were going away, and to the king one of those who sat
by him at table told what manner of thing the boy had done, and how the
youngest of them had taken that which was given with some design: and
he hearing this and being moved with anger, sent after them horsemen to
slay them. Now there is a river in this land to which the descendents of
these men from Argos sacrifice as a saviour. This river, so soon as the
sons of Temenos had passed over it, began to flow with such great volume
of water that the horsemen became unable to pass over. So the brothers,
having come to another region of Macedonia, took up their dwelling near
the so-called gardens of Midas the son of Gordias, where roses grow wild
which have each one sixty petals and excel all others in perfume.
In these gardens too Silenos was captured, as is reported by the
Macedonians: and above the gardens is situated a mountain called
Bermion, which is inaccessible by reason of the cold. Having taken
possession of that region, they made this their starting-point, and
proceeded to subdue also the rest of Macedonia.

139. From this Perdiccas the descent of Alexander was as
follows:—Alexander was the son of Amyntas, Amyntas was the son of
Alketes, the father of Alketes was Aëropos, of him Philip, of Philip
Argaios, and of this last the father was Perdiccas, who first obtained
the kingdom.

140. Thus then, I say, Alexander the son of Amyntas was descended; and
when he came to Athens sent from Mardonios, he spoke as follows: (a)
"Athenians, Mardonios speaks these words:—There has come to me a message
from the king which speaks in this manner:—To the Athenians I remit all
the offences which were committed against me: and now, Mardonios,
thus do,—first give them back their own land; then let them choose
for themselves another in addition to this, whichsoever they desire,
remaining independent; and set up for them again all their temples,
which I set on fire, provided that they consent to make a treaty with
me. This message having come to me, it is necessary for me to do so,
unless by your means I am prevented: and thus I speak to you now:—Why
are ye so mad as to raise up war against the king? since neither will ye
overcome him, nor are ye able to hold out against him for ever: for
ye saw the multitude of the host of Xerxes and their deeds, and ye are
informed also of the power which is with me at the present time; so that
even if ye overcome and conquer us (of which ye can have no hope if ye
are rightly minded), another power will come many times as large. Do
not ye then desire to match yourselves with the king, and so to be both
deprived of your land and for ever running a course for your own lives;
but make peace with him: and ye have a most honourable occasion to make
peace, since the king has himself set out upon this road: agree to a
league with us then without fraud or deceit, and remain free. (b) These
things Mardonios charged me to say to you, O Athenians; and as for me,
I will say nothing of the goodwill towards you on my part, for ye
would not learn that now for the first time; but I ask of you to do as
Mardonios says, since I perceive that ye will not be able to war with
Xerxes for ever,—if I perceived in you ability to do this, I should
never have come to you speaking these words,—for the power of the king
is above that of a man and his arm is very long. If therefore ye do not
make an agreement forthwith, when they offer you great things as the
terms on which they are willing to make a treaty, I have fear on your
behalf, seeing that ye dwell more upon the highway than any of your
allies, and are exposed ever to destruction alone, the land which ye
possess being parted off from the rest and lying between the armies
which are contending together. 111 Nay, but be persuaded, for this is
a matter of great consequence to you, that to you alone of the Hellenes
the great king remits the offences committed and desires to become a
friend."

141. Thus spoke Alexander; and the Lacedemonians having been informed
that Alexander had come to Athens to bring the Athenians to make a
treaty with the Barbarians, and remembering the oracles, who it was
destined that they together with the other Dorians should be driven
forth out of the Peloponnese by the Medes and the Athenians combined,
had been very greatly afraid lest the Athenians should make a treaty
with the Persians; and forthwith they had resolved to send envoys.
It happened moreover that they were introduced at the same time with
Alexander; 112 for the Athenians had waited for them, protracting the
time, because they were well assured that the Lacedemonians would hear
that an envoy had come from the Barbarians to make a treaty, and that
having heard it they would themselves send envoys with all speed. They
acted therefore of set purpose, so as to let the Lacedemonians see their
inclination.

142. So when Alexander had ceased speaking, the envoys from Sparta
followed him forthwith and said: "As for us, the Lacedemonians sent us
to ask of you not to make any change in that which concerns Hellas, nor
to accept proposals from the Barbarian; since this is not just in any
way nor honourable for any of the Hellenes to do, but least of all for
you, and that for many reasons. Ye were they who stirred up this war,
when we by no means willed it; and the contest came about for your
dominion, but now it extends even to the whole of Hellas. Besides this
it is by no means to be endured that ye Athenians, who are the authors
of all this, should prove to be the cause of slavery to the Hellenes,
seeing that ye ever from ancient time also have been known as the
liberators of many. We feel sympathy however with you for your
sufferings and because ye were deprived of your crops twice and have had
your substance ruined now for a long time. In compensation for this the
Lacedemonians and their allies make offer to support your wives and all
those of your households who are unfitted for war, so long as this war
shall last: but let not Alexander the Macedonian persuade you, making
smooth the speech of Mardonios; for these things are fitting for him to
do, since being himself a despot he is working in league with a despot:
for you however they are not fitting to do, if ye chance to be rightly
minded; for ye know that in Barbarians there is neither faith nor truth
at all."

Thus spoke the envoys:

143, and to Alexander the Athenians made answer thus: "Even of ourselves
we know so much, that the Mede has a power many times as numerous as
ours; so that there is no need for thee to cast this up against us.
Nevertheless because we long for liberty we shall defend ourselves as we
may be able: and do not thou endeavour to persuade us to make a treaty
with the Barbarian, for we on our part shall not be persuaded. And now
report to Mardonios that the Athenians say thus:—So long as the Sun goes
on the same course by which he goes now, we will never make an agreement
with Xerxes; but we will go forth to defend ourselves 113 against
him, trusting in the gods and the heroes as allies, for whom he had no
respect when he set fire to their houses and to their sacred images.
And in the future do not thou appear before the Athenians with any such
proposals as these, nor think that thou art rendering them good service
in advising them to do that which is not lawful; for we do not desire
that thou shouldest suffer anything unpleasant at the hands of the
Athenians, who art their public guest and friend."

144. To Alexander they thus made answer, but to the envoys from Sparta
as follows: "That the Lacedemonians should be afraid lest we should make
a treaty with the Barbarian was natural no doubt; 114 but it seems to be
an unworthy fear for men who know so well the spirit of the Athenians,
namely that there is neither so great quantity of gold anywhere upon the
earth, nor any land so much excelling in beauty and goodness, that we
should be willing to accept it and enslave Hellas by taking the side of
the Medes. For many and great are the reasons which hinder us from doing
this, even though we should desire it; first and greatest the images
and houses of the gods set on fire or reduced to ruin, which we must
necessarily avenge to the very utmost rather than make an agreement with
him who did these deeds; then secondly there is the bond of Hellenic
race, by which we are of one blood and of one speech, the common temples
of the gods and the common sacrifices, the manners of life which are the
same for all; to these it would not be well that the Athenians should
become traitors. And be assured of this, if by any chance ye were not
assured of it before, that so long as one of the Athenians remains
alive, we will never make an agreement with Xerxes. We admire however
the forethought which ye had with regard to us, in that ye took thought
for us who have had our substance destroyed, and are willing to support
the members of our households; and so far as ye are concerned, the
kindness has been fully performed: but we shall continue to endure as
we may, and not be a trouble in any way to you. Now therefore, with full
conviction this is so, send out an army as speedily as ye may: for, as
we conjecture, the Barbarian will be here invading our land at no far
distant time but so soon as he shall be informed of the message sent,
namely that we shall do none of those things which he desired of us.
Therefore before he arrives here in Attica, it is fitting that ye come
to our rescue quickly in Boeotia." Thus the Athenians made answer, and
upon that the envoys went away back to Sparta.


