BOOK IX. THE NINTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED CALLIOPE

1. Mardonios, when Alexander had returned back and had signified to him
that which was said by the Athenians, set forth from Thessaly and began
to lead his army with all diligence towards Athens: and to whatever land
he came, he took up with him the people of that land. The leaders
of Thessaly meanwhile did not repent of all that which had been done
already, but on the contrary they urged on the Persian yet much more;
and Thorax of Larissa had joined in escorting Xerxes in his flight and
at this time he openly offered Mardonios passage to invade Hellas..

2. Then when the army in its march came to Boeotia, the Thebans
endeavoured to detain Mardonios, and counselled him saying that there
was no region more convenient for him to have his encampment than that;
and they urged him not to advance further, but to sit down there and
endeavour to subdue to himself the whole of Hellas without fighting: for
to overcome the Hellenes by open force when they were united, as at the
former time they were of one accord together, 1 was a difficult task
even for the whole world combined, "but," they proceeded, "if thou wilt
do that which we advise, with little labour thou wilt have in thy power
all their plans of resistance. 2 Send money to the men who have power in
their cities, and thus sending thou wilt divide Hellas into two parties:
after that thou wilt with ease subdue by the help of thy party those who
are not inclined to thy side.".

3. Thus they advised, but he did not follow their counsel; for there had
instilled itself into him a great desire to take Athens for the second
time, partly from obstinacy 3 and partly because he meant to signify to
the king in Sardis that he was in possession of Athens by beacon-fires
through the islands. However he did not even at this time find the
Athenians there when he came to Attica; but he was informed that the
greater number were either in Salamis or in the ships, and he captured
the city finding it deserted. Now the capture of the city by the king
had taken place ten months before the later expedition of Mardonios
against it.

4. When Mardonios had come to Athens, he sent to Salamis Morychides
a man of the Hellespont, bearing the same proposals as Alexander the
Macedonian had brought over to the Athenians. These he sent for the
second time, being aware beforehand that the dispositions of the
Athenians were not friendly, but hoping that they would give way and
leave their obstinacy, since the Attic land had been captured by the
enemy and was in his power..

5. For this reason he sent Morychides to Salamis; and he came before
the Council 4 and reported the words of Mardonios. Then one of the
Councillors, Lykidas, expressed the opinion that it was better to
receive the proposal which Morychides brought before them and refer
it to the assembly of the people. 5 He, I say, uttered this opinion,
whether because he had received money from Mardonios, or because this
was his own inclination: however the Athenians forthwith, both those
of the Council and those outside, when they heard of it, were very
indignant, and they came about Lykidas and stoned him to death; but
the Hellespontian Morychides they dismissed unhurt. Then when there had
arisen much uproar in Salamis about Lykidas, the women of the Athenians
heard of that which was being done, and one woman passing the word to
another and one taking another with her, they went of their own accord
to the house of Lykidas and stoned his wife and his children to death.

6. The Athenians had passed over to Salamis as follows:—So long as they
were looking that an army should come from the Peloponnese to help them,
they remained in Attica; but as those in Peloponnesus acted very
slowly and with much delay, while the invader was said to be already
in Boeotia, they accordingly removed everything out of danger, and
themselves passed over to Salamis; and at the same time they sent envoys
to Lacedemon to reproach the Lacedemonians for having permitted the
Barbarian to invade Attica and for not having gone to Boeotia to meet
him in company with them, and also to remind them how many things
the Persian had promised to give the Athenians if they changed sides;
bidding the envoys warn them that if they did not help the Athenians,
the Athenians would find some shelter 6 for themselves..

7. For the Lacedemonians in fact were keeping a feast during this
time, and celebrating the Hyakinthia; and they held it of the greatest
consequence to provide for the things which concerned the god, while at
the same time their wall which they had been building at the Isthmus
was just at this moment being completed with battlements. And when the
envoys from the Athenians came to Lacedemon, bringing with them also
envoys from Megara and Plataia, they came in before the Ephors and said
as follows: "The Athenians sent us saying that the king of the Medes not
only offers to give us back our land, but also desires to make us his
allies on fair and equal terms without deceit or treachery, 7 and
is desirous moreover to give us another land in addition to our own,
whichsoever we shall ourselves choose. We however, having respect for
Zeus of the Hellenes and disdaining to be traitors to Hellas, did not
agree but refused, although we were unjustly dealt with by the other
Hellenes and left to destruction, and although we knew that it was more
profitable to make a treaty with the Persian than to carry on war: nor
shall we make a treaty at any future time, if we have our own will. Thus
sincerely is our duty done towards the Hellenes: 8 but as for you, after
having come then to great dread lest we should make a treaty with the
Persian, so soon as ye learnt certainly what our spirit was, namely that
we should never betray Hellas, and because your wall across the Isthmus
is all but finished, now ye make no account of the Athenians, but having
agreed with us to come to Boeotia to oppose the Persian, ye have now
deserted us, and ye permitted the Barbarian moreover to make invasion of
Attica. For the present then the Athenians have anger against you, for
ye did not do as was fitting to be done: and now they bid 9 you with all
speed send out an army together with us, in order that we may receive
the Barbarian in the land of Attica; for since we failed of Boeotia, the
most suitable place to fight in our land is the Thriasian plain.".

8. When the Ephors heard this they deferred their reply to the next day,
and then on the next day to the succeeding one; and this they did even
for ten days, deferring the matter from day to day, while during this
time the whole body of the Peloponnesians were building the wall over
the Isthmus with great diligence and were just about to complete it.
Now I am not able to say why, when Alexander the Macedonian had come
to Athens, they were so very anxious lest the Athenians should take the
side of the Medes, whereas now they had no care about it, except indeed
that their wall over the Isthmus had now been built, and they thought
they had no need of the Athenians any more; whereas when Alexander came
to Attica the wall had not yet been completed, but they were working at
it in great dread of the Persians..

9. At last however the answer was given and the going forth of the
Spartans took place in the following manner:—on the day before that
which was appointed for the last hearing of the envoys, Chileos a man of
Tegea, who of all strangers had most influence in Lacedemon, heard from
the Ephors all that which the Athenians were saying; and he, it seems,
said to them these words: "Thus the matter stands, Ephors:—if the
Athenians are not friendly with us but are allies of the Barbarian, then
though a strong wall may have been built across the Isthmus, yet a wide
door has been opened for the Persian into Peloponnesus. Listen to their
request, however, before the Athenians resolve upon something else
tending to the fall of Hellas.".

10. Thus he counselled them, and they forthwith took his words to heart;
and saying nothing to the envoys who had come from the cities, while
yet it was night they sent out five thousand Spartans, with no less than
seven of the Helots set to attend upon each man of them, 901 appointing
Pausanias the son of Cleombrotos to lead them forth. Now the leadership
belonged to Pleistarchos the son of Leonidas; but he was yet a boy, and
the other was his guardian and cousin: for Cleombrotos, the father of
Pausanias and son of Anaxandrides, was no longer alive, but when he had
led home from the Isthmus the army which had built the wall, no long
time after this he died. Now the reason why Cleombrotos led home
the army from the Isthmus was this:—as he was offering sacrifice for
fighting against the Persian, the sun was darkened in the heaven. And
Pausanias chose as commander in addition to himself Euryanax the son of
Dorieos, a man of the same house..

11. So Pausanias with his army had gone forth out of Sparta; and the
envoys, when day had come, not knowing anything of this going forth,
came in before the Ephors meaning to depart also, each to his own State:
and when they had come in before them they said these words: "Ye, O
Lacedemonians, are remaining here and celebrating this Hyakinthia and
disporting yourselves, having left your allies to destruction; and the
Athenians being wronged by you and for want of allies will make peace
with the Persians on such terms as they can: and having made peace,
evidently we become allies of the king, and therefore we shall join with
him in expeditions against any land to which the Persians may lead us;
and ye will learn then what shall be the issue for you of this matter."
When the envoys spoke these words, the Ephors said and confirmed it with
an oath, that they supposed by this time the men were at Orestheion on
their way against the strangers: for they used to call the Barbarians
"strangers." 10 So they, not knowing of the matter, asked the meaning
of these words, and asking they learnt all the truth; so that they were
struck with amazement and set forth as quickly as possible in pursuit;
and together with them five thousand chosen hoplites of the Lacedemonian
"dwellers in the country round" 11 did the same thing also.

12. They then, I say, were hastening towards the Isthmus; and the
Argives so soon as they heard that Pausanias with his army had gone
forth from Sparta, sent as a herald to Attica the best whom they could
find of the long-distance runners, 12 because they had before of their
own motion engaged for Mardonios that they would stop the Spartans from
going forth: and the herald when he came to Athens spoke as follows:
"Mardonios, the Argives sent me to tell thee that the young men have
gone forth from Lacedemon, and that the Argives are not able to stop
them from going forth: with regard to this therefore may it be thy
fortune to take measures well." 13.

13. He having spoken thus departed and went back; and Mardonios was
by no means anxious any more to remain in Attica when he heard this
message. Before he was informed of this he had been waiting, because he
desired to know the news from the Athenians as to what they were about
to do; and he had not been injuring or laying waste the land of Attica,
because he hoped always that they would make a treaty with him; but as
he did not persuade them, being now informed of everything he began to
retire out of the country before the force of Pausanias arrived at the
Isthmus, having first set fire to Athens and cast down and destroyed
whatever was left standing of the walls, houses or temples. Now he
marched away for this cause, namely first because Attica was not a
land where horsemen could act freely, and also because, if he should be
defeated in a battle in Attica, there was no way of retreat except by a
narrow pass, so that a few men could stop them. He intended therefore
to retreat to Thebes, and engage battle near to a friendly city and to a
country where horsemen could act freely.

14. Mardonios then was retiring out of the way, and when he was already
upon a road a message came to him saying that another body of troops
in advance of the rest 14 had come to Megara, consisting of a thousand
Lacedemonians. Being thus informed he took counsel with himself,
desiring if possible first to capture these. Therefore he turned back
and proceeded to lead his army towards Megara, and the cavalry going in
advance of the rest overran the Megaran land: this was the furthest land
in Europe towards the sun-setting to which this Persian army came..

15. After this a message came to Mardonios that the Hellenes were
assembled at the Isthmus; therefore he marched back by Dekeleia, for the
chiefs of Boeotia 15 had sent for those of the Asopians who dwelt
near the line of march, and these were his guides along the road to
Sphendaleis and thence to Tanagra. So having encamped for the night at
Tanagra and on the next day having directed his march to Scolos, he was
within the land of the Thebans. Then he proceeded to cut down the trees
in the lands of the Thebans, although they were on the side of the
Medes, moved not at all by enmity to them, but pressed by urgent
necessity both to make a defence for his camp, and also he was making it
for a refuge, in case that when he engaged battle things should not turn
out for him as he desired. Now the encampment of his army extended
from Erythrai along by Hysiai and reached the river Asopos: he was not
however making the wall to extend so far as this, but with each face
measuring somewhere about ten furlongs. 16

16. While the Barbarians were engaged upon this work, Attaginos the son
of Phyrnon, a Theban, having made magnificent preparations invited to
an entertainment Mardonios himself and fifty of the Persians who were of
most account; and these being invited came; and the dinner was given at
Thebes. Now this which follows I heard from Thersander, an Orchomenian
and a man of very high repute in Orchomenos. This Thersander said that
he too was invited by Attaginos to this dinner, and there were invited
also fifty men of the Thebans, and their host did not place them to
recline 17 separately each nation by themselves, but a Persian and
a Theban upon every couch. Then when dinner was over, as they were
drinking pledges to one another, 18 the Persian who shared a couch with
him speaking in the Hellenic tongue asked him of what place he was, and
he answered that he was of Orchomenos. The other said: "Since now thou
hast become my table-companion and the sharer of my libation, I desire
to leave behind with thee a memorial of my opinion, in order that thou
thyself also mayest know beforehand and be able to take such counsels
for thyself as may be profitable. Dost thou see these Persians who
are feasting here, and the army which we left behind encamped upon the
river? Of all these, when a little time has gone by, thou shalt see but
very few surviving." While the Persian said these words he shed many
tears, as Thersander reported; and he marvelling at his speech said
to him: "Surely then it is right to tell Mardonios and to those of the
Persians who after him are held in regard." He upon this said: "Friend,
that which is destined to come from God, it is impossible for a man to
avert; for no man is willing to follow counsel, even when one speaks
that which is reasonable. And these things which I say many of us
Persians know well; yet we go with the rest being bound in the bonds of
necessity: and the most hateful grief of all human griefs is this,
to have knowledge of the truth but no power over the event." 19 These
things I heard from Thersander of Orchomenos, and in addition to them
this also, namely that he told them to various persons forthwith, before
the battle took place at Plataia.

17. Mardonios then being encamped in Boeotia, the rest of the Hellenes
who lived in these parts and took the side of the Medes were all
supplying troops and had joined in the invasion of Attica, but the
Phokians alone had not joined in the invasion,—the Phokians, I say,
for these too were now actively 20 taking the side of the Medes, not of
their own will however, but by compulsion. Not many days however after
the arrival of Mardonios at Thebes, there came of them a thousand
hoplites, and their leader was Harmokydes, the man who was of most
repute among their citizens. When these too came to Thebes, Mardonios
sent horsemen and bade the Phokians take up their position by themselves
in the plain. After they had so done, forthwith the whole cavalry
appeared; and upon this there went a rumour 21 through the army of
Hellenes which was with the Medes that the cavalry was about to shoot
them down with javelins, and this same report went through the Phokians
themselves also. Then their commander Harmokydes exhorted them, speaking
as follows: "Phokians, it is manifest that these men are meaning to
deliver us to a death which we may plainly foresee, 22 because we have
been falsely accused by the Thessalians, as I conjecture: now therefore
it is right that every one of you prove himself a good man; for it is
better to bring our lives to an end doing deeds of valour and defending
ourselves, than to be destroyed by a dishonourable death offering
ourselves for the slaughter. Let each man of them learn that they
are Barbarians and that we, against whom they contrived murder, are
Hellenes.".

18. While he was thus exhorting them, the horsemen having encompassed
them round were riding towards them as if to destroy them; and they were
already aiming their missiles as if about to discharge them, nay some
perhaps did discharge them: and meanwhile the Phokians stood facing them
gathered together and with their ranks closed as much as possible every
way. Then the horsemen turned and rode away back. Now I am not able to
say for certain whether they came to destroy the Phokians at the request
of the Thessalians, and then when they saw them turn to defence they
feared lest they also might suffer some loss, and therefore rode away
back, for so Mardonios had commanded them; or whether on the other hand
he desired to make trial of them and to see if they had in them any
warlike spirit. Then, when the horsemen had ridden away back, Mardonios
sent a herald and spoke to them as follows: "Be of good courage,
Phokians, for ye proved yourselves good men, and not as I was informed.
Now therefore carry on this way with zeal, for ye will not surpass in
benefits either myself or the king." Thus far it happened as regards the
Phokians.

19. When the Lacedemonians came to the Isthmus they encamped upon it,
and hearing this the rest of the Peloponnesians who favoured the better
cause, and some also because they saw the Spartans going out, did not
think it right to be behind the Lacedemonians in their going forth.
So from the Isthmus, when the sacrifices had proved favourable,
they marched all together and came to Eleusis; and having performed
sacrifices there also, when the signs were favourable they marched
onwards, and the Athenians together with them, who had passed over
from Salamis and had joined them at Eleusis. And then they had come to
Erythrai in Boeotia, then they learnt that the Barbarians were encamping
on the Asopos, and having perceived this they ranged themselves over
against them on the lower slopes of Kithairon..

20. Then Mardonios, as the Hellenes did not descend into the plain, sent
towards them all his cavalry, of which the commander was Masistios (by
the Hellenes called Makistios), a man of reputation among the Persians,
who had a Nesaian horse with a bridle of gold and in other respects
finely caparisoned. So when the horsemen had ridden up to the Hellenes
they attacked them by squadrons, and attacking 23 they did them much
mischief, and moreover in contempt they called them women..

21. Now it happened by chance that the Megarians were posted in the
place which was the most assailable of the whole position and to which
the cavalry could best approach: so as the cavalry were making
their attacks, the Megarians being hard pressed sent a herald to the
commanders of the Hellenes, and the herald having come spoke these
words: "The Megarians say:—we, O allies, are not able by ourselves to
sustain the attacks of the Persian cavalry, keeping this position where
we took post at the first; nay, even hitherto by endurance and valour
alone have we held out against them, hard pressed as we are: and now
unless ye shall send some others to take up our position in succession
to us, know that we shall leave the position in which we now are." The
herald brought report to them thus; and upon this Pausanias made trial
of the Hellenes, whether any others would voluntarily offer to go to
this place and post themselves there in succession to the Megarians: and
when the rest were not desirous to go, the Athenians undertook the task,
and of the Athenians those three hundred picked men of whom Olympidoros
the son of Lampon was captain.

22. These they were who undertook the task and were posted at Erythrai
in advance of the other Hellenes who ere there present, having chosen
to go with them the bow-men also. For some time then they fought, and at
last an end was set to the fighting in the following manner:—while the
cavalry was attacking by squadrons, the horse of Masistios, going in
advance of the rest, was struck in the side by an arrow, and feeling
pain he reared upright and threw Masistios off; and when he had fallen,
the Athenians forthwith pressed upon him; and his horse they took and
himself, as he made resistance, they slew, though at first they could
not, for his equipment was of this kind,—he wore a cuirass of gold
scales underneath, and over the cuirass he had put on a crimson tunic.
So as they struck upon the cuirass they could effect nothing, until some
one, perceiving what the matter was, thrust into his eye. Then at length
he fell and died; and by some means the other men of the cavalry had not
observed this take place, for they neither saw him when he had fallen
from his horse nor when he was being slain, and while the retreat
and the turn 24 were being made, they did not perceive that which was
happening; but when they had stopped their horses, then at once they
missed him, since there was no one to command them; and when they
perceived what had happened, they passed the word to one another and all
rode together, that they might if possible recover the body..

23. The Athenians upon that, seeing that the cavalry were riding to
attack them no longer by squadrons but all together, shouted to the rest
of the army to help them. Then while the whole number of those on foot
were coming to their help, there arose a sharp fight for the body; and
so long as the three hundred were alone they had much the worse and were
about to abandon the body, but when the mass of the army came to their
help, then the horsemen no longer sustained the fight, nor did they
succeed in recovering the body; and besides him they lost others of
their number also. Then they drew off about two furlongs away and
deliberated what they should do; and it seemed good to them, as they had
no commander, to ride back to Mardonios..

24. When the cavalry arrived at the camp, the whole army and also
Mardonios made great mourning for Masistios, cutting off their own
hair and that of their horses and baggage-animals and giving way to
lamentation without stint; for all Boeotia was filled with the sound of
it, because one had perished who after Mardonios was of the most account
with the Persians and with the king..

25. The Barbarians then were paying honours in their own manner to
Masistios slain: but the Hellenes, when they had sustained the attack of
the cavalry and having sustained it had driven them back, were much more
encouraged; and first they put the dead body in a cart and conveyed it
along their ranks; and the body was a sight worth seeing for its size
and beauty, wherefore also the men left their places in the ranks and
went one after the other 25 to gaze upon Masistios. After this they
resolved to come down further towards Plataia; for the region of Plataia
was seen to be much more convenient for them to encamp in than that of
Erythrai, both for other reasons and because it is better watered. To
this region then and to the spring Gargaphia, which is in this region,
they resolved that they must come, and encamp in their several posts. So
they took up their arms and went by the lower slopes of Kithairon
past Hysiai to the Plataian land; and having there arrived they posted
themselves according to their several nations near the spring Gargaphia
and the sacred enclosure of Androcrates the hero, over low hills or
level ground.

26. Then in the arranging of the several posts there arose a contention
of much argument 2501 between the Tegeans and the Athenians; for
they each claimed to occupy the other wing of the army 26 themselves,
alleging deeds both new and old. The Tegeans on the one hand said as
follows: "We have been always judged worthy of this post by the whole
body of allies in all the common expeditions which the Peloponnesians
have made before this, whether in old times or but lately, ever since
that time when the sons of Heracles endeavoured after the death of
Eurystheus to return to the Peloponnese. This honour we gained at that
time by reason of the following event:—When with the Achaians and the
Ionians who were then in Peloponnesus we had come out to the Isthmus to
give assistance and were encamped opposite those who desired to return,
then it is said that Hyllos made a speech saying that it was not right
that the one army should risk its safety by engaging battle with the
other, and urging that that man of the army of the Peloponnesians whom
they should judge to be the best of them should fight in single combat
with himself on terms concerted between them. The Peloponnesians then
resolved that this should be done; and they made oath with one another
on this condition,—that if Hyllos should conquer the leader of the
Peloponnesians, then the sons of Heracles should return to their
father's heritage; but he should be conquered, then on the other hand
the sons of Heracles should depart and lead away their army, and not
within a hundred years attempt to return to the Peloponnese. There was
selected then of all the allies, he himself making a voluntary offer,
Echemos the son of Aëropos, the son of Phegeus, 27 who was our commander
and king: and he fought a single combat and slew Hyllos. By reason of
this deed we obtained among the Peloponnesians of that time, besides
many other great privileges which we still possess, this also of always
leading the other wing of the army, when a common expedition is made.
To you, Lacedemonians, we make no opposition, but we give you freedom
of choice, and allow you to command whichever wing ye desire; but of the
other we say that it belongs to us to be the leaders as in former time:
and apart from this deed which has been related, we are more worthy than
the Athenians to have this post; for in many glorious contests have
we contended against you, O Spartans, and in many also against others.
Therefore it is just that we have the other wing rather than the
Athenians; for they have not achieved deeds such as ours, either new or
old.".

27. Thus they spoke, and the Athenians replied as follows: "Though we
know that this gathering was assembled for battle with the Barbarian
and not for speech, yet since the Tegean has proposed to us as a task
to speak of things both old and new, the deeds of merit namely which by
each of our two nations have been achieved in all time, it is necessary
for us to point out to you whence it comes that to us, who have been
brave men always, it belongs as a heritage rather than to the Arcadians
to have the chief place. First as to the sons of Heracles, whose leader
they say that they slew at the Isthmus, these in the former time, when
they were driven away by all the Hellenes to whom they came flying from
slavery under those of Mykene, we alone received; and joining with them
we subdued the insolence of Eurystheus, having conquered in fight
those who then dwelt in Peloponnesus. Again when the Argives who
with Polyneikes marched against Thebes, had been slain and were lying
unburied, we declare that we marched an army against the Cadmeians
and recovered the dead bodies and gave them burial in our own land at
Eleusis. We have moreover another glorious deed performed against
the Amazons who invaded once the Attic land, coming from the river
Thermodon: and in the toils of Troy we were not inferior to any. But it
is of no profit to make mention of these things; for on the one hand,
though we were brave men in those times, we might now have become
worthless, and on the other hand even though we were then worthless, yet
now we might be better. Let it suffice therefore about ancient deeds;
but if by us no other deed has been displayed (as many there have been
and glorious, not less than by any other people of the Hellenes), yet
even by reason of the deed wrought at Marathon alone we are worthy to
have this privilege and others besides this, seeing that we alone of
all the Hellenes fought in single combat with the Persian, and having
undertaken so great a deed we overcame and conquered six-and-forty
nations. 28 Are we not worthy then to have this post by reason of that
deed alone? However, since at such a time as this it is not fitting to
contend for post, we are ready to follow your saying, O Lacedemonians,
as to where ye think it most convenient that we should stand and
opposite to whom; for wheresoever we are posted, we shall endeavour to
be brave men. Prescribe to us therefore and we shall obey." They made
answer thus; and the whole body of the Lacedemonians shouted aloud that
the Athenians were more worthy to occupy the wing than the Arcadians.
Thus the Athenians obtained the wing, and overcame the Tegeans.

28. After this the Hellenes were ranged as follows, both those of them
who came in continually afterwards 29 and those who had come at the
first. The right wing was held by ten thousand Lacedemonians; and of
these the five thousand who were Spartans were attended by thirty-five
thousand Helots serving as light-armed troops, seven of them appointed
for each man. 30 To stand next to themselves the Spartans chose the
Tegeans, both to do them honour and also because of their valour; and
of these there were one thousand five hundred hoplites. After these were
stationed five thousand Corinthians, and they had obtained permission
from Pausanias that the three hundred who were present of the men of
Potidaia in Pallene should stand by their side. Next to these were
stationed six hundred Arcadians of Orchomenos; and to these three
thousand Sikyonians. Next after these were eight hundred Epidaurians:
by the side of these were ranged a thousand Troizenians: next to the
Troizenians two hundred Lepreates: next to these four hundred of the
men of Mikene and Tiryns; and then a thousand Phliasians. By the side of
these stood three hundred Hermionians; and next to the Hermionians were
stationed six hundred Eretrians and Styrians; next to these four hundred
Chalkidians; and to these five hundred men of Amprakia. After these
stood eight hundred Leucadians and Anactorians; and next to them two
hundred from Pale in Kephallenia. After these were ranged five hundred
Eginetans; by their side three thousand Megarians; and next to these
six hundred Plataians. Last, or if you will first, were ranged the
Athenians, occupying the left wing, eight thousand in number, and the
commander of them was Aristeides the son of Lysimachos..

29. These all, excepting those who were appointed to attend the
Spartans, seven for each man, were hoplites, being in number altogether
three myriads eight thousand and seven hundred. 31 This was the whole
number of hoplites who were assembled against the Barbarian; and the
number of the light-armed was as follows:—of the Spartan division
thirty-five thousand men, reckoning at the rate of seven for each man,
and of these every one was equipped for fighting; and the light-armed
troops of the rest of the Lacedemonians and of the other Hellenes, being
about one for each man, amounted to thirty-four thousand five hundred..

30. Of the light-armed fighting men the whole number then was six
myriads nine thousand and five hundred; 32 and of the whole Hellenic
force which assembled at Plataia the number (including both the hoplites
and the light-armed fighting men) was eleven myriads 33 all but one
thousand eight hundred men; and with the Thespians who were present the
number of eleven myriads was fully made up; for there were present also
in the army those of the Thespians who survived, being in number about
one thousand eight hundred, and these too were without heavy arms.
34 These then having been ranged in order were encamped on the river
Asopos.

31. Meanwhile the Barbarians with Mardonios, when they had sufficiently
mourned for Masistios, being informed that the Hellenes were at Plataia
came themselves also to that part of the Asopos which flows there; and
having arrived there, they were ranged against the enemy by Mardonios
thus:—against the Lacedemonians he stationed the Persians; and since
the Persians were much superior in numbers, they were arrayed in deeper
ranks than those, and notwithstanding this they extended in front of the
Tegeans also: and he ranged them in this manner,—all the strongest part
of that body he selected from the rest and stationed it opposite to the
Lacedemonians, but the weaker part he ranged by their side opposite
to the Tegeans. This he did on the information and suggestion of the
Thebans. Then next to the Persians he ranged the Medes; and these
extended in front of the Corinthians, Potidaians, Orchomenians and
Sikyonians. Next to the Medes he ranged the Bactrians; and these
extended in front of the Epidaurians, Troizenians, Lepreates,
Tirynthians, Mykenians and Phliasians. After the Bactrians he stationed
the Indians; and these extended in front of the Hermionians, Eretrians,
Styrians and Chalkidians. Next to the Indians he ranged the Sacans, who
extended in front of the men of Amprakia, the Anactorians, Leucadians,
Palians and Eginetans. Next to the Sacans and opposite to the Athenians,
Plataians and Megarians, he ranged the Boeotians, Locrians, Malians,
Thessalians, and the thousand men of the Phokians: for not all the
Phokians had taken the side of the Medes, but some of them were even
supporting the cause of the Hellenes, being shut up in Parnassos; and
setting out from thence they plundered from the army of Mardonios and
from those of the Hellenes who were with him. He ranged the Macedonians
also and those who dwell about the borders of Thessaly opposite to the
Athenians..

32. These which have been named were the greatest of the nations who
were arrayed in order by Mardonios, those, I mean, which were the most
renowned and of greatest consideration: but there were in his army
also men of several other nations mingled together, of the Phrygians,
Thracians, Mysians, Paionians, and the rest; and among them also
some Ethiopians, and of the Egyptians those called Hermotybians and
Calasirians, 35 carrying knives, 36 who of all the Egyptians are the
only warriors. These men, while he was yet at Phaleron, he had caused to
disembark from the ships in which they served as fighting-men; for the
Egyptians had not been appointed to serve in the land-army which came
with Xerxes to Athens. Of the Barbarians then there were thirty myriads,
37 as has been declared before; but of the Hellenes who were allies of
Mardonios no man knows what the number was, for they were not numbered;
but by conjecture I judge that these were assembled to the number of
five myriads. These who were placed in array side by side were on foot;
and the cavalry was ranged apart from them in a separate body.

33. When all had been drawn up by nations and by divisions, then on
the next day they offered sacrifice on both sides. For the Hellenes
Tisamenos the son of Antiochos was he who offered sacrifice, for he it
was who accompanied this army as diviner. This man the Lacedemonians had
made to be one of their own people, being an Eleian and of the race
of the Iamidai: 38 for when Tisamenos was seeking divination at Delphi
concerning issue, the Pythian prophetess made answer to him that he
should win five of the greatest contests. He accordingly, missing the
meaning of the oracle, began to attend to athletic games, supposing
that he should win contests of athletics; and he practised for the
"five contests" 39 and came within one fall of winning a victory at the
Olympic games, 40 being set to contend with Hieronymos of Andros. The
Lacedemonians however perceived that the oracle given to Tisamenos had
reference not to athletic but to martial contests, and they endeavoured
to persuade Tisamenos by payment of money, and to make him a leader in
their wars together with the kings of the race of Heracles. He then,
seeing that the Spartans set much store on gaining him over as a friend,
having perceived this, I say, he raised his price and signified to them
that he would do as they desired, if they would make him a citizen of
their State and give him full rights, but for no other payment. The
Spartans at first when they heard this displayed indignation and
altogether gave up their request, but at last, when great terror
was hanging over them of this Persian armament, they gave way 41 and
consented. He then perceiving that they had changed their minds, said
that he could not now be satisfied even so, nor with these terms alone;
but it was necessary that his brother Hegias also should be made a
Spartan citizen on the same terms as he himself became one..

34. By saying this he followed the example of Melampus in his request,
42 if one may compare royal power with mere citizenship; for Melampus
on his part, when the women in Argos had been seized by madness, and the
Argives endeavoured to hire him to come from Pylos and to cause their
women to cease from the malady, proposed as payment for himself the half
of the royal power; and the Argives did not suffer this, but departed:
and afterwards, when more of their women became mad, at length they
accepted that which Melampus had proposed, and went to offer him this:
but he then seeing that they had changed their minds, increased his
demand, and said that he would not do that which they desired unless
they gave to his brother Bias also the third share in the royal power.
43 And the Argives, being driven into straits, consented to this also.
35. Just so the Spartans also, being very much in need of Tisamenos,
agreed with him on any terms which he desired: and when the Spartans had
agreed to this demand also, then Tisamenos the Eleian, having become a
Spartan, had part with them in winning five of the greatest contests
as their diviner: and these were the only men who ever were made
fellow-citizens of the Spartans. Now the five contests were these: one
and the first of them was this at Plataia; and after this the contest at
Tegea, which took place with the Tegeans and the Argives; then that at
Dipaieis against all the Arcadians except the Mantineians; after that
the contest with the Messenians at Ithome; 44 and last of all that which
took place at Tanagra against the Athenians and Argives. This, I say,
was accomplished last of the five contests.

36. This Tisamenos was acting now as diviner for the Hellenes in the
Plataian land, being brought by the Spartans. Now to the Hellenes the
sacrifices were of good omen if they defended themselves only, but not
if they crossed the Asopos and began a battle;.

37, and Mardonios too, who was eager to begin a battle, found the
sacrifices not favourable to this design, but they were of good omen
to him also if he defended himself only; for he too used the Hellenic
manner of sacrifice, having as diviner Hegesistratos an Eleian and the
most famous of the Telliadai, whom before these events the Spartans had
taken and bound, in order to put him to death, because they had suffered
much mischief from him. He then being in this evil case, seeing that he
was running a course for his life and was likely moreover to suffer
much torment before his death, had done a deed such as may hardly be
believed. Being made fast on a block bound with iron, he obtained
an iron tool, which in some way had been brought in, and contrived
forthwith a deed the most courageous of any that we know: for having
first calculated how the remaining portion of his foot might be got out
of the block, he cut away the flat of his own foot, 45 and after that,
since he was guarded still by warders, he broke through the wall and
so ran away to Tegea, travelling during the nights and in the daytime
entering a wood and resting there; so that, though the Lacedemonians
searched for him in full force, he arrived at Tegea on the third
night; and the Lacedemonians were possessed by great wonder both at
his courage, when they saw the piece of the foot that was cut off lying
there, and also because they were not able to find him. So he at that
time having thus escaped them took refuge at Tegea, which then was not
friendly with the Lacedemonians; and when he was healed and had procured
for himself a wooden foot, he became an open enemy of the Lacedemonians.
However in the end the enmity into which he had fallen with the
Lacedemonians was not to his advantage; for he was caught by them while
practising divination in Zakynthos, and was put to death.

38. However the death of Hegesistratos took place later than the
events at Plataia, and he was now at the Asopos, having been hired by
Mardonions for no mean sum, sacrificing and displaying zeal for his
cause both on account of his enmity with the Lacedemonians and on
account of the gain which he got: but as the sacrifices were not
favourable for a battle either for the Persians themselves or for
those Hellenes who were with them (for these also had a diviner for
themselves, Hippomachos a Leucadian), and as the Hellenes had men
constantly flowing in and were becoming more in number, Timagenides the
son of Herpys, a Theban, counselled Mardonios to set a guard on the pass
of Kithairon, saying that the Hellenes were constantly flowing in every
day and that he would thus cut off large numbers..

39. Eight days had now passed while they had been sitting opposite to
one another, when he gave this counsel to Mardonios; and Mardonios,
perceiving that the advice was good, sent the cavalry when night came
on to the pass of Kithairon leading towards Plataia, which the Boeotians
call the "Three Heads" 46 and the Athenians the "Oak Heads." 47 Having
been thus sent, the cavalry did not come without effect, for they caught
five hundred baggage-animals coming out into the plain, which were
bearing provisions from Peloponnesus to the army, and also the men
who accompanied the carts: and having taken this prize the Persians
proceeded to slaughter them without sparing either beast or man; and
when they were satiated with killing they surrounded the rest and drove
them into the camp to Mardonios.

40. After this deed they spent two days more, neither side wishing to
begin a battle; for the Barbarians advanced as far as the Asopos to make
trial of the Hellenes, but neither side would cross the river. However
the cavalry of Mardonios made attacks continually and did damage to the
Hellenes; for the Thebans, being very strong on the side of the Medes,
carried on the war with vigour, and always directed them up to the
moment of fighting; and after this the Persians and Medes took up the
work and were they who displayed valour in their turn.

41. For ten days then nothing more was done than this; but when the
eleventh day had come, while they still sat opposite to one another at
Plataia, the Hellenes having by this time grown much more numerous and
Mardonios being greatly vexed at the delay of action, then Mardonios the
son of Gobryas and Artabazos the son of Pharnakes, who was esteemed
by Xerxes as few of the Persians were besides, came to speech with
one another; and as they conferred, the opinions they expressed were
these,—that of Artabazos, that they must put the whole army in motion
as soon as possible and go to the walls of the Thebans, whither great
stores of corn had been brought in for them and fodder for their beasts;
and that they should settle there quietly and get their business done
as follows:—they had, he said, great quantities of gold, both coined and
uncoined, and also of silver and of drinking-cups; and these he advised
they should send about to the Hellenes without stint, more especially
to those of the Hellenes who were leaders in their several cities; and
these, he said, would speedily deliver up their freedom: and he advised
that they should not run the risk of a battle. His opinion then was the
same as that of the Thebans, 48 for he as well as they had some true
foresight: but the opinion of Mardonios was more vehement and more
obstinate, and he was by no means disposed to yield; for he said that he
thought their army far superior to that of the Hellenes, and he gave as
his opinion that they should engage battle as quickly as possible and
not allow them to assemble in still greater numbers than were already
assembled; and as for the sacrifices of Hegesistratos, they should leave
them alone and not endeavour to force a good sign, but follow the custom
of the Persians and engage battle..

42. When he so expressed his judgment, none opposed him, and thus his
opinion prevailed; for he and not Artabazos had the command of the
army given him by the king. He summoned therefore the commanders of
the divisions and the generals of those Hellenes who were with him, and
asked whether they knew of any oracle regarding the Persians, which
said that they should be destroyed in Hellas; and when those summoned to
council 49 were silent, some not knowing the oracles and others knowing
them but not esteeming it safe to speak, Mardonios himself said: "Since
then ye either know nothing or do not venture to speak, I will tell you,
since I know very well. There is an oracle saying that the Persians are
destined when they come to Hellas to plunder the temple at Delphi, and
having plundered it to perish every one of them. We therefore, just
because we know this, will not go to that temple nor will we attempt
to plunder it; and for this cause we shall not perish. So many of you
therefore as chance to wish well to the Persians, have joy so far
as regards this matter, and be assured that we shall overcome the
Hellenes." Having spoken to them thus, he next commanded to prepare
everything and to set all in order, since at dawn of the next day a
battle would be fought.

43. Now this oracle, which Mardonios said referred to the Persians, I
know for my part was composed with reference with the Illyrians and the
army of the Enchelians, and not with reference to the Persians at all.
However, the oracle which was composed by Bakis with reference to this
battle,


 "The gathering of Hellenes together and cry of Barbarian voices,
  Where the Thermodon flows, by the banks of grassy Asopos;
  Here very many shall fall ere destiny gave them to perish,
  Medes bow-bearing in fight, when the fatal day shall approach them,"—

these sayings, and others like them composed by Musaios, I know had
reference to the Persians. Now the river Thermodon flows between Tanagra
and Glisas.

44. After the inquiry about the oracles and the exhortation given by
Mardonios night came on and the guards were set: and when night was far
advanced, and it seemed that there was quiet everywhere in the camps,
and that the men were in their deepest sleep, then Alexander the son of
Amyntas, commander and king of the Macedonians, rode his horse up to
the guard-posts of the Athenians and requested that he might have speech
with their generals. So while the greater number of the guards stayed at
their posts, some ran to the generals, and when they reached them they
said that a man had come riding on a horse out of the camp of the Medes,
who discovered nothing further, but only named the generals and said
that he desired to have speech with them..

45. Having heard this, forthwith they accompanied the men to the
guard-posts, and when they had arrived there, Alexander thus spoke
to them: "Athenians, I lay up these words of mine as a trust to you,
charging you to keep them secret and tell them to no one except only to
Pausanias, lest ye bring me to ruin: for I should not utter them if I
did not care greatly for the general safety of Hellas, seeing that I am
a Hellene myself by original descent and I should not wish to see Hellas
enslaved instead of free. I say then that Mardonios and his army cannot
get the offerings to be according to their mind, 50 for otherwise ye
would long ago have fought. Now however he has resolved to let the
offerings alone and to bring on a battle at dawn of day; for, as
I conjecture, he fears lest ye should assemble in greater numbers.
Therefore prepare yourselves; and if after all Mardonios should put
off the battle and not bring it on, stay where ye are and hold out
patiently; for they have provisions only for a few days remaining. And
if this way shall have its issue according to your mind, then each one
of you ought to remember me also concerning liberation, 51 since I have
done for the sake of the Hellenes so hazardous a deed by reason of my
zeal for you, desiring to show you the design of Mardonios, in order
that the Barbarians may not fall upon you when ye are not as yet
expecting them: and I am Alexander the Macedonian." Thus having spoken
he rode away back to the camp and to his own position.

46. Then the generals of the Athenians came to the right wing and told
Pausanias that which they had heard from Alexander. Upon this saying he
being struck with fear of the Persians spoke as follows: "Since then at
dawn the battle comes on, it is right that ye, Athenians, should take
your stand opposite to the Persians, and we opposite to the Boeotians
and those Hellenes who are now posted against you; and for this reason,
namely because ye are acquainted with the Medes and with their manner
of fighting, having fought with them at Marathon, whereas we have had no
experience of these men and are without knowledge of them; for not
one of the Spartans has made trial of the Medes in fight, but of the
Boeotians and Thessalians we have had experience. It is right therefore
that ye should take up your arms and come to this wing of the army, and
that we should go to the left wing." In answer to this the Athenians
spoke as follows: "To ourselves also long ago at the very first, when we
saw that the Persians were being ranged opposite to you, it occurred to
us to say these very things, which ye now bring forward before we have
uttered them; but we feared lest these words might not be pleasing to
you. Since however ye yourselves have made mention of this, know that
your words have caused us pleasure, and that we are ready to do this
which ye say.".

47. Both then were content to do this, and as dawn appeared they began
to change their positions with one another: and the Boeotians perceiving
that which was being done reported it to Mardonios, who, when he heard
it, forthwith himself also endeavoured to change positions, bringing the
Persians along so as to be against the Lacedemonians: and when
Pausanias learnt that this was being done, he perceived that he was not
unobserved, and he led the Spartans back again to the right wing; and
just so also did Mardonios upon his left.

48. When they had been thus brought to their former positions, Mardonios
sent a herald to the Spartans and said as follows: "Lacedemonians, ye
are said forsooth by those who are here to be very good men, and they
have admiration for you because ye do not flee in war nor leave
your post, but stay there and either destroy your enemies or perish
yourselves. In this however, as it now appears, there is no truth; for
before we engaged battle and came to hand-to-hand conflict we saw you
already flee and leave your station, desiring to make the trial with
the Athenians first, while ye ranged yourselves opposite to our slaves.
These are not at all the deeds of good men in war, but we were deceived
in you very greatly; for we expected by reason of your renown that ye
would send a herald to us, challenging us and desiring to fight with the
Persians alone; but though we on our part were ready to do this, we did
not find that ye said anything of this kind, but rather that ye cowered
with fear. Now therefore since ye were not the first to say this, we
are the first. Why do we not forthwith fight, 52 ye on behalf of the
Hellenes, since ye have the reputation of being the best, and we on
behalf of the Barbarians, with equal numbers on both sides? and if we
think it good that the others should fight also, then let them fight
afterwards; and if on the other hand we should not think it good, but
think it sufficient that we alone should fight, then let us fight it
out to the end, and whichsoever of us shall be the victors, let these be
counted as victorious with their whole army.".

49. The herald having thus spoken waited for some time, and then, as no
one made him any answer, he departed and went back; and having returned
he signified to Mardonios that which had happened to him. Mardonios
then being greatly rejoiced and elated by his empty 53 victory, sent
the cavalry to attack the Hellenes: and when the horsemen had ridden
to attack them, they did damage to the whole army of the Hellenes by
hurling javelins against them and shooting with bows, being mounted
archers and hard therefore to fight against: and they disturbed and
choked up the spring Gargaphia, from which the whole army of the
Hellenes was drawing its water. Now the Lacedemonians alone were posted
near this spring, and it was at some distance from the rest of the
Hellenes, according as they chanced to be posted, while the Asopos was
near at hand; but when they were kept away from the Asopos, then they
used to go backwards and forwards to this spring; for they were not
permitted by the horsemen and archers to fetch water from the river..

50. Such then being the condition of things, the generals of the
Hellenes, since the army had been cut off from its water and was being
harassed by the cavalry, assembled to consult about these and other
things, coming to Pausanias upon the right wing: for other things too
troubled them yet more than these of which we have spoken, since they
no longer had provisions, and their attendants who had been sent to
Peloponnese for the purpose of getting them had been cut off by the
cavalry and were not able to reach the camp..

