51. It was resolved then by the generals in council with one another,
that if the Persians put off the battle for that day, they would go
to the Island. This is distant ten furlongs 54 from the Asopos and the
spring Gargaphia, where they were then encamped, and is in front of the
city of the Plataians: and if it be asked how there can be an island on
the mainland, thus it is 55:—the river parts in two above, as it flows
from Kithairon down to the plain, keeping a distance of about three
furlongs between its streams, and after that it joins again in one
stream; and the name of it is Oëroe, said by the natives of the country
to be the daughter of Asopos. To this place of which I speak they
determined to remove, in order that they might be able to get an
abundant supply of water and that the cavalry might not do them damage,
as now when they were right opposite. And they proposed to remove when
the second watch of the night should have come, so that the Persians
might not see them set forth and harass them with the cavalry pursuing.
They proposed also, after they had arrived at this place, round which,
as I say, Oëroe the daughter of Asopos flows, parting into two streams
56 as she runs from Kithairon, to send half the army to Kithairon during
this same night, in order to take up their attendants who had gone to
get the supplies of provisions; for these were cut off from them in
Kithairon.

52. Having thus resolved, during the whole of that day they had trouble
unceasingly, while the cavalry pressed upon them; but when the day drew
to a close and the attacks of the cavalry had ceased, then as it was
becoming night and the time had arrived at which it had been agreed
that they should retire from their place, the greater number of them set
forth and began to retire, not however keeping it in mind to go to the
place which had been agreed upon; but on the contrary, when they had
begun to move, they readily took occasion to flee 57 from the cavalry
towards the city of the Plataians, and in their flight they came as
far as the temple of Hera, which temple is in front of the city of the
Plataians at a distance of twenty furlongs from the spring Gargaphia;
and when they had there arrived they halted in front of the temple.

53. These then were encamping about the temple of Hera; and Pausanias,
seeing that they were retiring from the camp, gave the word to the
Lacedemonians also to take up their arms and go after the others who
were preceding them, supposing that these were going to the place to
which they had agreed to go. Then, when all the other commanders were
ready to obey Pausanias, Amompharetos the son of Poliades, the commander
of the Pitanate division, 58 said that he would not flee from the
strangers, nor with his own will would he disgrace Sparta; and he
expressed wonder at seeing that which was being done, not having been
present at the former discussion. And Pausanias and Euryanax were
greatly disturbed that he did not obey them and still more that they
should be compelled to leave the Pitanate division behind, since he thus
refused; 59 for they feared that if they should leave it in order to do
that which they had agreed with the other Hellenes, both Amompharetos
himself would perish being left behind and also the men with him. With
this thought they kept the Lacedemonian force from moving, and meanwhile
they endeavoured to persuade him that it was not right for him to do
so..

54. They then were exhorting Amompharetos, who had been left behind
alone of the Lacedemonians and Tegeans; and meanwhile the Athenians
were keeping themselves quiet in the place where they had been posted,
knowing the spirit of the Lacedemonians, that they were apt to say
otherwise than they really meant; 60 and when the army began to move,
they sent a horseman from their own body to see whether the Spartans
were attempting to set forth, or whether they had in truth no design at
all to retire; and they bade him ask Pausanias what they ought to do.
55. So when the herald came to the Lacedemonians, he saw that they were
still in their place and that the chiefs of them had come to strife with
one another: for when Euryanax and Pausanias both exhorted Amompharetos
not to run the risk of remaining behind with his men, alone of all the
Lacedemonians, they did not at all persuade him, and at last they had
come to downright strife; and meanwhile the herald of the Athenians had
arrived and was standing by them. And Amompharetos in his contention
took a piece of rock in both his hands and placed it at the feet of
Pausanias, saying that with this pebble he gave his vote not to fly from
the strangers, meaning the Barbarians. 61 Pausanias then, calling him a
madman and one who was not in his right senses, bade tell the state of
their affairs to the Athenian herald, 62 who was asking that which he
had been charged to ask; and at the same time he requested the Athenians
to come towards the Lacedemonians and to do in regard to the retreat the
same as they did..

56. He then went away back to the Athenians; and as the dawn of day
found them yet disputing with one another, Pausanias, who had remained
still throughout all this time, gave the signal, and led away all the
rest over the low hills, supposing that Amonpharetos would not stay
behind when the other Lacedemonians departed (in which he was in fact
right); and with them also went the Tegeans. Meanwhile the Athenians,
following the commands which were given them, were going in the
direction opposite to that of the Lacedemonians; for these were clinging
to the hills and the lower slope of Kithairon from fear of the cavalry,
while the Athenians were marching below in the direction of the plain..

57. As for Amonpharetos, he did not at first believe that Pausanias
would ever venture to leave him and his men behind, and he stuck to it
that they should stay there and not leave their post; but when Pausanias
and his troops were well in front, then he perceived that they had
actually left him behind, and he made his division take up their arms
and led them slowly towards the main body. This, when it had got away
about ten furlongs, stayed for the division of Amompharetos, halting
at the river Moloeis and the place called Argiopion, where also there
stands a temple of the Eleusinian Demeter: and it stayed there for this
reason, namely in order that of Amonpharetos and his division should not
leave the place where they had been posted, but should remain there, it
might be able to come back to their assistance. So Amompharetos and his
men were coming up to join them, and the cavalry also of the Barbarians
was at the same time beginning to attack them in full force: for the
horsemen did on this day as they had been wont to do every day; and
seeing the place vacant in which the Hellenes had been posted on the
former days, they rode their horses on continually further, and as soon
as they came up with them they began to attack them.

58. Then Mardonios, when he was informed that the Hellenes had departed
during the night, and when he saw their place deserted, called Thorax of
Larissa and his brothers Eurypylos and Thrasydeios, and said: "Sons
of Aleuas, will ye yet say anything, 63 now that ye see these places
deserted? For ye who dwell near them were wont to say that the
Lacedemonians did not fly from a battle, but were men unsurpassed in
war; and these men ye not only saw before this changing from their post,
but now we all of us see that they have run away during the past night;
and by this they showed clearly, when the time came for them to contend
in battle with those who were in truth the best of all men, that after
all they were men of no worth, who had been making a display of valour
among Hellenes, a worthless race. As for you, since ye had had no
experience of the Persians, I for my part was very ready to excuse you
when ye praised these, of whom after all ye knew something good; but
much more I marvelled at Artabazos that he should have been afraid of
the Lacedemonians, and that having been afraid he should have uttered
that most cowardly opinion, namely that we ought to move our army away
and go to the city of the Thebans to be besieged there,—an opinion about
which the king shall yet be informed by me. Of these things we will
speak in another place; now however we must not allow them to act thus,
but we must pursue them until they are caught and pay the penalty to us
for all that they did to the Persians in time past.".

59. Thus having spoken he led on the Persians at a run, after they had
crossed the Asopos, on the track of the Hellenes, supposing that
these were running away from him; and he directed his attack upon the
Lacedemonians and Tegeans only, for the Athenians, whose march was
towards the plain, he did not see by reason of the hills. Then the rest
of the commanders of the Barbarian divisions, seeing that the Persians
had started to pursue the Hellenes, forthwith all raised the signals for
battle and began to pursue, each as fast as they could, not arranged in
any order or succession of post..

60. These then were coming on with shouting and confused numbers,
thinking to make short work of 64 the Hellenes; and Pausanias, when the
cavalry began to attack, sent to the Athenians a horseman and said thus:
"Athenians, now that the greatest contest is set before us, namely that
which has for its issue the freedom or the slavery of Hellas, we have
been deserted by our allies, we Lacedemonians and ye Athenians, seeing
that they have run away during the night that is past. Now therefore
it is determined what we must do upon this, namely that we must defend
ourselves and protect one another as best we may. If then the cavalry
had set forth to attack you at the first, we and the Tegeans, who with
us refuse to betray the cause of Hellas, should have been bound to go to
your help; but as it is, since the whole body has come against us, it is
right that ye should come to that portion of the army which is hardest
pressed, to give aid. If however anything has happened to you which
makes it impossible for you to come to our help, then do us a kindness
by sending to us the archers; and we know that ye have been in the
course of this present war by far the most zealous of all, so that ye
will listen to our request in this matter also.".

61. When the Athenians heard this they were desirous to come to their
help and to assist them as much as possible; and as they were already
going, they were attacked by those of the Hellenes on the side of the
king who had been ranged opposite to them, so that they were no longer
able to come to the help of the Lacedemonians, for the force that
was attacking them gave them much trouble. Thus the Lacedemonians and
Tegeans were left alone, being in number, together with light-armed men,
the former fifty thousand and the Tegeans three thousand; for these
were not parted at all from the Lacedemonians: and they began to offer
sacrifice, meaning to engage battle with Mardonios and the force
which had come against them. Then since their offerings did not prove
favourable, and many of them were being slain during this time and many
more wounded,—for the Persians had made a palisade of their wicker-work
shields 65 and were discharging their arrows in great multitude and
without sparing,—Pausanias, seeing that the Spartans were hard pressed
and that the offerings did not prove favourable, fixed his gaze upon
the temple of Hera of the Plataians and called upon the goddess to help,
praying that they might by no means be cheated of their hope:.

62, and while he was yet calling upon her thus, the Tegeans started
forward before them and advanced against the Barbarians, and forthwith
after the prayer of Pausanias the offerings proved favourable for the
Lacedemonians as they sacrificed. So when this at length came to pass,
then they also advanced against the Persians; and the Persians put away
their bows and came against them. Then first there was fighting about
the wicker-work shields, and when these had been overturned, after that
the fighting was fierce by the side of the temple of Demeter, and so
continued for a long time, until at last they came to justling; for
the Barbarians would take hold of the spears and break them off. Now in
courage and in strength the Persians were not inferior to the others,
but they were without defensive armour, 66 and moreover they were
unversed in war and unequal to their opponents in skill; and they would
dart out one at a time or in groups of about ten together, some more and
some less, and fall upon the Spartans and perish..

63. In the place where Mardonios himself was, riding on a white horse
and having about him the thousand best men of the Persians chosen out
from the rest, here, I say, they pressed upon their opponents most of
all: and so long as Mardonios survived, they held out against them, and
defending themselves they cast down many of the Lacedemonians; but when
Mardonios was slain and the men who were ranged about his person, which
was the strongest portion of the whole army, had fallen, then the others
too turned and gave way before the Lacedemonians; for their manner of
dress, without defensive armour, was a very great cause of destruction
to them, since in truth they were contending light-armed against
hoplites..

64. Then the satisfaction for the murder of Leonidas was paid by
Mardonios according to the oracle given to the Spartans, 67 and the most
famous victory of all those about which we have knowledge was gained
by Pausanias the son of Cleombrotos, the son of Anaxandrides; of his
ancestors above this the names have been given for Leonidas, 68 since,
as it happens, they are the same for both. Now Mardonios was slain by
Arimnestos, 69 a man of consideration in Sparta, who afterwards, when
the Median wars were over, with three hundred men fought a battle
against the whole army of the Messenians, then at war with the
Lacedemonians, at Stenycleros, and both he was slain and also the three
hundred..

65. When the Persians were turned to flight at Plataia by the
Lacedemonians, they fled in disorder to their own camp and to the
palisade which they had made in the Theban territory: 70 and it is a
marvel to me that, whereas they fought by the side of the sacred grove
of Demeter, not one of the Persians was found to have entered the
enclosure or to have been slain within it, but round about the temple in
the unconsecrated ground fell the greater number of the slain. I suppose
(if one ought to suppose anything about divine things) that the goddess
herself refused to receive them, because they had set fire to the
temple, that is to say the "palace" 71 at Eleusis.

66. Thus far then had this battle proceeded: but Artabazos the son
of Pharnakes had been displeased at the very first because Mardonios
remained behind after the king was gone; and afterwards he had been
bringing forward objections continually and doing nothing, but had urged
them always not to fight a battle: and for himself he acted as
follows, not being pleased with the things which were being done by
Mardonios.—The men of whom Artabazos was commander (and he had with him
no small force but one which was in number as much as four myriads 72 of
men), these, when the fighting began, being well aware what the issue of
the battle would be, he led carefully, 73 having first given orders that
all should go by the way which he should lead them and at the same pace
at which they should see him go. Having given these orders he led his
troops on pretence of taking them into battle; and when he was well on
his way, he saw the Persians already taking flight. Then he no longer
led his men in the same order as before, but set off at a run, taking
flight by the quickest way not to the palisade nor yet to the wall of
the Thebans, but towards Phokis, desiring as quickly as possible to
reach the Hellespont..

67. These, I say, were thus directing their march: and in the meantime,
while the other Hellenes who were on the side of the king were purposely
slack in the fight, 74 the Boeotians fought with the Athenians for a
long space; for those of the Thebans who took the side of the Medes had
no small zeal for the cause, and they fought and were not slack, so
that three hundred of them, the first and best of all, fell there by the
hands of the Athenians: and when these also turned to flight, they fled
to Thebes, not to the same place as the Persians: and the main body of
the other allies fled without having fought constantly with any one or
displayed any deeds of valour..

68. And this is an additional proof to me that all the fortunes of the
Barbarians depended upon the Persians, namely that at that time these
men fled before they had even engaged with the enemy, because they saw
the Persians doing so. Thus all were in flight except only the cavalry,
including also that of the Boeotians; and this rendered service to the
fugitives by constantly keeping close to the enemy and separating the
fugitives of their own side from the Hellenes..

69. The victors then were coming after the troops of Xerxes, both
pursuing them and slaughtering them; and during the time when this
panic arose, the report was brought to the other Hellenes who had posted
themselves about the temple of Hera and had been absent from the battle,
that a battle had taken place and that the troops of Pausanias were
gaining the victory. When they heard this, then without ranging
themselves in any order the Corinthians and those near them turned to go
by the skirts of the mountain and by the low hills along the way which
led straight up to the temple of Demeter, while the Megarians and
Phliasians and those near them went by the plain along the smoothest
way. When however the Megarians and Phliasians came near to the enemy,
the cavalry of the Thebans caught sight of them from a distance hurrying
along without any order, and rode up to attack them, the commander of
the cavalry being Asopodoros the son of Timander; and having fallen upon
them they slew six hundred of them, and the rest they pursued and drove
to Kithairon.

70. These then perished thus ingloriously; 75 and meanwhile the Persians
and the rest of the throng, having fled for refuge to the palisade,
succeeded in getting up to the towers before the Lacedemonians came; and
having got up they strengthened the wall of defence as best they could.
Then when the Lacedemonians 76 came up to attack it, there began between
them a vigorous 77 fight for the wall: for so long as the Athenians
were away, they defended themselves and had much the advantage over
the Lacedemonians, since these did not understand the art of fighting
against walls; but when the Athenians came up to help them, then there
was a fierce fight for the wall, lasting for a long time, and at length
by valour and endurance the Athenians mounted up on the wall and made a
breach in it, through which the Hellenes poured in. Now the Tegeans were
the first who entered the wall, and these were they who plundered the
tent of Mardonios, taking, besides the other things which were in it,
also the manger of his horse, which was all of bronze and a sight worth
seeing. This manger of Mardonios was dedicated by the Tegeans as an
offering in the temple of Athene Alea, 78 but all the other things
which they took, they brought to the common stock of the Hellenes. The
Barbarians however, after the wall had been captured, no longer formed
themselves into any close body, nor did any of them think of making
resistance, but they were utterly at a loss, 79 as you might expect from
men who were in a panic with many myriads of them shut up together in a
small space: and the Hellenes were able to slaughter them so that out
of an army of thirty myriads, 80 if those four be subtracted which
Artabazos took with him in his flight, of the remainder not three
thousand men survived. Of the Lacedemonians from Sparta there were slain
in the battle ninety-one in all, of the Tegeans sixteen, and of the
Athenians two-and-fifty.

71. Among the Barbarians those who proved themselves the best men were,
of those on foot the Persians, and of the cavalry the Sacans, and for
a single man Mardonios it is said was the best. Of the Hellenes, though
both the Tegeans and the Athenians proved themselves good men, yet the
Lacedemonians surpassed them in valour. Of this I have no other proof
(for all these were victorious over their opposites), but only this,
that they fought against the strongest part of the enemy's force and
overcame it. And the man who proved himself in my opinion by much the
best was that Aristodemos who, having come back safe from Thermopylai
alone of the three hundred, had reproach and dishonour attached to him.
After him the best were Poseidonios and Philokyon and Amompharetos the
Spartan. 81 However, when there came to be conversation as to which of
them had proved himself the best, the Spartans who were present gave it
as their opinion that Aristodemos had evidently wished to be slain in
consequence of the charge which lay against him, and so, being as it
were in a frenzy and leaving his place in the ranks, he had displayed
great deeds, whereas Poseidonios had proved himself a good man although
he did not desire to be slain; and so far he was the better man of the
two. This however they perhaps said from ill-will; and all these whose
names I mentioned among the men who were killed in this battle, were
specially honoured, except Aristodemos; but Aristodemos, since he
desired to be slain on account of the before-mentioned charge, was not
honoured.

72. These obtained the most renown of those who fought at Plataia, for
as for Callicrates, the most beautiful who came to the camp, not of the
Lacedemonians alone, but also of all the Hellenes of his time, he
was not killed in the battle itself; but when Pausanias was offering
sacrifice, he was wounded by an arrow in the side, as he was sitting
down in his place in the ranks; and while the others were fighting, he
having been carried out of the ranks was dying a lingering death: and he
said to Arimnestos 82 a Plataian that it did not grieve him to die for
Hellas, but it grieved him only that he had not proved his strength of
hand, and that no deed of valour had been displayed by him worthy of the
spirit which he had in him to perform great deeds. 83

73. Of the Athenians the man who gained most glory is said to have been
Sophanes the son of Eutychides of the deme of Dekeleia,—a deme of which
the inhabitants formerly did a deed that was of service to them for all
time, as the Athenians themselves report. For when of old the sons of
Tyndareus invaded the Attic land with a great host, in order to bring
home Helen, and were laying waste the demes, not knowing to what
place of hiding Helen had been removed, then they say that the men
of Dekeleia, or as some say Dekelos himself, being aggrieved by the
insolence of Theseus and fearing for all the land of the Athenians, told
them the whole matter and led them to Aphidnai, which Titakos who was
sprung from the soil delivered up by treachery to the sons of Tyndareus.
In consequence of this deed the Dekeleians have had continually freedom
from dues in Sparta and front seats at the games, 84 privileges which
exist still to this day; insomuch that even in the war which many years
after these events arose between the Athenians and the Peloponnesians,
when the Lacedemonians laid waste all the rest of Attica, they abstained
from injury to Dekeleia..

74. To this deme belonged Sophanes, who showed himself the best of all
the Athenians in this battle; and of him there are two different stories
told: one that he carried an anchor of iron bound by chains of bronze
to the belt of his corslet; and this he threw whensoever he came up with
the enemy, in order, they say, that the enemy when they came forth out
of their ranks might not be able to move him from his place; and when a
flight of his opponents took place, his plan was to take up the anchor
first and then pursue after them. This story is reported thus; but the
other of the stories, disputing the truth of that which has been told
above, is reported as follows, namely that upon his shield, which was
ever moving about and never remaining still, he bore an anchor as a
device, and not one of iron bound to his corslet.

75. There was another illustrious deed done too by Sophanes; for when
the Athenians besieged Egina he challenged to a fight and slew Eurybates
the Argive, 85 one who had been victor in the five contests 86 at the
games. To Sophanes himself it happened after these events that when he
was general of the Athenians together with Leagros the son of Glaucon,
he was slain after proving himself a good man by the Edonians at Daton,
fighting for the gold mines.

76. When the Barbarians had been laid low by the Hellenes at Plataia,
there approached to these a woman, the concubine of Pharandates the son
of Teaspis a Persian, coming over of her own free will from the enemy,
who when she perceived that the Persians had been destroyed and that the
Hellenes were the victors, descended from her carriage and came up to
the Lacedemonians while they were yet engaged in the slaughter.
This woman had adorned herself with many ornaments of gold, and her
attendants likewise, and she had put on the fairest robe of those which
she had; and when she saw that Pausanias was directing everything there,
being well acquainted before with his name and with his lineage, because
she had heard it often, she recognised Pausanias and taking hold of his
knees she said these words: "O king of Sparta, deliver me thy suppliant
from the slavery of the captive: for thou hast also done me service
hitherto in destroying these, who have regard neither for demigods nor
yet for gods. 87 I am by race of Cos, the daughter of Hegetorides the
son of Antagoras; and the Persian took me by force in Cos and kept me
a prisoner." He made answer in these words: "Woman, be of good courage,
both because thou art a suppliant, and also if in addition to this
it chances that thou art speaking the truth and art the daughter of
Hegetorides the Coan, who is bound to me as a guest-friend more than any
other of the men who dwell in those parts." Having thus spoken, for
that time her gave her in charge to those Ephors who were present, and
afterwards he sent her away to Egina, whither she herself desired to go.

77. After the arrival of the woman, forthwith upon this arrived the
Mantineians, when all was over; and having learnt that they had come
too late for the battle, they were greatly grieved, and said that
they deserved to be punished: and being informed that the Medes with
Artabazos were in flight, they pursued after them as far as Thessaly,
though the Lacedemonians endeavoured to prevent them from pursuing after
fugitives. 88 Then returning back to their own country they sent the
leaders of their army into exile from the land. After the Mantineians
came the Eleians; and they, like the Mantineians, were greatly grieved
by it and so departed home; and these also when they had returned sent
their leaders into exile. So much of the Mantineians and Eleians.

78. At Plataia among the troops of the Eginetans was Lampon the son of
Pytheas, one of the leading men of the Eginetans, who was moved to go to
Pausanias with a most impious proposal, and when he had come with haste,
he said as follows: "Son of Cleombrotos, a deed has been done by
thee which is of marvellous greatness and glory, and to thee God has
permitted by rescuing Hellas to lay up for thyself the greatest renown
of all the Hellenes about whom we have any knowledge. Do thou then
perform also that which remains to do after these things, in order that
yet greater reputation may attach to thee, and also that in future every
one of the Barbarians may beware of being the beginner of presumptuous
deeds towards the Hellenes. For when Leonidas was slain at Thermopylai,
Mardonios and Xerxes cut off his head and crucified him: to him
therefore do thou repay like with like, and thou shalt have praise first
from all the Spartans and then secondly from the other Hellenes also;
for if thou impale the body of Mardonios, thou wilt then have taken
vengeance for Leonidas thy father's brother.".

79. He said this thinking to give pleasure; but the other made him
answer in these words: "Stranger of Egina, I admire thy friendly spirit
and thy forethought for me, but thou hast failed of a good opinion
nevertheless: for having exalted me on high and my family and my deed,
thou didst then cast me down to nought by advising me to do outrage to
a dead body, and by saying that if I do this I shall be better reported
of. These things it is more fitting for Barbarians to do than for
Hellenes; and even with them we find fault for doing so. However that
may be, I do not desire in any such manner as this to please either
Eginetans or others who like such things; but it is enough for me that
I should keep from unholy deeds, yea and from unholy speech also, and
so please the Spartans. As for Leonidas, whom thou biddest me avenge, I
declare that he has been greatly avenged already, and by the unnumbered
lives which have been taken of these men he has been honoured, and
not he only but also the rest who brought their lives to an end at
Thermopylai. As for thee however, come not again to me with such a
proposal, nor give me such advice; and be thankful moreover that thou
hast no punishment for it now."

80. He having heard this went his way; and Pausanias made a proclamation
that none should lay hands upon the spoil, and he ordered the Helots to
collect the things together. They accordingly dispersed themselves
about the camp and found tents furnished with gold and silver, and beds
overlaid with gold and overlaid with silver, and mixing-bowls of gold,
and cups and other drinking vessels. They found also sacks laid upon
waggons, in which there proved to be caldrons both of gold and of
silver; and from the dead bodies which lay there they stripped bracelets
and collars, and also their swords 89 if they were of gold, for as to
embroidered raiment, there was no account made of it. Then the Helots
stole many of the things and sold them to the Eginetans, but many things
also they delivered up, as many of them as they could not conceal; so
that the great wealth of the Eginetans first came from this, that they
bought the gold from the Helots making pretence that it was brass..

81. Then having brought the things together, and having set apart a
tithe for the god of Delphi, with which the offering was dedicated of
the golden tripod which rests upon the three-headed serpent of bronze
and stands close by the altar, and also 90 for the god at Olympia, with
which they dedicated the offering of a bronze statue of Zeus ten cubits
high, and finally for the god at the Isthmus, with which was made a
bronze statue of Poseidon seven cubits high,—having set apart these
things, they divided the rest, and each took that which they ought to
have, including the concubines of the Persians and the gold and the
silver and the other things, and also the beasts of burden. How much was
set apart and given to those of them who had proved themselves the best
men at Plataia is not reported by any, though for my part I suppose that
gifts were made to these also; Pausanias however had ten of each thing
set apart and given to him, that is women, horses, talents, camels, and
so also of the other things.

82. It is said moreover that this was done which here follows, namely
that Xerxes in his flight from Hellas had left to Mardonios the
furniture of his own tent, and Pausanias accordingly seeing the
furniture of Mardonios furnished 91 with gold and silver and hangings of
different colours ordered the bakers and the cooks to prepare a meal as
they were used to do for Mardonios. Then when they did this as they had
been commanded, it is said that Pausanias seeing the couches of gold and
of silver with luxurious coverings, and the tables of gold and silver,
and the magnificent apparatus of the feast, was astonished at the good
things set before him, and for sport he ordered his own servants to
prepare a Laconian meal; and as, when the banquet was served, the
difference between the two was great, Pausanias laughed and sent for the
commanders of the Hellenes; and when these had come together, Pausanias
said, pointing to the preparation of the two meals severally: "Hellenes,
for this reason I assembled you together, because I desired to show you
the senselessness of this leader of the Medes, who having such fare as
this, came to us who have such sorry fare as ye see here, in order
to take it away from us." Thus it is said that Pausanias spoke to the
commanders of the Hellenes.

83. However, 92 in later time after these events many of the Plataians
also found chests of gold and of silver and of other treasures; and
moreover afterwards this which follows was seen in the case of the dead
bodies here, after the flesh had been stripped off from the bones; for
the Plataians brought together the bones all to one place:—there was
found, I say, a skull with no suture but all of one bone, and there was
seen also a jaw-bone, that is to say the upper part of the jaw, which
had teeth joined together and all of one bone, both the teeth that bite
and those that grind; and the bones were seen also of a man five cubits
high..

84. The body of Mardonios however had disappeared 93 on the day after
the battle, taken by whom I am not able with certainty to say, but I
have heard the names of many men of various cities who are said to have
buried Mardonios, and I know that many received gifts from Artontes the
son of Mardonios for having done this: who he was however who took up
and buried the body of Mardonios I am not able for certain to discover,
but Dionysophanes an Ephesian is reported with some show of reason to
have been he who buried Mardonios..

85. He then was buried in some such manner as this: and the Hellenes
when they had divided the spoil at Plataia proceeded to bury their dead,
each nation apart by themselves. The Spartans made for themselves three
several burial-places, one in which they buried the younger Spartans,
94 of whom also were Poseidonios, Amompharetos, Philokyon and
Callicrates,—in one of the graves, I say, were laid the younger men, in
the second the rest of the Spartans, and in the third the Helots. These
then thus buried their dead; but the Tegeans buried theirs all together
in a place apart from these, and the Athenians theirs together; and the
Megarians and Phliasians those who had been slain by the cavalry. Of
all these the burial-places had bodies laid in them, but as to the
burial-places of other States which are to be seen at Plataia, these, as
I am informed, are all mere mounds of earth without any bodies in them,
raised by the several peoples on account of posterity, because they were
ashamed of their absence from the fight; for among others there is one
there called the burial-place of the Eginetans, which I hear was raised
at the request of the Eginetans by Cleades the son of Autodicos, a man
of Plataia who was their public guest-friend, 95 no less than ten years
after these events.

86. When the Hellenes had buried their dead at Plataia, forthwith they
determined in common council to march upon Thebes and to ask the Thebans
to surrender those who had taken the side of the Medes, and among the
first of them Timagenides and Attaginos, who were leaders equal to the
first; and if the Thebans did not give them up, they determined not to
retire from the city until they had taken it. Having thus resolved,
they came accordingly on the eleventh day after the battle and began to
besiege the Thebans, bidding them give the men up: and as the Thebans
refused to give them up, they began to lay waste their land and also to
attack their wall..

87. So then, as they did not cease their ravages, on the twentieth day
Timagenides spoke as follows to the Thebans: "Thebans, since it has been
resolved by the Hellenes not to retire from the siege until either they
have taken Thebes or ye have delivered us up to them, now therefore let
not the land of Boeotia suffer 96 any more for our sakes, but if they
desire to have money and are demanding our surrender as a colour for
this, let us give them money taken out of the treasury of the State;
for we took the side of the Medes together with the State and not by
ourselves alone: but if they are making the siege truly in order to get
us into their hands, then we will give ourselves up for trial." 97 In
this it was thought that he spoke very well and seasonably, and the
Thebans forthwith sent a herald to Pausanias offering to deliver up the
men..

88. After they had made an agreement on these terms, Attaginos escaped
out of the city; and when his sons were delivered up to Pausanias, he
released them from the charge, saying that the sons had no share in
the guilt of taking the side of the Medes. As to the other men whom the
Thebans delivered up, they supposed that they would get a trial, 98
and they trusted moreover to be able to repel the danger by payment of
money; but Pausanias, when he had received them, suspecting this very
thing, first dismissed the whole army of allies, and then took the men
to Corinth and put them to death there. These were the things which
happened at Plataia and at Thebes.

89. Artabazos meanwhile, the son of Pharnakes, in his flight
from Plataia was by this time getting forward on his way: and the
Thessalians, when he came to them, offered him hospitality and inquired
concerning the rest of the army, not knowing anything of that which had
happened at Plataia; and Artabazos knowing that if he should tell them
the whole truth about the fighting, he would run the risk of being
destroyed, both himself and the whole army which was with him, (for he
thought that they would all set upon him if they were informed of that
which had happened),—reflecting, I say, upon this he had told nothing of
it to the Phokians, and now to the Thessalians he spoke as follows:
"I, as you see, Thessalians, am earnest to march by the shortest way to
Thracia; and I am in great haste, having been sent with these men for a
certain business from the army; moreover Mardonios himself and his army
are shortly to be looked for here, marching close after me. To him give
entertainment and show yourselves serviceable, for ye will not in the
end repent of so doing." Having thus said he continued to march his army
with haste through Thessaly and Macedonia straight for Thracia, being
in truth earnest to proceed and going through the land by the shortest
possible way: 99 and so he came to Byzantion, having left behind him
great numbers of his army, who had either been cut down by the Thracians
on the way or had been overcome by hunger and fatigue; 100 and from
Byzantion he passed over in ships. He himself 101 then thus made his
return back to Asia.

90. Now on the same day on which the defeat took place at Plataia,
another took place also, as fortune would have it, at Mycale in Ionia.
For when the Hellenes who had come in the ships with Leotychides the
Lacedemonian, were lying at Delos, there came to them as envoys
from Samos Lampon the son of Thrasycles and Athenagoras the son of
Archestratides and Hegesistratos the son of Aristagoras, who had been
sent by the people of Samos without the knowledge either of the Persians
or of the despot Theomestor the son of Androdamas, whom the Persians had
set up to be despot of Samos. When these had been introduced before the
commanders, Hegesistratos spoke at great length using arguments of all
kinds, and saying that so soon as the Ionians should see them they would
at once revolt from the Persians, and that the Barbarians would not wait
for their attack; and if after all they did so, then the Hellenes
would take a prize such as they would never take again hereafter; and
appealing to the gods worshipped in common he endeavoured to persuade
them to rescue from slavery men who were Hellenes and to drive away the
Barbarian: and this he said was easy for them to do, for the ships of
the enemy sailed badly and were no match for them in fight. Moreover if
the Hellenes suspected that they were endeavouring to bring them on by
fraud, they were ready to be taken as hostages in their ships..

91. Then as the stranger of Samos was urgent in his prayer, Leotychides
inquired thus, either desiring to hear for the sake of the omen or
perhaps by a chance which Providence brought about: "Stranger of Samos,
what is thy name?" He said "Hegesistratos." 102 The other cut short the
rest of the speech, stopping all that Hegesistratos had intended to say
further, and said: "I accept the augury given in Hegesistratos, stranger
of Samos. Do thou on thy part see that thou give us assurance, thou and
the men who are with thee, that the Samians will without fail be our
zealous allies, and after that sail away home.".

92. Thus he spoke and to the words he added the deed; for forthwith the
Samians gave assurance and made oaths of alliance with the Hellenes, and
having so done the others sailed away home, but Hegesistratos he bade
sail with the Hellenes, considering the name to be an augury of good
success. Then the Hellenes after staying still that day made sacrifices
for success on the next day, their diviner being Deïphonos the son of
Euenios an Apolloniate, of that Apollonia which lies in the Ionian gulf.
10201.

93. To this man's father Euenios it happened as follows:—There are at
this place Apollonia sheep sacred to the Sun, which during the day feed
by a river 103 running from Mount Lacmon through the land of Apollonia
to the sea by the haven of Oricos; and by night they are watched by
men chosen for this purpose, who are the most highly considered of the
citizens for wealth and noble birth, each man having charge of them for
a year; for the people of Apollonia set great store on these sheep by
reason of an oracle: and they are folded in a cave at some distance from
the city. Here at the time of which I speak this man Euenios was keeping
watch over them, having been chosen for that purpose; and it happened
one night that he fell asleep during his watch, and wolves came by into
the cave and killed about sixty of the sheep. When he perceived this,
he kept it secret and told no one, meaning to buy others and substitute
them in the place of those that were killed. It was discovered however
by the people of Apollonia that this had happened; and when they were
informed of it, they brought him up before a court and condemned him to
be deprived of his eyesight for having fallen asleep during his watch.
But when they had blinded Euenios, forthwith after this their flocks
ceased to bring forth young and their land to bear crops as before. Then
prophesyings were uttered to them both at Dodona and also at Delphi,
when they asked the prophets the cause of the evil which they were
suffering, and they told them 104 that they had done unjustly in
depriving of his sight Euenios the watcher of the sacred sheep; for the
gods of whom they inquired had themselves sent the wolves to attack the
sheep; and they would not cease to take vengeance for him till the men
of Apollonia should have paid to Euenios such satisfaction as he himself
should choose and deem sufficient; and this being fulfilled, the gods
would give to Euenios a gift of such a kind that many men would think
him happy in that he possessed it..

94. These oracles then were uttered to them, and the people of
Apollonia, making a secret of it, proposed to certain men of the
citizens to manage the affair; and they managed it for them thus:—when
Euenios was sitting on a seat in public, they came and sat by him, and
conversed about other matters, and at last they came to sympathising
with him in his misfortune; and thus leading him on they asked what
satisfaction he should choose, if the people of Apollonia should
undertake to give him satisfaction for that which they had done. He
then, not having heard the oracle, made choice and said that if there
should be given him the lands belonging to certain citizens, naming
those whom he knew to possess the two best lots of land in Apollonia,
and a dwelling-house also with these, which he knew to be the best house
in the city,—if he became the possessor of these, he said, he would have
no anger against them for the future, and this satisfaction would be
sufficient for him if it should be given. Then as he was thus
speaking, the men who sat by him said interrupting him: "Euenios, this
satisfaction the Apolloniates pay to thee for thy blinding in accordance
with the oracles which have been given to them." Upon this he was angry,
being thus informed of the whole matter and considering that he had been
deceived; and they bought the property from those who possessed it and
gave him that which he had chosen. And forthwith after this he had a
natural gift of divination, 105 so that he became very famous..

95. Of this Euenios, I say, Deïphonos was the son, and he was acting
as diviner for the army, being brought by the Corinthians. I have heard
however also that Deïphonos wrongly made use of the name of Euenios, and
undertook work of this kind about Hellas, not being really the son of
Euenios.

96. Now when the sacrifices were favourable to the Hellenes, they put
their ships to sea from Delos to go to Samos; and having arrived off
Calamisa 106 in Samos, they moored their ships there opposite the temple
of Hera which is at this place, and made preparations for a sea-fight;
but the Persians, being informed that they were sailing thither, put out
to sea also and went over to the mainland with their remaining ships,
(those of the Phenicians having been already sent away to sail home):
for deliberating of the matter they thought it good not to fight a
battle by sea, since they did not think that they were a match for the
enemy. And they sailed away to the mainland in order that they might
be under the protection of their land-army which was in Mycale, a body
which had stayed behind the rest of the army by command of Xerxes and
was keeping watch over Ionia: of this the number was six myriads 107 and
the commander of it was Tigranes, who in beauty and stature excelled the
other Persians. The commanders of the fleet then had determined to take
refuge under the protection of this army, and to draw up their ships
on shore and put an enclosure round as a protection for the ships and a
refuge for themselves..

97. Having thus determined they began to put out to sea; and they came
along by the temple of the "Revered goddesses" 10701 to the Gaison
and to Scolopoeis in Mycale, where there is a temple of the Eleusinian
Demeter, which Philistos the son of Pasicles erected when he had
accompanied Neileus the son of Codros for the founding of Miletos; and
there they drew up their ships on shore and put an enclosure round them
of stones and timber, cutting down fruit-trees for this purpose, and
they fixed stakes round the enclosure and made their preparations
either for being besieged or for gaining a victory, for in making their
preparations they reckoned for both chances.

98. The Hellenes however, when they were informed that the Barbarians
had gone away to the mainland, were vexed because they thought that they
had escaped; and they were in a difficulty what they should do, whether
they should go back home, or sail down towards the Hellespont. At last
they resolved to do neither of these two things, but to sail on to
the mainland. Therefore when they had prepared as for a sea-fight both
boarding-bridges and all other things that were required, they sailed
towards Mycale; and when they came near to the camp and no one was seen
to put out against them, but they perceived ships drawn up within
the wall and a large land-army ranged along the shore, then first
Leotychides, sailing along in his ship and coming as near to the shore
as he could, made proclamation by a herald to the Ionians, saying:
"Ionians, those of you who chance to be within hearing of me, attend to
this which I say: for the Persians will not understand anything at all
of that which I enjoin to you. When we join battle, each one of you must
remember first the freedom of all, and then the watchword 'Hebe'; and
this let him also who has not heard know from him who has heard." The
design in this act was the same as that of Themistocles at Artemision;
for it was meant that either the words uttered should escape the
knowledge of the Barbarians and persuade the Ionians, or that they
should be reported to the Barbarians and make them distrustful of the
Hellenes. 108

99. After Leotychides had thus suggested, then next the Hellenes
proceeded to bring their ships up to land, and they disembarked upon the
shore. These then were ranging themselves for fight; and the Persians,
when they saw the Hellenes preparing for battle and also that they
had given exhortation to the Ionians, in the first place deprived the
Samians of their arms, suspecting that they were inclined to the side of
the Hellenes; for when the Athenian prisoners, the men whom the army
of Xerxes had found left behind in Attica, had come in the ships of the
Barbarians, the Samians had ransomed these and sent them back to
Athens, supplying them with means for their journey; and for this reason
especially they were suspected, since they had ransomed five hundred
persons of the enemies of Xerxes. Then secondly the Persians appointed
the Milesians to guard the passes which lead to the summits of Mycale,
on the pretext that they knew the country best, but their true reason
for doing this was that they might be out of the camp. Against these of
the Ionians, who, as they suspected, would make some hostile move 109 if
they found the occasion, the Persians sought to secure themselves in
the manner mentioned; and they themselves then brought together their
wicker-work shields to serve them as a fence.

100. Then when the Hellenes had made all their preparations, they
proceeded to the attack of the Barbarians; and as they went, a rumour
came suddenly 110 to their whole army, and at the same time a herald's
staff was found lying upon the beach; and the rumour went through their
army to this effect, namely that the Hellenes were fighting in Boeotia
and conquering the army of Mardonios. Now by many signs is the divine
power seen in earthly things, and by this among others, namely that now,
when the day of the defeat at Plataia and of that which was about to
take place at Mycale happened to be the same, a rumour came to the
Hellenes here, so that the army was encouraged much more and was more
eagerly desirous to face the danger..

101. Moreover this other thing by coincidence happened besides, namely
that there was a sacred enclosure of the Eleusinian Demeter close by the
side of both the battle-fields; for not only in the Plataian land did
the fight take place close by the side of the temple of Demeter, as
I have before said, but also in Mycale it was to be so likewise. And
whereas the rumour which came to them said that a victory had been
already gained by the Hellenes with Pausanias, this proved to be a true
report; for that which was done at Plataia came about while it was yet
early morning, but the fighting at Mycale took place in the afternoon;
and that it happened on the same day of the same month as the other
became evident to them not long afterwards, when they inquired into
the matter. Now they had been afraid before the rumour arrived, not for
themselves so much as for the Hellenes generally, lest Hellas should
stumble and fall over Mardonios; but when this report had come suddenly
to them, they advanced on the enemy much more vigorously and swiftly
than before. The Hellenes then and the Barbarians were going with
eagerness into the battle, since both the islands and the Hellespont
were placed before them as prizes of the contest.

102. Now for the Athenians and those who were ranged next to them,
to the number perhaps of half the whole army, the road lay along the
sea-beach and over level ground, while the Lacedemonians and those
ranged in order by these were compelled to go by a ravine and along the
mountain side: so while the Lacedemonians were yet going round, those
upon the other wing were already beginning the fight; and as long as
the wicker-work shields of the Persians still remained upright, they
continued to defend themselves and had rather the advantage in the
fight; but when the troops of the Athenians and of those ranged next to
them, desiring that the achievement should belong to them and not to
the Lacedemonians, with exhortations to one another set themselves more
vigorously to the work, then from that time forth the fortune of the
fight was changed; for these pushed aside the wicker-work shields and
fell upon the Persians with a rush all in one body, and the Persians
sustained their first attack and continued to defend themselves for
a long time, but at last they fled to the wall; and the Athenians,
Corinthians, Sikyonians and Troizenians, for that was the order in which
they were ranged, followed close after them and rushed in together
with them to the space within the wall: and when the wall too had been
captured, then the Barbarians no longer betook themselves to resistance,
but began at once to take flight, excepting only the Persians, who
formed into small groups and continued to fight with the Hellenes as
they rushed in within the wall. Of the commanders of the Persians
two made their escape and two were slain; Artaÿntes and Ithamitres
commanders of the fleet escaped, while Mardontes and the commander of
the land-army, Tigranes, were slain..

103. Now while the Persians were still fighting, the Lacedemonians and
those with them arrived, and joined in carrying through the rest of the
work; and of the Hellenes themselves many fell there and especially many
of the Sikyonians, together with their commander Perilaos. And those of
the Samians who were serving in the army, being in the camp of the Medes
and having been deprived of their arms, when they saw that from the very
first the battle began to be doubtful, 111 did as much as they could,
endeavouring to give assistance to the Hellenes; and the other Ionians
seeing that the Samians had set the example, themselves also upon that
made revolt from the Persians and attacked the Barbarians..

104. The Milesians too had been appointed to watch the passes of the
Persians 112 in order to secure their safety, so that if that should
after all come upon them which actually came, they might have guides
and so get safe away to the summits of Mycale,—the Milesians, I say, had
been appointed to do this, not only for that end but also for fear that,
if they were present in the camp, they might make some hostile move: 113
but they did in fact the opposite of that which they were appointed
to do; for they not only directed them in the flight by other than the
right paths, by paths indeed which led towards the enemy, but also at
last they themselves became their worst foes and began to slay them.
Thus then for the second time Ionia revolted from the Persians.

105. In this battle, of the Hellenes the Athenians were the best men,
and of the Athenians Hermolycos the son of Euthoinos, a man who had
trained for the pancration. This Hermolycos after these events, when
there was war between the Athenians and the Carystians, was killed in
battle at Kyrnos in the Carystian land near Geraistos, and there was
buried. After the Athenians the Corinthians, Troizenians and Sikyonians
were the best.

106. When the Hellenes had slain the greater number of the Barbarians,
some in the battle and others in their flight, they set fire to the
ships and to the whole of the wall, having first brought out the spoil
to the sea-shore; and among the rest they found some stores of money. So
having set fire to the wall and to the ships they sailed away; and
when they came to Samos, the Hellenes deliberated about removing the
inhabitants of Ionia, and considered where they ought to settle them in
those parts of Hellas of which they had command, leaving Ionia to the
Barbarians: for it was evident to them that it was impossible on the one
hand for them to be always stationed as guards to protect the Ionians,
and on the other hand, if they were not stationed to protect them,
they had no hope that the Ionians would escape with impunity from the
Persians. Therefore it seemed good to those of the Peloponnesians that
were in authority that they should remove the inhabitants of the trading
ports which belonged to those peoples of Hellas who had taken the side
of the Medes, and give that land to the Ionians to dwell in; but the
Athenians did not think it good that the inhabitants of Ionia should
be removed at all, nor that the Peloponnesians should consult about
Athenian colonies; and as these vehemently resisted the proposal, the
Peloponnesians gave way. So the end was that they joined as allies to
their league the Samians, Chians, Lesbians, and the other islanders who
chanced to be serving with the Hellenes, binding them by assurance and
by oaths to remain faithful and not withdraw from the league: and having
bound these by oaths they sailed to break up the bridges, for they
supposed they would find them still stretched over the straits.

These then were sailing towards the Hellespont;.

107, and meanwhile those Barbarians who had escaped and had been driven
to the heights of Mycale, being not many in number, were making their
way to Sardis: and as they went by the way, Masistes the son of Dareios,
who had been present at the disaster which had befallen them, was saying
many evil things of the commander Artaÿntes, and among other things he
said that in respect of the generalship which he had shown he was worse
than a woman, and that he deserved every kind of evil for having brought
evil on the house of the king. Now with the Persians to be called worse
than a woman is the greatest possible reproach. So he, after he had been
much reviled, at length became angry and drew his sword upon Masistes,
meaning to kill him; and as he was running upon him, Xeinagoras the son
of Prexilaos, a man of Halicarnassos, perceived it, who was standing
just behind Artaÿntes; and this man seized him by the middle and
lifting him up dashed him upon the ground; and meanwhile the spearmen of
Masistes came in front to protect him. Thus did Xeinagoras, and thus he
laid up thanks for himself both with Masistes and also with Xerxes for
saving the life of his brother; and for this deed Xeinagoras became
ruler of all Kilikia by the gift of the king. Nothing further happened
than this as they went on their way, but they arrived at Sardis.

Now at Sardis, as it chanced, king Xerxes had been staying ever since
that time when he came thither in flight from Athens, after suffering
defeat in the sea-fight..

108. At that time, while he was in Sardis, he had a passionate desire,
as it seems, for the wife of Masistes, who was also there: and as she
could not be bent to his will by his messages to her, and he did not
wish to employ force because he had regard for his brother Masistes and
the same consideration withheld the woman also, for she well knew that
force would not be used towards her, then Xerxes abstained from all
else, and endeavoured to bring about the marriage of his own son Dareios
with the daughter of this woman and of Masistes, supposing that if
he should do so he would obtain her more easily. Then having made the
betrothal and done all the customary rites, he went away to Susa; and
when he had arrived there and had brought the woman into his own house
for Dareios, then he ceased from attempting the wife of Masistes and
changing his inclination he conceived a desire for the wife of Dareios,
who was daughter of Masistes, and obtained her: now the name of this
woman was Artaÿnte..

109. However as time went on, this became known in the following
manner:—Amestris the wife of Xerxes had woven a mantle, large and of
various work and a sight worthy to be seen, and this she gave to Xerxes.
He then being greatly pleased put it on and went to Artaÿnte; and being
greatly pleased with her too, he bade her ask what she would to be given
to her in return for the favours which she had granted to him, for she
should obtain, he said, whatsoever she asked: and she, since it was
destined that she should perish miserably with her whole house, said to
Xerxes upon this: "Wilt thou give me whatsoever I ask thee for?" and he,
supposing that she would ask anything rather than that which she did,
promised this and swore to it. Then when he had sworn, she boldly asked
for the mantle; and Xerxes tried every means of persuasion, not being
willing to give it to her, and that for no other reason but only because
he feared Amestris, lest by her, who even before this had some inkling
of the truth, he should thus be discovered in the act; and he offered
her cities and gold in any quantity, and an army which no one else
should command except herself. Now this of an army is a thoroughly
Persian gift. Since however he did not persuade her, he gave her the
mantle; and she being overjoyed by the gift wore it and prided herself
upon it..

110. And Amestris was informed that she had it; and having learnt that
which was being done, she was not angry with the woman, but supposing
that her mother was the cause and that she was bringing this about, she
planned destruction for the wife of Masistes. She waited then until her
husband Xerxes had a royal feast set before him:—this feast is served up
once in the year on the day on which the king was born, and the name
of this feast is in Persian tycta, which in the tongue of the Hellenes
means "complete"; also on this occasion alone the king washes his head,
114 and he makes gifts then to the Persians:—Amestris, I say, waited
for this day and then asked of Xerxes that the wife of Masistes might
be given to her. And he considered it a strange and untoward thing
to deliver over to her his brother's wife, especially since she was
innocent of this matter; for he understood why she was making the
request..

111. At last however as she continued to entreat urgently and he was
compelled by the rule, namely that it is impossible among them that he
who makes request when a royal feast is laid before the king should
fail to obtain it, at last very much against his will consented; and in
delivering her up he bade Amestris do as she desired, and meanwhile he
sent for his brother and said these words: "Masistes, thou art the son
of Dareios and my brother, and moreover in addition to this thou art
a man of worth. I say to thee, live no longer with this wife with whom
thou now livest, but I give thee instead of her my daughter; with her
live as thy wife, but the wife whom thou now hast, do not keep; for it
does not seem good to me that thou shouldest keep her." Masistes then,
marvelling at that which was spoken, said these words: "Master, how
unprofitable a speech is this which thou utterest to me, in that thou
biddest me send away a wife by whom I have sons who are grown up to be
young men, and daughters one of whom even thou thyself didst take as
a wife for thy son, and who is herself, as it chances, very much to my
mind,—that thou biddest me, I say, send away her and take to wife thy
daughter! I, O king, think it a very great matter that I am judged
worthy of thy daughter, but nevertheless I will do neither of these
things: and do not thou urge me by force to do such a thing as this: but
for thy daughter another husband will be found not in any wise inferior
to me, and let me, I pray thee, live still with my own wife." He
returned answer in some such words as these; and Xerxes being stirred
with anger said as follows: "This then, Masistes, is thy case,—I will
not give thee my daughter for thy wife, nor yet shalt thou live any
longer with that one, in order that thou mayest learn to accept that
which is offered thee." He then when he heard this went out, having
first said these words: "Master, thou hast not surely brought ruin upon
me?" 115.

112. During this interval of time, while Xerxes was conversing with his
brother, Amestris had sent the spearmen of Xerxes to bring the wife of
Masistes, and she was doing to her shameful outrage; for she cut away
her breasts and threw them to dogs, and she cut off her nose and ears
and lips and tongue, and sent her back home thus outraged.

113. Then Masistes, not yet having heard any of these things, but
supposing that some evil had fallen upon him, came running to his house;
and seeing his wife thus mutilated, forthwith upon this he took counsel
with his sons and set forth to go to Bactria together with his sons
and doubtless some others also, meaning to make the province of Bactria
revolt and to do the greatest possible injury to the king: and this in
fact would have come to pass, as I imagine, if he had got up to the land
of the Bactrians and Sacans before he was overtaken, for they were much
attached to him, and also he was the governor of the Bactrians: but
Xerxes being informed that he was doing this, sent after him an army as
he was on his way, and slew both him and his sons and his army. So far
of that which happened about the passion of Xerxes and the death of
Masistes.

114. Now the Hellenes who had set forth from Mycale to the Hellespont
first moored their ships about Lecton, being stopped from their voyage
by winds; and thence they came to Abydos and found that the bridges had
been broken up, which they thought to find still stretched across, and
on account of which especially they had come to the Hellespont. So the
Peloponnesians which Leotychides resolved to sail back to Hellas, while
the Athenians and Xanthippos their commander determined to stay behind
there and to make an attempt upon the Chersonese. Those then sailed
away, and the Athenians passed over from Abydos to the Chersonese and
began to besiege Sestos..

115. To this town of Sestos, since it was the greatest stronghold of
those in that region, men had come together from the cities which
lay round it, when they heard that the Hellenes had arrived at the
Hellespont, and especially there had come from the city of Cardia
Oiobazos a Persian, who had brought to Sestos the ropes of the bridges.
The inhabitants of the city were Aiolians, natives of the country, but
there were living with them a great number of Persians and also of their
allies..

116. And of the province Artaÿctes was despot, as governor under Xerxes,
a Persian, but a man of desperate and reckless character, who also had
practised deception upon the king on his march against Athens, in
taking away from Elaius the things belonging to Protesilaos the son
of Iphiclos. For at Elaius in the Chersonese there is the tomb of
Protesilaos with a sacred enclosure about it, where there were many
treasures, with gold and silver cups and bronze and raiment and other
offerings, which things Artaÿctes carried off as plunder, the king
having granted them to him. And he deceived Xerxes by saying to him
some such words as these: "Master, there is here the house of a man,
a Hellene, who made an expedition against thy land and met with his
deserts and was slain: this man's house I ask thee to give to me, that
every one may learn not to make expeditions against thy land." By saying
this it was likely that he would easily enough persuade Xerxes to give
him a man's house, not suspecting what was in his mind: and when he said
that Protesilaos had made expedition against the land of the king, it
must be understood that the Persians consider all Asia to be theirs and
to belong to their reigning king. So when the things had been given him,
he brought them from Elaius to Sestos, and he sowed the sacred enclosure
for crops and occupied it as his own; and he himself, whenever he came
to Elaius, had commerce with women in the inner cell of the temple. 116
And now he was being besieged by the Athenians, when he had not made any
preparation for a siege nor had been expecting that the Hellenes would
come; for they fell upon him, as one may say, inevitably. 117.

117. When however autumn came and the siege still went on, the Athenians
began to be vexed at being absent from their own land and at the
same time not able to conquer the fortress, and they requested their
commanders to lead them away home; but these said that they would not do
so, until either they had taken the town or the public authority of the
Athenians sent for them home: and so they endured their present state.

118. Those however who were within the walls had now come to the
greatest misery, so that they boiled down the girths of their beds and
used them for food; and when they no longer had even these, then the
Persians and with them Artaÿctes and Oiobazos ran away and departed in
the night, climbing down by the back part of the wall, where the place
was left most unguarded by the enemy; and when day came, the men of the
Chersonese signified to the Athenians from the towers concerning that
which had happened, and opened the gates to them. So the greater number
of them went in pursuit, and the rest occupied the city..

119. Now Oiobazos, as he was escaping 119 into Thrace, was caught by the
Apsinthian Thracians and sacrificed to their native god Pleistoros with
their rites, and the rest who were with him they slaughtered in another
manner: but Artaÿctes with his companions, who started on their flight
later and were overtaken at a little distance above Aigospotamoi,
defended themselves for a considerable time and were some of them
killed and others taken alive: and the Hellenes had bound these and were
bringing them to Sestos, and among them Artaÿctes also in bonds together
with his son..

120. Then, it is said by the men of the Chersonese, as one of those who
guarded them was frying dried fish, a portent occurred as follows,—the
dried fish when laid upon the fire began to leap and struggle just as
if they were fish newly caught: and the others gathered round and were
marvelling at the portent, but Artaÿctes seeing it called to the man who
was frying the fish and said: "Stranger of Athens, be not at all afraid
of this portent, seeing that it has not appeared for thee but for me.
Protesilaos who dwells at Elaius signifies thereby that though he is
dead and his body is dried like those fish, 120 yet he has power given
him by the gods to exact vengeance from the man who does him wrong. Now
therefore I desire to impose this penalty for him, 121—that in place
of the things which I took from the temple I should pay down a hundred
talents to the god, and moreover as ransom for myself and my son I will
pay two hundred talents to the Athenians, if my life be spared." Thus he
engaged to do, but he did not prevail upon the commander Xanthippos; for
the people of Elaius desiring to take vengeance for Protesilaos asked
that he might be put to death, and the inclination of the commander
himself tended to the same conclusion. They brought him therefore to
that headland to which Xerxes made the passage across, or as some say to
the hill which is over the town of Madytos, and there they nailed him to
boards 122 and hung him up; and they stoned his son to death before the
eyes of Artaÿctes himself..

121. Having so done, they sailed away to Hellas, taking with them,
besides other things, the ropes also of the bridges, in order to
dedicate them as offerings in the temples: and for that year nothing
happened further than this.

122. Now a forefather of this Artaÿctes who was hung up, was that
Artembares who set forth to the Persians a proposal which they took up
and brought before Cyrus, being to this effect: "Seeing that Zeus
grants to the Persians leadership, and of all men to thee, O Cyrus, by
destroying Astyages, come, since the land we possess is small and also
rugged, let us change from it and inhabit another which is better: and
there are many near at hand, and many also at a greater distance, of
which if we take one, we shall have greater reverence and from more men.
It is reasonable too that men who are rulers should do such things; for
when will there ever be a fairer occasion than now, when we are rulers
of many nations and of the whole of Asia?" Cyrus, hearing this and not
being surprised at the proposal, 123 bade them do so if they would;
but he exhorted them and bade them prepare in that case to be no longer
rulers but subjects; "For," said he, "from lands which are not rugged
men who are not rugged are apt to come forth, since it does not belong
to the same land to bring forth fruits of the earth which are admirable
and also men who are good in war." So the Persians acknowledged that he
was right and departed from his presence, having their opinion defeated
by that of Cyrus; and they chose rather to dwell on poor land and be
rulers, than to sow crops in a level plain and be slaves to others.
