DISCOURSE ON THE METHOD
Part IV

I'm not entirely sure it's appropriate to share my earliest meditations here, because they're so abstract and unusual that most people might not find them interesting. But since the only way to judge whether the foundations I've laid are solid enough is to examine them directly, I feel I have to discuss them.

I had already noted, as I mentioned earlier, that in practical life it's sometimes necessary to act on opinions we know are uncertain, treating them as if they were beyond doubt. But now I wanted to focus entirely on the search for truth. And for that purpose, I thought the exact opposite approach was needed: I should reject as absolutely false anything in which I could find the slightest reason for doubt. My goal was to see whether, after all that rejection, anything would remain that was completely beyond question.

So I began. Since our senses sometimes deceive us, I decided to suppose that nothing is really as our senses show it to us. Since even the smartest people sometimes make logical errors -- even in simple geometry -- I assumed I was just as prone to mistakes, and I rejected as false all the reasoning I had previously accepted as solid proof. And finally, since the very same thoughts we have while awake can also come to us in our dreams -- when none of them are true -- I supposed that everything that had ever entered my mind was no more real than the illusions of a dream.

But then, immediately, I noticed something remarkable. Even as I was trying to think that everything was false, there was one thing that had to be true: the very fact that I was thinking this. I observed that the truth "I think, therefore I am" was so rock-solid, so absolutely certain, that no skeptic's argument, no matter how extreme, could possibly shake it. And so I concluded, without any hesitation, that I could accept this as the first principle of the philosophy I was searching for.

Next, I carefully examined what I was. I realized that I could imagine having no body. I could imagine that there was no world, no physical place where I existed. But I could not imagine that I did not exist -- because the very act of doubting the reality of other things proved, clearly and certainly, that I existed. On the other hand, if I had simply stopped thinking, then even if everything I had ever imagined were actually real, I would have had no reason to believe that I existed. From this I concluded that I am a substance whose entire essence or nature consists in nothing but thinking, and which doesn't need any place to exist, nor does it depend on any material thing. In other words, the "I" -- that is, the mind by which I am who I am -- is completely distinct from the body. It's even easier to know than the body. And even if the body didn't exist at all, the mind would still be everything that it is.

After this, I investigated what makes a proposition true and certain in general. Since I had found one truth that I knew with certainty, I figured I should also be able to identify what gave it that certainty. When I looked at the statement "I think, therefore I am," I noticed that the only thing that assured me of its truth was this: I could see very clearly that in order to think, it is necessary to exist. So I adopted a general rule: everything we perceive very clearly and distinctly is true. The only difficulty lies in figuring out exactly which of our perceptions count as clear and distinct.

After that, I reflected on the fact that I had doubts -- and that therefore my being was not entirely perfect. (It's obviously a greater perfection to know something than to doubt it.) This led me to ask: where did I get the ability to think of something more perfect than myself? I clearly recognized that this idea must have come from some nature that actually was more perfect than mine.

As for my ideas of other things outside of me -- the sky, the earth, light, heat, and a thousand others -- I wasn't as puzzled about where those came from. Since I didn't see anything in them that made them seem superior to me, I could believe that if they were true, they depended on my own nature (insofar as it had some degree of perfection), and if they were false, they came from nothing -- that is, they existed in me only because of some imperfection in my nature.

But that explanation couldn't work for the idea of a being more perfect than myself. Getting that idea from nothing was obviously impossible. And since it's just as contradictory for something more perfect to be produced by and depend on something less perfect as it is for something to come from nothing, I couldn't have gotten this idea from myself either. The only remaining option was that it had been placed in me by a nature truly more perfect than mine -- a nature that possessed within itself every perfection I could conceive of. In a word: God.

I added this further thought: since I was aware of some perfections that I didn't possess, I was clearly not the only being in existence. (I'll use the traditional philosophical terminology here, if you don't mind.) On the contrary, there had to be some other, more perfect being on whom I depended and from whom I had received everything I had. Here's why: if I had existed alone, independent of any other being -- if I had gotten from myself even the small amount of perfection I actually possessed -- then by the same reasoning, I should have been able to give myself all the rest of the perfection I knew I lacked. I could have made myself infinite, eternal, unchanging, all-knowing, all-powerful -- in short, I could have given myself all the perfections I could recognize in God. Which is absurd.

For in order to understand God's nature (whose existence the preceding arguments have established), as far as my own nature allowed, I only needed to consider all the qualities of which I had some idea and ask whether possessing them was a mark of perfection. I was confident that none that indicated any imperfection belonged to God, and that all the rest did. So I saw that doubt, inconsistency, sadness, and things like that could not be found in God, since I myself would have been glad to be free of them. Beyond this, I had ideas of physical, material things. Even if I supposed I was dreaming and that everything I saw or imagined was false, I still couldn't deny that these ideas existed in my thoughts.

But since I had already clearly recognized that thinking nature is distinct from physical nature, and since I saw that anything composed of parts is a sign of dependency, and that dependency is clearly a kind of imperfection, I concluded that being composed of two natures could not be a perfection in God. Therefore, God was not composed of mind and body. And if there were any bodies in the world, or any minds, or any other natures that were not wholly perfect, their existence depended on God's power in such a way that they could not continue to exist without him for a single moment.

From there, I was eager to search for more truths. I turned my attention to the objects of geometry, which I conceived as a continuous body or space extending infinitely in length, width, and height (or depth), divisible into parts of different shapes and sizes that could be moved and rearranged in all sorts of ways -- since this is what geometers take as their subject matter. I reviewed some of their simplest proofs.

First, I noticed that the great certainty everyone agrees these proofs have is based solely on the fact that they are clearly conceived, following the rules I had already established. Second, I noticed that there was nothing in these proofs that guaranteed the actual existence of their objects. For example, when I considered a triangle, I could clearly see that its three angles necessarily add up to two right angles. But that didn't prove that any triangle actually exists in the world. On the other hand, when I turned back to my idea of a Perfect Being, I found that existence was contained in that idea in the very same way that the property of having angles adding up to two right angles is contained in the idea of a triangle -- or the way all points on the surface of a sphere are equidistant from its center. In fact, it was even clearer than those examples. Therefore, it is at least as certain that God -- this Perfect Being -- exists as any proof in geometry.

Now, the reason many people convince themselves that it's hard to know this truth -- and even hard to know what their own mind really is -- is that they never lift their thoughts above physical objects. They're so used to thinking only through imagination (which is a way of thinking limited to material things) that anything they can't picture seems unintelligible to them. This is clear enough from the fact that the traditional philosophers adopted as a principle that nothing is in the understanding that wasn't first in the senses -- a principle that clearly doesn't apply to the ideas of God and the soul, which have never been in the senses. It seems to me that people who try to use their imagination to grasp these ideas are doing essentially the same thing as if they tried to use their eyes to hear sounds or smell odors. There is actually this difference: the sense of sight is no less reliable than smell or hearing. But neither imagination nor the senses can give us certainty about anything unless our understanding -- our reason -- steps in to verify it.

Finally, if there are still people who aren't convinced of God's existence and the soul's reality by the arguments I've given, I want them to know this: all the other things they think they're more certain of -- that we have a body, that stars and an earth exist, and so on -- are actually less certain. Yes, we have what you might call a practical certainty about these things, strong enough that it seems crazy to doubt them. But at the same time, no reasonable person can deny that, when it comes to absolute metaphysical certainty, there is room for doubt. After all, we can imagine, while asleep, that we have a different body, that we see different stars and a different earth -- when none of those things exist. How do we know that the thoughts we have in dreams are any less true than the ones we have while awake, when our dream-thoughts are sometimes just as vivid and detailed?

Let the most brilliant minds study this question for as long as they like. I don't believe they can give a reason sufficient to remove this doubt unless they assume that God exists. For consider: even the principle I've already adopted as a rule -- that everything we perceive clearly and distinctly is true -- is only certain because God exists, because God is a Perfect Being, and because everything we have comes from him. It follows that our ideas and concepts, to the extent that they are clear and distinct, are real and come from God, and must therefore be true. On the other hand, when we have ideas that contain some falsehood, this can only be the case with ideas that are somewhat confused and obscure -- ideas that, to that extent, participate in nothingness. They are confused in us because we are not entirely perfect. And it's clear that it would be just as contradictory for falsehood or imperfection (as imperfection) to come from God as it would be for truth or perfection to come from nothing. But if we didn't know that everything real and true in us comes from a Perfect and Infinite Being, then no matter how clear and distinct our ideas might be, we would have no grounds for being sure they were true.

But once our knowledge of God and the soul has given us confidence in this rule, we can easily see that our waking thoughts should not be called into question just because of what happens in our dreams. If someone had a truly distinct idea while asleep -- say a geometer discovered a new proof in a dream -- the fact that they were asleep wouldn't make the proof any less valid. As for the most common error in dreams, which is that they present objects to us in the same way our senses do when we're awake -- this isn't really a problem, because it rightly makes us suspicious of what the senses tell us. After all, we're frequently deceived in the same way while awake: people with jaundice see everything as yellow, and distant stars and objects appear much smaller than they really are.

In the end, whether awake or asleep, we should never let ourselves be convinced of anything except by the evidence of our reason. Notice that I say our reason -- not our imagination or our senses. For example, although we can clearly see the sun, we shouldn't conclude that it's only as big as it looks. And we can vividly imagine a lion's head stuck on a goat's body, but that doesn't mean a chimera actually exists. Reason doesn't tell us that what we see or imagine is necessarily real. But it does tell us that all our ideas must contain some truth -- because otherwise, God, who is perfectly truthful, would not have placed them in us. And because our reasoning is never as clear or as thorough during sleep as when we're awake (even though our imagination can sometimes be just as vivid in dreams), reason tells us this: since not all our thoughts can be true -- because we aren't perfect -- the ones that are true will inevitably be found among our waking experiences rather than our dreams.
