MEDITATIONS ON THE FIRST PHILOSOPHY
Preface to the Reader

I already touched briefly on the questions of God's existence and the nature of the human soul in my Discourse on the Method, published in French in 1637. But I didn't intend to treat those topics fully there -- only to raise them in passing, so I could learn from my readers' reactions how best to handle them later. These questions seemed so important to me that they deserved more than a single treatment. And the path I follow in discussing them is so unfamiliar, so far from the usual approach, that I thought it wouldn't be wise to lay it all out at length in French, in a work that anyone might pick up. I was worried that weaker minds might think they could follow this path too.

In the Discourse, I had asked anyone who found something worth criticizing in my work to please let me know. And I can report that no objections worth mentioning were raised against what I said on these topics -- except two. I'll reply to them briefly here, before taking them up in more detail later.

The first objection goes like this: even though the human mind, when it reflects on itself, doesn't perceive itself to be anything other than a thinking thing, it doesn't follow that its nature or essence consists only in being a thinking thing. The word "only" is the problem -- it seems to rule out everything else that might also belong to the mind's nature. My reply is that I wasn't trying, in that passage, to rule things out according to how things actually are (which I wasn't dealing with at that point). I was only following the order of my own thinking. What I meant was simply this: as far as I was aware, I could clearly recognize nothing belonging to my essence except that I was a thinking thing -- a thing with the ability to think. But I'll show later how, from the fact that I'm conscious of nothing else belonging to my essence besides thinking, it follows that nothing else really does belong to it.

The second objection is this: just because I have an idea of something more perfect than myself, it doesn't follow that the idea itself is more perfect than me, and even less that the thing the idea represents actually exists. My reply is that there's an ambiguity in the word "idea." It can be taken in two ways. In one sense, an idea is just an act of understanding -- a mental event -- and in that sense, it obviously can't be said to be more perfect than I am. But in another sense, "idea" refers to the thing represented by that mental act. And that thing, even if it doesn't exist outside my mind, can still be more perfect than me because of what it essentially is. I'll show more fully, later in this work, how the fact that I have an idea of something more perfect than myself proves that this thing really exists.

Beyond these two objections, I've also seen two rather lengthy essays attacking my work. But these attacked my conclusions far more than my premises, using arguments borrowed from the standard atheist playbook. Arguments like these can't make any impression on anyone who properly understands my reasoning. And since many people's judgment is so irrational and weak that they're more easily swayed by the first opinions they encounter on a subject -- no matter how false or unreasonable -- than by a true and solid refutation that comes afterward, I don't want to repeat those arguments here just to respond to them. I'd only be giving them their first hearing with some readers. I'll just say this in general: everything the atheists typically argue against God's existence always comes down to one of two mistakes. Either they project human qualities onto God, or they give our own minds too much credit, assuming we have enough power and wisdom to determine and understand what God can and should do. So nothing they argue will cause us any trouble, as long as we remember that our minds are finite while God is beyond our comprehension and infinite.

Now that I've tested the waters, so to speak, and gotten some sense of how people respond to my work, I'm taking up the topics of God and the human soul once again. At the same time, I'll be laying out the foundations of all of First Philosophy. I don't expect praise from the general public for this effort, and I'm not looking for a wide readership. In fact, I'd advise no one to read this work unless they're both able and willing to think seriously alongside me, to pull their minds away from the senses, and to free themselves from all preconceptions. People like that, I know very well, are remarkably rare. As for those who don't bother to follow the order and connection of my arguments, and instead just pick out isolated passages to nitpick -- as many people do -- I can say that they won't get much out of reading this. They may find opportunities to quibble here and there, but they're unlikely to raise any objections that are serious or worth responding to.

Since I certainly don't promise to satisfy everyone on all these matters at first glance, and I'm not so arrogant as to think I've anticipated every possible difficulty, here is my plan. First, in the Meditations themselves, I'll present the reasoning that has led me, I believe, to certain and evident knowledge of the truth, to see whether the arguments that convinced me can also convince others. Then I'll respond to the objections raised by several brilliant and learned people, to whom I sent these Meditations for criticism before publication. Their objections are so numerous and wide-ranging that I'm confident nothing important will easily come to mind that they haven't already addressed. So I strongly urge my readers: don't form any judgment about the questions raised in the Meditations until you've read through all of the Objections and Replies as well.
