MEDITATIONS ON THE FIRST PHILOSOPHY
Meditation III: Of God: That He Exists

Meditation III

Of God: That He Exists

I'm now going to close my eyes, stop my ears, and shut out all my senses. I'll even try to erase from my mind every image of physical things -- or at least, since that's nearly impossible, I'll treat those images as empty and meaningless. Holding a conversation only with myself and looking carefully at my own nature, I'll try to build, step by step, a deeper and more familiar understanding of who I am.

I am a thinking, conscious thing -- a being that doubts, affirms, denies, knows a few things and is ignorant of many, that loves, hates, wills, refuses, that imagines and perceives. As I noted before, even if the things I perceive or imagine have no reality outside of me, I can still be sure that those ways of being conscious -- what I'm calling perceptions and imaginings -- do exist in me, as aspects of my thought.

In what I've just said, I think I've summed up everything I truly know -- or at least everything I was aware of knowing up to this point. Now I want to push further and look carefully to see if there's anything else in myself that I haven't noticed yet. I'm certain that I am a thinking thing. But does that tell me what's actually required for me to be certain of any truth? In this first piece of knowledge, the only thing that gives me assurance is the clear and distinct perception of what I'm affirming. That wouldn't be enough to guarantee truth if it were possible for something I clearly and distinctly perceived to turn out to be false. So it seems I can now adopt a general rule: everything I perceive very clearly and distinctly is true.

And yet, I've previously accepted many things as absolutely certain that I later found to be doubtful. What were those things? The earth, the sky, the stars, and all the other objects I used to perceive through the senses. But what did I actually perceive clearly about them? Nothing more than that ideas and thoughts of those objects were present in my mind. Even now I don't deny that those ideas exist in me. But there was something else I used to affirm -- something I believed I clearly perceived, though in truth I didn't perceive it at all. I mean the existence of external objects from which those ideas supposedly came and which those ideas supposedly resembled perfectly. That's where I went wrong. Or if I happened to judge correctly on some point, it wasn't because of any genuine knowledge I possessed.

But what about when I considered something in arithmetic or geometry -- something very simple and straightforward, like the fact that two plus three equals five? Didn't I see that clearly enough to affirm it was true? The only reason I later thought we should doubt such things was this: it occurred to me that perhaps God gave me a nature that makes me prone to deception, even about things that seem most obviously true. But whenever this worry about God's supreme power comes to mind, I have to admit it would be easy for him -- if he chose -- to make me go wrong even about things where I think I have the strongest evidence. On the other hand, whenever I focus on things I think I grasp with perfect clarity, I'm so completely convinced of their truth that I can't help but say: Let anyone deceive me who can -- they'll never bring it about that I don't exist, as long as I'm conscious that I do exist. They'll never make it true at some future time that I have never existed, when it's true right now that I do exist. They'll never make two and three anything other than five. Contradictions like that are impossible.

And in fact, since I have no reason to think God is a deceiver -- and since I haven't even established yet whether God exists -- this source of doubt, which depends entirely on that assumption, is pretty thin. It's metaphysical, you might say. But to remove it completely, I need to investigate whether God exists as soon as the opportunity arises. And if I find that God does exist, I also need to determine whether he could be a deceiver. Without knowing these two things, I don't see how I can ever be certain of anything.

Now, so that I can pursue this inquiry without breaking the order I've set for myself -- which is to move step by step from what I find first in my mind to what I discover later -- I need to sort my thoughts into categories and figure out which ones are capable of truth and error in the strict sense.

Some of my thoughts are like images of things, and it's only these that properly deserve the name "idea" -- for instance, when I think of a person, a mythical creature, the sky, an angel, or God. Other thoughts have additional forms beyond mere representation: when I will something, fear something, affirm or deny something, I always have some object in mind, but my thought also includes something beyond the mere image of that object. Thoughts in this second category include acts of will, emotions, and judgments.

Now, when it comes to ideas considered purely in themselves -- not as pointing to anything beyond themselves -- they can't, strictly speaking, be false. Whether I imagine a goat or a chimera, it's equally true that I'm imagining one or the other. Nor do we need to worry about falsity in the will or emotions. I might desire things that are wrong or that don't even exist, but it's still true that I desire them. So the only place where I need to watch out for error is in my judgments. And the most common error in judgment is this: I assume that the ideas in my mind resemble things outside of me. If I just considered my ideas as certain ways of thinking -- without assuming they correspond to external objects -- they'd hardly give me any opportunity to go wrong.

Among my ideas, some seem to be innate, others seem to come from outside me, and still others seem to be made up by me. My ability to conceive of a thing, a truth, or a thought -- that seems to come from my own nature and nothing else. But if I hear a noise right now, or see the sun, or feel warmth, I've always judged that those sensations come from objects outside of me. And finally, things like sirens, griffins, and the like are clearly inventions of my own mind. That said, I might end up concluding that all my ideas are really of the externally-caused type, or all innate, or all invented. I haven't yet clearly pinpointed their true origin.

What I mainly need to do right now is examine those ideas that seem to come from external objects and ask: what reason do I actually have for thinking they resemble those objects? There seem to be two reasons. First, nature seems to teach me so. Second, I notice that these ideas don't depend on my will and therefore don't depend on me -- they often come to me against my will. Right now, for example, whether I want to or not, I feel heat. So I'm naturally inclined to think this sensation of heat is produced in me by something other than myself -- namely, the heat of the fire I'm sitting by. And it seems perfectly reasonable to suppose that the fire impresses its own likeness on me, rather than something else entirely.

But I need to ask whether these reasons are really strong enough.

When I say "nature teaches me," I only mean a kind of spontaneous impulse that pushes me to believe my ideas resemble their objects. I don't mean the "natural light" -- that is, genuine rational insight -- which actually gives me knowledge of truth. These two things are very different. What the natural light reveals to be true is beyond doubt -- for example, that I exist because I doubt, and similar truths. I have no other faculty for distinguishing truth from error that could overrule the natural light, and the natural light is completely trustworthy. But as for those spontaneous impulses? I've noticed many times, when it came to choosing between right and wrong in action, that they often led me astray. So I have no reason to trust them on questions of truth and error either.

As for the other reason -- that these ideas don't depend on my will and must therefore come from external objects -- I don't find it any more convincing. Just as those natural impulses exist in me even though they don't always match my will, it's possible that I have some faculty I'm not fully aware of that produces ideas on its own, without any help from external objects. After all, that seems to be exactly what happens when I dream: ideas are produced in me by some internal power, without any external cause.

And finally, even if I granted that my ideas do come from external objects, it doesn't follow that they must resemble those objects. In fact, I've noticed many cases where there's a huge difference between an object and the idea of it. Take the sun, for example. I find two completely different ideas of the sun in my mind. One comes from my senses: the sun appears tiny, barely a speck in the sky. The other is based on astronomical reasoning: the sun is many times larger than the entire Earth. Both of these ideas can't accurately resemble the same sun, and reason tells me the one that seems to come directly from sense experience is actually the least accurate representation.

All of this shows clearly enough that, until now, my belief in external objects hasn't been based on careful, deliberate judgment. It's been based on a kind of blind impulse.

But there's another way to approach this question: is there anything among my ideas whose cause must lie outside of me?

If I consider my ideas merely as ways of being conscious, I don't see any difference or inequality among them -- they all seem to come from me in the same way. But when I consider them as representations -- as mental images where one depicts one thing and another depicts something different -- then there are obviously huge differences between them. Ideas that represent substances clearly contain more, so to speak, than ideas that represent mere properties or features of substances. And the idea by which I conceive of God -- a supreme, eternal, infinite, unchangeable, all-knowing, all-powerful being who created everything else that exists -- this idea certainly contains more representational content than the ideas of finite things.

Let me explain what I mean by "representational content," because this is important. Every idea represents something -- it has content. The degree of reality or perfection of what an idea represents, I'll call its "objective reality." (This is a technical term, and it doesn't mean what "objective" usually means in modern speech. It refers to the reality of the content of the idea -- the thing the idea is about, as it exists within the idea.) And "formal reality" is the degree of reality something has in itself, as an actually existing thing. The key principle I want to establish is about the relationship between these two.

Now, it's obvious by the natural light of reason that there must be at least as much reality in a cause as in its effect. Where else could the effect get its reality, if not from its cause? And how could the cause give it that reality without possessing it? From this it follows that something can't come from nothing, and also that what is more perfect -- what contains more reality -- can't be produced by what is less perfect.

This isn't just true for things that actually exist in the world. It's also true for ideas and their representational content. A stone that doesn't yet exist can't begin to exist unless it's produced by something that already contains, either straightforwardly or in some higher form, everything that makes up the stone. Heat can only be produced in something by a cause that is at least as perfect as heat. And the same goes for ideas: the idea of heat, or the idea of a stone, can't exist in my mind unless it was put there by a cause that contains at least as much reality as I conceive to be in the heat or the stone.

Now, it's true that an idea, as a thing in itself, is just a mode of thought -- its existence as a mental event doesn't require much. But in order for an idea to have this particular representational content rather than that one, it must get that content from some cause that has at least as much actual reality as the idea has representational content. If you suppose an idea contains something that wasn't in its cause, then that something would have to come from nothing. But however modest the kind of existence something has when it exists merely as the content of an idea in someone's mind, that existence isn't nothing. So the idea can't come from nothing either.

And I shouldn't think that just because the reality I'm considering in my ideas is merely representational, the cause of that reality only needs to have representational reality too. No -- just as the representational mode of existence belongs to ideas by their very nature, the actual mode of existence belongs to the causes of ideas by their very nature (at least to the first and fundamental cause). And while one idea can give rise to another, this chain can't go on forever. Eventually we have to arrive at a first idea whose cause is like an original blueprint -- something that actually and formally contains all the reality or perfection that the ideas only contain representationally.

So the natural light teaches me this: ideas exist in me like pictures or images. These pictures may fall short of the things they represent, but they can never contain anything greater or more perfect than those things' actual source.

The more carefully I think about all this, the more clearly I see it. But let me draw the practical conclusion. It's this: if any one of my ideas has so much representational content that I'm sure that same reality doesn't exist in me -- either actually or in some higher form -- then I myself can't be the cause of that idea. And if I can't be its cause, it necessarily follows that I'm not alone in the world. Some other being must exist as the cause of that idea. On the other hand, if I can't find any such idea, then I have no solid reason for believing anything else exists besides myself. And believe me, I've searched very carefully.

So let me go through my ideas. Setting aside the idea that represents me (which presents no difficulty here), there is an idea that represents God. Then there are ideas of physical, lifeless things; ideas of angels; ideas of animals; and ideas of other people like myself.

The ideas of other people, animals, and angels -- I can easily see how these could have been assembled from the other ideas I already have: ideas of myself, of physical things, and of God. Even if no other people, animals, or angels existed in the world, I could have put these ideas together on my own.

As for ideas of physical objects -- I can't find anything in them so great or impressive that it seems beyond my own ability to produce. If I look at them closely and examine them one by one, the way I examined the idea of wax yesterday, I find there's very little in them that I perceive clearly and distinctly. What I do clearly grasp includes: size (that is, extension in length, width, and depth), shape (which results from the boundaries of that extension), the spatial relationships between differently shaped objects, and motion (the change of those relationships). To these I can add substance, duration, and number.

But as for light, colors, sounds, smells, tastes, heat, cold, and the other qualities we perceive by touch -- I think of these only with such obscurity and confusion that I can't even tell whether they're real or illusory. In other words, I don't know whether my ideas of these qualities are ideas of real things or ideas of nothing at all. I mentioned earlier that formal falsity -- falsity in the strict sense -- can only occur in judgments. But there's a kind of material falsity in ideas themselves: it happens when an idea represents something that is nothing as if it were something. For example, my ideas of heat and cold are so far from being clear and distinct that I can't tell from them whether cold is just the absence of heat, or heat the absence of cold, or whether both are real qualities in their own right. And since ideas are like images -- each one seeming to represent some object -- if cold is really nothing but the absence of heat, then an idea that represents cold as something real and positive would, in a sense, be false.

For ideas like these, I don't need to look for any source beyond myself. If they're false -- if they represent things that don't exist -- then the natural light tells me they arise from some deficiency in my nature, from nothing, in a manner of speaking. And if they happen to be true, they show me so little reality that I can't even distinguish what they represent from nonexistence. So I see no reason why I couldn't be their author.

As for those ideas of physical things that are clear and distinct, there are some that I could seemingly have derived from the idea I have of myself: substance, duration, number, and so on. When I think that a stone is a substance -- something capable of existing on its own -- and that I too am a substance, I notice that these are very different concepts (I'm a thinking, non-physical thing, while the stone is a physical, non-thinking thing). Yet both ideas share the concept of substance. Similarly, when I think of myself as existing now while also remembering that I existed in the past, or when I'm aware of having various thoughts that I can count, I acquire the ideas of duration and number, which I can then apply to other things. As for extension, shape, spatial position, and motion -- since I'm nothing but a thinking thing, these qualities aren't formally in me. But because they're just particular ways a substance can be, and because I myself am a substance, it seems possible that I contain them in some higher or more fundamental way.

So there remains only the idea of God, and I need to consider whether there's anything in it that couldn't have originated from me alone.

By "God" I mean a substance that is infinite, eternal, unchangeable, independent, all-knowing, and all-powerful -- a being by whom I myself and everything else that exists (if anything else does exist) was created. These properties are so extraordinary that the more carefully I consider them, the less it seems possible that this idea could have come from me alone. And so, from everything I've argued above, the conclusion is absolutely necessary: God exists.

Here's why. Yes, I have the idea of substance because I myself am a substance. But I'm a finite being. So I shouldn't have the idea of an infinite substance unless that idea was given to me by a substance that really is infinite.

And I shouldn't suppose that I grasp the infinite merely by negating the finite -- the way I understand rest as the absence of motion, or darkness as the absence of light. On the contrary, I clearly see that there is more reality in an infinite substance than in a finite one. In a real sense, my awareness of the infinite comes before my awareness of the finite -- my perception of God comes before my perception of myself. How could I know that I doubt, that I desire, that something is lacking in me, that I'm not entirely perfect, unless I already had an idea of a being more perfect than myself, by comparison with which I could recognize my own deficiencies?

And it can't be said that this idea of God is perhaps materially false -- that it might have arisen from nothing, from some imperfection in my nature -- the way I said earlier about ideas of heat and cold. On the contrary, this idea is supremely clear and distinct, and it contains more representational content than any other idea I have. No idea could be more true or less open to the suspicion of falsity.

This idea of a supremely perfect and infinite being is true in the highest degree. You might imagine that such a being doesn't actually exist, but you can't suppose that the idea of such a being represents nothing real. It is also clear and distinct in the highest degree, because whatever the mind clearly and distinctly conceives as real, true, and involving some perfection is entirely contained in this idea.

It doesn't matter that I can't fully comprehend the infinite, or that there might be an infinity of things in God that I can't comprehend or even conceive of. It's the very nature of the infinite that it can't be fully grasped by a finite being like me. It's enough that I understand this much and judge that everything I clearly perceive, everything I know to involve some perfection -- and perhaps also infinitely many properties I'm unaware of -- all exist in God, either directly or in some higher form. This is enough to make my idea of God the truest, clearest, and most distinct idea in my mind.

But maybe I'm more than I think I am. Maybe all the perfections I attribute to God somehow exist in me potentially, even if they haven't shown themselves yet. I'm already aware that my knowledge is growing and improving little by little, and I don't see anything to prevent it from increasing indefinitely. And if my knowledge can keep growing, why couldn't I eventually acquire all the other perfections of the divine nature? And if the potential for these perfections already exists in me, why wouldn't that be enough to produce the idea of God?

None of this works, though. Here's why. First, even if it's true that my knowledge is gradually increasing and that there's much in me that hasn't been fully realized yet, none of this comes anywhere close to the idea I have of God, in whom no perfection is merely potential -- everything is fully actual. In fact, the very fact that my knowledge grows by degrees is itself a sign of imperfection. Second, even if my knowledge keeps growing, it will never actually become infinite, because it can never reach a point beyond which it's incapable of further growth. But I conceive of God as actually infinite -- as a being to whom nothing can be added. Third, the representational content of an idea can't be produced by something that merely has the potential to exist -- which, strictly speaking, is nothing -- but only by something that actually and formally exists.

To be honest, there's nothing in all of this that isn't easy to see for anyone who thinks about it carefully, by the natural light of reason. But when I let my attention slip even a little, my mind gets clouded by mental images of physical things, and I don't easily remember why the idea of a being more perfect than myself must have come from a being that really is more perfect than me. So let me push the inquiry further: could I, who have this idea of God, exist if there were no God?

Where, in that case, would I get my existence? Perhaps from myself. Or from my parents. Or from some other cause less perfect than God. (Anything more perfect than God, or even equal to God, is inconceivable.)

But suppose I were the source of my own existence. If that were true, I would have no doubts, no unfulfilled desires, no missing perfections. I would have given myself every perfection I can conceive of, and I'd be God. Don't think that the perfections I'm currently missing would be harder to acquire than what I already have. On the contrary, it was clearly a far more difficult thing for me -- a thinking being -- to emerge from nothing than it would be for me to acquire knowledge of the many things I'm still ignorant of, which are just features of a thinking substance. If I had managed the greater feat of giving myself existence, I certainly wouldn't have denied myself the lesser accomplishments. I wouldn't have denied myself any of the properties I can see are contained in the idea of God, because none of them seem harder to achieve than existence itself. And if any of them were harder, they would certainly seem so to me (assuming I made everything else I have), because they would be the point at which my power ran out.

And even if I supposed that I've always existed just as I am now, that wouldn't get me off the hook. It wouldn't follow that no author of my existence is needed. The whole span of my life can be divided into countless separate moments, each completely independent of the others. The fact that I existed a moment ago doesn't mean I must exist right now, unless some cause creates me afresh at this very instant -- that is, sustains me in existence. When you think carefully about the nature of time, it becomes perfectly clear that a thing requires exactly the same power and action to be sustained in existence at each moment as would be needed to create it from scratch if it didn't already exist. The difference between creation and preservation is just a conceptual distinction, not a real one. This is something the natural light makes evident.

So I need to ask myself: do I have some power that can ensure I'll still exist a moment from now? Since I'm a thinking thing (or at least, since the question right now concerns only the thinking part of me), if such a power were in me, I would surely be aware of it. But I'm aware of no such power. This tells me clearly that I depend on some being other than myself.

But maybe that being isn't God. Maybe I was produced by my parents, or by some cause less perfect than God. No -- that can't be right. As I argued before, there must be at least as much reality in a cause as in its effect. Since I'm a thinking thing that has an idea of God in me, my cause -- whatever it ultimately turns out to be -- must also be a thinking thing that possesses the idea of God and all the perfections I attribute to God.

Then the same question can be asked about that cause. Does it get its existence from itself, or from something else? If from itself, then by the reasoning I've already laid out, it must be God. Because if it has the power of self-existence, it must also have the power to actually possess every perfection it can conceive of -- in other words, all the perfections I conceive as belonging to God. But if it gets its existence from some other cause, we ask the same question again about that cause, and so on, until we finally arrive at an ultimate cause, which will be God.

And there clearly can't be an infinite chain of causes here. The relevant question isn't what cause originally produced me in the distant past, but what cause is sustaining me in existence right now, at this very moment.

Nor can we suppose that several partial causes worked together to produce me, each contributing one of the perfections I attribute to God, so that all those perfections exist somewhere in the universe but not together in a single being. On the contrary, the unity, simplicity, and inseparability of all God's attributes is itself one of the chief perfections I conceive God to possess. The idea of this unity couldn't have been placed in my mind by any cause that didn't also give me the ideas of all those other perfections. No power could enable me to grasp them as bound together in an inseparable unity without simultaneously giving me knowledge of what they are.

Finally, as for my parents: even granting everything I've ever believed about them, it still doesn't follow that they sustain my existence, or that they produced me insofar as I am a thinking being. At most, they contributed certain physical arrangements to the matter in which I -- or rather my mind, which is what I now take myself to be -- happens to reside. So my parents create no difficulty here. The conclusion follows absolutely: from the mere fact that I exist and have in me an idea of a supremely perfect being -- that is, God -- his existence is demonstrated with the greatest clarity.

One question remains: how did I receive this idea of God? I didn't get it from the senses; it doesn't appear to me unexpectedly the way ideas of physical things do when they strike my sense organs. It's also not something I invented or constructed on my own, because I can't add to it or take away from it. The only remaining possibility is that it's innate -- placed in me from the very beginning, just as the idea of myself is innate.

And really, it's not surprising that God, in creating me, implanted this idea in me, so that it might serve as the mark of the craftsman stamped on his work. That mark doesn't even need to be something distinct from the work itself. Simply from the fact that God created me, it's highly likely that he fashioned me in some way after his own image and likeness -- and that I perceive this likeness through the same faculty by which I'm aware of myself. When I turn my attention inward, I not only find that I am an incomplete, imperfect, and dependent being who constantly strives toward something better and greater than what I am. I also find assurance that the being on whom I depend possesses all the perfections I aspire to -- and not just indefinitely or potentially, but actually and infinitely. And that being is God.

The entire force of this argument comes down to this: I couldn't possibly exist with the nature I have -- and yet have this idea of God in my mind -- unless God really exists. This same God whose idea I find in myself -- a being who possesses all those supreme perfections that my mind can dimly conceive but never fully comprehend, a being entirely free from every defect -- cannot be a deceiver. Fraud and deception always spring from some deficiency, and the natural light makes clear that a perfect being has no deficiency at all.

But before I examine this further and explore the other truths that follow from it, I want to pause here for a moment to contemplate God himself. I want to reflect at leisure on his astonishing attributes -- to behold, admire, and adore this incomparably great light, as far as my mind's eye can bear it, dazzled as it is by the sight. Just as we learn through faith that the supreme happiness of the next life consists in contemplating God, so even now we learn from experience that a similar meditation, though incomparably less perfect, is the source of the deepest satisfaction we can know in this life.
