MEDITATIONS ON THE FIRST PHILOSOPHY
Meditation VI: Of the Existence of Material Things, and of the Real Distinction Between the Mind and Body of Man

Meditation VI

Of the Existence of Material Things, and of the Real Distinction Between the Mind and Body of Man


The only question left to investigate is whether physical things exist. On this question, I at least know for certain that they can exist, insofar as they are the subject matter of pure mathematics, since I can conceive of them clearly and distinctly in that respect. There's no doubt that God has the power to produce everything I can distinctly conceive, and I've never considered anything impossible for him unless I ran into a contradiction when trying to conceive it properly. Furthermore, the faculty of imagination that I possess -- a faculty I'm aware of using whenever I turn my attention to physical things -- gives me reason to think they exist. Here's why: when I carefully consider what imagination actually is, I find that it's simply a particular application of my knowing faculty to a body that is immediately present to it, and which therefore exists.

To make this clearer, let me point out the difference between imagination and pure understanding. Take this example: when I imagine a triangle, I don't merely understand that it's a figure with three sides. At the same time, I also visualize those three sides as present before my mind's eye, through a kind of inner mental focus. That's what I call imagining. But if I want to think about a chiliogon -- a thousand-sided figure -- I can certainly understand that it's a figure with a thousand sides, just as easily as I understand that a triangle has three. But I can't imagine those thousand sides the way I can the three sides of a triangle. I can't picture them as present before my mind's eye. And although, out of habit, I always try to picture something whenever I think about physical objects, so that in thinking of a chiliogon I may vaguely picture some sort of figure in my mind, this picture is clearly not a chiliogon. It's no different from the image I'd form if I were thinking of a myriogon -- a ten-thousand-sided figure -- or any other figure with a lot of sides. This vague picture would be useless for discovering the properties that distinguish a chiliogon from other polygons. But if the question is about a pentagon, it's true that I can understand its shape without the help of imagination, just as I can with a chiliogon. But I can also imagine it, by focusing my mind's attention on its five sides and the area they enclose. So I notice that a special mental effort is needed for the act of imagining -- an effort not required for pure understanding. This special effort clearly reveals the difference between imagination and pure intellection.

I'd also note that this power of imagination, insofar as it differs from the power of pure understanding, is in no way essential to who I am -- to the essence of my mind. Even if I didn't have it, I would still be the same person I am now. From this, it seems we can conclude that imagination depends on something other than the mind. And I can easily see how it would work: if some body exists, and my mind is so closely connected and united with it that it can turn to examine it at will, then this would explain how the mind imagines physical objects. The difference between imagining and pure understanding would then come down to this: when the mind purely understands, it turns inward and considers one of the ideas it already contains within itself. But when it imagines, it turns outward toward the body and perceives in it something that corresponds to an idea it has formed on its own or received through the senses. I can easily see, I say, that imagination could work this way -- if it's true that bodies exist. And because I can't find any other obvious way to explain it, I conjecture with some probability that they do exist. But only with probability. Even after careful examination, I don't find that I can draw a necessary proof of the existence of any body from the distinct idea of physical nature that I have in my imagination.

Now, I'm used to imagining many things beyond the physical nature that pure mathematics studies -- things like colors, sounds, tastes, pain, and so on -- though with less distinctness. And since I perceive these things much better through the senses, which seem to have delivered them to my imagination via memory, it seems right that I should also examine what sense perception is and see whether I can get a definitive proof of the existence of physical objects from those ideas that come to me through this mode of awareness.

First, I'll recall what I previously accepted as true on the basis of sense perception, and what my grounds were for believing it. Second, I'll review the reasons that later forced me to doubt it. And finally, I'll consider what I should believe now.

So, to begin: I perceived that I had a head, hands, feet, and other body parts composing what I considered to be part of myself -- or perhaps even all of myself. I also perceived that this body was situated among many others that could affect it in various ways, both good and bad. I noticed what was good through a certain sensation of pleasure, and what was bad through a sensation of pain. Besides pleasure and pain, I also experienced hunger, thirst, and other appetites, along with physical inclinations toward joy, sadness, anger, and similar emotions. And looking beyond myself, I perceived in bodies not only their extension, shape, and movement, but also hardness, heat, and other qualities of touch, as well as light, colors, smells, tastes, and sounds. The variety of these let me distinguish the sky from the earth, the sea from everything else, and one body from another.

Given the ideas of all these qualities that were presented to my mind -- which were, strictly speaking, the only things I directly perceived -- it wasn't unreasonable for me to think I was perceiving objects entirely different from my thoughts, namely, bodies that produced those ideas. I was aware that the ideas came to me without my choosing them: I couldn't perceive any object, no matter how much I wanted to, unless it was present to one of my sense organs, and I couldn't avoid perceiving it when it was present. Because the ideas I received through the senses were far more vivid, clear, and in their own way more distinct than anything I could produce by deliberate thought or find stored in memory, they seemed unable to have come from me alone and must therefore have been caused by other objects. And since the only knowledge I had of those objects came from the ideas themselves, the most natural conclusion was that the objects resembled the ideas they caused. I also remembered that I had relied on the senses before I relied on reason, and that the ideas I formed on my own were never as clear as those I received through the senses -- and were mostly assembled from pieces of the latter. So I easily convinced myself that there was no idea in my understanding that hadn't first passed through the senses.

And I wasn't entirely wrong to believe that the body I called my own, by a special right, belonged to me more closely than any other body. I could never be separated from it the way I could from other bodies. I felt all my appetites and emotions in it and because of it. Pain and the stirring of pleasure affected its parts, not the parts of other bodies separate from it. But when I asked why a certain mysterious sensation of pain should give rise to sadness, or why pleasure should produce joy, or why that indescribable twisting in the stomach I call hunger should make me think of eating, and dryness in the throat should make me think of drinking, and so on -- I couldn't give any explanation, except that nature taught me so. There's certainly no obvious connection -- at least none I can understand -- between that irritation in the stomach and the desire to eat, any more than between perceiving something that causes pain and the feeling of sadness that follows. All my other judgments about the objects of sense seemed to be dictates of nature in the same way, because I noticed that these judgments formed in me before I had any chance to weigh the reasons for or against them.

But over time, experience gradually eroded the trust I had placed in my senses. Towers that looked round from a distance turned out to be square up close. Colossal statues on top of those towers looked tiny when viewed from the ground. In countless cases like these, I found that judgments based on the external senses were wrong. And not just the external senses -- even the internal ones. What could be more internal than pain? Yet I learned from people who'd had an arm or leg amputated that they still sometimes seemed to feel pain in the missing limb. This made me think I couldn't be entirely sure that any of my own limbs was actually affected when I felt pain in it.

To these grounds for doubt, I soon added two more of very broad scope. The first was this: I believed that nothing I ever perceived while awake couldn't also seem to occur in my dreams. And since I didn't think the ideas in my dreams came from objects outside me, I couldn't see any reason to believe this about what I seemed to perceive while awake either. The second was this: since I didn't yet know who made me (or at least was supposing I didn't), there was nothing to prevent me from having been made in such a way that I was deceived even about what seemed most obviously true. As for the reasons that had previously convinced me of the existence of physical objects, I had no great difficulty answering them. Since nature seemed to push me toward many things that reason warned me against, I didn't think I should trust its teachings very much. And although my sense perceptions didn't depend on my will, I didn't think that proved they came from things outside me. Perhaps some faculty within me -- one I hadn't yet discovered -- was producing them.

But now that I'm coming to know myself better and to see more clearly who made me, I don't think I should rashly accept everything the senses seem to teach. On the other hand, I don't think I should doubt all of it either.

First of all: since I know that everything I clearly and distinctly conceive can be made by God exactly as I conceive it, the mere fact that I can clearly and distinctly conceive one thing apart from another is enough to be certain they are different -- since at least God could make them exist separately. It doesn't matter what power actually separates them; the point is that I'm able to conceive them apart. So, simply because I know with certainty that I exist, and because in the meantime I can't see that anything else necessarily belongs to my nature beyond my being a thinking thing, I rightly conclude that my essence consists solely in being a thinking thing -- a substance whose entire essence or nature is simply to think. And even though I may possess a body (indeed, as I'll shortly explain, I certainly do possess a body) with which I am very closely joined, nevertheless -- because on the one hand I have a clear and distinct idea of myself as simply a thinking, non-extended thing, and on the other hand I have a distinct idea of body as simply an extended, non-thinking thing -- it is certain that I (that is, my mind, by which I am what I am) am entirely and truly distinct from my body, and can exist without it.

Furthermore, I find within myself various faculties of thought, each with its own particular character. For example, I have the faculties of imagining and perceiving. I can clearly and distinctly conceive of myself as a complete being without these faculties, but I can't conceive of them without me -- that is, without an intelligent substance in which they exist. In their very nature, they involve some form of understanding, which tells me they are distinct from me in the way that modes are distinct from the things they belong to. I also notice certain other faculties -- like the power to change location, to take on various shapes, and so on -- that likewise can't be conceived of or exist apart from some substance. But it's clear that these faculties, if they truly exist, must belong to some physical or extended substance, since their very concept involves extension but involves no understanding at all.

Beyond that, there's a certain passive faculty of perception in me -- a capacity for receiving and becoming aware of the ideas of sensible things. But this faculty would be useless unless there also existed, either in me or in something else, an active faculty capable of forming and producing those ideas. Now, this active faculty can't be in me, at least not insofar as I'm merely a thinking thing, since it doesn't presuppose any thinking on my part and since these ideas are frequently produced in my mind without any contribution from me -- and often contrary to my will. So this active faculty must exist in some substance other than me, and all the representational content of the ideas it produces must be contained in that substance -- either formally (in the same form) or eminently (in a higher form), as I established earlier. This substance is either a body -- a physical thing that formally contains everything that is representationally present in my ideas -- or it is God himself, or some being more exalted than body, which contains it eminently.

But since God is no deceiver, it's clear that he doesn't send me these ideas directly from himself, nor does he use some intermediary creature that contains their representational content only eminently rather than formally. He has given me no ability to discover that this is the case. On the contrary, he has given me a very strong inclination to believe that these ideas come from physical objects. I don't see how God could be defended against the charge of deception if these ideas actually came from any source other than physical things. Therefore, physical objects must exist.

That said, they may not be exactly the way we perceive them through the senses, since sense perception is often quite obscure and confused. But at least we must acknowledge that everything I clearly and distinctly conceive as belonging to them -- that is, broadly speaking, everything that falls within the scope of pure geometry -- really does exist outside of me.

As for other properties that are either merely particular (for example, that the sun is of such-and-such a size and shape) or are conceived with less clarity and distinctness (like light, sound, pain, and so on) -- although these are quite uncertain, nevertheless, on the sole ground that God is no deceiver and therefore hasn't allowed any falsehood in my beliefs without also giving me the means to correct it, I think I can safely conclude that I have the resources within myself to arrive at the truth about them. And first of all, there can be no doubt that each of nature's teachings contains some truth. By "nature" in its most general sense, I now mean nothing other than God himself, or the order and arrangement God has established in created things. And by my nature in particular, I mean everything that God has given to me.

Now, there is nothing nature teaches me more vividly than that I have a body that feels bad when I'm in pain and that needs food and drink when I feel hungry or thirsty. I should therefore have no doubt that there's some truth in this.

Nature also teaches me, through these sensations of pain, hunger, thirst, and so on, that I'm not merely lodged in my body the way a pilot is stationed in a ship. Rather, I am so closely joined to it, so thoroughly intermingled with it, that my mind and body together form a kind of unity. If this weren't the case, then when my body was hurt, I -- being simply a thinking thing -- wouldn't feel pain. Instead, I would perceive the injury purely through my understanding, the way a pilot sees by sight when something in the ship is damaged. And when my body needed food or drink, I would have clear intellectual knowledge of this fact, rather than being alerted to it by the confused sensations of hunger and thirst. For in truth, all these sensations of hunger, thirst, pain, and the rest are really nothing more than certain confused modes of thinking that arise from the union and apparent merging of mind and body.

Beyond this, nature teaches me that my body is surrounded by many other bodies, some of which I should seek out and others I should avoid. And indeed, since I perceive various kinds of colors, sounds, smells, tastes, heat, hardness, and so on, I can safely conclude that the bodies from which these different sense perceptions come must have certain features that correspond to those perceptions -- though these features may not actually resemble them. And since some of these perceptions are pleasant and others unpleasant, there can be no doubt that my body -- or rather my complete self, insofar as I'm made up of both body and mind -- can be affected in various ways, both good and bad, by the bodies around it.

But there are many other things that seem to be teachings of nature but really aren't. They're just beliefs that crept into my mind through a habit of forming careless judgments. It can easily happen that such judgments contain errors. For example, I've believed that all space in which there's nothing affecting my senses must be empty. That whatever is hot must contain something exactly like the idea of heat in my mind. That a white or green body must actually contain the same whiteness or greenness that I perceive. That whatever tastes bitter or sweet must have that very taste in it. That the stars, towers, and all distant objects must be the same size and shape as they appear to my eyes. And so on.

But to avoid any confusion here, I need to define more precisely what I mean by "being taught by nature." I'm using "nature" here in a narrower sense than when it means the totality of everything God has given me. In that broader sense, "nature" would include much that belongs only to the mind -- things I'm not referring to at the moment -- such as my grasp of the truth that what is done cannot be undone, and all other truths I perceive by the natural light of reason, without any help from the body. It would also include much that belongs only to the body and that I'm not calling "nature" here either, such as the property of heaviness and the like. I'm using "nature" exclusively to refer to what God has given me as a being composed of both mind and body.

So nature, taken in this sense, does teach me to avoid what causes pain and to pursue what gives pleasure, and things of that sort. But I don't find that nature teaches me to draw conclusions about things in the external world based directly on these sense perceptions, without first examining them carefully with my mind. It seems to me that discerning the truth about external objects is the job of the mind alone, not of the composite whole of mind and body.

For example, although a star makes no bigger impression on my eye than a candle flame does, I don't feel any natural or instinctive urge to believe the star is actually no bigger than the flame. I simply judged it that way since childhood, without any rational basis. And even though approaching fire makes me feel heat, and getting too close makes me feel pain, there's no reason to conclude that there's something in the fire that actually resembles my sensation of heat, any more than that there's something resembling my sensation of pain. All I have grounds for believing is that there's something in the fire, whatever it may be, that produces those sensations of heat or pain in me. Similarly, even though there are spaces where nothing excites my senses, I shouldn't conclude that those spaces contain nothing at all. I can see that on this point, as on many others, I've been in the habit of turning nature's order upside down. The perceptions of the senses were given to me by nature merely as signals to tell my mind what is beneficial or harmful to the composite being of which it is a part, and they are clear and distinct enough for that purpose. But I've been using them as infallible rules for determining the true nature of external objects -- a task for which they can only provide the most obscure and confused information.

I've already examined thoroughly enough how it is that, despite the supreme goodness of God, my judgments can still contain errors. But a difficulty arises here concerning the things nature teaches me to pursue or avoid, and concerning my internal sensations, in which I seem to have sometimes detected error -- cases where nature itself seems to deceive me directly. Take, for example, the case of someone who is tricked by the pleasant taste of food that has been laced with poison. Nature leads this person to desire the food because of its pleasant taste, not the poison, which nature knows nothing about. All we can conclude from this is that our nature isn't all-knowing, which is hardly surprising, since we are finite beings with correspondingly limited knowledge.

But we also quite frequently make errors about things to which nature directly inclines us. Consider people with dropsy, who crave drink even though it would harm them. You might say the reason they're deceived is that their nature has been corrupted. But this doesn't really solve the problem, because a sick person is just as much a creature of God as a healthy one. It seems just as contradictory to the goodness of God that the sick person's nature should be deceptive as that the healthy person's should be.

Now, consider a clock made of wheels and counterweights. It follows the laws of nature no less precisely when it's poorly made and tells the wrong time than when it fulfills its maker's intentions perfectly. In the same way, if I think of the human body as a kind of machine -- assembled from bones, nerves, muscles, veins, blood, and skin -- arranged so that it would go through the same involuntary motions it currently exhibits even if there were no mind in it, then I can easily see that it would be just as natural for such a body, if it were dropsical, to experience the dryness of the throat that normally triggers the sensation of thirst, and to have its nerves and other parts move in the way required for drinking (thereby making the illness worse and harming itself), as it would be natural for a healthy body to be prompted to drink for its own good by a similar dryness. And although, looking at the purpose a clock was designed for, I might say that a clock that tells the wrong time has strayed from its proper nature; and on the same principle, looking at the human body as a machine designed by God for its usual functions, I might say that a dropsical body whose dry throat doesn't lead to beneficial drinking has gone wrong in its nature -- still, I can plainly see that this second use of "nature" is very different from the first. The second is nothing more than a label that depends entirely on my thinking, something external that I apply by comparing a sick person and a badly made clock to my ideas of a healthy person and a well-made clock. But the first use of "nature" refers to something genuinely found in things -- something that has real truth.

Now, it's true that when we talk about a dropsical body whose nature is "corrupted" because its throat is dry even though it doesn't need a drink, we're applying an external label. But when we talk about the composite whole -- the mind in its union with the body -- it's not just a label. It is a genuine error of nature for this composite being to feel thirst when drinking would be harmful. And so we still need to ask why God's goodness doesn't prevent this kind of error in human nature.

To begin this investigation, I'll first note that there is an enormous difference between mind and body. By its very nature, body is always divisible, while mind is completely indivisible. When I consider the mind -- that is, when I consider myself purely as a thinking thing -- I can't distinguish any parts within myself. I perceive myself as something absolutely unified and whole. And even though the entire mind seems to be united to the entire body, if a foot or an arm or any other part is cut off, I'm aware that nothing has been taken away from my mind. The faculties of willing, perceiving, understanding, and so on can't properly be called its "parts," because it's one and the same mind that wills, that perceives, and that understands.

The exact opposite is true of physical or extended things. I can't think of any physical object, no matter how small, that I can't easily divide in thought -- and that I don't therefore recognize as divisible. This alone would be enough to teach me that the mind is entirely different from the body, if I hadn't already established this on other grounds.

Next, I note that the mind doesn't receive impressions from every part of the body directly. It receives them only from the brain -- or perhaps from just one small part of it, namely, what is called the "common sense." Whenever this part of the brain is affected in the same way, it produces the same perception in the mind, regardless of how the rest of the body might be arranged. This is proven by countless experiments that don't need to be listed here.

I also note that the nature of the body is such that whenever any one of its parts is moved by another part some distance away, it can just as easily be moved in the same way by any of the parts in between, even if the more distant part does nothing. For example, consider a taut cord A-B-C-D. If you pull the last part, D, the first part, A, will move in exactly the same way it would if you had pulled one of the middle parts, B or C, and left D alone. In the same way, when I feel pain in my foot, physics teaches me that this sensation is produced by means of nerves that stretch from the foot to the brain. When these nerves are disturbed in the foot, they simultaneously disturb the innermost part of the brain where they originate, exciting there a specific motion that nature has established to cause the mind to feel a sensation of pain as if located in the foot. But since these nerves must pass through the shin, the thigh, the lower back, the upper back, and the neck to reach the brain, it can happen that even though the nerve endings in the foot aren't affected -- only certain parts along their path through the lower back or neck -- the same motion is excited in the brain as would be caused by an actual injury to the foot. The mind will then necessarily feel pain in the foot, exactly as if it had actually been hurt. And the same applies to all our other sense perceptions.

Finally, I note that since each movement in the part of the brain that directly affects the mind produces only one particular sensation, the best arrangement one could imagine is for that movement to cause, out of all the sensations it could possibly produce, the one that is most useful for preserving the health of the human body. And experience shows that this is exactly what all the perceptions nature has given us are like. There is nothing in them that doesn't demonstrate the power and goodness of God.

For example, when the nerves of the foot are shaken violently or unusually hard, the motion travels through the spinal cord to the innermost parts of the brain and gives the mind a signal -- a sensation of pain felt as if it were in the foot. This alerts the mind and motivates it to do everything it can to remove the cause of the pain, since it's dangerous and harmful to the foot. Now, it's true that God could have designed human nature so that the same motion in the brain caused the mind to be aware of something entirely different. The motion might have made the mind conscious of itself insofar as it exists in the brain, or insofar as it exists somewhere between the foot and the brain, or it might have caused the mind to perceive some completely different thing. But none of those alternatives would have been as useful for preserving the body as what the mind actually feels. In the same way, when we need something to drink, a certain dryness arises in the throat that moves its nerves, and through them the internal parts of the brain. This movement gives the mind the sensation of thirst, because in that situation nothing is more useful for us than to know that we need drink for the preservation of our health. And so it goes in all the other cases.

From all of this, it is quite clear that despite the supreme goodness of God, human nature -- insofar as it is composed of mind and body -- can't help but sometimes lead us astray. If some cause produces in the brain the same motion that is normally produced when the foot is injured -- but the cause this time is not in the foot but somewhere along the nerves between the foot and the brain, or even in the brain itself -- then pain will be felt as if it were in the foot, and the senses will be naturally deceived. Since the same motion in the brain can only produce the same sensation in the mind, and since this sensation is far more often caused by something actually hurting the foot than by something acting elsewhere, it's reasonable that this motion should lead the mind to feel pain in the foot rather than in any other part of the body. And if dryness of the throat sometimes arises not, as usual, because drinking would be good for the body, but from the opposite cause -- as happens in dropsy -- it's still much better for it to mislead us in that case than for it to mislead us constantly when the body is healthy. The same reasoning applies to all the other cases.

This line of thinking is enormously useful, not only for recognizing the errors my nature is prone to, but also for making it easier to avoid or correct them. I know that all my senses usually point me toward what is true rather than what is false in matters relating to the body's well-being. I'm almost always able to use more than one sense to examine the same object. I can use my memory to connect present experience with past knowledge. And I can use my understanding, which has by now uncovered all the sources of my errors. So I should no longer fear that the things my senses present to me every day are false. The extravagant doubts of those earlier days should be dismissed as overblown and absurd -- especially the most sweeping doubt of all, the one about sleep, which I couldn't distinguish from being awake.

For I now find a very clear difference between the two. Our memory can never connect our dreams with one another and with the rest of our lives the way it habitually connects the events that occur when we're awake. Truly, if someone appeared to me suddenly while I was awake and then vanished just as suddenly -- the way images do in dreams -- so that I couldn't tell where they came from or where they went, I would have every reason to consider them a ghost or a phantom produced by my brain rather than a real person. But when I perceive things and can clearly determine where they come from, where they are, and when they appeared to me, and when I can connect that perception without interruption to the rest of my life, then I am perfectly certain that I'm perceiving them while awake and not in a dream.

And I should not have the slightest doubt about the truth of these perceptions if, after calling on all my senses, my memory, and my understanding to examine them, none of these faculties reports anything that contradicts any other. Since God is no deceiver, it necessarily follows that in such cases I am not being deceived.

But because the demands of practical life often force us to make decisions before we've had time for such careful examination, we must acknowledge that human life is frequently subject to error about particular things. And in the end, we must recognize the weakness of our nature.
