PRINCIPLES OF PHILOSOPHY
Part I: Of the Principles of Human Knowledge


I. That in order to seek truth, it is necessary once in the course of our life, to doubt, as far as possible, of all things.

Since we were once children who formed all sorts of judgments about the things we perceived with our senses -- before we had full use of our reason -- a great many prejudices stand in the way of our arriving at the truth. The only way to free ourselves of these prejudices, it seems, is to undertake, at least once in our lives, to doubt everything in which we can find even the smallest ground for uncertainty.


II. That we ought also to consider as false all that is doubtful.

It will also be useful to treat as false anything we are able to doubt. This way, we can more clearly discover what is truly most certain and easiest to know.


III. That we ought not meanwhile to make use of doubt in the conduct of life.

In the meantime, it should be noted that this kind of sweeping doubt is only meant for use when we are seeking the truth through contemplation. In everyday life, we are very often forced to act on opinions that are merely probable. Sometimes we must choose between two courses of action even when neither one seems more likely than the other, since if we waited to resolve all our doubts, the opportunity to act would often pass us by.


IV. Why we may doubt of sensible things.

With this in mind, since we are now focused solely on investigating the truth, we will begin by doubting whether any of the things we have ever perceived through our senses, or imagined, actually exist. First, because experience shows us that the senses sometimes deceive us, and it would be unwise to fully trust what has even once misled us. Second, because in our dreams we constantly seem to perceive or imagine countless things that have no real existence. And once someone has committed to this kind of thorough doubt, there seem to be no reliable marks by which to distinguish sleep from waking.


V. Why we may also doubt of mathematical demonstrations.

We will also doubt the things we previously held as most certain -- even mathematical proofs and the principles we considered self-evident. First, because we have sometimes seen people make mistakes in such matters, accepting as absolutely certain and self-evident what turned out to be false. But the main reason is this: we have learned that God, who created us, is all-powerful. We do not yet know whether he might have chosen to make us in such a way that we are always deceived, even in what we think we know best. This does not seem any less possible than the occasional deception we already know from experience. And if we suppose that no all-powerful God is the author of our existence -- that we exist by ourselves or by some other means -- then the less powerful we suppose our maker to be, the more reason we have to think we are imperfect enough to be continually deceived.


VI. That we possess a free will, by which we can withhold our assent from what is doubtful, and thus avoid error.

But no matter who may ultimately be the author of our existence, and no matter how powerful or deceptive that being might be, we are still conscious of a freedom within ourselves. We can always choose to withhold our belief from anything that is not manifestly certain and beyond doubt, and in this way guard ourselves against ever being deceived.


VII. That we cannot doubt of our existence while we doubt, and that this is the first knowledge we acquire when we philosophize in order.

When we reject everything we can entertain even the smallest doubt about -- even going so far as to imagine it is all false -- we can easily suppose that there is no God, no sky, no physical objects, and that we ourselves have neither hands nor feet nor any body at all. But we cannot in the same way suppose that we do not exist while we are doubting these things. There is a contradiction in thinking that what thinks does not exist at the very moment it is thinking. And so the knowledge "I think, therefore I am" is the first and most certain truth that anyone arrives at when they philosophize in an orderly way.


VIII. That we hence discover the distinction between the mind and the body, or between a thinking and corporeal thing.

This is also the best way to discover the nature of the mind and how it differs from the body. When we ask what we are -- while supposing, as we now do, that nothing exists apart from our thinking -- we clearly see that neither extension, nor shape, nor motion in space, nor anything else that can be attributed to a body belongs to our nature. Nothing belongs to us except thought alone. It follows that our concept of the mind comes before our concept of anything physical, and is more certain. After all, we are still doubting whether any body exists, yet we already know that we think.


IX. What thought is.

By the word "thought," I mean everything that takes place in us in such a way that we are immediately aware of it. Accordingly, not only understanding, willing, and imagining, but even perceiving through the senses counts here as thinking. For if I say "I see" or "I walk," and therefore I exist -- and if by "seeing" or "walking" I mean the physical act of my eyes or my legs, which is a bodily function -- then the conclusion is not absolutely certain. As often happens in dreams, I might think I see or walk even though I have not opened my eyes or moved from my spot, and perhaps even though I have no body at all. But if I mean the sensation itself -- the consciousness of seeing or walking -- then the knowledge is clearly certain, because it refers to the mind, which alone perceives or is conscious that it sees or walks.


X. That the notions which are simplest and self-evident are obscured by logical definitions; and that such are not to be reckoned among the cognitions acquired by study, but as born with us.

I am not going to define several other terms I have used or plan to use later, because their meaning seems sufficiently obvious. I have often noticed that philosophers make a mistake when they try to explain the most simple and self-evident truths through logical definitions -- they only end up making them more obscure. And when I said that the proposition "I think, therefore I am" is the first and most certain truth that anyone reaches through orderly philosophizing, I did not mean to deny that you first need to know what thought, existence, and certainty are, or that in order to think you must exist, and so on. But because these are the simplest notions of all -- and by themselves they do not tell us that anything exists -- I did not think it was appropriate to formally list them.


XI. How we can know our mind more clearly than our body.

Now, to see how our knowledge of the mind is not only prior to and more certain than our knowledge of the body, but even clearer, we should note something that is plainly obvious by the natural light of reason: nothing has properties or qualities if it is nothing at all. Wherever we observe certain properties, there must also be a thing or substance to which those properties belong. The same natural light shows us that we know a thing or substance more clearly the more properties we discover in it.

Now, we recognize a greater number of properties in our mind than in anything else. This is because whenever we come to know anything at all, we are at the same time -- and with even greater certainty -- led to knowledge of our own mind. For example, if I judge that the earth exists because I touch or see it, then by that very same reasoning, and with even stronger grounds, I must conclude that my mind exists. It is possible that I am wrong about touching the earth, and that no earth actually exists. But it is not possible for me to make that judgment without my mind -- the thing doing the judging -- existing. The same holds for anything whatsoever that is presented to our mind.


XII. How it happens that every one does not come equally to know this.

People who have not philosophized in an orderly way have held different views on this, because they never carefully distinguished the mind from the body. Although they had no trouble believing that they themselves existed -- and were more certain of this than of anything else -- they failed to notice that by "themselves" they should have meant their minds alone, at least when the question concerned metaphysical certainty. Instead, they meant their bodies -- which they saw with their eyes and touched with their hands -- and to which they mistakenly attributed the power of perception. This prevented them from clearly grasping the nature of the mind.


XIII. In what sense the knowledge of other things depends upon the knowledge of God.

But when the mind knows itself yet remains in doubt about everything else, it looks around on all sides to extend its knowledge further. First, it discovers within itself the ideas of many things. As long as it simply contemplates these ideas -- neither affirming nor denying that anything outside itself corresponds to them -- it is in no danger of error. The mind also discovers certain common principles from which it constructs various proofs so convincing that doubt seems impossible, at least while we are paying attention to them. For example, the mind contains ideas of numbers and shapes, and among its common principles is the rule that "if equals are added to equals, the results are equal," and others like it. From these, it is easy to prove that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, and so on.

As long as we focus on the premises from which these conclusions follow, we feel confident they are true. But the mind cannot always stay focused on them. When it recalls a conclusion without remembering the steps of the proof, and is still unsure whether its creator made it the kind of thing that might be deceived even about what seems most obvious -- then it has legitimate grounds for doubting such conclusions. It cannot achieve certain knowledge until it has discovered who made it.


XIV. That we may validly infer the existence of God from necessary existence being comprised in the concept we have of him.

When the mind then reviews the various ideas it contains, it discovers one that stands out above all the rest: the idea of a Being who is all-knowing, all-powerful, and absolutely perfect. In this idea, the mind notices something remarkable. Unlike the ideas of all other things, which contain only possible or contingent existence, this idea contains necessary and eternal existence. Just as the equality of its three angles to two right angles is necessarily contained in the idea of a triangle -- making the mind fully convinced that a triangle's angles equal two right angles -- so too, necessary and eternal existence is contained in the idea of an all-perfect Being. From this, the mind should clearly conclude that this all-perfect Being exists.


XV. That necessary existence is not in the same way comprised in the notions which we have of other things, but merely contingent existence.

The mind will be even more certain of this if it considers that it has no idea of any other thing in which necessary existence is contained. From this alone, it will see that the idea of an all-perfect Being was not fabricated by the mind itself and does not represent something imaginary. Rather, it represents a true and unchangeable nature that must exist, since it can only be conceived as necessarily existing.


XVI. That prejudices hinder many from clearly knowing the necessity of the existence of God.

Our mind would have no trouble accepting this truth if it were completely free from prejudices. But since we are used to distinguishing essence from existence in everything else, and since we can freely invent ideas of things that neither exist nor have ever existed, it easily happens -- when we do not keep our thoughts firmly focused on the all-perfect Being -- that we start to wonder whether the idea we have of God is one we made up, or at least one of those ideas whose essence does not include existence.


XVII. That the greater objective (representative) perfection there is in our idea of a thing, the greater also must be the perfection of its cause.

When we reflect further on the various ideas within us, it is easy to see that, considered simply as ways of thinking, they do not differ much from one another. But considered in terms of the objects they represent, they differ enormously. And their causes must be proportionally more perfect according to the degree of objective perfection the ideas contain. This is no different from the case of someone who has the idea of a machine of extraordinary ingenuity. We have every right to ask where this idea came from -- whether, for example, he saw such a machine built by someone else, or was so thoroughly taught the mechanical sciences, or possesses such natural genius that he could invent it on his own without ever seeing anything like it. For all the ingenuity contained in the idea -- as if in a picture -- must exist at least in its first and primary cause, not merely as a representation, but truly and actually.


XVIII. That the existence of God may be again inferred from the above.

Since we find in our minds the idea of God -- an all-perfect Being -- we have the right to ask where we got it. And we will discover that the perfections it represents are so vast that we could only have received it from an all-perfect Being: that is, from a God who truly exists. For it is obvious by the natural light that nothing can come from nothing, and that the more perfect cannot be produced by the less perfect as its complete cause. Moreover, we cannot have the idea or representation of anything unless there is somewhere -- either in us or outside us -- an original that actually contains all the perfections that idea represents. Since we do not find in ourselves the absolute perfections of which we have this idea, we must conclude that they exist in some nature different from ours -- namely, in God. Or at least they were once in him. And it most clearly follows from their infinity that they are still there.


XIX. That, although we may not comprehend the nature of God, there is yet nothing which we know so clearly as his perfections.

This will be sufficiently clear to anyone who is used to reflecting on the idea of God and considering his infinite perfections. Although we cannot fully comprehend them -- because it is in the nature of the infinite not to be comprehended by what is finite -- we nevertheless conceive them more clearly and distinctly than we do material objects. This is because God's perfections, being simple and unlimited, fill our mind more completely.


XX. That we are not the cause of ourselves, but that this is God, and consequently that there is a God.

Not everyone has noticed this, however. And because when we have the idea of some ingenious machine, we usually know perfectly well how we came by that idea -- yet we cannot even remember when the idea of God was first communicated to us, since it has always been in our minds -- we must continue our inquiry and ask about the source of our own being. After all, we possess the idea of a God with infinite perfections. It is perfectly evident by the natural light that anything which knows something more perfect than itself cannot be the source of its own existence. If it were, it would have given itself all the perfections it knows about. Therefore, it can only derive its existence from a being that actually possesses all those perfections -- that is, from God.


XXI. That the duration alone of our life is sufficient to demonstrate the existence of God.

The truth of this argument becomes clear when we consider the nature of time. The parts of time do not depend on one another and never exist simultaneously. So from the fact that we exist right now, it does not necessarily follow that we will exist a moment from now -- unless some cause, the same one that first produced us, continually reproduces us, so to speak, or in other words, keeps us in existence. For we easily understand that we have no power in ourselves to sustain our own existence. And the being that has enough power to sustain us must, by even greater reason, sustain itself -- or rather, need no sustaining at all -- and thus, in short, be God.


XXII. That in knowing the existence of God, in the manner here explained, we likewise know all his attributes, as far as they can be known by the natural light alone.

There is a great advantage in proving God's existence in this way -- namely, through his idea. It allows us to know at the same time what God is, as far as our limited nature permits. For when we reflect on the innate idea we have of him, we see that he is eternal, all-knowing, all-powerful, the source of all goodness and truth, the creator of all things, and that he possesses in himself everything in which we can clearly recognize infinite perfection or goodness that is not limited by any imperfection.


XXIII. That God is not corporeal, and does not perceive by means of senses as we do, or will the evil of sin.

There are indeed many things in the world that are to some degree imperfect or limited while also possessing some perfection. None of these imperfections can be in God. Thus, since divisibility is included in physical extension, and divisibility indicates imperfection, it is certain that God is not a body. And although it is in some sense a perfection in humans to be able to perceive through the senses, every sense involves passivity, which indicates dependence. So we must conclude that God does not perceive through senses in any way. He only understands and wills -- but not as we do, through separate acts. Rather, he always acts through a single, identical, and utterly simple act by which he understands, wills, and brings about everything that truly exists. He does not will the evil of sin, since that is merely the absence of being.


XXIV. That in passing from the knowledge of God to the knowledge of the creatures, it is necessary to remember that our understanding is finite, and the power of God infinite.

Now that we know God alone is the true cause of everything that exists or can exist, the best way to philosophize will be to start from our knowledge of God himself and try to explain the things he has created. We should try to deduce this knowledge from the ideas naturally present in our minds, for this will give us the most perfect kind of science: knowledge of effects through their causes. But to do this without falling into error, we must be careful to keep in mind that God, the author of all things, is infinite, while we are entirely finite.


XXV. That we must believe all that God has revealed, although it may surpass the reach of our faculties.

So if God should reveal to us or to others matters about himself that surpass the natural powers of our mind -- such as the mysteries of the incarnation and the trinity -- we will not refuse to believe them, even though we may not clearly understand them. Nor will we be surprised to find, in the immensity of his nature or even in what he has created, many things that exceed our comprehension.


XXVI. That it is not needful to enter into disputes regarding the infinite, but merely to hold all that in which we can find no limits as indefinite, such as the extension of the world, the divisibility of the parts of matter, the number of the stars, etc.

We will therefore never get tangled up in debates about the infinite. It would be absurd for us, being finite, to try to determine anything about it, and thus to try to limit it by attempting to comprehend it. So we will not bother responding to those who ask whether half of an infinite line is also infinite, or whether an infinite number is even or odd, and so on. Only those who imagine their minds to be infinite seem obligated to entertain questions like that.

For our part, when we find things that seem to have no limits in certain respects, we will not call them infinite but will simply regard them as indefinite. So because we cannot imagine an extension so large that we cannot conceive of a larger one, we will say that the magnitude of possible things is indefinite. Because a body can always be divided into parts that are themselves divisible into yet smaller parts, we will regard quantity as divisible into an indefinite number of parts. Because we cannot imagine so many stars that God could not create still more, we will suppose their number is indefinite. And so on for other cases.


XXVII. What difference there is between the indefinite and the infinite.

We will call these things "indefinite" rather than "infinite" in order to reserve the term "infinite" for God alone. First, because in God we not only discover no limits in any respect, but we also positively conceive that he has none. Second, because with other things, we do not in the same positive way conceive that they are unlimited in every respect. We merely recognize, in a negative way, that if they have any limits, we cannot discover them.


XXVIII. That we must examine, not the final, but the efficient, causes of created things.

Likewise, we will not seek to explain natural things by asking what purpose God or nature intended in creating them -- that is, we will not look for final causes. We should not presume to think we can read the mind of God. Instead, considering God as the efficient cause of all things, let us use the natural light of reason he has given us -- applied to those of his attributes he has been willing for us to know -- to work out what must follow regarding the effects we perceive through our senses. We should keep in mind, however, as already noted, that we can only trust this natural light as long as nothing contrary to its findings is revealed by God himself.


XXIX. That God is not the cause of our errors.

The first of God's attributes we should consider here is that he is absolutely truthful and the source of all light. It is therefore plainly contradictory for him to deceive us, or to be properly and directly the cause of the errors we experience. For although the ability to deceive might seem like a sign of cleverness among humans, the desire to deceive always stems from malice, fear, or weakness -- none of which can be attributed to God.


XXX. That consequently all which we clearly perceive is true, and that we are thus delivered from the doubts above proposed.

From this it follows that the natural light -- the faculty of knowledge God gave us -- can never grasp an object incorrectly, insofar as it truly grasps it: that is, insofar as the object is clearly and distinctly perceived. For God would deserve to be called a deceiver if he had given us a faculty that was defective in such a way that it led us to mistake falsehood for truth when we used it properly. This removes the most serious doubt we raised earlier -- the worry that perhaps our nature itself was so flawed that we might be deceived even in what seems most obvious.

The same principle should also dispel all the other grounds for doubt previously mentioned. Mathematical truths should now be beyond suspicion, since they are among the clearest truths we have. And if we perceive anything through our senses, whether awake or asleep, we can easily discover the truth as long as we separate what is clear and distinct in our perception from what is obscure and confused. I will not say more about this here, since it was already thoroughly treated in the Meditations, and what follows will explain it even more precisely.


XXXI. That our errors are, in respect of God, merely negations, but, in respect of ourselves, privations.

Although God does not deceive us, we still frequently fall into error. If we want to understand where our errors come from, in order to guard against them, we need to recognize that they depend less on our understanding than on our will. They do not require any active contribution from God to be produced. When considered in relation to God, our errors are merely negations -- the absence of something. But in relation to ourselves, they are privations -- the lack of something we ought to have.


XXXII. That there are only two modes of thinking in us, namely, the perception of the understanding and the action of the will.

All the modes of thinking we are conscious of can be grouped into two general classes. The first is perception, which is the operation of the understanding. The second is volition, which is the operation of the will. Perceiving through the senses, imagining, and conceiving things that are purely intellectual are all different forms of perceiving. Desiring, being averse to something, affirming, denying, and doubting are all different forms of willing.


XXXIII. That we never err unless when we judge of something which we do not sufficiently apprehend.

When we perceive something, we are in no danger of error as long as we refrain from making any judgment about it. Even when we do form a judgment, we would never go wrong if we only gave our assent to what we clearly and distinctly perceived. The reason we usually get deceived is that we make judgments without having adequate knowledge of what we are judging.


XXXIV. That the will as well as the understanding is required for judging.

I grant that the understanding is necessary for judging, since we obviously cannot judge what we do not perceive at all. But the will is also required, since we must choose to give our assent to what we have perceived. It is not necessary, however, to have a complete and perfect understanding of something in order to judge it. We often assent to things of which we have only a very vague and confused grasp.


XXXV. That the will is of greater extension than the understanding, and is thus the source of our errors.

Furthermore, the reach of the intellect extends only to the few things presented to it, and it is always very limited. The will, on the other hand, can in a sense be called infinite, because we observe that there is nothing that could be the object of any other will -- even the unlimited will of God -- that our will cannot also reach toward. So we easily extend our will beyond what we clearly perceive, and when we do, it is no wonder that we end up being deceived.


XXXVI. That our errors cannot be imputed to God.

But although God has not given us an all-knowing intellect, this does not make him in any way the author of our errors. It is simply in the nature of a created intellect to be finite, and in the nature of a finite intellect not to grasp everything.


XXXVII. That the chief perfection of man is his being able to act freely or by will, and that it is this which renders him worthy of praise or blame.

The fact that the will is broader than the understanding actually fits its nature perfectly. It is a great perfection in human beings to be able to act freely, and it is precisely this freedom that makes us responsible for our actions and worthy of praise or blame. We do not praise self-operating machines for performing their movements exactly as designed, since they act out of necessity. Instead, we praise the maker for the skill with which he built them, because he acted freely. On the same principle, we deserve credit when we embrace the truth, precisely because we do so by choice, not by compulsion.


XXXVIII. That error is a defect in our mode of acting, not in our nature; and that the faults of their subjects may be frequently attributed to other masters, but never to God.

It is true that whenever we err, there is some defect in how we act or how we use our freedom -- but not in our nature, which remains the same whether our judgments are true or false. And although God could have given us such a sharp intellect that we would never have made a mistake, we have no right to demand this of him. Among humans, a person who could have prevented someone else's wrongdoing but did not is held responsible, because human authority exists precisely for the purpose of keeping people from doing wrong. But God's dominion over the universe is absolutely and completely free. For this reason, we should thank him for the good things he has given us, rather than complaining that he did not give us everything we know he could have.


XXXIX. That the liberty of our will is self-evident.

That we possess free will -- the power to give or withhold our assent -- is so obvious that it must be counted among the first and most basic truths we are born knowing. This has already become very clear: when we set out to doubt everything, and even supposed that our all-powerful creator was deceiving us in every possible way, we were still conscious of being free to withhold belief from anything that was not completely certain and beyond doubt. And whatever we cannot doubt even in those extreme circumstances is as self-evident and certain as anything we can ever know.


XL. That it is likewise certain that God has foreordained all things.

But because what we have already discovered about God assures us that his power is so immense that we would be wrong to think ourselves capable of ever doing anything he had not ordained in advance, we would quickly run into serious difficulties if we tried to reconcile God's preordination with the freedom of our will and grasp both truths at once.


XLI. How the freedom of our will may be reconciled with the divine preordination.

Instead of getting entangled in those difficulties, we should remember that our mind is limited while the power of God -- by which he not only knew from all eternity everything that is or can be, but also willed and preordained it -- is infinite. We have enough intelligence to know clearly and distinctly that this power exists in God, but not enough to comprehend how he leaves the free actions of human beings undetermined. On the other hand, we have such a vivid awareness of the freedom and openness that exists in ourselves that there is nothing we know more clearly or completely. The omnipotence of God should not make us doubt this. It would be absurd to doubt what we experience directly in ourselves just because we cannot fully grasp another matter that we know, by its very nature, to be beyond our comprehension.


XLII. How, although we never will to err, it is nevertheless by our will that we do err.

Now that we know all our errors depend on our will, and that no one wishes to deceive himself, it may seem puzzling that we make any errors at all. But we need to distinguish between wanting to be deceived and wanting to assent to opinions that happen to contain error. No one deliberately chooses to be wrong. Yet hardly anyone hesitates to assent to things in which error lurks without their knowing it. In fact, it is often the very desire to find the truth that leads people -- when they do not fully understand the proper method for seeking it -- to rush to judgment on matters they do not adequately understand, and thus to fall into error.


XLIII. That we shall never err if we give our assent only to what we clearly and distinctly perceive.

But this much is certain: we will never mistake falsehood for truth as long as we judge only what we clearly and distinctly perceive. Since God is no deceiver, the faculty of knowledge he has given us cannot be deceptive, nor can our faculty of will lead us astray when we do not extend it beyond what we clearly know. Even if this truth could not be established by reasoning, the minds of all people have been so constituted by nature as to spontaneously assent to whatever is clearly perceived, and to find it impossible to doubt.


XLIV. That we uniformly judge improperly when we assent to what we do not clearly perceive, although our judgment may chance to be true; and that it is frequently our memory which deceives us by leading us to believe that certain things were formerly sufficiently understood by us.

It is equally certain that when we accept a conclusion we do not really understand, we are either mistaken or, if we happen to stumble on the truth, it is only by luck. Either way, we can never be confident we are not in error. I admit it rarely happens that we judge something we have noticed we do not understand, because it is a dictate of the natural light never to judge what we do not know. But our most frequent mistake is this: we assume we have a past knowledge of many things, giving our assent to them as if they were stored reliably in memory and perfectly understood -- when in truth, we have no such knowledge.


XLV. What constitutes clear and distinct perception.

There are indeed a great many people who go through their entire lives without ever perceiving anything in the way required for sound judgment. The knowledge on which we can build certain and indubitable judgment must be not only clear but also distinct. I call a perception "clear" when it is present and open to the attentive mind -- just as we say we see objects clearly when they are right in front of our eyes, stimulating them with enough force, and our eyes are focused on them. I call a perception "distinct" when it is so precise and sharply separated from every other perception that it contains within itself nothing but what is clear.


XLVI. It is shown, from the example of pain, that a perception may be clear without being distinct, but that it cannot be distinct unless it is clear.

For example, when someone feels intense pain, the awareness they have of that pain is very clear. But it is not always distinct, because people usually confuse it with a vague judgment they form about the nature of the pain. They assume that something in the painful body part resembles the sensation of pain they experience. In this way, a perception can be clear without being distinct. But it can never be distinct without also being clear.


XLVII. That, to correct the prejudices of our early years, we must consider what is clear in each of our simple notions.

Indeed, in our early years the mind was so immersed in the body that, although it perceived many things clearly enough, it never knew anything distinctly. And since we already exercised our judgment on many things at that age, we picked up numerous prejudices that most people never manage to shed. To put ourselves in a position to get rid of these, I will briefly list all the simple notions that make up our thoughts, and distinguish in each what is clear from what is obscure or likely to lead us into error.


XLVIII. That all the objects of our knowledge are to be regarded either (1) as things or the affections of things; or (2) as eternal truths; with the enumeration of things.

Whatever objects fall under our knowledge, we consider them either as things (or properties of things), or as eternal truths that have no existence outside our thought. Among things, the most general notions are substance, duration, order, number, and perhaps a few others that apply to every kind of thing. However, I recognize only two highest categories of things. The first is intellectual things -- things that have the power to think -- which includes mind or thinking substance and its properties. The second is material things -- extended substance, or body, and its properties. Perception, volition, and all the various modes of knowing and willing relate to thinking substance. To extended substance we attribute magnitude (that is, extension in length, breadth, and depth), shape, motion, position, divisibility of parts, and the like.

There are also, however, certain things we experience internally that should not be attributed to the mind alone or to the body alone, but to the close and intimate union between them, as will be explained in its proper place. These include the appetites of hunger and thirst, and also the emotions or passions of the mind that are not purely mental -- such as anger, joy, sadness, and love. Finally, there are all the sensations: pain, pleasure, light and colors, sounds, smells, tastes, heat, hardness, and the other qualities we perceive by touch.


XLIX. That the eternal truths cannot be thus enumerated, but that this is not necessary.

What I have just listed, we should regard as things, or the qualities or modes of things. Now we come to eternal truths. When we recognize that something cannot come from nothing, the proposition "nothing comes from nothing" is not treated as a thing or as the property of a thing, but as an eternal truth that resides in our mind -- what we call a common notion or axiom. Other examples include: the same thing cannot both be and not be at the same time; what is done cannot be undone; whoever thinks must exist while they think; and countless others. It would be difficult to list them all, but this is not necessary, since as long as we are not blinded by prejudices, we cannot fail to recognize them when the occasion for thinking about them arises.


L. That these truths are clearly perceived, but not equally by all men, on account of prejudices.

As for these common notions, there is no doubt that they can be clearly and distinctly known -- otherwise they would not deserve the name. Yet some of them are not equally accepted by everyone. This is not because some people have a broader faculty of knowledge than others, but rather because these common notions sometimes conflict with certain people's prejudices. Those who hold such prejudices cannot easily embrace these truths, even though others who are free from those prejudices grasp them with perfect clarity.


LI. What substance is, and that the term is not applicable to God and the creatures in the same sense.

Now, regarding what we consider as things or the modes of things, it is worth examining each concept on its own. By "substance," we can only mean a thing that exists in such a way that it needs nothing else in order to exist. Strictly speaking, there can be only one substance that is absolutely independent, and that is God. All other things can only exist with the ongoing support of God. Accordingly, the term "substance" does not apply to God and to created things in the same sense -- to use a term familiar from academic philosophy, it is not used "univocally." No single meaning of this word can be clearly understood as applying to both God and creatures.


LII. That the term is applicable univocally to the mind and the body, and how substance itself is known.

Created substances, however -- whether physical or thinking -- can be understood under a common concept. They are things that need nothing but God's ongoing support in order to exist. But substance itself cannot be first discovered merely from the fact that something exists independently, since independent existence is not something we directly observe. We can, however, easily discover substance from any of its properties, based on the common principle that nothing has no properties. When we perceive that some property is present, we can infer that some existing thing or substance to which it belongs must also be present.


LIII. That of every substance there is one principal attribute, as thinking of the mind, extension of the body.

Although any property is sufficient to lead us to the knowledge of a substance, there is one principal property of every substance that constitutes its nature or essence, and on which all the others depend. Extension in length, breadth, and depth constitutes the nature of physical substance, and thought constitutes the nature of thinking substance. Everything else that can be attributed to body presupposes extension and is merely some mode of an extended thing. Likewise, all the properties we discover in the mind are merely different modes of thinking. For example, we cannot conceive shape without conceiving something extended, nor motion without extended space, nor imagination or sensation or will without a thinking thing. But we can conceive extension without shape or motion, and thought without imagination or sensation, and so on -- as is clear to anyone who reflects on these matters.


LIV. How we may have clear and distinct notions of the substance which thinks, of that which is corporeal, and of God.

In this way, we can easily form two clear and distinct ideas: one of created thinking substance, the other of physical substance -- provided we carefully distinguish all the properties of thought from those of extension. We can also form a clear and distinct idea of an uncreated and independent thinking substance -- that is, of God -- provided we do not suppose this idea fully represents everything that is in God, and do not mix anything fictitious into it. Instead, we should attend simply to what is contained in our concept of him and what we clearly know belongs to the nature of an absolutely perfect Being. For no one can deny that we have such an idea of God, unless they groundlessly assume there is no knowledge of God at all in the human mind.


LV. How duration, order, and number may be also distinctly conceived.

We will also have very clear conceptions of duration, order, and number if, instead of mixing in what properly belongs to the concept of substance, we simply think of the duration of a thing as a way of conceiving it insofar as it continues to exist. In the same way, order and number are not things distinct from the things arranged in order or counted, but simply ways we think about those things.


LVI. What are modes, qualities, attributes.

What we are calling "modes" here is the same as what we elsewhere call "attributes" or "qualities." But when we consider a substance as affected or varied by them, we use the term "modes." When these variations allow the substance to be classified as a certain kind, we use the term "qualities." And when we simply regard them as belonging to the substance, we call them "attributes." Accordingly, since God should be conceived as beyond change, it is not proper to say there are modes or qualities in God, but only attributes. And even in created things, whatever is always found in them in the same way -- such as existence and duration in a thing that exists and endures -- should be called an attribute rather than a mode or quality.


LVII. That some attributes exist in the things to which they are attributed, and others only in our thought; and what duration and time are.

Some of these attributes or modes exist in the things themselves, while others exist only in our thought. Take time, for example, which we distinguish from duration in general and call the measure of motion. Time is really just a way we think about duration itself. We do not actually conceive the duration of things that move as being different from the duration of things that do not move. This is clear from the fact that if two bodies are in motion for an hour -- one moving quickly and the other slowly -- we do not count more time for one than for the other, even though there is much more motion in one body than in the other. But to measure the duration of all things by a common standard, we compare their duration to the largest and most regular motions that produce years and days, and we call this "time." So what we call time is nothing added to duration in general -- it is simply a way of thinking about it.


LVIII. That number and all universals are only modes of thought.

In the same way, number, when it is not considered as existing in created things but merely in the abstract, is only a way of thinking. The same is true of all those general ideas we call universals.


LIX. How universals are formed; and what are the five common, namely, genus, species, difference, property, and accident.

Universals arise simply from our using one and the same idea to think about all the individual things that share a certain resemblance. When we group all the objects represented by this idea under one name, that name also becomes universal. For example, when we see two stones and pay no attention to their nature beyond noting that there are two of them, we form the idea of a certain number, which we call "two." When we later see two birds or two trees and merely notice there are two of them, we take up the same idea as before, which is therefore universal. And we likewise give this number the same universal name "two."

In the same way, when we consider a figure with three sides, we form an idea we call "triangle" and then use it as a universal to represent all other three-sided figures. But when we notice that some three-sided figures have a right angle and others do not, we form the universal idea of a right-angled triangle. This, being more specific than the previous idea, can be called a species, with the right angle being the universal difference that distinguishes right-angled triangles from all others. Further, because the square of the side opposite the right angle equals the sum of the squares of the other two sides, and because this property belongs only to this species of triangle, we can call it the universal property of the species. Finally, if we notice that some of these triangles are in motion and others are not, this will be their universal accident. Accordingly, there are traditionally five universals: genus, species, difference, property, and accident.


LX. Of distinctions; and first of the real.

But number in things themselves arises from the distinctions between them. Distinction comes in three kinds: real, modal, and of reason. A real distinction properly holds between two or more substances. To be certain that two substances are really distinct from each other, it is enough that we can clearly and distinctly conceive one without the other. For our knowledge of God assures us that he can bring about anything of which we have a distinct idea. So since we have, for example, the idea of an extended, physical substance -- even though we do not yet know for certain whether any such thing actually exists -- the mere fact that we have this idea is enough to assure us that it could exist. And if it does exist, every part of it that we can distinguish in thought must be really distinct from every other part.

In the same way, since everyone is conscious that they think, and can in thought exclude from themselves every other substance -- whether thinking or extended -- it is certain that each of us, so considered, is really distinct from every other thinking and physical substance. And even if we suppose that God has united a body to a soul as closely as possible, making them into a single composite whole, the two substances would remain really distinct despite this union. No matter how tightly God might have joined them, he could not have given up the power to separate them or to preserve one apart from the other. And whatever God can separate or preserve separately is really distinct.


LXI. Of the modal distinction.

There are two kinds of modal distinction. The first is between a mode and the substance it belongs to. The second is between two modes of the same substance.

We recognize the first kind when we can clearly grasp a substance apart from a particular mode, but cannot conceive the mode without conceiving the substance. For example, there is a modal distinction between shape or motion and the physical substance in which they exist, and a similar distinction between affirmation or memory and the mind.

We recognize the second kind when we can think of one mode without the other, though we cannot think of either without thinking of the substance they both belong to. For example, if a stone is square and moving, we can conceive its square shape without its motion, and its motion without its square shape. But we cannot conceive either the motion or the shape apart from the substance of the stone.

As for a mode of one substance being different from another substance, or from a mode of another substance -- such as the motion of one body being different from another body, or from the mind, or motion being different from doubt -- this should be called a real distinction rather than a modal one, because these modes cannot be clearly conceived apart from the really distinct substances to which they belong.


LXII. Of the distinction of reason (logical distinction).

Finally, the distinction of reason is the distinction between a substance and one of its attributes -- an attribute without which, however, we cannot have a distinct conception of the substance -- or between two such attributes of the same substance, where we try to think of one without the other. This distinction becomes apparent from our inability to form a clear and distinct idea of the substance if we separate that attribute from it, or to clearly perceive one such attribute if we separate it from the other. For example, because any substance that ceases to endure also ceases to exist, duration is distinct from substance only in thought. And in general, all the ways of thinking by which we consider objects differ only in thought -- both from the objects they are thought about, and from each other when applied to the same object.

I should note that I believe I once classified this kind of distinction with the modal distinction -- namely, toward the end of my Reply to the First Objections to the Meditations. But that was only necessary to treat these distinctions in a general way, and for my purposes at the time it was enough simply to distinguish both of them from the real distinction.


LXIII. How thought and extension may be distinctly known, as constituting, the one the nature of mind, the other that of body.

Thought and extension can be regarded as constituting the natures of thinking and physical substance respectively. In that case, they should be conceived as nothing other than thinking and extended substance themselves -- that is, as mind and body. Understood this way, they are conceived with the greatest clarity and distinctness. Moreover, we more easily conceive thinking substance or extended substance than substance by itself -- that is, with its thinking or extension left out. There is some difficulty in abstracting the notion of substance from the notions of thinking and extension, which are only different from each other in thought. A concept does not become more distinct just because it contains fewer elements; it becomes more distinct when we accurately distinguish what it contains from everything else.


LXIV. How these may likewise be distinctly conceived as modes of substance.

Thought and extension can also be considered as modes of substance, insofar as one and the same mind can have many different thoughts, and one and the same body, keeping its size unchanged, can be extended in different ways -- sometimes more in length and less in breadth or depth, other times more in breadth and less in length. In this case, they are modally distinguished from substance and can be conceived just as clearly and distinctly, provided they are not treated as substances or independent things, but simply as modes of things. By regarding them as belonging to the substances they are modes of, we distinguish them properly and see them for what they truly are. If, on the other hand, we tried to consider them apart from the substances they belong to, we would be treating them as self-standing things and would confuse the ideas of mode and substance.


LXV. How we may likewise know their modes.

In the same way, we will best understand the various modes of thought -- such as understanding, imagining, remembering, willing, and so on -- and the various modes of extension -- such as all shapes, the arrangement of parts, and their motions -- provided we consider them simply as modes of the things they belong to. As for motion in particular, we will understand it well enough if we think only of local motion -- movement from place to place -- without trying to account for the force that produces it, which I will attempt to explain in its proper place.


LXVI. How our sensations, affections, and appetites may be clearly known, although we are frequently wrong in our judgments regarding them.

There remain our sensations, emotions, and appetites, which we can also know clearly -- as long as we are careful to include in our judgments only what is precisely contained in our perception and of which we are directly aware. But this is very difficult to do, at least when it comes to sensations. The reason is that all of us, from our earliest years, have judged that everything we perceived through our senses had an existence outside our minds and was entirely similar to our sensations -- that is, to our perceptions of them. So when we saw a certain color, for instance, we thought we were seeing something in the outside world that was identical to the idea of color we were experiencing. And from the habit of judging this way, we came to regard the externality of the color as so obvious that we considered it certain and indubitable.


LXVII. That we are frequently deceived in our judgments regarding pain itself.

The same prejudice applies to all our other sensations, including pleasure and pain. Even though we do not usually believe that objects resembling pleasure and pain exist outside us, we still do not consider these sensations to be in the mind alone or in our perception. Instead, we locate them in the hand, or the foot, or some other part of the body. But there is no reason to believe that the pain we feel "in" the foot, for example, is something outside the mind that actually exists in the foot, or that the light we seem to see "in" the sun exists in the sun the way it does in us. Both of these beliefs are prejudices from our childhood, as will become clear later.


LXVIII. How in these things what we clearly conceive is to be distinguished from that in which we may be deceived.

To separate what is clear in our sensations from what is obscure, we must carefully observe the following. We have a clear and distinct knowledge of pain, color, and similar things when we consider them simply as sensations or thoughts. But when we judge them to be real things existing outside our minds, we are completely unable to form any conception of what they could be. Indeed, when someone says they see a color in a body or feel pain in a limb, it is exactly as if they said they see or feel something there whose nature they are entirely ignorant of -- or in other words, that they do not know what they see or feel.

Admittedly, a person who does not examine their thoughts carefully may easily convince themselves they have some knowledge of what the sensation is, since they assume there is something in the external world resembling the sensation of color or pain they are experiencing. But if they actually reflect on what the sensation of color or pain represents as existing in the colored body or wounded limb, they will find they have absolutely no knowledge of it.


LXIX. That magnitude, figure, etc., are known far differently from colour, pain, etc.

This will become even more obvious if we consider the following. Size, shape, motion (at least local motion -- philosophers have made other kinds of motion less intelligible by inventing them), the arrangement of parts, duration, number, and those other properties that we clearly perceive in all bodies -- these are known in a completely different way from how we know color, pain, smell, taste, or any of the other properties that, as I said above, must be attributed to the senses. For although when we see a body we are no less certain of its existence from its having a shape than from its having a color, we know its shape far more clearly than its color.


LXX. That we may judge of sensible things in two ways, by the one of which we avoid error, by the other fall into it.

It is therefore clear that saying we perceive colors in objects is really the same as saying we perceive something in objects whose nature we do not know -- except that it produces in us a certain very vivid and clear sensation, which we call the sensation of color. But there is a very important difference in how we judge this. As long as we simply judge that there is something unknown in objects -- in things as they actually are -- from which the sensation reaches us, we are far from falling into error. In fact, we are guarding against it, because recognizing that we do not know what something is makes us less likely to judge rashly.

But when we think we actually perceive colors in objects -- even though we are really ignorant of what we are calling "color" and cannot conceive any resemblance between the color we suppose to be in objects and what we experience in sensation -- we fail to notice this. And because there are other properties of objects, such as size, shape, and number, that either exist or can exist in them exactly as our senses perceive or our understanding conceives them, we easily slide into the error of thinking that what we call color in objects is something just like the color we perceive. We end up supposing we clearly perceive something that we do not perceive at all.


LXXI. That the chief cause of our errors is to be found in the prejudices of our childhood.

Here we can identify the first and chief cause of our errors. In early life, the mind was so closely tied to the body that it paid attention to nothing beyond the thoughts caused by objects affecting the body. It did not yet relate these thoughts to anything existing outside itself. It simply felt pain when the body was hurt, pleasure when something beneficial happened, and when the body was affected in ways that neither greatly helped nor harmed it, the mind experienced what we call tastes, smells, sounds, heat, cold, light, colors, and the like. These sensations, in truth, represent nothing that exists outside our mind and vary according to the different ways the body is affected.

At the same time, the mind also perceived magnitudes, shapes, and motions -- but these were presented not as sensations, but as things or properties of things that exist, or at least could exist, outside the mind. However, at that age the mind did not yet notice this difference between the two kinds of perception.

Later, when the body -- which nature has designed to move itself in various directions -- began pursuing what was beneficial and avoiding what was harmful, the mind, closely connected to it, started to notice that the things pursued or avoided existed outside itself. The mind then attributed to these external objects not only magnitudes, shapes, and motions -- which it grasped as real properties of things -- but also tastes, smells, and other sensations that were actually produced within the mind itself. And since the mind only considered other objects insofar as they were useful to the body it was joined to, it judged that things had more or less reality depending on how strongly they affected the body. This is how people came to believe there was more substance in rocks and metals than in air or water -- because they felt more hardness and weight in them. Air was thought to be practically nothing, as long as it was neither moving, nor hot, nor cold. The stars appeared to be no bigger than candle flames, since that was all the light they seemed to give off. The mind did not notice that the earth rotates on its axis or that its surface is curved like a globe, and so it readily judged the earth to be flat and motionless. Our minds have been filled since infancy with a thousand other prejudices of this sort, which in our youth we forgot we had accepted without proper examination, treating them as if they were the highest certainty -- as if they were known through our senses or implanted in us by nature.


LXXII. That the second cause of our errors is that we cannot forget these prejudices.

Now, in our mature years, when the mind is no longer entirely subject to the body and does not refer everything to it -- and instead also seeks to discover the truth about things as they are in themselves -- we do recognize that many of the judgments we formed in childhood were false. But we find it very difficult to erase them from our memory, and as long as they remain there, they give rise to various errors. For example, since from our earliest years we imagined the stars to be very small, we find it extremely hard to shake that impression, even when astronomical reasoning plainly tells us they are enormously large. So powerful is the grip of preconceived opinion.


LXXIII. The third cause is, that we become fatigued by attending to those objects which are not present to the senses; and that we are thus accustomed to judge of these not from present perception but from preconceived opinion.

Beyond this, our mind cannot focus on any object for long without eventually feeling some strain and fatigue. And of all objects, it has the greatest difficulty focusing on those that are present neither to the senses nor to the imagination -- whether because this is natural to it given its union with the body, or because in our early years, being occupied only with perceptions and images, it became more practiced in those modes of thinking than in any other. This is also why many people are unable to conceive of any substance except what is physical and even perceptible to the senses. They are unaware that the only objects of imagination are those that involve extension, shape, and motion, while there are many other things that are purely intelligible. They convince themselves that nothing can exist except body, and that no body exists that cannot be sensed. And since in truth we never perceive any object exactly as it is through the senses alone -- but only through our reason applied to what the senses give us, as will be shown later -- the result is that most people throughout their lives perceive nothing except in a confused way.


LXXIV. The fourth source of our errors is, that we attach our thoughts to words which do not express them with accuracy.

Finally, because we attach all our ideas to words in order to express them and commit our thoughts to memory in connection with those words, and because we later find it easier to recall the words than the things they stand for, we can scarcely conceive of anything so distinctly that we completely separate what we conceive from the words chosen to express it. As a result, most people pay more attention to words than to things. They frequently assent to terms without attaching any meaning to them at all, either because they think they once understood the terms, or because they assume they learned them from others who understood them correctly. This is not the place to discuss this matter in detail, since the nature of the human body has not yet been explained, nor has the very existence of body been established. But enough has been said to enable us to distinguish our clear and distinct conceptions from our obscure and confused ones.


LXXV. Summary of what must be observed in order to philosophize correctly.

If we want to philosophize seriously and devote ourselves to discovering all the truths we are capable of knowing, we must, first of all, set aside our prejudices. In other words, we must take great care to withhold our assent from the opinions we have previously accepted until, upon fresh examination, we find them to be true. Next, we must make an orderly review of the ideas in our minds and accept as true all and only those that we clearly and distinctly perceive.

By doing this, we will first discover that we exist insofar as it is our nature to think, and at the same time that there is a God on whom we depend. After considering his attributes, we will be able to investigate the truth of all other things, since God is their cause. Besides our knowledge of God and of our own mind, we will also find that we possess knowledge of many eternally true propositions -- for example, that nothing cannot be the cause of anything. We will further discover in our minds the knowledge of an extended, physical nature that can be moved, divided, and so on, as well as certain sensations that affect us -- such as pain, colors, and tastes -- even though we do not yet know why we are affected in these ways.

Comparing what we have now learned, through this orderly examination, with our earlier confused understanding, we will develop the habit of forming clear and distinct ideas of everything we are capable of knowing. In these few principles, I believe the most general and important foundations of human knowledge are contained.


LXXVI. That we ought to prefer the divine authority to our perception; but that, apart from things revealed, we ought to assent to nothing that we do not clearly apprehend.

Above all, we must impress this infallible rule upon our memory: what God has revealed is incomparably more certain than anything else, and we should submit our belief to divine authority rather than to our own judgment -- even if the light of reason should seem, with the greatest clarity and evidence, to suggest something contrary to what is revealed. But in matters on which there is no revelation, it is entirely inconsistent with the character of a philosopher to accept as true what has not been verified, or to trust the senses -- that is, the thoughtless judgments of childhood -- more than the considered conclusions of mature reason.
