PRINCIPLES OF PHILOSOPHY
Part III: Of the Visible World

Now that we have established certain principles about the physical world -- principles arrived at not through the biases of the senses but through the light of reason, and possessing such strong evidence that we cannot doubt their truth -- the question is whether we can use these principles alone to explain everything we observe in nature. We will start with the most general phenomena, the ones on which everything else depends: the overall structure of this entire visible universe.

But before we can properly investigate this, two things must be kept in mind.

The first is that we should always remember the infinite power and goodness of God. We should not worry about making the mistake of imagining his works to be too grand, too beautiful, or too perfect. Instead, we should be careful not to assume limits to his creation when we have no certain knowledge of such limits -- for that would be to think less of God's power than we should.

The second is that we should be careful not to think too highly of ourselves. We would be guilty of this if we claimed to know the boundaries of the universe without being certain of them through either natural reasoning or divine revelation -- as though the reach of our thought extended beyond what God has actually made. And we would be even more guilty if we convinced ourselves that God created everything solely for our benefit, or if we imagined that our intellect could fully grasp the purposes God had in mind when creating the universe.

Now, as far as morality goes, it may be a perfectly good and pious idea to believe that God made everything for us, since this belief can inspire greater gratitude and love toward him. And in a certain sense, it is even true -- there is nothing in creation that we cannot put to some use, even if only as an exercise for our minds in studying it and honoring God because of it. But it is by no means likely that everything was created for us in the sense that God had no other purpose in making it. In fact, this assumption would be plainly absurd and foolish when it comes to understanding the physical world. After all, we have no doubt that many things exist -- or once existed and have since ceased to be -- that were never seen or known by any human being, and were never of any use to us at all.
