Book Three

The sun rose, leaving the lovely water and climbing into the bronze sky to give light to the immortals and to mortal men on the grain-giving earth; and they came to Pylos, the well-built city of Neleus. The people there were on the shore of the sea, sacrificing black bulls to the dark-haired earth-shaker. There were nine companies, five hundred men sitting in each, and each company had nine bulls ready. They had just tasted the inner parts and were burning the thigh-pieces for the god when the ship put straight in to shore. They hauled up the sail of the trim ship and furled it and moored her, and stepped out, and Telemachus stepped out after them, with Athena leading the way.

The goddess grey-eyed Athena spoke to him first. "Telemachus, there is no call for you to be shy now, none at all. You sailed over the sea for this — to find out about your father, where the earth covers him and what death he met. So go straight to Nestor, who breaks horses, and let us find out what he is keeping to himself. Ask him yourself to tell you the exact truth. He will not lie to you; he is a man of real understanding."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her: "Mentor, how am I to go, and how am I to greet him? I have no practice yet in careful speaking, and a young man is ashamed to question a man much older."

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena answered him: "Telemachus, some of it you will work out for yourself, and heaven will prompt you with the rest. I do not think you were born and brought up without the goodwill of the gods."

With that Pallas Athena led the way quickly, and he followed in the goddess's footsteps, and they came to the gathering and the companies of the men of Pylos. Nestor was sitting there with his sons, and round about them his people were getting the feast ready, roasting some of the meat and putting other pieces on spits. When they saw the strangers they all came crowding round, and took their hands in welcome, and asked them to sit down.

Nestor's son Peisistratus came up first and took them both by the hand and sat them down at the feast, on soft fleeces on the sand of the sea, beside his brother Thrasymedes and his father. He gave them portions of the inner meat and poured wine into a golden cup, and lifted it to Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis, and said:

"Pray now, stranger, to lord Poseidon, since it is his feast you have come in on. And when you have poured the offering and prayed, as is right, give your friend the cup of honey-sweet wine as well, so that he can pour too, since I imagine he also prays to the immortals. Every man needs the gods. But he is younger, of an age with me, so I will give the golden cup to you first."

With that he put the cup of sweet wine into her hand. Pallas Athena was pleased with the man's good sense and judgment, that he had given her the golden cup first, and she prayed hard at once to lord Poseidon.

"Hear me, Poseidon, who hold the earth, and do not grudge us the fulfilment of what we ask. First of all give Nestor and his sons a great name; and then grant the rest of them a gracious return for this splendid sacrifice, to all the men of Pylos. And grant besides that Telemachus and I may go home having done everything we came here for in our fast black ship."

That was her prayer, and she was bringing it all about herself. Then she gave Telemachus the fine two-handled cup, and the son of Odysseus prayed in the same way.

When they had roasted the outer flesh and drawn it off the spits, they divided out the portions and had a splendid meal. And when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, the horseman Nestor of Gerenia spoke first among them.

"Now it is more proper to ask the strangers who they are, since they have had the pleasure of their food. Strangers, who are you? Where do you sail from over the watery roads? Is it on some business, or are you wandering at random over the sea like pirates, who wander with their lives in their hands and bring harm to people in other countries?"

Then clear-headed Telemachus took courage and answered, because Athena herself put the courage in his heart, so that he might ask about his father who was gone, and so that men might think well of him.

"Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaeans, you ask where we are from, and I will tell you. We have come from Ithaca, which lies below Neion. The business I speak of is my own and not the people's. I have come after the wide-scattered rumour of my father, in case I hear something of him — noble Odysseus, who endures everything, who once, they say, fought at your side and sacked the city of the Trojans. Of every other man who fought against the Trojans we know where he met his miserable end; but of him the son of Cronos has made even the death impossible to learn. No one can say for certain where he died — whether he was beaten by enemies on dry land, or on the deep among the waves of Amphitrite.

"That is why I have come to your knees now: in case you are willing to tell me about his miserable death, whether you happened to see it with your own eyes or heard the story of his wanderings from someone else. His mother bore him to more sorrow than any other man. Do not soften it out of pity for me or out of kindness. Tell me exactly how you came to see him. I beg you, if my father, noble Odysseus, ever promised you anything in word or deed and carried it out in the land of the Trojans, where you Achaeans suffered so much — remember it now, and tell me the exact truth."

Then the horseman Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "My friend, since you have brought back to my mind the grief we endured in that country, we sons of the Achaeans, with no check on our daring — all we endured aboard ship, roaming after plunder over the misty water wherever Achilles led; and all our fighting round the great city of king Priam. There all our best men were killed. Warlike Ajax lies there, and Achilles, and Patroclus, who was the equal of the gods in counsel; and there lies my own dear son, strong and faultless, Antilochus, who could outrun anyone and was a fighter besides.

"And we suffered a great many other things as well. Who among mortal men could tell it all? If you stayed here five years or six and asked about all the troubles the good Achaeans endured there, you would grow tired before the end and go back to your own country. For nine years we worked at their ruin with every kind of trick, and the son of Cronos brought it off only just. In all that time no man dared to compete with him in cleverness, because noble Odysseus was far ahead of everyone in every kind of trick — your father, if you really are his son. Amazement takes hold of me looking at you: your speech is like his, and nobody would think a younger man could speak so like him.

"All the time we were there, noble Odysseus and I never once spoke on opposite sides, either in the assembly or in the council. We were of one mind, and advised the Argives with good sense and shrewdness about how everything might be done best. But when we had sacked the high city of Priam and gone away in our ships, and a god had scattered the Achaeans, then Zeus planned a bitter homecoming for the Argives in his heart, because not all of them were sensible or just. So a good many of them met a bad end through the deadly anger of the grey-eyed goddess, the daughter of the mighty father, who set the two sons of Atreus quarrelling.

"Those two called all the Achaeans to an assembly, recklessly and out of all proper order, at sunset — and the sons of the Achaeans came heavy with wine — and they said their piece and explained why they had gathered the army. Then Menelaus told all the Achaeans to think about going home over the broad back of the sea; and that did not please Agamemnon at all, who wanted to hold the army back and make holy sacrifices to appease the terrible anger of Athena. The fool. He did not know she would not be listening: the mind of the gods who live for ever is not quickly turned. So those two stood there trading hard words, while the well-greaved Achaeans jumped up with a tremendous noise, in favour of two different plans.

"We rested that night, each side turning hard thoughts against the other, because Zeus was bringing an evil doom on us. In the morning some of us launched our ships on the bright sea and put our goods on board, and the women with their low belts. Half the army held back and stayed there with Agamemnon, son of Atreus, shepherd of the people, and half of us embarked and rowed away. The ships sailed fast; a god smoothed the deep sea for us. When we reached Tenedos we made sacrifice to the gods, in a hurry to get home; but Zeus did not yet intend our homecoming, the stubborn god, and he stirred up bad feeling all over again.

"So some of them turned their curved ships round and went back — lord Odysseus, the wise and cunning-minded, with his crew, doing Agamemnon a favour again. But I fled on with the whole squadron that followed me, because I knew the god was contriving trouble. The warlike son of Tydeus fled too, and urged his men on; and fair-haired Menelaus came after us late and caught us up at Lesbos, while we were debating the long voyage — whether to sail out to sea of rugged Chios, towards the island of Psyria, keeping Chios on our left, or inside Chios past windy Mimas. We asked the god for a sign, and he gave us one, and told us to cut through the middle of the sea to Euboea, so as to get out of danger soonest. A shrill wind got up to blow, and the ships ran quickly over the teeming roads, and put in at night at Geraestus. There we laid many thighs of bulls on Poseidon's altar, thankful to have crossed the great sea.

"It was the fourth day when the company of Diomedes, son of Tydeus, the horse-breaker, brought their trim ships to a stop in Argos; but I held on for Pylos, and the wind never once died from the moment the god sent it to blow.

"So I came home, dear child, with no news, and I know nothing about the others, which of the Achaeans were saved and which were lost. But what I have heard sitting in my own halls you shall hear, as is right, and I will not keep it from you. The Myrmidons who rage with the spear came home safely, they say, led by the famous son of great-hearted Achilles; and Philoctetes came safely, the fine son of Poias. Idomeneus brought all his company to Crete, all who escaped the war, and the sea took none of them from him. About the son of Atreus you have heard yourselves, far off as you are — how he came home, and how Aegisthus contrived a miserable end for him. And he paid for it terribly, so good a thing is it that a man leaves a son behind him when he dies, since that son took revenge on his father's killer, sly Aegisthus, for killing his glorious father. You too, my friend — and I can see you are tall and good-looking — be brave, so that men born long after may speak well of you."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaeans, that son did take his revenge, and the Achaeans will spread his fame far, so that men yet to come will hear of it. I wish the gods would clothe me in that kind of strength, so that I could take revenge on the suitors for the grievous wrong they do, plotting outrages against me out of pure wantonness. But the gods have spun no such happiness for me, or for my father. As it is, I have to endure it."

Then the horseman Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "My friend, since you have brought it to my mind and spoken of it — they say a great many men are courting your mother and contriving harm in your halls against your will. Tell me, are you letting yourself be put down like this, or do the people through the country hate you, following some word from a god? Who knows but Odysseus may come one day and take revenge on them for their violence — either alone, or with the whole Achaean army behind him? I only wish grey-eyed Athena would choose to love you as she cared for glorious Odysseus, and cared enormously, in the land of the Trojans, where we Achaeans suffered so much. I have never seen the gods show love so openly as Pallas Athena showed it to him, standing there beside him where anyone could see. If she chose to love you like that, and to care about you in her heart, there is many a one of them who would forget marriage altogether."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Old man, I do not think that is ever going to happen. What you say is too much. It astonishes me. I have no hope of it happening, not even if the gods should will it so."

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena said to him: "Telemachus, what a thing to let past your teeth. A god who wanted to could easily bring a man home safe, even from a long way off. As for me, I would rather go through a great deal of hard suffering before I got home and saw the day of my return, than come home and be killed at my own hearth, the way Agamemnon was killed by the trickery of Aegisthus and his own wife. But death is common to everyone, and not even the gods can keep it off a man they love, when the cruel fate of death comes to strike him down."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her: "Mentor, let us not talk about this any more, however much it grieves us. There is no homecoming for him now, ever. The immortals arranged death and black fate for him long ago. But there is something else I want to ask Nestor about, since he knows more about judgment and wisdom than anyone else. Three generations of men he has been king over, they say, and to look at him he seems to me like an immortal. Nestor, son of Neleus, tell me the truth: how did the son of Atreus die, wide-ruling Agamemnon? Where was Menelaus? What death did sly Aegisthus plan for the king, since he killed a man far stronger than himself? Was Menelaus not in Achaean Argos, but wandering somewhere else among men, so that Aegisthus took heart and did the murder?"

Then the horseman Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "Then I will tell you the whole truth, my child. You can guess for yourself how it would have turned out if the son of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaus, had come back from Troy and found Aegisthus alive in his halls. They would not have heaped the earth over him even in death; the dogs and the birds would have torn him where he lay out on the plain, far from the city, and not one of the Achaean women would have wept for him. It was a monstrous thing he thought up.

"We were away in Troy getting through our many labours, while he sat comfortably in a corner of horse-pasturing Argos and worked away with words at Agamemnon's wife. At first she refused the shameful thing, beautiful Clytemnestra, because she had a good mind in her; and besides, there was a singer with her whom the son of Atreus had ordered strictly, when he set out for Troy, to look after his wife. But when the doom of the gods bound her to be overcome, then Aegisthus took the singer to a desert island and left him there for the birds to prey on and tear; and he took her home, willing as he was willing. And he burned many thigh-pieces on the holy altars of the gods and hung up many offerings, woven stuffs and gold, for having brought off a huge thing that he had never hoped for in his heart.

"Now we were sailing home from Troy together, the son of Atreus and I, on the best of terms. But when we came to holy Sunium, the cape of Athens, Phoebus Apollo attacked the helmsman of Menelaus with his gentle arrows and killed him while he held the steering-oar of the running ship — Phrontis, son of Onetor, who was better than anyone alive at handling a ship when the storm winds blew hard. So Menelaus stayed there, eager as he was to get on, to bury his companion and pay him the funeral rites. But when he in his turn went on over the wine-dark sea in the hollow ships and came at speed to the steep height of Malea, then Zeus, whose voice carries far, planned a hateful road for him and poured out the blasts of shrieking winds, and the waves swelled up huge, like mountains.

"Then he split the ships in two and brought some of them to Crete, where the Cydonians live along the streams of Iardanus. There is a smooth cliff there, sheer down to the sea, on the boundary of Gortyn in the misty water, where the south-west wind drives the great wave against the headland on the left towards Phaestus, and a little rock holds back a great sea. Some of the ships came there, and the men barely escaped drowning, while the waves smashed the ships to pieces against the reef. The other five dark-prowed ships the wind and the wave carried to Egypt. So Menelaus was wandering there with his ships among people of another language, collecting a great deal of goods and gold — and meanwhile Aegisthus was contriving this miserable business at home.

"Seven years he ruled over Mycenae, rich in gold, after killing the son of Atreus, and the people were held down under him. But in the eighth year his ruin came, noble Orestes, back from Athens, and he killed his father's murderer, sly Aegisthus, for killing his glorious father. When he had killed him he gave the Argives a funeral feast over his hateful mother and the cowardly Aegisthus; and on the very same day Menelaus came to him, good at the war-cry, bringing a great deal of treasure, as much as his ships would carry.

"So do not you wander long away from home, my friend, leaving your wealth behind you and such insolent men in your house — in case they divide it all up and eat it, and you have made your journey for nothing. But I urge you and tell you to go to Menelaus, because he has only lately come from a foreign country, from people that no man would hope in his heart to come back from, once the storms had driven him astray into a sea so vast that the very birds do not cross it in a year, it is so great and so terrible. Go now, with your ship and your companions; or, if you would rather go by land, there is a chariot and horses here for you, and my sons here at your service, who will guide you to lovely Lacedaemon, where fair-haired Menelaus lives. Ask him yourself to tell you the exact truth. He will not lie to you; he is a man of real understanding."

So he spoke, and the sun went down and the dark came on. Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena said to them: "Old man, you have told this properly. But come, cut out the tongues of the victims and mix the wine, so that when we have poured offerings to Poseidon and the other immortals we can think about sleep. It is the hour for it. The light has gone down under the dark already, and it is not right to sit long at the gods' feast; we should be going."

So spoke the daughter of Zeus, and they did as she said. Heralds poured water over their hands, and boys filled the bowls to the brim and served everyone, pouring the first drops into the cups for an offering. Then they threw the tongues on the fire and stood up and poured. And when they had poured the offering and drunk as much as they wanted, Athena and godlike Telemachus were both for going back to the hollow ship. But Nestor tried to stop them, and said:

"Zeus forbid, and the other immortal gods, that you should go from my house to your fast ship as though you were leaving a man with no clothes to his name and no means, who has no cloaks or blankets in his house for himself and his guests to sleep soft on. I have cloaks and fine blankets in my house. The dear son of this man Odysseus is certainly never going to lie down on a ship's deck while I am alive, and while there are children left in my halls after me to look after guests, whoever comes to my house."

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena answered him: "You have spoken well in this, old friend, and it is right for Telemachus to do as you say; it is much better. He shall go with you now and sleep in your halls, and I will go to the black ship to put heart into my companions and tell them everything. I am the only older man among them; the rest are younger, who come with us out of friendship, all of them the same age as great-hearted Telemachus. I will lie down by the hollow black ship for tonight, and in the morning I will go to the great-hearted Cauconians, where a debt is owed to me, and it is neither new nor small. As for this man, since he has come to your house, send him on with a chariot and with your son, and give him horses — the fastest runners you have and the strongest."

With that the goddess grey-eyed Athena was gone, in the likeness of a sea-eagle. Astonishment fell on all of them at the sight, and the old man marvelled when he saw it with his own eyes. He took Telemachus by the hand and said to him:

"My friend, I do not think you will turn out a coward or a weakling, if the gods go with you to guide you when you are as young as this. This is none other of those who live on Olympus but the daughter of Zeus, Tritogeneia, the most glorious of maidens, who honoured your noble father too among the Argives. Queen, be gracious to me, and give a fine name to me and to my sons and to my honoured wife; and in return I will sacrifice to you a broad-browed heifer, a yearling, unbroken, that no man has yet led under the yoke. Her I will sacrifice, and I will lay gold over her horns."

That was his prayer, and Pallas Athena heard him. Then the horseman Nestor of Gerenia led the way, his sons and the husbands of his daughters, to his beautiful palace. And when they reached the king's splendid house they sat down in rows on the chairs and the high seats, and the old man mixed a bowl of sweet wine for them as they came, wine now in its eleventh year, which the housekeeper opened by loosing the string that held the lid. The old man had a bowl of it mixed, and prayed hard as he poured the offering to Athena, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis.

And when they had poured the offering and drunk as much as they wanted, they went off, each to his own house, to rest. But the horseman Nestor of Gerenia had Telemachus, the dear son of godlike Odysseus, sleep there on a corded bedstead under the echoing portico, and beside him Peisistratus with the good ash spear, a leader of men, who was the one son still unmarried in the palace. Nestor himself slept in the inner room of the high house, with the lady his wife beside him, who had made up the bed.

As soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, the horseman Nestor of Gerenia got up from his bed and went out and sat down on the polished stones in front of his high doors, white and gleaming as if with oil. Neleus used to sit on them once, who was the equal of the gods in counsel; but fate had struck him down before this and he had gone to the house of Hades, and now Nestor of Gerenia sat on them in his turn, the guardian of the Achaeans, holding a sceptre in his hands. His sons gathered round him in a crowd as they came out of their rooms — Echephron and Stratius and Perseus and Aretus and godlike Thrasymedes — and after them, sixth, came lord Peisistratus. They brought godlike Telemachus and sat him down beside them, and the horseman Nestor of Gerenia spoke first among them.

"Quickly, my dear children, do what I want, so that I may win the goodwill of Athena first of all the gods, who came to me openly, in her own presence, at the god's rich feast. Let one of you go to the plain for a heifer, so that she comes quickly, and let the herdsman drive her; and let one go to the black ship of great-hearted Telemachus and bring all his companions, leaving only two men; and let one go and tell the goldsmith Laerces to come here and lay gold over the heifer's horns. The rest of you stay together here, and tell the women inside to get a feast ready through our splendid halls, and to fetch seats, and logs to set on either side of the altar, and to bring clear water."

So he spoke, and they all set busily to work. The heifer came from the plain; the companions of great-hearted Telemachus came from the fast, trim ship; the smith came with his bronze tools in his hands, the equipment of his trade, anvil and hammer and well-made tongs, which he worked the gold with; and Athena came to accept the sacrifice. The old man Nestor, the chariot-driver, gave the gold, and the smith prepared it and laid it over the heifer's horns, so that the goddess might be pleased when she saw the offering. Stratius and noble Echephron led the heifer by the horns, and Aretus came out of the store-room with water for their hands in a basin worked with flowers, and barley grains in a basket in his other hand; and Thrasymedes, steady in a fight, stood by holding a sharp axe to fell the heifer, and Perseus held the bowl for the blood. Then the old man Nestor, the chariot-driver, began the opening rite, washing his hands and scattering the barley, and prayed hard to Athena, cutting hair from the heifer's head as a first offering and throwing it into the fire.

When they had prayed and scattered the barley grains, Nestor's son Thrasymedes, high of heart, stepped up at once and struck. The axe cut through the sinews of the neck and loosened the strength of the heifer. Then the women raised the sacred cry, the daughters and the sons' wives and the honoured wife of Nestor, Eurydice, the eldest of the daughters of Clymenus. The men lifted the heifer's head from the wide-wayed earth and held it, and Peisistratus, a leader of men, cut the throat. When the black blood had run out of her and the life had left the bones, they cut the body up at once, and cut out the thigh-pieces in the proper order, and covered them with a double layer of fat, and laid raw flesh on top. The old man burned them on split wood and poured bright wine over them, and beside him the young men held the five-pronged forks in their hands. And when the thigh-pieces were burned up and they had tasted the inner parts, they cut the rest into pieces and spitted it and roasted it, holding the pointed spits in their hands.

Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, the youngest daughter of Nestor son of Neleus, bathed Telemachus. When she had bathed him and rubbed him richly with oil and put a fine cloak and a tunic on him, he came out of the bath looking like the immortals; and he went and sat down beside Nestor, the shepherd of the people.

Now when they had roasted the outer flesh and drawn it off the spits, they sat down and feasted, and good men waited on them, pouring wine into golden cups. And when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, the horseman Nestor of Gerenia spoke first.

"My sons, up, and yoke horses with beautiful manes under the car for Telemachus, so that he can get on with his journey."

So he spoke, and they listened readily and obeyed, and quickly yoked the fast horses under the car. The housekeeper put bread and wine in the car, and good things such as kings brought up by Zeus are used to eating. Then Telemachus climbed into the beautiful car, and Peisistratus, son of Nestor, a leader of men, got up beside him and took the reins in his hands. He touched the horses with the whip to start them, and the pair went off willingly to the plain and left the steep citadel of Pylos behind. All day long they shook the yoke they carried on their necks.

The sun went down and all the roads grew dark. They came to Pherae, to the house of Diocles, son of Ortilochus, whose father was Alpheus. There they spent the night, and he set out the entertainment that is due to strangers. And as soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, they yoked the horses and mounted the inlaid car and drove out through the gateway and the echoing portico. Peisistratus touched the horses with the whip to start them, and the pair went on willingly. So they came to the wheat-bearing plain, and after that pressed on towards the end of their journey, so well did the fast horses carry them.

And the sun went down and all the roads grew dark.
