Book Four (Part 1 of 2)

They came to the hollow land of Lacedaemon with its many ravines, and drove to the palace of glorious Menelaus. They found him giving a wedding feast in his house for a great many relatives, for his son and his daughter. The girl he was sending to the son of Achilles, who breaks the ranks of men: he had first promised her and agreed to give her in the land of Troy, and now the gods were bringing the marriage about. So he was sending her off with horses and chariots to the famous city of the Myrmidons, whose king her husband was. And for his son he was bringing home from Sparta the daughter of Alector, for sturdy Megapenthes, his well-loved son, whom a slave woman had borne him; for the gods gave Helen no more children after she had borne her lovely daughter Hermione, who had the beauty of golden Aphrodite.

So they were feasting in the great high-roofed hall, the neighbours and the family of glorious Menelaus, enjoying themselves; and among them a divine singer sang to the lyre, and two tumblers whirled up and down through the middle of them as he began his song.

The two of them, prince Telemachus and the fine son of Nestor, stopped at the gateway of the palace, they and their horses. Lord Eteoneus came out and saw them, the busy attendant of glorious Menelaus, and went through the hall to bring the news to the shepherd of the people. He came up beside him and spoke winged words.

"Menelaus, brought up by Zeus, there are two strangers here, two men who look like the seed of great Zeus. Tell me, shall we unyoke their fast horses for them, or send them on to somebody else who will look after them?"

Fair-haired Menelaus was seriously annoyed, and said to him: "You were not a fool before this, Eteoneus, son of Boethous, but now you are talking nonsense like a child. The two of us ate other men's hospitality often enough before we came home here, hoping Zeus would give us some rest from suffering afterwards. Unyoke the strangers' horses, and bring the men inside to the feast."

So he spoke, and the other hurried through the hall and called the other busy attendants to come with him. They loosed the sweating horses from under the yoke and tied them at the horses' stalls and threw down spelt for them with white barley mixed in, and tilted the chariot against the shining wall by the entrance, and brought the men into the marvellous house. They stared as they went through the palace of the king whom Zeus brought up: there was a gleam as of sun or moon over the high-roofed house of glorious Menelaus. And when they had looked their fill they went into the polished baths and washed.

When the women had bathed them and rubbed them with oil and put fleecy cloaks and tunics on them, they sat down on chairs beside Menelaus, son of Atreus. A maid brought water for their hands in a lovely golden jug and poured it over a silver basin for them to wash, and drew a polished table up beside them. The housekeeper, a grave woman, brought bread and set it out, and plenty of good things with it, giving freely from her stores. A carver lifted platters of every kind of meat and set them down, and put out golden cups.

Then fair-haired Menelaus greeted the two of them. "Help yourselves to the food, and be glad. When you have eaten we will ask you who you are, since the breeding of your fathers is not lost in you: you are of the stock of men who are sceptred kings, brought up by Zeus. Common men could not father sons like you."

With that he took up roast meat in his hands and set it in front of them, the fat ox chine that had been put before him as his own portion of honour. So they put out their hands to the good food in front of them. And when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, Telemachus leaned his head close to the son of Nestor, so that the others would not hear, and said:

"Son of Nestor, dear to my heart, look at the flash of bronze all through these echoing halls, and the gold, and the electrum, and the silver, and the ivory. The court of Olympian Zeus inside must be something like this. There is wealth here past telling. Amazement takes hold of me looking at it."

Fair-haired Menelaus heard him as he spoke, and said to them with winged words: "Dear children, no mortal man can compete with Zeus, whose halls and possessions are everlasting. Among men, another might compete with me in wealth, or he might not. I brought my wealth home in my ships after a great deal of suffering and wide wandering, and came home in the eighth year. I wandered over Cyprus and Phoenicia and Egypt, and I came to the Ethiopians and the Sidonians and the Erembi, and to Libya, where the lambs are horned from birth — for there the ewes bear three times in the full round of the year, and neither master nor shepherd ever lacks cheese or meat or sweet milk, because the flocks give milk to the milking the whole year through.

"While I was wandering in those countries gathering a great living, another man killed my brother, secretly, when he was off his guard, through the trickery of his accursed wife. So you see I take no joy in being lord of all this wealth. You will have heard about it from your fathers, whoever they may be, because I suffered a great deal and let a stately house fall to ruin, and one stocked with a great deal of fine treasure. I wish I lived in my halls with a third of this wealth and those men were alive who died then in the broad land of Troy, far from horse-pasturing Argos.

"And even so, though I often sit in my halls weeping and grieving for all of them — one moment I ease my heart with weeping, and then I stop, because men soon have enough of the cold comfort of mourning — even so, I do not mourn for all of them as much as I mourn for one, who makes me hate sleep and food both when I think of him. No Achaean worked or endured as much as Odysseus worked and endured. And it seems his portion was to be nothing but grief, and mine to have a sorrow for him that I never forget, because he has been gone so long, and we do not know whether he is alive or dead. The old man Laertes mourns him, I suppose, and steady Penelope, and Telemachus, whom he left a new-born child in his house."

So he spoke, and roused in Telemachus the wish to weep for his father. Tears fell from his eyelids to the ground when he heard his father's name, and he held his purple cloak up in front of his eyes with both hands. Menelaus noticed, and turned it over in his mind and heart, whether to leave him to speak of his father himself, or to question him first and try him on every point.

While he was turning it over in his mind and heart, Helen came out of her fragrant high-roofed room, like Artemis of the golden arrows. Adraste came with her and set a beautifully made chair for her, and Alcippe brought a rug of soft wool, and Phylo a silver basket, which Alcandre had given her, the wife of Polybus, who lived in Thebes of Egypt, where the greatest store of wealth is laid up in men's houses. He gave Menelaus two silver baths and two tripods and ten talents of gold. And besides these, his wife gave Helen beautiful gifts of her own: a golden distaff, and a basket on wheels, of silver, with the rims finished in gold. Phylo the maid brought it and set it beside her, full of finely spun yarn, and the distaff lay across it loaded with violet-dark wool.

So Helen sat down on the chair, with a footstool below for her feet, and at once she questioned her husband about it all.

"Do we know, Menelaus, brought up by Zeus, who these men say they are who have come to our house? Shall I hide what I think, or say it? My heart tells me to say it. I never yet saw anyone so like another, man or woman — amazement takes hold of me looking at him — as this man is like the son of great-hearted Odysseus, Telemachus, whom that fighting man left a new-born child in his house, when for the sake of shameless me you Achaeans came up under the walls of Troy with fierce war in your hearts."

Then fair-haired Menelaus answered her: "I am noticing it myself now, wife, since you point out the likeness. His feet were like that, and his hands, and the glances of his eyes, and his head and the hair on it. And just now, when I was speaking of Odysseus and telling all the misery and the labour he went through for my sake, this young man let a bitter tear fall from under his brows and held his purple cloak up in front of his eyes."

Then Peisistratus, son of Nestor, answered him: "Menelaus, son of Atreus, brought up by Zeus, leader of armies — he is that man's son, as you say. But he is careful in his mind and ashamed in his heart, on his first coming, to make a display of forward talk in front of you, when we both take pleasure in your voice as if it were a god's. The horseman Nestor of Gerenia sent me out to come with him as his guide, because he was eager to see you, so that you might put some word or some deed in his heart. A son has a great deal of trouble in his halls when his father is gone and there is nobody else to help him, which is how it is with Telemachus now: his father is gone, and there is nobody among the people who can keep ruin away."

Then fair-haired Menelaus answered him and said: "Well, well — so the son of a man I loved has come to my house, a man who went through so much for my sake. I always thought that if he came back I would welcome him beyond all the other Argives, if Olympian Zeus, whose voice carries far, had granted the two of us a homecoming over the sea in our fast ships. I would have given him a city in Argos to live in, and built him a house, and brought him over from Ithaca with his goods and his son and all his people, clearing out one of the cities round about that are ruled by me. Then we would have been together often, here, and nothing would have kept us apart, loving each other and taking pleasure in each other, until the black cloud of death wrapped us round. But the god himself must have been jealous of that, I think, who granted no homecoming to that one unlucky man."

So he spoke, and stirred in all of them the wish to mourn. Argive Helen wept, the daughter of Zeus, and Telemachus wept, and Menelaus, son of Atreus; nor could the son of Nestor keep his eyes dry, because he was thinking of faultless Antilochus, whom the glorious son of the shining Dawn had killed. Thinking of him, he spoke winged words.

"Son of Atreus, old Nestor always used to say you were wiser than anyone, whenever we mentioned you in his halls and asked each other about you. So now, if it is at all possible, listen to me. I take no pleasure in weeping at suppertime — and besides, the early dawn will soon be here. Not that I think it any shame to weep for a mortal who has died and met his fate. This is the only due we pay to miserable mortals, to cut our hair and let a tear fall down the cheeks. A brother of mine is dead too, and not the meanest of the Argives; you probably knew him. I never met him or saw him myself, but they say Antilochus was ahead of everyone, quicker on his feet than anyone and a fighter besides."

Then fair-haired Menelaus answered him and said: "My friend, you have said everything a wise man might say or do, even a man older than you. It is the father you come from that makes you speak so sensibly. The seed of the man is easy to recognise for whom the son of Cronos spins good fortune at his marriage and at his birth — as now he has granted Nestor all his days long that he should come to a sleek old age himself in his halls, and that his sons in their turn should be wise and very brave with the spear. Let us stop this weeping that has begun and think about our supper again, and let them pour water over our hands. There will be stories in the morning too for Telemachus and me to tell each other, our fill of them."

So he spoke, and Asphalion poured water over their hands, the busy attendant of glorious Menelaus, and they put out their hands to the good food in front of them.

Then Helen, daughter of Zeus, thought of something else. Straight away she threw into the wine they were drinking a drug that quiets all pain and anger and brings forgetfulness of every trouble. Whoever swallowed it, once it was mixed in the bowl, would not let a tear fall down his cheeks all that day, not even if his mother and father lay there dead, not even if men killed his brother or his own son with the sword in front of him and his own eyes saw it. Such cunning drugs the daughter of Zeus had, and good ones, which Polydamna gave her, the wife of Thon, a woman of Egypt — for there the grain-giving earth bears the greatest store of drugs, many that heal when they are mixed and many that are deadly, and there every man is a doctor, wiser than the rest of mankind, for they are of the race of Paeeon.

Now when she had thrown the drug in and told them to pour the wine, she spoke again and said:

"Menelaus, son of Atreus, brought up by Zeus, and you here, sons of good men — Zeus gives good and bad, now to one and now to another, since he can do anything — so sit here in the halls and eat, and take pleasure in the stories, and I will tell one that suits the hour. I cannot tell or count everything, all the labours of Odysseus, who endures everything. But here is one thing that strong man did and endured in the land of the Trojans, where you Achaeans suffered so much.

"He beat himself with cruel blows, marking his own body, and threw a wretched garment round his shoulders, and in the likeness of a slave he went into the broad-wayed city of the enemy. He hid himself under the appearance of another man, a beggar, when he was nothing of the kind at the Achaean ships. In that likeness he went into the city of the Trojans, and every one of them took him for nothing. I alone recognised him under the disguise, and questioned him, and he was clever and tried to get away from me. But when I was bathing him and rubbing him with oil, and had put clothes on him and sworn a great oath not to make him known among the Trojans as Odysseus before he got back to the fast ships and the huts, then at last he told me the whole plan of the Achaeans. And after he had killed a great many Trojans with his long sword he went back to the Argives and brought back a great deal of information. Then the other Trojan women wailed aloud, but my heart was glad, because it had already turned back towards home, and I groaned for the blindness Aphrodite gave me, when she led me there from my own dear country, leaving my child and my bridal chamber and a husband who lacked nothing, either in mind or in looks."

Then fair-haired Menelaus answered her and said: "Yes, wife, everything you have said is right. I have come to know the mind and the counsel of many fighting men before now, and I have travelled over the wide earth, but I never yet saw with my own eyes a man like Odysseus, who endures everything. Here is another thing that strong man did and endured, in the carved horse, where all the leaders of the Argives were sitting, bringing death and doom to the Trojans. You came out there, and it must have been that some god told you to, who wanted to give glory to the Trojans; and godlike Deiphobus came with you. Three times you walked round the hollow ambush, feeling it with your hands, and you called the leaders of the Danaans aloud by name, making your voice like the voices of the wives of all the Argives. Now I and the son of Tydeus and noble Odysseus were sitting in the middle and heard you calling, and the two of us were desperate to get up and come out, or else to answer at once from inside; but Odysseus held us back and stopped us, however much we wanted to. Then all the other sons of the Achaeans kept quiet, and only Anticlus was determined to answer you; but Odysseus shut his mouth with his strong hands, and saved all the Achaeans, and held him like that until Pallas Athena led you away."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Menelaus, son of Atreus, brought up by Zeus, leader of armies, it is all the harder to bear; because none of that kept miserable destruction away from him, not even though the heart inside him had been made of iron. But come, send us to bed, so that we can lie down now and take our pleasure in sweet sleep."

So he spoke, and Argive Helen told her women to set bedsteads under the portico and to lay fine purple blankets on them and spread covers over the top, and to put fleecy cloaks on those to wear. So the maids went out of the hall with torches in their hands and made up the beds, and a herald led the guests out. So they slept there in the forecourt of the palace, prince Telemachus and the fine son of Nestor; but the son of Atreus slept in the inner room of the high house, and long-robed Helen lay beside him, loveliest of women.

As soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, Menelaus got up from his bed, good at the war-cry, and put on his clothes. He slung his sharp sword over his shoulder, bound the fine sandals under his shining feet, and came out of his room looking like a god. He sat down beside Telemachus and said to him:

"What need has brought you here, prince Telemachus, to lovely Lacedaemon over the broad back of the sea? Is it public business, or your own? Tell me the truth of it."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Menelaus, son of Atreus, brought up by Zeus, leader of armies, I came in case you could tell me some news of my father. My house is being eaten up and my rich lands ruined. My house is full of men who are enemies, who go on killing my crowding sheep and my slow-moving cattle — my mother's suitors, arrogant past bearing. That is why I have come to your knees now: in case you are willing to tell me about his miserable death, whether you happened to see it with your own eyes or heard the story of his wanderings from someone else. His mother bore him to more sorrow than any other man. Do not soften it out of pity for me or out of kindness. Tell me exactly how you came to see him. I beg you, if my father, noble Odysseus, ever promised you anything in word or deed and carried it out in the land of the Trojans, where you Achaeans suffered so much — remember it now, and tell me the truth."

Fair-haired Menelaus was seriously annoyed, and said to him: "The disgrace of it — that men with no courage in them should want to lie in the bed of a man of such a heart. It is as when a hind puts her new-born suckling fawns to sleep in the thicket lair of a strong lion, and goes off over the mountain slopes and the grassy valleys looking for pasture, and then the lion comes back to his lair and lets loose a cruel doom on the two of them. That is how Odysseus will let loose a cruel doom on these men. Father Zeus, and Athena, and Apollo — I wish that Odysseus might come among the suitors with the strength he had that time in well-built Lesbos, when he stood up and wrestled a match with Philomeleides and threw him hard, and all the Achaeans were delighted. If he came in that strength, every one of them would find a quick death and a bitter courtship.

"But as for what you are asking me and begging me about, I will not turn aside and talk of other things, or deceive you. Of everything the unerring old man of the sea told me, I will not hide or keep back one word.

"In Egypt the gods held me back, eager as I was to get here, because I did not sacrifice the full hecatombs to them; and the gods always want men to remember what they have ordered. Now there is an island in the surging sea in front of Egypt, and men call it Pharos, as far off as a hollow ship runs in a whole day when a shrill wind blows fair behind her. There is a harbour there with good anchorage, where men launch their trim ships out to sea when they have drawn their supply of dark water. For twenty days the gods kept me there, and the winds that blow over the deep never once got up, the winds that speed men's ships over the broad back of the sea. And by now all my stores would have been spent, and my men's strength with them, if one of the gods had not pitied me and saved me — Eidothea, daughter of mighty Proteus, the old man of the sea, whose heart I had moved above all others.

"She met me wandering alone, away from my companions, who were always roaming about the island fishing with bent hooks, because hunger was pinching their bellies. She came close to me and said:

"'Are you as foolish as this, stranger, and as slack in the wits? Or are you slack on purpose, and enjoying your suffering? You have been shut up on this island so long, and can find no sign of getting out, and your companions' hearts are failing them.'

"So she spoke, and I answered her: 'I will speak out and tell you, whichever of the goddesses you are, that I am not shut up here of my own will. I must have sinned somehow against the immortals who hold the wide sky. But tell me — because the gods know everything — which of the immortals has me in chains here and has blocked my road, and tell me about my homecoming, how I am to go over the teeming water.'

"So I spoke, and the beautiful goddess answered at once: 'Then I will tell you plainly, stranger. The unerring old man of the sea comes here, immortal Proteus of Egypt, who knows the depths of every sea and is the servant of Poseidon. He is my father, they say, who begot me. If you could somehow lie in wait and catch him, he will tell you your road and the length of your journey, and about your homecoming, how you are to go over the teeming water. And he will tell you too, if you like, you whom Zeus brought up, what harm and what good has been done in your halls while you have been away on your long and miserable road.'

"So she spoke, and I answered her: 'Work out yourself, then, how to lie in wait for the divine old man, in case he sees me first and knows my purpose and avoids me. A god is hard for a mortal man to master.'

"So I spoke, and the beautiful goddess answered at once: 'Then I will tell you plainly, stranger. When the sun has reached the middle of the sky, the unerring old man of the sea comes out of the water at the breath of the west wind, hidden under the dark ripple. And when he has come out he lies down to sleep in the hollow caves, and round about him the seals sleep in a herd, the brood of the lovely daughter of the sea, coming up out of the grey water, and bitter is the smell they breathe of the depths of the sea. I will bring you there at daybreak and lay you all in a row; so choose three of your companions carefully, the best you have in your well-benched ships.

"'And I will tell you all the old man's wizard tricks. First he will count the seals and go over them; and when he has told them all off by fives and looked at them, he will lie down in the middle of them, the way a shepherd does among his flocks. As soon as you see him settled, then fill your hearts with strength and courage and hold him there, however hard he struggles and strains to get away. Try he will, and he will turn himself into every shape there is of everything that moves on the earth, and into water, and into blazing fire. Hold him without flinching and grip him all the harder. But when at last he speaks of his own accord and questions you in the shape you saw him lie down in, then stop your force, hero, and let the old man go, and ask him which of the gods is angry with you, and about your homecoming, how you are to go over the teeming water.'

"With that she plunged under the surging sea, and I went to my ships where they stood on the sand, and my heart turned over a great deal darkly as I went. But when I had come down to the ship and the sea, and we had got our supper ready, and immortal night had come on, then we lay down to rest on the shore of the sea. And as soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, I went along the shore of the broad-wayed sea, praying hard to the gods; and I took three of my companions with me, the ones I trusted most for any adventure.

"Meanwhile she had plunged under the broad breast of the sea and brought up the skins of four seals from the deep, all newly flayed, and she planned a trick against her father. She had scooped out lairs in the sand of the sea and sat waiting; and we came up close to her, and she made us lie down in a row and threw a skin over each of us. Then our ambush would have been the worst thing imaginable, because the deadly stench of the sea-bred seals distressed us horribly — who would lie down beside a beast of the sea? — but she saved us herself and thought of a great remedy. She brought ambrosia of a very sweet smell and put it under each man's nose, and killed the stink of the animal.

"So all morning we waited with steady hearts, and the seals came out of the sea in crowds. They lay down in rows along the shore of the sea, and at noon the old man came out of the sea and found his fat seals, and went over them all and counted their number. He counted us first among the creatures, and his heart never guessed there was a trick; and then he lay down himself. At that we rushed on him with a shout and threw our arms round him, and the old man did not forget his crafty tricks. First he turned into a bearded lion, and then into a snake, and a leopard, and a huge boar; then he turned into running water, and into a tall leafy tree. But we held on without flinching, with steady hearts.

"And when at last the old man grew tired, skilled in wizardry as he was, he questioned me and said: 'Which of the gods took counsel with you, son of Atreus, so that you could lie in wait for me and take me against my will? What do you need?'

"So he spoke, and I answered him: 'You know, old man — why do you try to put me off with that question? — how long I have been shut up on this island, and can find no sign of getting out, and my heart is failing inside me. Tell me — because the gods know everything — which of the immortals has me in chains here and has blocked my road, and tell me about my homecoming, how I am to go over the teeming water.'

"So I spoke, and he answered at once: 'You ought to have made fine offerings to Zeus and the other gods before you embarked, so that you might come to your own country as quickly as possible, sailing over the wine-dark sea. It is not your fate to see your friends and reach your well-built house and your own country before you have gone once more to the waters of the Aegyptus, the heaven-fed river, and made holy sacrifices to the immortal gods who hold the wide sky. Then at last the gods will grant you the journey you want.'

"So he spoke, and my spirit broke inside me, because he was telling me to go back over the misty water to Egypt, a long and weary way. Even so I answered him: 'I will do all of it, old man, exactly as you tell me. But tell me this now, and tell me the truth. Did all the Achaeans come home unhurt in their ships, all the ones Nestor and I left behind when we set out from Troy? Or did any of them die a cruel death on board his ship, or in the arms of his friends, when he had wound up the whole skein of the war?'

"So I spoke, and he answered at once: 'Son of Atreus, why do you ask me this? You have no business knowing it, or learning what is in my mind; and I do not think you will be long without tears once you have heard it all. Many of them were killed and many were left. Two leaders only of the bronze-coated Achaeans died on the way home — as for the fighting, you were there yourself — and one, I think, is still alive, and held back on the wide sea.

"'Ajax was lost among his long-oared ships. Poseidon drove him first onto the great rocks of Gyrae, and saved him out of the sea; and he would have escaped his doom, hated as he was by Athena, if he had not spoken a boastful word in the great blindness of his heart. He declared that he had got clear of the great gulf of the sea in spite of the gods. Poseidon heard him boasting, and at once took his trident in his mighty hands and struck the rock of Gyrae and split it apart. One part stayed where it was, and the broken part fell into the sea — the part Ajax had been sitting on when his heart was so blinded — and it carried him down into the boundless surging deep. So he died there, when he had drunk the salt water.

"'Your brother escaped the fates, indeed, and got clear of them in his hollow ships, because queenly Hera saved him. But when he was about to reach the steep height of Malea, then the storm wind caught him up and carried him over the teeming water, groaning heavily, to the edge of the country where Thyestes once lived, and where now his son Aegisthus lived. But when a safe homecoming showed itself even from there, and the gods turned the wind round so that it blew fair, and they reached home, then Agamemnon set foot on his own land rejoicing, and took hold of his land and kissed it, and the hot tears streamed from his eyes, because the sight of his country was welcome to him.

"'Now a watchman saw him from his post, whom sly Aegisthus had taken and set there, promising him two talents of gold as a reward; and he had been keeping guard for a year, in case Agamemnon should get past him unseen and remember his furious strength. He went to the palace to bring the news to the shepherd of the people, and Aegisthus at once planned a treacherous stroke. He picked twenty men, the best in the country, and set them in ambush, and on the other side of the hall he gave orders for a feast to be got ready. Then he went with chariot and horses to fetch Agamemnon, shepherd of the people, with a cowardly thing in his mind. He brought him up knowing nothing of his doom, and when he had feasted him he killed him, the way a man kills an ox at the stall. And not one of the companions of the son of Atreus was left, of all who followed him, and not one of Aegisthus's men: they were all killed in the halls.'

"So he spoke, and my spirit broke inside me, and I sat down on the sand and wept, and my heart had no more wish to live and see the light of the sun. But when I had had my fill of weeping and writhing on the ground, the unerring old man of the sea said to me: 'Do not weep any longer, son of Atreus, for so long a time without stopping; we shall find no help in it. Rather, try with all the speed you have to get to your own country. Either you will find Aegisthus alive, or Orestes may have got in ahead of you and killed him, and you may come in on his funeral feast.'

"So he spoke, and my heart and spirit were warmed with comfort again inside me, in spite of my grief, and I spoke to him with winged words: 'These two I know of now. Name the third, the one who is still alive and held back on the wide sea — or dead, it may be. I want to hear it, in spite of my grief.'

"So I spoke, and he answered at once: 'It is the son of Laertes, whose home is in Ithaca. I saw him on an island, shedding big tears, in the halls of the nymph Calypso, who keeps him there by force; and he cannot come to his own country, because he has no ships with oars at hand and no companions to send him on his way over the broad back of the sea. But as for you, Menelaus, brought up by Zeus, it is not ordained that you should die and meet your fate in horse-pasturing Argos. The immortals will carry you to the Elysian plain at the ends of the earth, where fair-haired Rhadamanthus lives, and where living is easiest for men. There is no snow there, and no heavy storm, and it never rains, but Ocean always sends up the blasts of the shrill west wind to cool men; because you have Helen for a wife, and in their eyes you are the husband of the daughter of Zeus.'

"With that he plunged under the surging sea, and I went to my ships with my godlike companions, and my heart turned over a great deal darkly as I went. But when I had come down to the ship and the sea, and we had got our supper ready, and immortal night had come on, then we lay down to rest on the shore of the sea. And as soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, first of all we drew our ships down to the bright sea, and set the masts and the sails in the trim ships, and the men went aboard and sat down at the benches, and sitting in their order struck the grey sea with their oars.

"So I sailed back to the waters of the Aegyptus, the heaven-fed river, and moored my ships there and made the full sacrifices. And when I had stopped the anger of the gods who live for ever, I heaped up a mound for Agamemnon, so that his fame might never be put out. When I had finished that I set out for home, and the immortals gave me a fair wind and brought me quickly to my own dear country.

"But come now, stay in my halls until the eleventh or the twelfth day. Then I will send you off with honour and give you splendid gifts: three horses and a well-polished car. And besides that I will give you a beautiful cup, so that you can pour offerings to the immortal gods and remember me all your days."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Son of Atreus, do not keep me here a long time. I would be content to sit in your house for a year without any longing for home or parents coming on me — the pleasure I take in listening to your stories and your talk is extraordinary. But my companions are already fretting in sacred Pylos, and you are keeping me here a long while. And whatever gift you would give me, let it be some treasure. I will not take horses to Ithaca; I will leave them here for you to enjoy, since you are lord of a wide plain where there is lotus in plenty, and galingale, and wheat and spelt, and broad-eared white barley. In Ithaca there are no wide tracks and no meadowland at all. It is a pasture for goats, and pleasanter than one that pastures horses. Not one of the islands that lean on the sea is fit for driving horses or rich in meadows, and Ithaca least of all."

So he spoke, and Menelaus smiled, good at the war-cry, and stroked him with his hand and said to him: "You are of good blood, dear child, to talk like that. So I will change the gifts; I can well enough. Of all the gifts stored as treasure in my house, I will give you the finest and the most valuable. I will give you a well-made mixing bowl. It is all of silver, with the rims finished in gold, the work of Hephaestus; and the warrior Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it to me when his house sheltered me on my way there, and now I have a mind to give it to you."

So they talked to each other, and meanwhile the banqueters were coming to the palace of the king. They drove up sheep and brought strengthening wine, and their wives with their beautiful veils sent them bread. So they were busy about the feast in the halls.
