Book Eleven

But when we had come down to the ship and the sea, first of all we drew the ship down to the bright sea and set the mast and sail in the black ship, and took the sheep and put them aboard, and got in ourselves, sorrowing and shedding big tears. And Circe of the lovely hair, dread goddess with human speech, sent a fair wind after our dark-prowed ship to help us, filling the sail, a good companion. So when we had made all the tackle fast through the ship we sat down, and the wind and the helmsman kept her straight on her course. All day long her sail was stretched as she ran over the sea; and the sun set and all the ways grew dark.

She came to the deep-flowing Oceanus, which bounds the earth, where the country and the city of the Cimmerians are, wrapped in mist and cloud. The bright sun never looks down on them with his rays, either when he climbs the starry sky or when he turns back to earth from the sky, but deadly night is spread over those wretched people. We came there and beached our ship and took the sheep out, and went ourselves along the stream of Oceanus until we came to the place Circe had told us of.

Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sharp sword from beside my thigh and dug a pit a cubit's length this way and that, and poured an offering round it to all the dead, first with milk and honey, then with sweet wine, and in the third place with water, and sprinkled white barley meal over it. And I made an earnest plea to the powerless heads of the dead, promising that when I came to Ithaca I would sacrifice in my halls a barren heifer, the best I had, and pile the altar with fine gifts, and that to Teiresias alone I would sacrifice separately a ram, wholly black, the finest in my flocks.

But when I had made my plea to the tribes of the dead with vows and prayers, I took the sheep and cut their throats over the pit, and the dark blood ran out. Then out of Erebus the spirits of the dead gathered — brides, and unmarried young men, and old men worn out with labour, and tender girls with hearts still new to sorrow, and many who had been wounded with bronze-tipped spears, men killed in fighting, still wearing their blood-stained armour. They came crowding round the pit from every side with an extraordinary cry, and pale fear took hold of me.

Then I called to my companions and told them to flay and burn the sheep that lay there killed by the pitiless bronze, and to pray to the gods, to mighty Hades and dread Persephone. And I drew my sharp sword from beside my thigh myself and sat there, and would not let the powerless heads of the dead come near the blood until I had questioned Teiresias.

The first to come was the spirit of my companion Elpenor. He had not yet been buried under the broad-wayed earth; we had left his body behind in the hall of Circe, unwept and unburied, because another task was pressing us on. When I saw him I wept, and my heart was full of pity for him, and I spoke to him with winged words:

"Elpenor, how did you come here, under the murky dark? You have come on foot and outstripped me in my black ship."

So I spoke, and he answered me with a groan: "Son of Laertes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of the many tricks, an evil doom from some god was my undoing, and measureless wine. When I had lain down to sleep in the house of Circe I did not think to go to the long ladder to come down again, but fell headlong from the roof, and my neck was broken away from the spine, and my spirit went down to the house of Hades. Now I beg you by those we left behind, who are not here with us, by your wife and by your father who brought you up when you were a baby, and by Telemachus, whom you left an only son in your halls — because I know that when you go from here, from the house of Hades, you will put in at the island of Aeaea with your well-built ship. There, prince, I ask you to remember me. Do not leave me behind unwept and unburied when you go, and do not turn away from me, in case I bring the anger of the gods on you. Burn me with my armour, everything that is mine, and heap a mound up for me on the shore of the grey sea, in memory of an unhappy man, so that men still to come may learn of me. Do this for me, and fix on the mound the oar I rowed with in life when I was among my companions."

So he spoke, and I answered him: "I will carry out all of it, unhappy man, and do it."

So the two of us sat and talked sadly to each other, I on one side holding my sword over the blood, while on the other side the phantom of my companion spoke at length.

Then the spirit of my dead mother came up, Anticleia, the daughter of great-hearted Autolycus, whom I had left alive when I went to sacred Ilios. At the sight of her I wept, and my heart was full of pity for her; but even so I would not let her come near the blood, for all my great sorrow, until I had questioned Teiresias.

Then the spirit of Theban Teiresias came up, carrying his golden staff in his hand, and he knew me and said to me: "Son of Laertes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of the many tricks, what is it now, unlucky man? Why have you left the light of the sun and come here to look at the dead and a country where there is no joy? Give way from the pit and draw back your sharp sword, so that I can drink the blood and tell you the truth."

So he spoke, and I gave way and thrust my silver-studded sword into its sheath; and when he had drunk the dark blood, then the blameless seer spoke to me and said:

"You are asking about your honey-sweet homecoming, glorious Odysseus; but a god will make it hard for you. I do not think you will get past the earth-shaker, who has stored up anger in his heart against you, furious that you blinded his dear son. Even so you may reach home, though in a bad way, if you will curb your own spirit and your companions', as soon as you bring your well-built ship to the island of Thrinacia, escaping from the violet sea, and find the cattle and fine flocks of Helios grazing there, who oversees and overhears everything. If you leave them unharmed and keep your mind on your homecoming, you may still reach Ithaca, though in a bad way. But if you harm them, then I foresee ruin for your ship and your companions; and even if you get clear yourself, you will come home late and badly, after losing all your companions, in another man's ship, and you will find trouble in your house — proud men eating up your living, courting your godlike wife and offering wedding gifts. But you will take your revenge on their violence when you come.

"And when you have killed the suitors in your halls, whether by trickery or openly with the sharp sword, then go out, taking a well-shaped oar, until you come to men who know nothing of the sea and do not eat food mixed with salt, and know nothing of ships with purple cheeks or of the well-shaped oars that are the wings of ships. And I will tell you a sign, quite unmistakable, which will not escape you. When another traveller meets you and says you have a winnowing-fan on your broad shoulder, then plant your well-shaped oar in the ground and make fine offerings to lord Poseidon — a ram and a bull and a boar that mates with sows — and go home and offer sacred hecatombs to the immortal gods who hold the wide sky, to each in his order. And death will come to you yourself far from the sea, a death so gentle that it will lay you low when you are worn out with a sleek old age, and your people will live in prosperity around you. This is the truth I have told you."

So he spoke, and I answered him: "Teiresias, the gods themselves must have spun the thread of all this. But tell me this, and tell me the truth. I see the spirit of my dead mother here. She sits in silence near the blood and does not think fit to look at her own son's face or to speak to him. Tell me, prince, how can she know that I am he?"

So I spoke, and he answered at once: "The word I shall say is an easy one, and I will put it in your mind. Whichever of the dead and gone you let come near the blood will tell you the truth; whichever you refuse will go back again."

With that the spirit of the prince Teiresias went back into the house of Hades, when he had delivered his prophecies; but I stayed there steadily until my mother came up and drank the dark blood. And at once she knew me, and spoke to me with winged words, wailing:

"My child, how did you come here under the murky dark, still alive? It is hard for the living to look on these regions, because there are great rivers between, and dreadful streams; Oceanus first, which nobody can cross on foot at all, but only with a well-built ship. Have you only now come here from Troy, after long wandering with your ship and your companions? And have you not reached Ithaca yet, or seen your wife in your halls?"

So she spoke, and I answered her: "Mother, necessity brought me down to the house of Hades, to consult the spirit of Theban Teiresias. I have not come near the shore of Achaea yet, nor set foot on my own land; I have been wandering all this time, loaded with trouble, since the day I first went with noble Agamemnon to Ilios, famous for horses, to fight the Trojans. But tell me this, and tell me the truth. What fate of miserable death overcame you? Was it a long illness, or did Artemis the archer attack you with her gentle arrows and kill you? And tell me about my father and my son, whom I left behind. Does the honour that was mine still rest with them, or does some other man hold it now, and do they say I shall never come back? And tell me about my wedded wife, what she means to do and what is in her mind. Does she stay with her son and keep everything safe? Or has one of the Achaeans married her already, whoever is best of them?"

So I spoke, and my honoured mother answered at once: "She does stay in your halls, with a steady heart; and the nights and the days waste away for her sorrowfully as she weeps. Nobody holds your fine honour yet; Telemachus keeps your estate undisturbed, and feasts at the shared banquets that a man who deals judgment should share in, because everybody invites him. But your father stays out there in the country and does not come to the city; and he has no bed for bedding, and no cloaks and bright coverlets, but through the winter he sleeps in the house where the slaves sleep, in the ashes by the fire, and wears poor clothes on his body. And when summer comes, and rich autumn, then all over the slope of his vineyard his low beds of fallen leaves are strewn. There he lies grieving, and nurses his great sorrow in his heart, longing for you to come back; and a heavy old age has come on him.

"And that is how I died too, and met my fate. The keen-sighted archer goddess did not attack me in my halls with her gentle arrows and kill me, and no illness came on me, the kind that most often takes the spirit out of the limbs by a miserable wasting. It was longing for you, and for your counsel, glorious Odysseus, and for your tenderness, that robbed me of honey-sweet life."

So she spoke, and I turned it over in my heart and wanted to take hold of the spirit of my dead mother. Three times I sprang towards her, and my heart told me to hold her, and three times she flitted out of my arms like a shadow or a dream, and the pain grew sharper at my heart. And I spoke to her with winged words:

"Mother, why do you not stay for me, when I want to hold you, so that even in the house of Hades the two of us might put our arms round each other and take our fill of cold lamenting? Is this only a phantom that august Persephone has sent me, so that I may lament and groan the more?"

So I spoke, and my honoured mother answered at once: "Oh, my child, unluckiest of all men, Persephone, the daughter of Zeus, is not deceiving you at all. This is the way it is with mortals when a man dies. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and the bones together, but the strong force of the blazing fire destroys them, as soon as the life leaves the white bones, and the spirit flits away like a dream and hovers to and fro. But make your way to the light as fast as you can, and keep all this in mind, so that you can tell it to your wife afterwards."

So the two of us talked to each other; and the women came, because august Persephone sent them out, all those who had been the wives and daughters of chieftains. They flocked in crowds about the dark blood, and I considered how I might question each of them; and this seemed to my mind the best plan. I drew my long sword from beside my strong thigh and would not let them all drink the dark blood at once. So they came up one after another, and each declared her birth, and I questioned them all.

The first I saw was high-born Tyro, who said she was the daughter of noble Salmoneus and declared herself the wife of Cretheus, son of Aeolus. She fell in love with the river, divine Enipeus, who is far the loveliest of the rivers that send their streams over the earth, and she used to go to the fair waters of Enipeus. But the Enfolder and Shaker of the earth took his shape and lay with her at the mouths of the eddying river. And the dark wave stood round them like a mountain, arched over, and hid the god and the mortal woman. And he loosed her maiden girdle and poured sleep over her. But when the god had finished his work of love, he took her hand and said to her:

"Be glad, woman, in our love. As the year goes round you will bear glorious children, because the embraces of a god are not feeble. Tend them and bring them up. But go home now, and hold your tongue, and tell nobody; and know that I am Poseidon, the shaker of the earth."

With that he plunged under the surging sea. And she conceived and bore Pelias and Neleus, who both became strong servants of great Zeus; and Pelias lived in spacious Iolcus and was rich in flocks, and the other lived in sandy Pylos. And her other children she bore to Cretheus, queenly among women as she was — Aeson, and Pheres, and Amythaon, who fought from chariots.

And after her I saw Antiope, the daughter of Asopus, who boasted that she had slept in the arms of Zeus himself; and she bore two sons, Amphion and Zethus, who first founded the seat of seven-gated Thebe and fenced it round with walls, because they could not live in spacious Thebe unfenced, however mighty they were.

And after her I saw Alcmene, the wife of Amphitryon, who lay in the arms of great Zeus and bore Heracles, steady in a fight, the lion-hearted. And I saw Megara, the daughter of high-hearted Creon, whom the son of Amphitryon had for a wife, always stubborn in his strength.

And I saw the mother of Oedipodes, lovely Epicaste, who did a monstrous thing in the ignorance of her mind, in marrying her own son; and he married her when he had killed his own father, and the gods made it known among men straight away. He stayed on as lord of the Cadmeans in lovely Thebe, suffering through the deadly counsels of the gods; but she went down to the house of Hades, the strong warder. She made a noose fast high up from a lofty beam, overcome by her sorrow; but for him she left behind a great many troubles, all the ones a mother's Avengers bring about.

And I saw beautiful Chloris, whom Neleus once married for her beauty, when he had brought countless wedding gifts. She was the youngest daughter of Amphion, son of Iasus, who once ruled mightily in Orchomenus of the Minyae; and she was queen of Pylos, and bore her husband glorious children, Nestor and Chromius and lordly Periclymenus, and besides these she bore noble Pero, a wonder to men. All who lived round about sought her in marriage, but Neleus would give her to no man except the one who should drive off from Phylace the cattle of mighty Iphicles, sleek and broad of brow; and they were hard to drive. The blameless seer alone undertook to drive them off; but a grievous fate from the gods trapped him, hard bonds and the herdsmen of the field. But when at last the months and the days were coming to fulfilment, as the year rolled round and the seasons came on, then mighty Iphicles released him, when he had told him all the oracles; and the will of Zeus was fulfilled.

And I saw Leda, the wife of Tyndareus, who bore Tyndareus two sons stout of heart, Castor the horse-tamer and Polydeuces the boxer. The earth, the giver of life, covers them both, alive as they are, and even in the world below they have honour from Zeus. One day they live in turn, and one day they are dead; and they have won honour equal to the gods'.

And after her I saw Iphimedeia, the wife of Aloeus, who declared she had lain with Poseidon. She bore two sons, but short-lived they were, godlike Otus and far-famed Ephialtes — men whom the grain-giving earth reared as the tallest, and far the handsomest, after famous Orion. At nine years old they were nine cubits across and nine fathoms in height. And they threatened to raise the din of furious war against the immortals on Olympus. They meant to pile Ossa on Olympus, and Pelion with its waving forests on Ossa, so that heaven could be scaled. And they would have done it, if they had reached the full measure of manhood; but the son of Zeus, whom fair-haired Leto bore, killed them both before the down blossomed under their temples and covered their chins with a full beard.

And I saw Phaedra and Procris, and lovely Ariadne, the daughter of Minos of the deadly mind, whom Theseus once wanted to carry from Crete to the hill of sacred Athens; but he had no joy of her, because Artemis killed her first in sea-girt Dia, on the witness of Dionysus.

And I saw Maera and Clymene, and hateful Eriphyle, who took precious gold as the price of her own husband's life.

But I cannot tell or name all the wives and daughters of heroes that I saw; immortal night would wane before I finished. It is time to sleep now, either when I have gone to the fast ship and the crew, or here. My sending rests with the gods, and with you.

So he spoke, and they were all hushed and silent, and were held spellbound through the shadowy halls. Then white-armed Arete was the first to speak among them.

"Phaeacians, how does this man seem to you, in looks and in build and in the balanced spirit inside him? And besides, he is my guest, though each of you has a share in the honour. So do not be in a hurry to send him away, and do not be sparing with your gifts to a man in such need; you have a great many treasures stored in your halls by the favour of the gods."

Then the old lord Echeneus spoke among them too, who was an elder among the Phaeacians: "Friends, the words of our wise queen are not wide of the mark, or of our own thinking. Do as she says. But it is on Alcinous here that the deed and the word depend."

Then Alcinous answered him and said: "This word of hers shall stand, as surely as I am alive and lord over the Phaeacians, who love the oar. But let our guest bear to stay until tomorrow, for all his great longing to get home, until I have made our gift complete. His sending rests with the men, with all of them, but most of all with me; the control in this country is mine."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Lord Alcinous, renowned above all men, if you told me to stay here even for a year, and would speed my sending and give me splendid gifts, I would choose that too. It would be far better to come to my own dear country with a fuller hand. I would win more respect and more affection from every man who saw me when I had got back to Ithaca."

Then Alcinous answered him again and said: "Odysseus, looking at you we do not take you for a cheat and a dissembler of the kind the dark earth breeds and scatters far and wide, men who make up lies out of things nobody could ever see. There is grace on your words, and a good mind inside you, and you have told your tale with skill, like a singer — the bitter troubles of all the Argives and your own. But tell me this, and tell me the truth. Did you see any of your godlike companions, who went to Ilios along with you and met their fate there? The night is ahead of us, long, extraordinarily long, and it is not yet time to sleep in the hall. Tell me the rest of these marvellous doings. I could hold out until the bright dawn, if you were willing to tell me of these troubles of yours in the hall."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him.

Lord Alcinous, renowned above all men, there is a time for many words and a time for sleep as well. But if you still want to listen, I would not grudge telling you of other things more pitiful still than these — the sorrows of my companions, who died afterwards, who got clear of the dreadful war-cry of the Trojans but died on their homecoming through the will of an evil woman.

When holy Persephone had scattered the spirits of the women this way and that, the spirit of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, came up sorrowing; and round about him others were gathered, the spirits of all those who were killed with him in the house of Aegisthus and met their fate. He knew me at once when he had drunk the dark blood, and wept aloud and shed big tears and stretched his hands out towards me, eager to reach me. But he had no strength or force left in him any more, of the kind there used to be in his supple limbs.

When I saw him I wept, and my heart was full of pity for him, and I spoke to him with winged words: "Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, what fate of miserable death overcame you? Did Poseidon strike you aboard your ships, when he had roused a furious blast of cruel winds? Or did enemies do you harm on land, while you were cutting off their cattle and their fine flocks of sheep, or fighting to take their city and their women?"

So I spoke, and he answered at once: "Son of Laertes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of the many tricks, Poseidon did not strike me aboard my ships, when he had roused a furious blast of cruel winds, and enemies did not do me harm on land. Aegisthus contrived my death and my fate, and killed me with the help of my accursed wife, when he had invited me to his house and made me a feast — the way a man kills an ox at the stall. So I died by the most pitiful death, and round about me the rest of my companions were killed one after another, like white-tusked pigs slaughtered in the house of a rich and powerful man for a wedding feast, or a shared meal, or a rich drinking party.

"You have been present before now at the killing of a great many men, killed in single combat or in the press of a fight; but your heart would have felt the most pity if you had seen that sight, how we lay round the mixing bowl and the loaded tables in the hall, and the whole floor swam with blood. And the most pitiful cry I heard was Cassandra's, the daughter of Priam, whom treacherous Clytemnestra killed beside me. And I tried to lift my hands and strike the murderess down, dying as I was, run through with the sword. But she, the shameless creature, turned her back on me, and though I was going to the house of Hades she did not think fit to draw my eyelids down with her fingers or to close my mouth. So true is it that there is nothing more dreadful or more shameless than a woman who takes such deeds into her heart, as she too devised a monstrous thing, contriving death for her own wedded husband. I thought I would come home welcome to my children and my slaves; but she, with her heart set on utter wickedness, has poured shame on herself and on the women yet to come, even on the one who does right."

So he spoke, and I answered him: "Zeus, whose voice carries far, has visited an extraordinary hatred on the house of Atreus from the beginning, through the counsels of women. A great many of us died for Helen's sake, and Clytemnestra spread a snare for you while you were far away."

So I spoke, and he answered at once: "So in your own case never be gentle even to your wife. Do not tell her everything in your mind, but tell her something and let something be hidden. Yet death will not come to you from your wife, Odysseus; the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, is very prudent and has an understanding heart. We left her a bride newly married when we went to the war, and a boy was at her breast, a baby, who now, I suppose, sits in the ranks of men, a happy man, since his dear father will see him when he comes, and he will greet his father as he should. But my wife did not even let me fill my eyes with the sight of my own son. Before that she killed me too, her husband. And there is another thing I will tell you, and you must take it to heart: bring your ship in to the shore of your own dear country in secret and not openly, because there is no trusting women any longer.

"But tell me this, and tell me the truth: do you hear of my son as still alive, in Orchomenus, it may be, or in sandy Pylos, or with Menelaus in wide Sparta? Noble Orestes has not died on the earth yet."

So he spoke, and I answered him: "Son of Atreus, why do you ask me this? I do not know at all whether he is alive or dead, and it is a bad thing to speak words as empty as wind."

So the two of us stood and talked sadly to each other, sorrowing and shedding big tears. And the spirit of Achilles, son of Peleus, came up, and those of Patroclus and of faultless Antilochus and of Ajax, who was the finest of all the Danaans in looks and in build after the faultless son of Peleus. And the spirit of the swift-footed grandson of Aeacus recognised me, and spoke to me weeping with winged words:

"Son of Laertes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of the many tricks, rash man, what greater thing than this will you think up in your heart? How did you dare to come down to Hades, where the unheeding dead live, the phantoms of men worn out?"

So he spoke, and I answered him: "Achilles, son of Peleus, far the mightiest of the Achaeans, I came because I needed Teiresias, in case he would tell me some plan by which I might reach rugged Ithaca. I have not come near the land of Achaea yet, nor set foot on my own country, but am always suffering; whereas no man before you was ever more blessed than you, Achilles, and none will be hereafter. In the old days, when you were alive, we Argives honoured you like the gods, and now that you are here you rule mightily among the dead. So do not grieve at all that you are dead, Achilles."

So I spoke, and he answered at once: "Do not try to speak soothingly to me about death, glorious Odysseus. I would rather be above ground still and labouring for some poor man with little land and not much to live on, than be lord over all the dead who have perished.

"But tell me news of my son, that lordly boy — whether he followed to the war to be a leader or not. And tell me of noble Peleus, if you have heard anything, whether he still has honour among the crowd of the Myrmidons, or whether they do him dishonour through Hellas and Phthia because old age binds him hand and foot. I am not there to help him under the rays of the sun, in the strength I once had in wide Troy, when I killed the best of their army in defence of the Argives. If I could come to my father's house in that strength, even for an hour, I would make many a one of those who do him violence and keep him from his honour rue my strength and my invincible hands."

So he spoke, and I answered him: "I have heard nothing of noble Peleus; but as for your dear son Neoptolemus, I will tell you the whole truth, as you ask me. It was I myself who brought him from Scyros in my trim hollow ship to join the army of the well-greaved Achaeans. And whenever we took counsel round the city of Troy he was always the first to speak, and he never missed with a word; godlike Nestor and I alone were better than he was. And whenever we fought with the bronze on the Trojan plain he never stayed back in the crowd or the press of men, but always ran far out to the front, yielding to nobody in his strength; and he killed a great many men in dreadful fighting. I could not tell or name them all, all the army he killed defending the Argives; but what a fighter that son of Telephus was whom he killed with the sword, the prince Eurypylus — and a great many of his companions, the Ceteians, were killed round about him, because of the gifts a woman wanted. He was the handsomest man I ever saw, next to noble Memnon.

"And again, when we, the best of the Argives, were about to go down into the horse that Epeus made, and the whole command was laid on me, both to open and to close the door of our stoutly-built ambush, then the other leaders and counsellors of the Danaans were wiping the tears from their eyes and every man's legs shook under him; but I never once saw his fine face go pale at all, or saw him wiping tears off his cheeks. He kept begging me to let him go out of the horse, and kept handling his sword-hilt and his spear heavy with bronze, and was eager to do the Trojans harm. And after we had sacked the high city of Priam he went aboard his ship with his share of the plunder and a fine prize, unhurt, neither struck by the sharp spear nor wounded in close fighting, as often happens in war; because Ares rages at random."

So I spoke, and the spirit of the grandson of Aeacus went off with long strides over the field of asphodel, glad that I had said his son was outstanding.

And the other spirits of the dead and gone stood there sorrowing, and each asked after those who were dear to him. Only the spirit of Ajax, son of Telamon, stood apart, still full of anger over the victory I had won against him in the contest by the ships for the arms of Achilles, which his honoured mother had set as the prize; and the judges were the sons of the Trojans and Pallas Athena. I wish I had never won in a contest for such a prize; the earth closed over so noble a head because of those arms, over Ajax, who in looks and in deeds of war was above all the other Achaeans, next to the faultless son of Peleus. I spoke to him with soothing words:

"Ajax, son of faultless Telamon, were you not even in death going to forget your anger against me over those accursed arms? The gods must have set them there to be a curse to the Argives: such a tower of strength was lost to them in you, and we Achaeans grieve for you in your death without stopping, as we grieve for the life of Achilles, son of Peleus. And nobody is to blame but Zeus, who bore a terrible hatred against the army of the Danaan spearmen and brought your doom on you. Come here, prince, and hear my word and my speech; and put down your anger and your proud spirit."

So I spoke, but he did not answer me a word, and went off to Erebus to join the other spirits of the dead and gone. Even so he would have spoken to me for all his anger, or I to him; but the heart in my breast wanted to see the spirits of the other dead.

There I saw Minos, the glorious son of Zeus, with the golden sceptre in his hand, giving judgment to the dead from his seat, while they sat and stood about the king through the wide-gated house of Hades and asked him for judgment.

And after him I made out huge Orion, driving together over the field of asphodel the wild animals he had killed himself on the lonely hills, with a club in his hands all of bronze, unbreakable for ever.

And I saw Tityos, the son of glorious Gaea, lying on the ground. He stretched over nine roods, and two vultures sat one on either side of him and tore at his liver, plunging their beaks into his bowels, and he could not beat them off with his hands. He had offered violence to Leto, the glorious wife of Zeus, as she went towards Pytho through Panopeus with its lovely lawns.

And I saw Tantalus in violent torment, standing in a pool, and the water came up close to his chin. He looked like a man dying of thirst, and could not take any and drink; because as often as the old man stooped down, eager to drink, so often the water was swallowed up and vanished away, and the black earth appeared at his feet, because some god dried it up. And tall leafy trees let their fruit stream down over his head, pears and pomegranates and apple trees with their bright fruit, and sweet figs and thriving olives. But as often as the old man reached out towards them to clutch them with his hands, the wind would toss them up to the shadowy clouds.

And I saw Sisyphus in violent torment, trying to lift a monstrous stone with both hands. He would brace himself with hands and feet and thrust the stone up towards the crest of a hill; but as often as he was about to heave it over the top, the weight would turn it back, and then the shameless stone would come rolling down again to the plain. And he would strain and thrust it back again, and the sweat ran down off his limbs and the dust rose up from his head.

And after him I made out mighty Heracles — his phantom; because he himself takes his pleasure at the feast among the immortal gods, and has Hebe for a wife, Hebe of the lovely ankles, the daughter of great Zeus and of Hera of the golden sandals. Round about him rose a clamour from the dead, like birds flying everywhere in terror; and he, like dark night, with his bow bare and an arrow on the string, glared round him terribly, like a man in the act of shooting. There was an awful belt about his breast, a baldric of gold, with marvellous things worked on it, bears and wild boars and lions with flashing eyes, and struggles and battles and murders and killings of men. May the man never design another like it, whoever stored up the design of that belt in his craft.

He knew me in his turn when his eyes took me in, and spoke to me weeping with winged words: "Son of Laertes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of the many tricks — poor wretch, are you dragging out an evil lot too, of the kind I once bore under the rays of the sun? I was the son of Zeus, son of Cronos, and I had misery beyond measure; because I was made subject to a man far worse than myself, and he laid hard labours on me. He once sent me here to fetch the hound of Hades, because he could think of no other task mightier than that. I carried the hound off and led him out of the house of Hades; and Hermes was my guide, and grey-eyed Athena."

With that he went back into the house of Hades, but I stayed there steadily, hoping that some other of the warrior heroes who died in the old days might still come out. And I would have seen still others of the men of former times, whom I wanted to see, Theseus and Peirithous, the glorious children of the gods; but before that the countless tribes of the dead came crowding up with an extraordinary cry, and pale fear seized me, in case august Persephone might send out at me from the house of Hades the head of the Gorgon, that terrible monster.

So I went at once to the ship and told my companions to embark themselves and loose the stern cables. They went aboard quickly and sat down at the benches. And the swelling flood carried the ship down the stream of Oceanus, first with our rowing, and afterwards the wind was fair.
