Book Twelve

Now when our ship had left the stream of the river Oceanus and had come to the wave of the broad sea, and to the island of Aeaea, where early Dawn has her home and her dancing-lawns, and the sun his risings, we beached our ship on the sands when we came there, and went out ourselves onto the shore of the sea, and there we fell asleep and waited for the bright Dawn.

As soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, I sent my companions to the house of Circe to fetch the body of the dead Elpenor. We cut billets of wood at once and buried him where the headland runs furthest out to sea, sorrowing and shedding big tears. And when the dead man was burned, and the dead man's armour, we heaped up a mound and dragged a pillar onto it, and planted his well-shaped oar on top of the mound.

So we were busy with these separate tasks; and Circe was not unaware of our coming back from the house of Hades, but got herself ready quickly and came, and her women brought bread and meat in plenty with her, and flaming red wine. And the beautiful goddess stood in the middle of us and spoke:

"Reckless men, who have gone down alive to the house of Hades, to meet death twice when other men die only once. Come, eat food and drink wine here this whole day through; and at the coming of Dawn you shall set sail, and I will point out the way and tell you everything, so that you do not suffer pain and misery through wretched bad planning, either by sea or on land."

So she spoke, and our proud hearts agreed. So all day long until sunset we sat feasting on plenty of meat and sweet wine. But when the sun set and the dark came on, they lay down to rest beside the stern cables of the ship; and Circe took me by the hand and led me apart from my dear companions and made me sit, and lay down close by herself and asked me the whole story. And I told her everything in its order.

Then queenly Circe said to me:

"So all that has found its end. Now listen to what I tell you, and a god himself will bring it back to your mind. You will come first to the Sirens, who beguile every man who comes to them. Whoever draws near them in ignorance and hears the Sirens' voice never comes home again, so that his wife and his little children may stand beside him rejoicing; the Sirens beguile him with their clear-toned song, sitting in a meadow, with a great heap of the bones of rotting men round about them, and the skin shrivelling on the bones. Row past them, and knead sweet wax and stop your companions' ears with it, so that none of the rest can hear. But if you have a mind to listen yourself, let them bind you in the fast ship hand and foot, upright in the step of the mast, with the ropes made fast at the ends to the mast itself, so that you may listen to the voice of the two Sirens with delight. And if you beg your companions and tell them to loose you, then let them tie you with still more bonds.

"But when your companions have rowed past them, then I shall not say for certain which way your course is to lie; think it over in your own mind, and I will tell you of both ways. On one side there are beetling crags, and the great wave of dark-eyed Amphitrite roars against them; the blessed gods call these the Planctae. No winged thing can get past them, not even the timid doves that carry ambrosia to father Zeus: the smooth rock always snatches away even one of these, and the father sends in another to make up the number. And no ship of men that has come there has ever got away, but the planks of ships and the bodies of men are whirled about together by the waves of the sea and the blasts of deadly fire. One seafaring ship alone has passed that way, the Argo that everyone speaks of, on her voyage home from Aeetes; and even her the wave would have dashed against the great crags there, if Hera had not sent her through, because Jason was dear to her.

"On the other path there are two cliffs. One of them reaches the wide sky with its sharp peak, and a dark cloud surrounds it. This never melts away, and clear sky never surrounds that peak, in summer or at harvest time. No mortal man could climb it or set foot on the top, not if he had twenty hands and feet; the rock is smooth, as if it had been polished. And in the middle of the cliff there is a dim cave, turned to the west, towards Erebus, and that is where you are to steer your hollow ship, glorious Odysseus. Not even a strong man could shoot an arrow from the hollow ship so as to reach into that vaulted cave. Scylla lives in there, yelping horribly. Her voice is only the voice of a new-born puppy, but she herself is an evil monster, and nobody would be glad at the sight of her, not even a god who met her. She has twelve feet, all misshapen, and six necks, extraordinarily long, and on each one a terrible head, with three rows of teeth in it, thick and close together and full of black death. She is hidden up to her middle in the hollow cave, but she holds her heads out beyond the dreadful chasm and fishes there, searching eagerly round the rock for dolphins and sea-dogs and any bigger creature she may catch, of the kind deep-moaning Amphitrite rears in numbers past counting. No sailors can yet boast that they have got past her unhurt in their ship, because with each head she carries off a man, snatching him out of the dark-prowed ship.

"But the other cliff, Odysseus, you will notice is lower — they are close to each other; you could shoot an arrow across — and there is a great fig tree on it with rich foliage; and beneath it divine Charybdis sucks down the black water. Three times a day she belches it out, and three times she sucks it down horribly. Do not be there when she sucks it down, because nobody could save you from ruin then, not even the earth-shaker. Keep very close to Scylla's cliff and drive your ship past quickly; it is far better to mourn six companions in your ship than all of them together."

So she spoke, but I answered her: "Come, goddess, tell me this truly: is there any way I might get clear of deadly Charybdis and fight the other off, when she does my companions harm?"

So I spoke, and the beautiful goddess answered: "Reckless man, your heart is set on the works of war again, and on hard labour. Will you not give way even to the immortal gods? She is not mortal; she is an immortal evil, dreadful and hard and fierce, and not to be fought with. There is no defence; the bravest thing is to run from her. If you linger to arm yourself by the cliff, I am afraid she may dart out again and attack you with as many heads and take as many men as before. Row past with all your strength, and call on Crataiis, the mother of Scylla, who bore her as a curse to mortals. Then she will stop her darting out again.

"And you will come to the island of Thrinacia. The cattle of Helios graze there in great numbers, and his fine flocks, seven herds of cattle and as many fine flocks of sheep, fifty in each. They bear no young and they never die, and goddesses are their shepherds, nymphs with lovely hair, Phaethusa and Lampetie, whom beautiful Neaera bore to Helios Hyperion. Their honoured mother, when she had borne them and brought them up, sent them to the island of Thrinacia to live far off and keep their father's flocks and his sleek cattle. If you leave them unharmed and keep your mind on your homecoming, you may still reach Ithaca, though in a bad way. But if you harm them, then I foretell ruin for your ship and for your companions; and even if you get clear yourself, you will come home late and badly, after losing all your companions."

So she spoke, and golden-throned Dawn came at once. Then the beautiful goddess went off up the island, and I went to the ship and roused my companions to embark themselves and loose the stern cables. So they went aboard at once and sat down at the benches, and sitting in their order struck the grey sea with their oars. And Circe of the lovely hair, dread goddess with human speech, sent a fair wind after our dark-prowed ship to help us, filling the sail, a good companion. So when we had quickly made all the tackle fast through the ship we sat down, and the wind and the helmsman guided the ship.

Then I spoke among my companions, grieving in my heart: "Friends, it is not right that one or two alone should know the oracles that Circe, the beautiful goddess, told me. So I will tell you, and then, knowing them, we shall either die or, avoiding death and fate, get clear. First she told us to avoid the voice of the marvellous Sirens and their flowery meadow. Me alone she told to listen to their voice. But you must bind me with hard bonds, so that I stay fast where I am, upright in the step of the mast, with the ropes made fast at the ends to the mast itself; and if I beg you and tell you to loose me, then tie me fast with still more bonds."

So I went through all this and told my companions. Meanwhile the well-built ship came quickly to the island of the two Sirens, because a fair and gentle wind carried her on. Then the wind dropped and there was a windless calm, and a god lulled the waves to sleep. But my companions got up and furled the sail and stowed it in the hollow ship, and then sat down at the oars and made the water white with their polished oars of fir. And I cut a great round cake of wax into small bits with my sharp sword and kneaded it with my strong hands, and the wax soon grew warm, forced by the strong pressure and by the rays of the lord Helios Hyperion. Then I stopped the ears of all my companions with it, one after another; and they bound me in the ship hand and foot, upright in the step of the mast, and made the ropes fast at the ends to the mast itself, and sat down themselves and struck the grey sea with their oars.

But when we were as far off as a man can make himself heard when he shouts, driving swiftly on our way, the Sirens did not fail to notice the fast ship as it drew near, and they raised their clear-toned song:

"Come here, as you go by, famous Odysseus, great glory of the Achaeans; stop your ship, so that you may listen to the voice of us two. No man has ever yet rowed past this island in his black ship until he has heard the sweet voice from our lips. He has his joy of it, and goes on his way a wiser man. We know everything the Argives and the Trojans endured in wide Troy through the will of the gods, and we know everything that happens on the fruitful earth."

So they spoke, sending out their beautiful voices, and my heart wanted to listen, and I told my companions to loose me, nodding at them with my brows; but they fell to their oars and rowed on. And Perimedes and Eurylochus got up at once and bound me with still more bonds and drew them tighter. But when they had rowed past the Sirens, and we could hear their voices and their song no longer, then my trusty companions took away the wax I had stopped their ears with and loosed me from my bonds.

But when we had left the island I saw smoke straight away, and a great billow, and heard a booming. Then the oars flew out of my men's hands in their terror and splashed one and all in the swirl, and the ship stood still where it was, when they no longer worked the tapering oars with their hands. But I went through the ship and cheered my men with gentle words, going up to each man in turn:

"Friends, we have not been strangers to sorrow up to now. This evil that is on us is certainly no worse than when the Cyclops penned us in his hollow cave by brute strength; and even from there we got away by my courage and counsel and wit. I think we shall remember these dangers too, one day. Come now, do as I tell you, all of you. Keep your seats on the benches and strike the deep surf of the sea with your oars, and hope that Zeus grants us to escape and avoid this death. And to you, steersman, I give this order, and take it to heart, since you handle the steering-oar of the hollow ship: keep the ship well away from this smoke and surf, and hug the cliff, or before you know it she will swerve off to the other side and you will throw us into destruction."

So I spoke, and they quickly did as I said. But I said nothing about Scylla, that incurable evil, in case my companions were seized with fear and stopped rowing and huddled together in the hold. And then I forgot Circe's hard command, when she told me not to arm myself at all; but I put my glorious armour on and took two long spears in my hand and went to the fore-deck of the ship, because I thought Scylla of the rock would first be seen from there, who was to bring ruin on my companions. But nowhere could I make her out, and my eyes grew tired with gazing everywhere towards the misty rock.

So we sailed on up the narrow strait, wailing. On one side lay Scylla, and on the other divine Charybdis sucked down the salt water of the sea terribly. Whenever she belched it out, she would seethe and bubble in utter turmoil like a cauldron over a great fire, and high overhead the spray would fall on the tops of both cliffs. But as often as she sucked the salt water down, she could all be seen inside in utter turmoil, and the rock roared terribly round about, while beneath, the earth showed black with sand; and pale fear seized my men.

So we looked towards her, in fear of destruction; and meanwhile Scylla seized six of my companions out of the hollow ship, the best in strength and in force. Turning my eyes to the fast ship and to my men, I saw their feet and hands above me already, lifted high in the air. They cried aloud to me, calling me by name for that last time, in the anguish of their hearts. And as a fisher on a jutting rock, when he throws in his baits as a snare for the little fishes, lets down into the sea the horn of an ox from the farmyard on his long pole, and then flings the fish he catches ashore, writhing — so they were drawn writhing up towards the cliffs. And there at her doors she devoured them, shrieking and stretching their hands out towards me in their terrible death-struggle. That was the most pitiful thing my eyes ever saw of all I bore while I explored the paths of the sea.

Now when we had got clear of the rocks, and dreadful Charybdis and Scylla, we came to the god's fine island, where the beautiful broad-browed cattle were, and the many fine flocks of Helios Hyperion. While I was still out at sea in my black ship I heard the lowing of the cattle being stalled and the bleating of the sheep, and the words of the blind seer, Theban Teiresias, came into my mind, and the words of Aeaean Circe, who charged me very strictly to avoid the island of Helios, who gives joy to mortals. Then I spoke among my companions, grieving in my heart:

"Hear my words, companions, for all the trouble you are in, so that I can tell you the oracles of Teiresias and of Aeaean Circe, who charged me very strictly to avoid the island of Helios, who gives joy to mortals; because there, she said, was our most terrible danger. Row the black ship on past the island."

So I spoke, but their spirits broke inside them, and Eurylochus answered me at once with hateful words:

"You are a hard man, Odysseus. You have strength beyond other men, and your limbs never grow tired. You must be made of iron all through, since you will not let your companions, worn out with labour and drowsiness, set foot on shore, where on this sea-girt island we might get a good supper ready once more; you tell us to wander on just as we are through the swift night, driven away from the island over the misty water. It is out of the night that fierce winds are born, the wreckers of ships. How could a man escape utter destruction if a blast of the south wind or the blustering west wind came on suddenly, the winds that most often wreck ships in spite of the sovereign gods? Let us give way to the black night this time and get our supper ready, staying beside the fast ship, and in the morning we will go aboard and put out into the broad sea."

So spoke Eurylochus, and the rest of my companions agreed with him. Then I knew for certain that some god was contriving trouble, and I spoke to him with winged words:

"Eurylochus, you are forcing me, and I stand alone. But come now, all of you swear me a great oath, that if we find a herd of cattle or a great flock of sheep, no man will kill either cow or sheep in the blind folly of his mind, but will be content to eat the food immortal Circe gave us."

So I spoke; and they swore at once that they would not, as I told them. And when they had sworn and finished the oath, we moored our well-built ship in the hollow harbour near a spring of sweet water, and my companions went out of the ship and skilfully got their supper ready. But when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, they began to weep, remembering their dear companions whom Scylla had snatched out of the hollow ship and devoured; and sweet sleep came on them as they wept.

But at the third watch of the night, when the stars had turned their course, Zeus the cloud-gatherer roused a fierce wind against us with an extraordinary storm, and hid land and sea alike in cloud, and night rushed down out of the sky. And as soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, we dragged our ship up and made her fast in a hollow cave, where the fine dancing-floors and the seats of the nymphs were. Then I called my men together and spoke among them:

"Friends, there is meat and drink in our fast ship. Let us keep our hands off those cattle, then, so that we come to no harm; because these are the cows and the fine sheep of a dread god, of Helios, who oversees everything and overhears everything."

So I spoke, and their proud hearts agreed. Then for a whole month the south wind blew without stopping, and no other wind rose except the east and the south.

Now as long as my men had grain and red wine they kept their hands off the cattle, because they were eager to save their lives. But when all the stores had been used up out of the ship, and they had to roam about hunting for game — fish and birds and whatever might come to their hands, fishing with bent hooks, because hunger was pinching their bellies — then I went off up the island to pray to the gods, hoping one of them would show me a way to go. And when, going through the island, I had got away from my companions, I washed my hands in a place where there was shelter from the wind and prayed to all the gods who hold Olympus; and they poured sweet sleep over my eyelids.

And meanwhile Eurylochus began to give my companions evil counsel:

"Hear my words, companions, for all the trouble you are in. Every kind of death is hateful to wretched mortals, but to die of hunger and meet your doom that way is the most pitiful of all. Come, let us drive off the best of the cattle of Helios and make sacrifice to the immortals who hold the wide sky. And if we ever get to Ithaca, our own country, we will build a rich temple to Helios Hyperion at once and put a great many fine offerings in it. And if he is angry at all about his straight-horned cattle, and means to destroy our ship, and the other gods consent, I would rather lose my life once and for all with a gulp at the wave than waste slowly away on a desert island."

So spoke Eurylochus, and the rest of my companions agreed with him. Straight away they drove off the best of the cattle of Helios from close at hand, because the beautiful sleek broad-browed cattle were grazing not far from the dark-prowed ship. They stood round them and prayed to the gods, plucking the tender leaves off a high-crested oak, because they had no white barley aboard the well-benched ship. And when they had prayed and cut the cattle's throats and flayed them, they cut out the thigh-pieces and covered them with a double layer of fat and laid raw flesh on top. They had no wine to pour over the blazing offering, but they made libations with water and roasted all the entrails over the fire.

Now when the thighs were burned up and they had tasted the inner parts, they cut up the rest and spitted it. And then sweet sleep fled from my eyelids, and I went off to the fast ship and the shore of the sea. But when, as I went, I came near the curved ship, the hot savour of the fat drifted round me, and I groaned and cried aloud to the immortal gods:

"Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who live for ever, you lulled me in a pitiless sleep to my ruin, and my companions, left behind, have contrived a monstrous thing."

Lampetie of the long robes went quickly to Helios Hyperion with the news that we had killed his cattle; and he spoke at once among the immortals, angry at heart:

"Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who live for ever, take vengeance now on the companions of Odysseus, son of Laertes, who have insolently killed my cattle, which I always took delight in when I climbed towards the starry sky and when I turned back to earth from the sky again. If they do not pay me a fitting atonement for the cattle, I will go down to Hades and shine among the dead."

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered him and said: "Helios, go on shining among the immortals and among mortal men on the grain-giving earth. As for these men, I will soon strike their fast ship with my bright thunderbolt and smash it to pieces in the middle of the wine-dark sea."

I heard this from fair-haired Calypso, and she said she had heard it herself from the messenger Hermes.

But when I had come down to the ship and the sea I rebuked my men, going up to each one in turn; but we could find no remedy — the cattle were dead already. And the gods showed my men portents at once. The hides crawled; the flesh, both roast and raw, bellowed on the spits; and there was a lowing as of cattle.

For six days my trusty companions feasted on the best of the cattle of Helios that they had driven off. But when Zeus, the son of Cronos, brought the seventh day on us, then the wind stopped blowing in a storm, and we went aboard at once and put out into the broad sea when we had set up the mast and hoisted the white sail.

But when we had left that island and no other land came in sight, but only sky and sea, then the son of Cronos set a black cloud over the hollow ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it. She ran on for no long time, because the shrieking west wind came at once, blowing with a furious storm, and the blast of the wind snapped both the forestays of the mast, so that the mast fell backwards and all its tackle was strewn in the bilge. The mast struck the head of the pilot in the stern of the ship and crushed all the bones of his skull together, and he fell from the deck like a diver, and his proud spirit left his bones. And Zeus thundered and hurled his bolt at the ship, and she shuddered from stem to stern, struck by the bolt of Zeus, and was filled with sulphurous smoke, and my companions fell out of the ship. They were carried on the waves round the black ship like sea-crows, and the god took their homecoming from them.

But I kept pacing up and down the ship until the surge tore the sides away from the keel, and the wave carried her on dismantled and snapped the mast off at the keel. But the backstay, made of ox-hide, had been flung over the mast; with this I lashed the two together, keel and mast, and sat on them and was carried by the deadly winds.

Then the west wind stopped blowing in a storm, and the south wind came quickly, bringing sorrow to my heart, so that I should travel back the way to deadly Charybdis. All night long I was carried, and at sunrise I came to the cliff of Scylla and to dread Charybdis. She was sucking down the salt water of the sea; but I sprang up to the tall fig tree and took hold of it and clung to it like a bat. Yet I could not plant my feet firmly anywhere or climb the tree, because its roots spread far below and its branches hung out of reach above, long and great, overshadowing Charybdis. There I clung steadily until she should vomit the mast and keel out again; and to my joy they came at last. At the hour when a man gets up from the assembly for his supper, a man who settles the many quarrels of young men seeking judgment, at that hour those spars appeared out of Charybdis. And I let go with hands and feet from above and plunged down into the water out beyond the long spars, and sat on them and rowed on with my hands. And as for Scylla, the father of gods and men did not let her catch sight of me again, or I should never have escaped destruction.

From there I was carried for nine days, and on the tenth night the gods brought me to Ogygia, where Calypso of the lovely hair lives, dread goddess with human speech, who welcomed me and looked after me. But why should I tell you this tale? I told it yesterday in your hall to you and to your noble wife. It is a tiresome thing, I think, to tell a plainly told tale over again.
