Book Thirteen

So he spoke, and they were all hushed and silent, and were held spellbound through the shadowy halls. And Alcinous answered him again and said:

"Odysseus, since you have come to my high-roofed house with its floor of bronze, I do not think you will be driven back and go home with your purpose baffled, however much you have suffered. And to each man of you who are always used to drinking the flaming wine of the elders in my halls and listening to the singer, I say this, and give this charge. Clothing for the stranger lies stored already in the polished chest, with finely worked gold and all the other gifts the counsellors of the Phaeacians brought here. But come, let us each give him a great tripod and a cauldron; and we in turn will gather the cost from among the people and repay ourselves. It would be hard for one man to give freely without being repaid."

So spoke Alcinous, and his word pleased them. They went off, each man to his house, to rest; but as soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, they hurried to the ship and brought the bronze that gives men strength. And the strong and mighty Alcinous went through the ship himself and stowed the gifts carefully under the benches, so that they should not get in the way of any of the crew at their rowing when they worked the oars hard.

Then they went to the house of Alcinous and prepared a feast. And the strong and mighty Alcinous sacrificed a bull for them to Zeus, son of Cronos, god of the dark clouds, who is lord of all. And when they had burned the thigh-pieces they feasted a splendid feast and enjoyed themselves, and among them the divine singer Demodocus sang to the lyre, honoured by the people.

But Odysseus kept turning his head towards the blazing sun, eager to see it set, because he was eager to be gone home. As a man longs for supper when all day long a yoke of wine-dark oxen has drawn the jointed plough for him through fallow land, and the light of the sun sinks gladly for him so that he can get to his supper, and his knees are weary as he goes — so gladly did the light of the sun sink for Odysseus. And at once he spoke among the Phaeacians, who love the oar, and to Alcinous above all he declared his word:

"Lord Alcinous, renowned above all men, pour the offering now and send me on my way in peace; and to yourselves, farewell. Everything my heart wanted has been brought about: a convoy, and friendship gifts. May the gods of heaven make them a blessing to me, and may I find my faultless wife at home when I get back, and those I love unhurt. And may you, staying here, be a joy to your wedded wives and your children; and may the gods grant you prosperity of every kind, and may no trouble come on your people."

So he spoke, and they all praised his words and said the stranger should be sent on his way, since he had spoken properly. Then mighty Alcinous said to the herald:

"Pontonous, mix the bowl and serve wine out to everyone in the hall, so that when we have prayed to father Zeus we may send the stranger off to his own country."

So he spoke, and Pontonous mixed the honey-hearted wine and served it out to all, coming up to each in turn; and they poured offerings to the blessed gods who hold the wide sky, from where they sat. But noble Odysseus got up and put the two-handled cup into Arete's hand, and spoke to her with winged words:

"Farewell, my queen, through all the years, until old age comes, and death, which are the lot of mortals. I am going on my way; but may you have joy in this house of your children and your people and Alcinous the king."

So noble Odysseus spoke and crossed the threshold. And mighty Alcinous sent a herald with him to lead him to the fast ship and the shore of the sea. And Arete sent slave women with him, one carrying a newly washed cloak and a tunic, and another she told to follow carrying the strong chest, and another carried bread and red wine.

But when they had come down to the ship and the sea, the lordly young men of his escort took these things at once and stowed them in the hollow ship, all the food and drink. Then they spread a rug and a linen sheet for Odysseus on the deck of the hollow ship, at the stern, so that he could sleep soundly; and he went aboard too and lay down in silence. Then they sat down at the benches, each in his place, and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone.

And as soon as they leaned back and tossed the salt water with their oar-blades, sweet sleep fell on his eyelids, an unwaking sleep, the sweetest there is and most like death. And as four yoked stallions on a plain spring forward all together under the strokes of the lash, and leaping high finish their course quickly, so the stern of that ship leapt high, and in her wake the dark wave of the loud-sounding sea foamed mightily, and she ran on safely and surely; not even the wheeling hawk, the swiftest of winged things, could have kept pace with her. So she ran on swiftly and cut through the waves of the sea, carrying a man who was the equal of the gods in counsel, one who in time past had suffered a great deal in his heart, passing through the wars of men and the grievous waves; but now he slept in peace, forgetting all he had suffered.

Now when the brightest of the stars rose, which always comes to herald the light of early Dawn, the seafaring ship drew near to the island.

There is a certain harbour of Phorcys in the land of Ithaca, the old man of the sea, and at its mouth two jutting headlands sheer towards the sea but sloping down on the harbour side. These keep back the great waves raised by heavy winds outside, and inside the benched ships lie unmoored when they have reached the anchorage. At the head of the harbour there is a long-leafed olive tree, and near it a pleasant shadowy cave sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads. Inside it are mixing bowls and jars of stone, and the bees store honey there too. And there are long looms of stone in the cave, where the nymphs weave purple-dyed webs, a wonder to look at; and there are ever-flowing springs in it as well. There are two doors to the cave, one towards the north wind, by which men go down; but the one towards the south wind is sacred, and men do not go in by it; it is the way of the immortals.

Here they rowed in, knowing the place from of old; and the ship ran a full half of her length up the shore in her swift course, at such a pace was she driven by the arms of the rowers. Then they stepped out of the benched ship onto the land, and first they lifted Odysseus out of the hollow ship, with the linen sheet and the bright rug just as they were, and laid him down on the sand, still overcome with sleep. And they lifted out the goods the lordly Phaeacians had given him as he set out for home, through the favour of great-hearted Athena. They set these all together by the trunk of the olive tree, out of the path, in case some traveller should come on them before Odysseus woke and spoil them. Then they went home again themselves.

But the Shaker of the Earth did not forget the threats he had first made against godlike Odysseus, and he asked what the purpose of Zeus was:

"Father Zeus, I shall not be held in honour among the immortal gods any longer, seeing that mortals do not honour me in the least — the Phaeacians, who as you know are of my own line. I said just now that Odysseus should suffer a great deal before he got home, though I did not rob him of his homecoming altogether, once you had promised it and confirmed it with your nod. And these men have carried him in his sleep over the sea in a fast ship and set him down in Ithaca, and given him gifts past telling, stores of bronze and gold and woven clothing, more than Odysseus would ever have brought back from Troy if he had come home unhurt with his fair share of the plunder."

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered him and said: "What a thing to say, shaker of the earth, wide of sway. The gods do you no dishonour; it would be a hard business to attack our eldest and best with dishonour. But as for men, if anyone gives way to his own strength and force and fails to honour you in anything, you may always take your revenge, even afterwards. Do as you like, and as pleases you."

Then Poseidon the earth-shaker answered him: "I would have done as you say at once, god of the dark clouds, but I always dread your anger and avoid it. Now I mean to strike the fine ship of the Phaeacians as she comes back from her convoy over the misty water, so that they may hold off and stop giving convoy to men, and to throw a great mountain round their city."

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered him and said: "Lazy one, this is what seems best to me. When all the people are looking out from the city at her as she speeds on her way, then turn her to stone close by the land — a stone in the shape of a fast ship, so that everyone may marvel; and throw a great mountain round their city."

Now when Poseidon the earth-shaker heard this he went off to Scheria, where the Phaeacians live, and waited there. And she drew close to shore, the seafaring ship, speeding swiftly on her way. Then the Earth-shaker came up to her and turned her to stone and rooted her fast underneath with a blow of the flat of his hand, and then he was gone.

And they spoke winged words to one another, the long-oared Phaeacians, men famous for their ships; and one would say, with a glance at his neighbour: "Who has fastened our fast ship on the sea like this on her way home? She was in plain sight."

That is how one of them would speak; but they did not know how these things were to go. Then Alcinous spoke to the company and said:

"Now the oracles of my father, spoken long ago, have come on me. He used to say that Poseidon was angry with us because we give safe convoy to everyone. He said that one day, as a beautiful ship of the Phaeacians was coming home from a convoy over the misty water, Poseidon would strike her, and would throw a great mountain round our town. That is what the old man said, and now all of it is coming to pass. But come, do as I say, all of you. Stop giving convoy to mortals, when anyone comes to our city, and let us sacrifice twelve choice bulls to Poseidon, in case he takes pity and does not throw a high mountain round our town."

So he spoke, and they were seized with fear and got the bulls ready.

So they were praying to the lord Poseidon, the leaders and counsellors of the land of the Phaeacians, standing round the altar; and Odysseus woke out of his sleep in his own country. But he did not know it after his long absence, because the goddess had poured a mist round him, Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus, so that she might make him unrecognisable and tell him everything, so that his wife should not know him, nor his townspeople, nor his friends, until the suitors had paid the full price for all their wrongdoing. So everything looked strange to their lord — the long paths, the bays offering safe anchorage, the sheer cliffs, and the thriving trees.

So he sprang up and stood and looked at his own country, and then he groaned and struck both his thighs with the flat of his hands, and said mournfully:

"What country have I come to now? What kind of people? Are they cruel and wild and unjust, or do they welcome strangers, and do their minds fear the gods? Where shall I take all this wealth, and where shall I go wandering myself? I wish I had stayed there among the Phaeacians, and had gone on to some other of the mighty kings, who would have entertained me and sent me on my way home. As it is I do not know where to put this wealth; and I will not leave it here, in case it becomes somebody else's plunder to my cost. It is a disgrace: they were not altogether wise or just, it seems, the leaders and counsellors of the Phaeacians, who have brought me to a strange country. They said they would bring me to clear-seen Ithaca, and they have not made their word good. May Zeus, the suppliant's god, pay them for it, who watches over all men and punishes anyone who sins. But come, I will count the goods and go over them, in case these men have carried something off with them in the hollow ship, to my cost."

So he spoke, and set about counting the beautiful tripods and the cauldrons and the gold and the finely woven clothing; and he missed nothing of them. Then, longing mournfully for his own country, he walked along the shore of the loud-sounding sea, with many a groan.

And Athena came up to him in the form of a young man, a shepherd of sheep, a delicate one, of the kind the sons of princes are. She wore a well-made cloak in a double fold about her shoulders, and had sandals under her shining feet, and a spear in her hands. Odysseus was glad at the sight of her and came to meet her, and spoke to her with winged words:

"Friend, since you are the first person I have come to in this country, greetings; and I hope you do not meet me with any evil in your mind. Save this treasure, and save me. I pray to you as to a god, and I have come to your dear knees. And tell me this too, truly, so that I know for certain: what country is this, and what people? What men live here? Is it some clear-seen island, or a shore of the deep-soiled mainland that lies resting on the sea?"

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena answered him: "You are a fool, stranger, or you have come from far away, if you really have to ask about this country. It is not nameless at all; a great many people know it, both all those who live towards the dawn and the sun, and all those behind, towards the murky dark. It is a rugged island, not fit for driving horses, and yet it is not altogether poor, though it is narrow. Corn grows in it beyond measure, and the wine-grape too, and it never lacks rain or rich dew. It is a good land for pasturing goats and cattle; there are trees of every kind in it, and pools for watering that do not fail the year round. So the name of Ithaca, stranger, has reached even to the land of Troy, which they say is far from this country of Achaea."

So she spoke, and much-enduring noble Odysseus was glad, and rejoiced in his country, the land of his fathers, hearing the word of Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis. And he spoke to her with winged words — and did not speak the truth, but checked the word before it was out, always turning over thoughts of great cunning in his breast:

"I heard of Ithaca even in broad Crete, far over the sea; and now I have come here myself with these goods of mine. I left as much again with my children when I fled the country, after I had killed the dear son of Idomeneus, Orsilochus, swift of foot, who in broad Crete outran all the men who live by their labour. He would have robbed me of all that plunder from Troy which I had suffered so much heartache for, passing through the wars of men and the grievous waves — because I would not do his father a favour and serve as his squire in the land of the Trojans, but commanded men of my own. So I struck him with my bronze-tipped spear as he came home from the field, lying in wait for him by the roadside with one of my men. A dark night covered the sky and nobody noticed us, and I took his life unseen.

"Now when I had killed him with the sharp bronze I went straight to a ship and made my plea to some lordly Phoenicians, giving them plunder enough to satisfy them. I told them to take me aboard and land me at Pylos, or at fine Elis, where the Epeans hold sway. But the force of the wind thrust them away from there, badly against their will, and they did not mean to play me false; and driven off our course we came here by night. We rowed on into the harbour in a hurry, and had no thought of supper, badly as we needed it, but went out of the ship just as we were and lay down, every one of us. Then sweet sleep came over me in my weariness, and they took my goods out of the hollow ship and set them where I was lying on the sand. And they went aboard and left for the well-peopled land of Sidon; and I was left here with a badly troubled heart."

So he spoke, and the goddess grey-eyed Athena smiled and stroked him with her hand, and changed herself into the form of a woman, handsome and tall and skilled in glorious handiwork. And she spoke to him with winged words:

"He would have to be cunning and a thief who could get past you in any kind of guile, even if it were a god who met you. Bold man, crafty in counsel, never satisfied with deceiving — not even in your own country, it seems, were you going to give up your tricks and your lying tales, which you love from the bottom of your heart. But come, let us talk no more of this; we are both well versed in craft, since you are far the best of all men in counsel and in speech, and I am famous among all the gods for wisdom and craft. And yet you did not know Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus — me, who always stand at your side and guard you in every trouble. And it was I who made you loved by all the Phaeacians.

"And now I have come here to weave a plan with you, and to hide all the treasure the lordly Phaeacians gave you by my counsel and will when you set out for home; and to tell you the full measure of trouble it is your fate to go through in your own well-built house. Be strong; you must bear it. And tell no man of them all, and no woman, that you have come back from your wanderings, but endure your many griefs in silence, and put up with the violence of men."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "It is hard for a mortal man to know you when he meets you, goddess, however clever he is, because you take whatever shape you like. But this I know well, that you were kind to me in the old days, as long as we sons of the Achaeans were fighting in the land of Troy. But after we had sacked the high city of Priam and gone away in our ships, and a god had scattered the Achaeans, I have never seen you since then, daughter of Zeus, and never noticed you coming aboard my ship to keep sorrow off me. I wandered on and on with a stricken heart in my breast, until the gods delivered me from trouble, until in the rich country of the Phaeacians you cheered me with your words and led me into their city yourself. But now I beg you by your father — because I do not think I have come to clear-seen Ithaca; this is some other country I am roaming in, and you are saying this to mock me and beguile my mind — tell me whether I really have come to my own dear country."

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena answered him: "That is always the way your mind works, and that is why I cannot leave you in your sorrow: because you are soft of speech, sharp-witted and prudent. Any other man coming home from his wanderings would have hurried eagerly to see his children and his wife in his halls; but you are not yet willing to know or learn anything until you have tested your wife, who stays in her halls as she always did, and the nights and the days waste away for her sorrowfully as she weeps.

"As for me, I never doubted this, but knew it well in my heart, that you would come home after losing all your companions. But you must understand, I was not willing to fight against Poseidon, my father's brother, who stored up anger in his heart against you, furious that you blinded his dear son. But come, I will show you the land of Ithaca, so that you can be sure. This is the harbour of Phorcys, the old man of the sea, and here at the head of the harbour is the long-leafed olive tree, and near it the pleasant shadowy cave sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads. This is the vaulted cave where you used to offer the nymphs many hecatombs that bring fulfilment; and over there is Mount Neriton, clothed with its forests."

So spoke the goddess, and scattered the mist, and the land appeared. Then much-enduring noble Odysseus was glad, rejoicing in his own country, and he kissed the earth, the giver of grain. And at once he prayed to the nymphs with his hands stretched out:

"Naiad Nymphs, daughters of Zeus, I never thought to see you again; but now I greet you with loving prayers. And I will give you gifts too, as I used to, if the daughter of Zeus, who drives the spoil, graciously grants me to live, and brings my dear son to manhood."

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena answered him again: "Take heart, and do not let these things trouble your mind. But let us put your goods away at once in the innermost recess of the marvellous cave, where they will stay safe for you; and let us think ourselves how it may all turn out for the best."

With that the goddess went into the shadowy cave and searched out its hiding places. And Odysseus brought all the treasure there, the gold and the stubborn bronze and the finely worked clothing which the Phaeacians had given him. He laid them carefully away, and Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis, set a stone at the door.

Then the two of them sat down by the trunk of the sacred olive tree and planned death for the insolent suitors. And the goddess grey-eyed Athena was the first to speak:

"Son of Laertes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of the many tricks, think how you may lay your hands on the shameless suitors, who for three years now have been lording it in your halls, courting your godlike wife and offering wedding gifts. And she, looking mournfully for your coming, holds out hope to all of them and makes promises to each man, sending them messages, when her mind is on something else."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "I was very near dying in my halls by the evil fate of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, if you had not told me all of it properly, goddess. But come, weave some plan by which I can pay them back; and stand beside me yourself and put dauntless courage into me, as when we loosed the bright diadem of Troy. If you would stand at my side, grey-eyed one, as eager as you were then, I would fight three hundred men with you, mighty goddess, if you would give me help with a ready heart."

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena answered him: "I will be with you, and I will not forget you when we are busy with this work; and I think many a one of the suitors who eat up your substance will spatter the wide earth with his blood and brains. But come, I will make you unrecognisable to everyone. I will shrivel the fine skin on your supple limbs, and destroy the flaxen hair on your head, and dress you in a rag that anyone would shudder to see a man wearing. And I will dim your two eyes, that were so beautiful before, so that you will look mean in the sight of all the suitors, and of your wife, and of the son you left in your halls.

"And you must go first of all to the swineherd who keeps your pigs, and who has a kindly heart towards you, and loves your son and steady Penelope. You will find him staying with the pigs, and they are feeding by the rock of Corax and the spring Arethusa, eating acorns to their hearts' content and drinking the black water, the things that make the rich flesh of pigs grow fat. Stay there, and sit beside him and question him about everything, while I go to Sparta, the land of beautiful women, to call your dear son Telemachus back, Odysseus, who went to spacious Lacedaemon, to the house of Menelaus, to look for news of you, and whether you were still alive anywhere."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her: "Why did you not tell him, then, when your mind knows everything? Was it so that he too should suffer, wandering over the restless sea, while others ate up his substance?"

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena answered him: "Do not let your heart be too troubled about him. I guided him myself, so that he should win a good name by going there; and he has no hardship, but sits in peace in the palace of the son of Atreus, with good things past telling in front of him. There are young men lying in wait for him in a black ship, eager to kill him before he comes to his own country; but I do not think that will happen. Before that the earth will cover many a one of the suitors who eat up your substance."

With that Athena touched him with her wand. She withered the fine flesh on his supple limbs and destroyed the flaxen hair on his head, and put the skin of an old man over all his limbs. And she dimmed his two eyes, that were so beautiful before, and dressed him in other clothes, a vile ragged cloak and a tunic, torn and filthy, grimed with dirty smoke. And she threw the great skin of a swift hind over him, with the hair stripped off, and gave him a staff and a miserable bag full of holes, slung on a twisted cord.

So when the two of them had taken counsel together they parted; and the goddess went off to lovely Lacedaemon to fetch the son of Odysseus.
