Book Fifteen

But Pallas Athena went to spacious Lacedaemon to remind the glorious son of great-hearted Odysseus about his homecoming and to hurry him on his way. She found Telemachus and the noble son of Nestor lying in the front porch of the palace of glorious Menelaus. Nestor's son was overcome with soft sleep, but sweet sleep did not hold Telemachus: all through the immortal night anxious thoughts about his father kept him awake. And grey-eyed Athena stood near him and said:

"Telemachus, you do wrong to wander any longer far from home, leaving your wealth behind you and men in your house as insolent as those — in case they divide it all up and eat your possessions, and you have made your journey for nothing. Rouse Menelaus, good at the war-cry, as fast as you can, to send you on your way, so that you may find your noble mother still at home. Her father and her brothers are telling her now to marry Eurymachus, because he is ahead of all the suitors in his presents and has increased his wedding gifts. Take care she does not carry some treasure out of your halls against your will. You know what sort of spirit there is in a woman's breast: she wants to build up the house of the man who marries her, and takes no thought for her earlier children or the husband of her youth, once he is dead, and asks about them no longer. So go, and put all your possessions in the charge of whichever of the women seems to you the best, until the gods show you a noble bride.

"And there is another thing I will tell you, and you must take it to heart. The best men among the suitors are lying in wait for you deliberately in the strait between Ithaca and rugged Samos, eager to kill you before you come to your own country. But I do not think that will happen; before that the earth will cover many a one of the suitors who eat up your substance. Keep your well-built ship well away from the islands, and sail by night as well as by day; and that one of the immortals who keeps and guards you will send a fair breeze after you. And when you have reached the nearest shore of Ithaca, send your ship and all your companions on to the city, but go yourself first of all to the swineherd who keeps your pigs, and who has a kindly heart towards you. Spend the night there, and tell him to go to the city and take word to wise Penelope that she has you safe, and that you have come back from Pylos."

With that she went off to high Olympus. And Telemachus woke the son of Nestor out of sweet sleep, rousing him with a touch of his heel, and said to him:

"Wake up, Peisistratus, son of Nestor; bring up your fiery-hoofed horses and yoke them under the car, so that we can get on our way."

Then Peisistratus, son of Nestor, answered him and said: "Telemachus, there is no way we can drive through the dark night, however eager we are for our journey; and it will soon be dawn. Wait until the warrior son of Atreus, Menelaus, famous for his spear, brings his gifts and sets them in the car and sends us off with kindly words of farewell. A guest remembers all his days the host who shows him kindness."

So he spoke, and golden-throned Dawn came soon. Menelaus came up to them, good at the war-cry, getting up from his bed beside fair-haired Helen. And when the prince, the dear son of Odysseus, saw him, he hurried to put his bright tunic on and to fling a great cloak over his powerful shoulders, and went out. Then Telemachus, the dear son of godlike Odysseus, came up to Menelaus and said to him:

"Menelaus, son of Atreus, brought up by Zeus, leader of armies, send me back now at last to my own dear country; my heart is eager to be home."

Then Menelaus answered him, good at the war-cry: "Telemachus, I shall not hold you here a long time when you are eager to go back. I would blame another man who as a host loves too much or hates too much; due measure is better in everything. It is an equal wrong to speed a guest on who does not want to go and to hold back one who is eager to be gone. One should make the guest who is present welcome, and send off the one who wants to go. But wait until I bring fine gifts and put them in your car, and your own eyes see them, and until I tell the women to get a meal ready in the halls out of the plentiful store that is inside. It is a double good — it brings honour and glory, and profit as well — that a traveller should dine before he goes out over the wide and boundless earth. And if you would like to travel through Hellas and the middle of Argos, then let it be so, and I will go with you myself, and yoke horses for you and take you to the cities of men. And nobody will send us away empty-handed; every one of them will give us some one thing at least to take away, a fine bronze tripod or cauldron, or a pair of mules, or a golden cup."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Menelaus, son of Atreus, brought up by Zeus, leader of armies, I would rather go home at once, because when I left I left nobody behind to watch over my possessions. I do not want to die myself while looking for my godlike father, or to lose some fine treasure out of my halls."

Now when Menelaus heard this, good in battle, he told his wife and her women at once to get a meal ready in the halls out of the plentiful store that was inside. Eteoneus, son of Boethous, came up to him, just out of bed, because he lived not far off. Menelaus, good at the war-cry, told him to kindle a fire and roast some of the meat; and he heard and obeyed.

And Menelaus went down himself to his vaulted treasure chamber, not alone, because Helen went with him, and Megapenthes. And when they came to the place where his treasures were stored, the son of Atreus took a two-handled cup and told his son Megapenthes to carry a mixing bowl of silver. And Helen went to the chests where her richly embroidered robes were, which she had made herself. One of these Helen, that beautiful woman, lifted out and carried away, the one that was finest in its embroidery and the largest. It shone like a star, and it lay beneath all the rest.

Then they went through the house until they came to Telemachus; and fair-haired Menelaus said to him: "Telemachus, may Zeus, the loud-thundering lord of Hera, bring about your homecoming, just as your heart wants it. And of all the gifts stored as treasure in my house, I will give you the finest and the most valuable. I will give you a well-made mixing bowl. It is all of silver, with the rims finished in gold, the work of Hephaestus; and the warrior Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it to me when his house sheltered me on my way there; and now I have a mind to give it to you."

With that the warrior son of Atreus put the two-handled cup into his hands. And strong Megapenthes brought the bright mixing bowl of silver and set it in front of him. And Helen of the lovely cheeks came up with the robe in her hands and said to him:

"Here, I give you this gift too, dear child, a remembrance of the hands of Helen, for the day of the marriage you long for, for your bride to wear. Until then let it lie in your halls in your dear mother's keeping. And for yourself, I hope you reach your well-built house and your own country with joy."

With that she put it in his hands, and he took it gladly. And prince Peisistratus took the gifts and laid them in the box of the chariot, and looked at them all, marvelling in his heart. Then fair-haired Menelaus led them into the house, and the two of them sat down on chairs and high seats. And a maid brought water for their hands in a lovely golden jug and poured it over a silver basin for them to wash, and drew a polished table up beside them. And the housekeeper, a grave woman, brought bread and set it in front of them, and plenty of meat with it, giving freely from her stores. And the son of Boethous carved the meat close by and divided the portions, and the son of glorious Menelaus poured the wine. So they put out their hands to the good food in front of them.

But when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, then Telemachus and the glorious son of Nestor yoked the horses and got up into the inlaid car, and drove out through the gateway and the echoing portico. And the son of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaus, went after them, carrying honey-hearted wine in a golden cup in his right hand, so that they might pour an offering before they set out. He took his stand in front of the horses and pledged the young men and said:

"Farewell, young men, and take my greetings to Nestor, shepherd of the army; he was as kind as a father to me while we sons of the Achaeans were making war in the land of Troy."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Yes, king brought up by Zeus, we will tell him all this when we come, as you say. And I wish that when I get back to Ithaca I might find Odysseus at home just as surely, to tell him how I met with every kindness at your hands before I left, and am bringing away treasures many and fine."

Even as he spoke a bird flew past on the right, an eagle, carrying a great white goose in its talons, a tame bird from the yard, and men and women followed shouting. And the eagle came near them and darted off to the right in front of the horses; and they were glad when they saw it, and the hearts in all their breasts were cheered. And Peisistratus, son of Nestor, was the first to speak among them:

"Consider, Menelaus, brought up by Zeus, leader of armies, whether the god showed this sign for the two of us or for yourself."

So he spoke, and Menelaus, dear to Ares, turned over how he might interpret the sign rightly with understanding. But long-robed Helen took the word from him and said:

"Listen to me, and I will prophesy as the immortals put it in my heart, and as I think it will come about. As this eagle came from the mountain, where his kin are and where he was born, and snatched up the goose that was reared in the house, so Odysseus will come home after many labours and many wanderings, and will take his revenge; or he is at home even now, and sowing the seeds of trouble for all the suitors."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her: "May Zeus grant it so, the loud-thundering lord of Hera; then I will pray to you there as to a god."

He spoke, and touched the two horses with the lash, and they sped quickly towards the plain, running eagerly through the city. So all day long they shook the yoke they carried on their necks. And the sun set, and all the ways grew dark. And they came to Pherae, to the house of Diocles, son of Ortilochus, whose father was Alpheus. There they spent the night, and he set out for them the entertainment due to strangers.

As soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, they yoked the horses and got up into the inlaid car and drove out through the gateway and the echoing portico. Then Peisistratus touched the horses with the whip to start them, and the pair went on willingly, and soon after that they reached the steep citadel of Pylos. Then Telemachus said to the son of Nestor:

"Son of Nestor, will you make me a promise now, and keep it, as I ask? We call ourselves friends from of old, through our fathers' friendship, and we are the same age besides, and this journey will settle us still more firmly in one mind. Do not take me past my ship, you whom Zeus brought up, but leave me there, in case that old man keeps me in his house against my will, wanting to show me kindness; and I must hurry home."

So he spoke, and the son of Nestor took counsel with his heart as to how he might properly give the promise and keep it. And as he turned it over, this seemed the better course. He turned his horses towards the fast ship and the shore of the sea, and took out the beautiful gifts Menelaus had given him, the clothes and the gold, and set them in the stern of the ship. And he urged Telemachus on and spoke to him with winged words:

"Go aboard quickly now, and tell all your companions to do the same, before I get home and bring the old man word. I know this well in my mind and heart: his spirit is so masterful that he will not let you go, but will come here himself to invite you to his house; and I tell you he will not go back without you, because he will be very angry, whatever anyone says."

With that he drove his horses with the beautiful manes back to the city of the Pylians, and quickly reached the palace. And Telemachus called to his men and gave them their orders:

"Set all the gear in order in the black ship, men, and let us go aboard ourselves and get on our way."

So he spoke, and they listened readily and obeyed; and they went aboard at once and sat down at the benches.

So he was busy with this, and was praying and making an offering to Athena by the stern of the ship, when a man from a far country came up to him, one who was fleeing out of Argos because he had killed a man; and he was a seer. By descent he came from Melampus, who lived long ago in Pylos, mother of flocks, a rich man with a very wealthy house among the Pylians, but who afterwards came to a land of strangers, fleeing from his country and from great-hearted Neleus, the most lordly of living men, who for a whole year had kept a great deal of wealth from him by force. Melampus meanwhile lay bound with bitter bonds in the halls of Phylacus, suffering hard pains because of the daughter of Neleus and the terrible blindness of heart the goddess had laid on him, the Erinys who brings houses to ruin.

But he escaped his fate, and drove the deep-lowing cattle from Phylace to Pylos, and took his revenge on godlike Neleus for that cruel deed, and brought the girl home to be his own brother's wife. And for himself he went to the country of other men, to horse-pasturing Argos, because it was appointed for him to live there, holding sway over many Argives. There he married a wife and built himself a high-roofed house and fathered Antiphates and Mantius, two stalwart sons. And Antiphates fathered great-hearted Oicles, and Oicles fathered Amphiaraus, the rouser of armies, whom Zeus who holds the aegis and Apollo loved heartily with every kind of love. Yet he did not reach the threshold of old age, but died at Thebe, because of a woman's gifts. Sons were born to him, Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. And Mantius fathered Polypheides and Cleitus. Golden-throned Dawn snatched Cleitus away for his beauty, so that he might live with the immortals; and Apollo made Polypheides, high of heart, a seer, far the best of mortals, after Amphiaraus was dead. He moved to Hyperesia, having grown angry with his father, and lived there and prophesied to all men.

It was his son, Theoclymenus by name, who now came and stood beside Telemachus. He found him pouring offerings and praying by his fast black ship, and spoke to him with winged words:

"Friend, since I find you making a burnt offering in this place, I beg you by your offerings and by the god, and by your own life and the lives of the companions who follow you, tell me truly what I ask and do not hide it. Who are you among men, and where from? Where is your city, and where are your parents?"

And clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Then I will tell you all of it plainly, stranger. I am from Ithaca by birth, and my father is Odysseus, as surely as there ever was such a man; but now he has died by a pitiful fate. So I have taken my companions and a black ship and come to look for news of my father, who has been gone so long."

Then godlike Theoclymenus answered him: "I too have fled from my country, because I killed a man, one of my own kin. And he has many brothers and kinsmen in horse-pasturing Argos, and they hold great sway among the Achaeans. It is to avoid death and black fate at their hands that I am running, because it seems it is my lot to be a wanderer among men. Take me aboard your ship, since I have made my plea to you in my flight, in case they kill me outright; I think they are after me."

And clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Then I will certainly not thrust you away from my trim ship, since you are eager to come. Follow with us, and you shall have such hospitality in our home as we have."

With that he took the man's bronze spear from him and laid it at full length on the deck of the curved ship, and went aboard the seafaring ship himself. Then he sat down in the stern and made Theoclymenus sit beside him; and his men loosed the stern cables. And Telemachus called to his men and told them to lay hold of the tackle, and they obeyed quickly. They raised the fir mast and set it in the hollow socket and made it fast with the forestays, and hauled the white sail up with twisted ox-hide ropes.

And grey-eyed Athena sent them a favourable wind, blowing strongly through the sky, so that the ship should run swiftly and finish her way over the salt water of the sea. So they went past Crouni and Chalcis with its beautiful streams. Now the sun set and all the ways grew dark. And the ship drew near to Pheae, sped by the wind of Zeus, and past fine Elis, where the Epeans hold sway. And from there he steered for the sharp isles, turning over whether he would escape death or be taken.

But the two of them, Odysseus and the good swineherd, were eating supper in the hut, and the other men ate with them. And when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, Odysseus spoke among them, testing the swineherd to see whether he would go on entertaining him with kindly care and tell him to stay there at the farm, or send him off to the city:

"Listen to me now, Eumaeus, and all you other men. In the morning I mean to go off to the city to beg, so that I am not the ruin of you and your men. Give me good advice, then, and send a trusty guide with me to lead me there. And through the city I shall have to wander by myself, hoping somebody will give me a cup of water and a loaf. And I would go to the house of godlike Odysseus and take news to wise Penelope, and join the company of the insolent suitors, in case they give me a meal, since they have plenty of good things. I could do them good service in anything they wanted at once. I will tell you, and you take heed and listen: by the favour of Hermes the messenger, who gives grace and glory to all men's work, no man can compete with me in the business of serving — at piling a fire well, at splitting dry faggots, at carving and roasting meat, and at pouring wine — in all the things in which meaner men serve the noble."

And you were deeply moved, Eumaeus the swineherd, and said to him: "Oh, stranger, how has such a thought come into your mind? You must be wanting to die on the spot, if you really mean to go into the crowd of the suitors, whose wantonness and violence reach the iron sky. Their serving men are nothing like you; the ones who serve them are young, well dressed in cloaks and tunics, and their heads and their bright faces are always sleek, and the polished tables are loaded with bread and meat and wine. No, stay here. Nobody is troubled by your being here, not I, and none of the other men with me. And when the dear son of Odysseus comes, he will dress you in a cloak and a tunic for clothes himself, and will send you wherever your heart and spirit tell you to go."

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him: "I wish, Eumaeus, that you might be as dear to father Zeus as you are to me, since you have made me stop wandering and stop my miserable hardship. Nothing is worse for mortals than roaming; and yet for their cursed belly's sake men put up with terrible troubles, when wandering and sorrow and pain come on them. But now, since you keep me here and tell me to wait for your master, come, tell me about the mother of godlike Odysseus, and about his father, whom he left behind on the threshold of old age when he went away. Are they still alive under the rays of the sun, or are they dead now and in the house of Hades?"

Then the swineherd, a leader of men, answered him: "Then I will tell you plainly, stranger. Laertes is still alive, but he prays to Zeus all the time that the life may waste out of his limbs in his halls. He grieves extraordinarily for his son, who is gone, and for the wise lady his wedded wife, whose death troubled him more than anything and brought him to an untimely old age. And she died of grief for her glorious son, a miserable death, and I hope no man dies that way who lives here as my friend and does me kindness.

"As long as she lived, sorrowful as it was, it was always a pleasure to me to ask and enquire after her, because she had brought me up herself along with long-robed Ctimene, her noble daughter, the youngest child she bore. I was brought up with her, and her mother honoured me only a little less than her own children. But when we both reached the longed-for prime of youth, they sent Ctimene to Same to be married, and got themselves countless bridal gifts; and as for me, my lady dressed me in a cloak and a tunic, very good clothes, and gave me sandals for my feet and sent me out to the fields; but in her heart she loved me all the more.

"Now I go without all that; and yet for my own part the blessed gods make the work prosper that I give my mind to. From it I have eaten and drunk and given to strangers who deserve respect. But from my mistress I can hear nothing pleasant, in word or deed, because a plague has fallen on the house, these overbearing men. And servants long very much to speak before their mistress and learn everything, and to eat and drink, and then to carry something off to the fields as well — the kind of thing that always warms a servant's heart."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "So you must have wandered far from your country and your parents when you were only a child, Eumaeus the swineherd. But tell me this, and tell me the truth. Was some broad-wayed city of men sacked, where your father and your honoured mother lived? Or did enemies take you in their ships when you were alone with your sheep or your cattle, and carry you off for sale to this master's house, and he paid a good price for you?"

Then the swineherd, a leader of men, answered him: "Stranger, since you ask and question me about this, listen now in silence, and enjoy yourself, and drink your wine as you sit here. These nights are extraordinarily long. There is time for sleep, and time to take pleasure in hearing tales; you do not need to lie down before it is time. There is weariness even in too much sleep. As for the rest, if any man's heart and spirit tell him to, let him go out and sleep, and at daybreak let him eat and follow our master's pigs. But we two will drink and eat in the hut, and take delight each in the other's hard troubles as we call them to mind. In later time a man finds joy even in his troubles, if he has suffered a great deal and wandered a great deal. But I will tell you what you ask and enquire about.

"There is an island called Syria, if you have heard of it, above Ortygia, where the turning-places of the sun are. It is not so very thickly settled, but it is a good country, rich in herds, rich in flocks, full of wine, plentiful in wheat. Famine never comes into that country, and no hateful sickness besides falls on wretched mortals; but when the tribes of men grow old through the city, Apollo of the silver bow comes with Artemis and attacks them with his gentle arrows and kills them. There are two cities in that island, and all the land is divided between them; and my father ruled as king over both, Ctesius, son of Ormenus, a man like the immortals.

"Phoenicians came there, men famous for their ships, greedy rogues, bringing countless trinkets in their black ship. Now there was a Phoenician woman in my father's house, handsome and tall and skilled in glorious handiwork. The wily Phoenicians beguiled her. First, as she was washing clothes, one of them lay with her in love beside the hollow ship; and that beguiles the minds of women, even an upright one. Then he asked her who she was and where she came from, and she pointed out at once the high-roofed house of my father, and said:

"'I declare I come from Sidon, rich in bronze, and I am the daughter of Arybas, to whom wealth flowed in streams. But Taphian pirates seized me as I was coming from the fields, and brought me here and sold me to that man's house, and he paid a good price for me.'

"Then the man who had lain with her in secret answered her: 'Would you go back home with us, then, and see the high-roofed house of your father and mother, and see them too? They are still alive, and they are accounted rich.'

"Then the woman answered him and said: 'That might well be, if you sailors will pledge yourselves by an oath to bring me safely home.'

"So she spoke, and they all swore to it, as she told them. But when they had sworn and finished the oath, the woman spoke among them again and said:

"'Be quiet now, and let none of your company speak to me if he meets me in the street, or at the well, in case somebody goes to the palace and tells the old king, and he grows suspicious and binds me with hard bonds and contrives death for you. Keep my words in mind, and hurry on the trading of your wares. And when your ship is loaded with goods, let a message come to me quickly at the palace; because I will bring whatever gold comes to my hand as well. And I would gladly give another thing for my passage. There is a child of my noble master, whose nurse I am in the palace, such a knowing child, who is always running out with me. I would bring him aboard, and he would fetch you an enormous price, wherever you took him for sale among men of a strange language.'

"With that she went off to the fine palace. And they stayed there in our country a whole year, and got a great deal of substance by trading in their hollow ship. But when their hollow ship was loaded for the voyage home, then they sent a messenger to bring the woman word. A man came to my father's house, well versed in guile, with a golden necklace strung with amber beads between. The girls in the hall and my honoured mother were handling it and gazing at it and offering him their price; and he nodded at the woman in silence. And when he had nodded to her he went off to the hollow ship; and she took me by the hand and led me out of the house.

"In the front hall of the palace she found the cups and the tables of the banqueters who waited on my father. They had gone out to the council and the people's place of debate; and she quickly hid three goblets in her dress and carried them off, and I followed her without a thought. Then the sun set and all the ways grew dark. And we hurried and came to the fine harbour where the fast Phoenician ship was. Then they went aboard, putting the two of us on board as well, and sailed over the watery roads, and Zeus sent them a favourable wind.

"For six days we sailed, night and day alike; but when Zeus, son of Cronos, brought the seventh day on us, then Artemis the archer struck the woman, and she fell with a thud into the hold the way a sea bird plunges. They threw her out to be a prey for seals and fishes, and I was left with my heart badly stricken. And the wind and the wave carried them and brought them to Ithaca, where Laertes bought me with his wealth. That is how my eyes came to see this country."

Then Odysseus, born of Zeus, answered him and said: "Eumaeus, you have deeply stirred the heart in my breast, telling all this tale of the sorrow you have borne. And yet in your case Zeus has given good side by side with the bad, since after all your labour you have come to the house of a kindly man, who gives you food and drink, and does it kindly, and you live well; whereas I have come here wandering through the many cities of men."

So they talked to one another, and then lay down to sleep, not for long, but for a little; because fair-throned Dawn came soon.

But the companions of Telemachus, drawing in to shore, furled the sail and took the mast down quickly, and rowed the ship to her anchorage with their oars. Then they threw out the mooring-stones and made the stern cables fast, and went out themselves onto the shore of the sea and got their meal ready and mixed the flaming wine. But when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, clear-headed Telemachus was the first to speak among them:

"Row the black ship on to the city now; but I will visit the fields and the herdsmen, and come down to the city in the evening when I have looked over my lands. And in the morning I will set a good feast of meat and sweet wine before you as wages for your journey."

Then godlike Theoclymenus answered him: "Where shall I go, dear child? Whose house shall I come to, of the men who rule in rocky Ithaca? Or shall I go straight to your mother's house and yours?"

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "If things were otherwise I would tell you to go to our house, because there is no lack of hospitality for strangers there; but it would be worse for you, since I shall be away and my mother will not see you. She does not often appear before the suitors in the house, but weaves at her loom in an upper room, away from them. But I will tell you of another man you may go to, Eurymachus, the glorious son of wise Polybus, whom the men of Ithaca now look on as on a god. He is far the best man of them, and the most eager to marry my mother and to have the honour of Odysseus. But Olympian Zeus, who lives in the sky, knows whether he will bring the evil day on them before that marriage."

Even as he spoke a bird flew out on the right, a hawk, the swift messenger of Apollo. He held a dove in his talons and was plucking her and shedding the feathers on the ground, midway between the ship and Telemachus himself. Then Theoclymenus called him apart from his companions and took his hand and said to him:

"Telemachus, this bird has not flown out on our right without a god's warrant; I knew as I looked at him that he was a bird of omen. There is no house in the land of Ithaca more kingly than yours; you are supreme for ever."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him again: "Stranger, I wish this word of yours might be fulfilled. Then you would soon know kindness and many a gift from me, so that anyone who met you would call you a lucky man."

Then he spoke to Peiraeus, his trusty companion: "Peiraeus, son of Clytius, you are the one who in other matters listens to me above all my companions who went with me to Pylos; so now take this stranger, please, and give him a kindly welcome in your house and treat him with honour until I come."

Then Peiraeus, the famous spearman, answered him: "Telemachus, however long you stay here, I will entertain him, and he shall have no lack of what is due to a stranger."

With that he went aboard the ship and told his companions to embark themselves and loose the stern cables. So they went aboard at once and sat down at the benches. But Telemachus bound the fine sandals under his feet and took his mighty spear, tipped with sharp bronze, from the deck of the ship. Then the men loosed the stern cables and thrust off and sailed to the city, as Telemachus told them, the dear son of godlike Odysseus.

But his feet carried him quickly on as he strode forward, until he reached the farm where his countless pigs were, and where the worthy swineherd slept among them with a heart loyal to his masters.
