Book Sixteen

Meanwhile the two in the hut, Odysseus and the good swineherd, had kindled a fire and were getting their breakfast ready at dawn, and had sent the herdsmen out with the droves of pigs. And the baying hounds fawned round Telemachus and did not bark as he came near. And noble Odysseus noticed the fawning of the hounds, and the sound of footsteps came to his ears, and at once he spoke winged words to Eumaeus:

"Eumaeus, some companion of yours must be coming, or somebody you know at least, because the hounds are not barking but fawning round him, and I hear the sound of footsteps."

The word was not fully out of his mouth before his own dear son stood in the doorway. The swineherd sprang up in astonishment, and the vessels dropped out of his hands that he was busy with, mixing the flaming wine. He went to meet his lord and kissed his head and both his beautiful eyes and his two hands, and a big tear fell from him. As a loving father greets his own dear son, who comes in the tenth year from a distant country — his only son and best loved, for whose sake he has borne much sorrow — so the good swineherd took godlike Telemachus in his arms and kissed him all over, like a man escaped from death; and he spoke to him with winged words, wailing:

"You have come, Telemachus, sweet light of my eyes. I thought I would never see you again after you had gone to Pylos in your ship. But come in, dear child, so that I can delight my heart with looking at you here in my house, newly come from other countries. You do not often visit the farm and the herdsmen, but stay in the town; it seems good to your heart, I suppose, to keep an eye on the destructive crowd of the suitors."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "So it shall be, father. It is for your sake that I have come here, to see you with my eyes and to hear you tell me whether my mother is still in the halls, or whether some other man has married her by now, and the bed of Odysseus lies without its bedding, covered with foul spiders' webs."

Then the swineherd, a leader of men, answered him: "Yes indeed, she stays in your halls with a steady heart, and the nights and the days waste away for her sorrowfully as she weeps."

With that he took the bronze spear from him, and Telemachus went in and crossed the stone threshold. As he came in, his father Odysseus got up from his seat to give him place; but Telemachus checked him and said:

"Sit down, stranger. We shall find a seat somewhere else in our farm; here is a man who will set one for us."

So he spoke, and Odysseus went back and sat down again; and the swineherd strewed green brushwood underneath for Telemachus and a fleece over it, and the dear son of Odysseus sat down there. Then the swineherd set platters of roast meat in front of them, left over from their meal the day before, and quickly heaped bread up in baskets and mixed honey-sweet wine in a bowl of ivy wood, and sat down himself opposite godlike Odysseus. So they put out their hands to the good food in front of them.

But when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, Telemachus said to the good swineherd: "Father, where did this stranger come to you from? How did sailors bring him to Ithaca? Who did they say they were? Because he certainly did not get here on foot."

And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd, and said: "Then I will tell you the whole truth, my child. He says he is from broad Crete by birth, and says he has wandered roaming through many cities of mortals; that is the lot a god has spun for him. And now he has run away from a ship of the Thesprotians and come to my farm, and I put him in your hands. Do what you like. He declares himself your suppliant."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Eumaeus, this word of yours stings me to the heart. How am I to welcome this stranger in my house? I am young myself, and I have no trust yet in my strength to defend me against a man when one of them grows angry over nothing. And as for my mother, the heart in her breast wavers this way and that, whether to stay here with me and keep the house, respecting her husband's bed and the voice of the people, or to go now with whichever of the Achaeans who court her in the halls is the best and offers the most wedding gifts. But as for this stranger, now that he has come to your house, I will dress him in a cloak and a tunic, good clothes, and give him a two-edged sword and sandals for his feet, and send him wherever his heart and spirit tell him to go. Or, if you like, keep him here at the farm and look after him, and I will send clothes here and all his food to eat, so that he is not the ruin of you and your men. But I will not let him go there, to join the company of the suitors; they are too full of wanton insolence. They might mock him, and I would be badly grieved. And it is hard for one man to achieve anything against many, however strong he is; they are far stronger."

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him: "Friend, since it must be right for me to answer — you two tear my heart when I hear your words, the kind of wantonness you say the suitors contrive in the halls in spite of you, a man as fine as you are. Tell me, are you letting yourself be put down like this? Or do the people through the country hate you, following the voice of a god? Or have you cause to blame your brothers, whose fighting a man trusts in even when a great quarrel arises?

"I wish I were as young as you are with the temper I have now, either the son of blameless Odysseus, or Odysseus himself — some stranger might cut my head off my neck straight away if I did not prove myself the ruin of the whole lot of them when I had got to the halls of Odysseus, son of Laertes. And if they overwhelmed me by their numbers, alone as I was, I would far rather die, killed in my own halls, than go on seeing these shameful things — strangers mishandled, and men dragging the women through the fine halls in a shameful way, and wine drawn off and wasted, and men eating up my bread without a thought, without limit, with no end to the business."

And clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Then I will tell you all of it plainly, stranger. The people at large bear me no grudge and no hatred, and I have no cause to blame brothers, whose fighting a man trusts in even when a great quarrel arises. The son of Cronos has made our house run in a single line: Arceisius fathered Laertes as his only son, and his father again fathered Odysseus as his only son, and Odysseus fathered me as his only son and left me in his halls, and had no joy of me. That is why enemies past counting are in the house now: all the princes who hold sway over the islands — Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus — and those who lord it over rocky Ithaca, every one of them is courting my mother and wasting my house. And she will not refuse the marriage, which she hates, and cannot bring the matter to an end; and they eat up my substance with their feasting, and will bring me to ruin too before long. But all this lies on the knees of the gods.

"But go quickly, father, and tell steady Penelope that she has me safe and that I have come back from Pylos. I will stay here; and you come back here when you have told your tale to her alone. And let none of the rest of the Achaeans learn it; there are a great many contriving harm against me."

And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd, and said: "I see, I take your point; you are telling this to a man who understands. But tell me this, and tell me the truth: shall I go the same way with news to Laertes too, wretched man? For a time, though he grieved badly for Odysseus, he used to oversee the fields and eat and drink with the slaves in the house, as the heart in his breast told him. But now, from the day you went to Pylos in your ship, they say he has not eaten and drunk the same way, or overseen the fields, but sits groaning and wailing and weeping, and the flesh wastes off his bones."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "That is sadder still; but even so we will let him be, for all our sorrow. If mortals could have everything they wished for, we should choose first of all the day of my father's homecoming. No, come back when you have given your message, and do not wander over the fields looking for Laertes. But tell my mother to send her housekeeper out to him as fast as she can, and secretly; she could take word to the old man."

With that he roused the swineherd, and he took his sandals in his hands and bound them under his feet and went off to the city.

And Athena was not unaware that Eumaeus the swineherd had gone from the farm, but she came near in the likeness of a woman, handsome and tall and skilled in glorious handiwork. And she stood opposite the door of the hut, showing herself to Odysseus; but Telemachus did not see her in front of him or notice her, because the gods do not appear openly to everyone. But Odysseus saw her, and the hounds did; and they did not bark, but slunk whining in fear to the far side of the farm. She made a sign with her brows, and noble Odysseus understood it and went out of the hall, past the great wall of the court, and stood in front of her; and Athena said to him:

"Son of Laertes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of the many tricks, reveal your word to your son now and do not hide it, so that when the two of you have planned death and doom for the suitors you may go to the famous city. And I myself will not be far from you for long, because I am eager for the fight."

With that Athena touched him with her golden wand. First of all she threw a well-washed cloak and a tunic round his breast, and increased his height and his youthful bloom. He grew dark of colour again, and his cheeks filled out, and the beard about his chin grew dark. And when she had done this she went away; and Odysseus went into the hut.

And his dear son marvelled, and turned his eyes aside in fear, in case it should be a god; and he spoke to him with winged words: "You seem to me another sort of man now, stranger, than you were a little while ago; the clothes you have on are different and your colour is not the same. You must be a god, one of those who hold the wide sky. Be gracious, then, so that we may offer you acceptable sacrifices and golden gifts, finely made; and spare us."

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him: "I am no god; why do you compare me to the immortals? I am your father, for whose sake you groan and endure so many griefs and put up with the violence of men."

With that he kissed his son and let a tear fall from his cheeks to the ground, though before this he had always held them back steadily.

But Telemachus — because he still did not believe it was his father — answered him again and said: "You are not my father Odysseus; some god is beguiling me, so that I may weep and groan still more. No mortal man could contrive this by his own wit, unless a god came to him himself and made him young or old easily, by his will. Just now you were an old man and meanly dressed, and now you are like the gods who hold the wide sky."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Telemachus, it does not become you to marvel too much that your father is in the house, or to be amazed. No other Odysseus will ever come here; I am the man, just as you see me, come to my own country in the twentieth year after suffering and many wanderings. This is the work of Athena, driver of the spoil, who makes me whatever she likes — because she has the power — now like a beggar, and now again like a young man wearing fine clothes on his body. It is easy for the gods who hold the wide sky both to glorify a mortal man and to bring him low."

With that he sat down, and Telemachus flung his arms round his noble father and wept and shed tears, and a longing for lamentation rose in the hearts of both of them. They wailed aloud more insistently than birds, sea-eagles or vultures with crooked talons, whose young the country people have taken out of the nest before they were fledged; just so pitifully did they let the tears fall from under their brows. And the light of the sun would have gone down on their weeping, if Telemachus had not spoken suddenly to his father:

"In what kind of ship, dear father, have sailors brought you here to Ithaca now? Who did they say they were? Because you certainly did not get here on foot."

And much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him: "Then I will tell you the whole truth, my child. The Phaeacians brought me, men famous for their ships, who send other men on their way too, whoever comes to them. They brought me over the sea in a fast ship while I slept, and set me down in Ithaca, and gave me glorious gifts, stores of bronze and gold and woven clothing. These treasures are lying in caves, by the favour of the gods. And now I have come here at Athena's bidding, so that we can plan the killing of our enemies. Come, count the suitors for me and give me their number, so that I know how many they are and what kind of men, and can turn it over in my noble heart and decide whether the two of us are able to take them on alone, without others, or whether we should look for others too."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Father, I have always heard of your great fame, that you were a fighter in strength of hand and in wise counsel; but this is too much of a thing to say. Amazement takes hold of me. It could not be that two men should fight against so many, and mighty men at that. The suitors are not ten, or twice ten, but a great many more. You shall learn their number here and now. From Dulichium there are fifty-two picked young men, and six serving men attend them; from Same came twenty-four men; from Zacynthus there are twenty young Achaeans; and from Ithaca itself twelve men, all of them the noblest, and with them Medon the herald and the divine singer and two squires skilled at carving meat. If we meet all of them inside the halls, I am afraid your coming to avenge their violence will be bitter and deadly. Think whether you can think of some helper, one who would help us two with a ready heart."

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him: "Then I will tell you, and you take heed and listen to my words, and consider whether Athena, with father Zeus, will be enough for the two of us, or whether I should think of some other helper."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "Those two helpers you name are good ones, certainly, though they live high up in the clouds; and they rule over all men alike and over the immortal gods."

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him: "Those two will not hold off long from the mighty struggle, when the strength of Ares is put to the test between the suitors and us in my halls. But for now, go home at daybreak and join the company of the haughty suitors. The swineherd will bring me to the city later on, in the likeness of a miserable old beggar. And if they treat me with contempt in the house, let the heart in your breast endure while I am badly used — even if they drag me by the feet through the house to the door, or throw things at me and strike me; you must endure the sight of it. You may tell them to stop their folly, trying to talk them round with gentle words; but they will not listen to you at all, because their day of doom is at hand.

"And there is another thing I will tell you, and you must take it to heart. When Athena, rich in counsel, puts it into my mind, I will nod to you with my head; and when you notice it, take all the weapons of war that are lying in your halls and put every one of them away in the secret place of the high store-room. And when the suitors miss the arms and question you, beguile them with gentle words, and say:

"'I have put them away out of the smoke, since they are no longer like the ones Odysseus left behind him when he went off to Troy, but are all fouled as far as the breath of the fire has reached them. And the son of Cronos has put this greater fear in my heart besides: that when you are heated with wine you may start a quarrel among yourselves and wound one another, and so bring shame on your feasting and your courting. Iron draws a man to it of itself.'

"But leave two swords behind for the two of us alone, and two spears, and two ox-hide shields for us to take hold of, so that we can rush at them and seize them; and as for the suitors, Pallas Athena and Zeus the counsellor will beguile them.

"And there is another thing I will tell you, and you must take it to heart. If you are truly my son and of our blood, then let nobody hear that Odysseus is at home; let Laertes not know it, or the swineherd, or anybody in the household, or Penelope herself. You and I by ourselves will learn the temper of the women; and we will make trial of a good many of the serving men too, and see which of them honours us and fears us at heart, and which takes no notice of us and scorns you, a man as fine as you are."

Then his glorious son answered him and said: "Father, I think you will come to know my spirit hereafter; there is no slackness of will in me. But I do not think this plan will be a gain to us both, and I tell you to think it over. You will go about for a long time to no purpose, testing each man as you visit the farms, while in your halls those others are wasting your substance insolently at their ease, and there is no sparing. As for the women, I do tell you to find out which of them dishonour you and which are innocent. But I would not have us make trial of the men at the farms; let us deal with that afterwards, if you really do know some sign from Zeus who holds the aegis."

So they talked to one another; and meanwhile the well-built ship that had brought Telemachus and all his companions from Pylos put in to Ithaca. And when they had come into the deep harbour they drew the black ship up on the shore, while proud squires carried their armour out and took the beautiful gifts straight to the house of Clytius. And they sent a herald to the house of Odysseus to take word to wise Penelope that Telemachus was at the farm and had told the ship to sail on to the city, so that the noble queen should not grow anxious and let the round tears fall.

So the two of them met, the herald and the good swineherd, on the same errand, to bring the lady news. And when they reached the palace of the godlike king, the herald spoke out in the middle of the women and said: "Your son has come back from Pylos just now, my queen."

But the swineherd came close to Penelope and told her everything her dear son had told him to say. And when he had told her the whole of what he had been ordered, he went off to the pigs and left the courtyard and the hall.

But the suitors were dismayed and downcast in spirit, and went out of the hall past the great wall of the court, and sat down there in front of the gates. Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the first to speak among them:

"My friends, a great piece of work has been insolently brought off by Telemachus, this journey, and we thought he would never get it done. Come, let us launch a black ship, the best we have, and get seamen together as rowers, to take word to the others as quickly as possible to come home."

The word was not fully out of his mouth when Amphinomus, turning where he sat, saw a ship in the deep harbour and men furling the sail with oars in their hands. And he broke into a merry laugh and spoke among his companions:

"Let us not send any message; here they are at home. Either some god told them of this, or they saw the ship of Telemachus sailing past themselves and could not catch her."

So he spoke, and they got up and went to the shore of the sea. The men quickly drew the black ship up on the shore, and proud squires carried their armour out. And they went all together to the meeting place, and would not let anyone else sit with them, young or old. Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke among them:

"See how the gods have delivered this man from destruction. Day after day watchmen sat on the windy heights, watch following watch; and at sunset we never spent a night on shore, but sailed over the deep in our fast ship and waited for the bright Dawn, lying in wait for Telemachus so that we could take him and kill the man himself; and meanwhile some god has brought him home. But let us contrive a miserable death for him here, for Telemachus, and let him not slip out of our hands; because while he lives, I think, this work of ours will not prosper. He is shrewd himself in counsel and in wisdom, and the people show us no favour any longer.

"Come, before he gathers the Achaeans to the meeting place — because I do not think he will be slow to act, but will be full of anger, and will stand up and declare among them all how we contrived his utter destruction and did not catch him; and they will not praise us when they hear of our wickedness. Take care, then, that they do not do us some harm and drive us out of our country, and we come to a land of strangers. Let us act first, and seize him in the fields far from the city, or on the road; and let us keep his substance and his wealth ourselves, dividing it fairly among us — though we would give the house to his mother to keep, and to the man who marries her.

"But if this plan does not please you, and you would rather he lived and kept all his father's wealth, then let us stop eating up his store of pleasant things gathering here, and let each man court her from his own hall with his gifts and try to win her; and she would marry the man who offers most and comes as her fated husband."

So he spoke, and they were all hushed and silent. Then Amphinomus spoke to the gathering and said his word among them. He was the glorious son of prince Nisus, son of Aretias, and he led the suitors who came from Dulichium, rich in wheat and in grass; and he pleased Penelope with his words more than all the others, because he had an understanding heart. He meant it kindly, and he spoke to the gathering:

"Friends, I would not choose to kill Telemachus. It is a dreadful thing to kill one of royal stock. Let us first try to learn the will of the gods. If the oracles of great Zeus approve, I will kill him myself and tell all the others to do it; but if the gods turn us from the act, I tell you to hold off."

So spoke Amphinomus, and his word pleased them. So they got up at once and went to the house of Odysseus, and went in and sat down on the polished seats.

Then wise Penelope thought of something else, to show herself to the suitors, overbearing in their insolence. For she had learned of the death threatened against her son in her halls, since the herald Medon told her, who had heard their plan. So she went towards the hall with her women. But when that lovely woman reached the suitors she stood by the doorpost of the well-built hall, holding her shining veil in front of her face; and she rebuked Antinous and said to him:

"Antinous, full of insolence, deviser of evil — and yet they say you are the best of all your years in the land of Ithaca in counsel and in speech. You are nothing of the kind. Madman, why do you contrive death and doom for Telemachus, and take no thought for suppliants, whom Zeus is witness for? It is an impious thing to plot evil against one another. Do you not know of the time your father came to this house as a fugitive, in terror of the people? They were furious with him, because he had joined Taphian pirates and harried the Thesprotians, who were in league with us. They meant to kill him and take his life by violence and eat up his great and pleasant living altogether; but Odysseus held them back and stopped them, for all their eagerness. And it is his house you consume now without paying for it, and his wife you court, and his son you try to kill, and on me you bring great distress. Stop it, I tell you, and tell the rest to stop."

Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered her: "Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, take heart, and do not let these things distress you. The man is not alive, and shall not live, and shall never be born, who will lay hands on your son Telemachus while I live and look on the light of the earth. I tell you this outright, and it will happen: that man's black blood will soon be running round my spear. Odysseus, the sacker of cities, often set me on his knees too, and put roast meat in my hands and held red wine to my lips. So Telemachus is by far the dearest of all men to me, and I tell him to have no fear of death, from the suitors at least; but from the gods no man can avoid it."

So he spoke to cheer her, and was plotting death against that son himself. So she went up to her bright upper room and wept for Odysseus, her dear husband, until grey-eyed Athena put sweet sleep on her eyelids.

But in the evening the good swineherd came back to Odysseus and his son, and they were busy getting supper ready and had killed a boar of a year old. And Athena came close to Odysseus, son of Laertes, and struck him with her wand and made him an old man again, and put mean clothes on his body, in case the swineherd should look at him and know him and go to bring news to steady Penelope, and not hold the secret fast in his heart.

Then Telemachus spoke first to the swineherd and said: "You have come, good Eumaeus. What news is there in the city? Have the proud suitors come home from their ambush by now, or are they still watching for me where they were, to take me on my way home?"

And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd, and said: "I had no mind to go about the city asking and enquiring about that; my heart told me to come back here as fast as I could when I had given my message. But a swift messenger from your companions joined me, a herald, who was the first to tell your mother the news. And I know this much besides, because I saw it with my own eyes. I was above the city as I went on my way, at the hill of Hermes, when I saw a fast ship putting into our harbour, and there were a great many men in her, and she was loaded with shields and double-pointed spears. And I thought it was them, but I have no knowledge of it."

So he spoke, and the strong young Telemachus smiled, and glanced at his father with his eyes, and avoided the swineherd's eye.

And when they had finished their work and got the meal ready they fell to feasting, and their hearts lacked nothing of the equal feast. But when they had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, they thought about rest, and took the gift of sleep.
