Book Eighteen

Now there came up a public beggar, who used to beg through the town of Ithaca and was known for his greedy belly, eating and drinking without end. He had no strength or force in him, but in bulk he was big enough to look at. Arnaeus was his name, which his honoured mother had given him at his birth; but all the young men called him Irus, because he used to run errands whenever anybody told him to.

He came now, and set about driving Odysseus out of his own house, and began abusing him with winged words: "Get out of the doorway, old man, or you will be dragged out by the foot before long. Do you not see that they are all winking at me and telling me to drag you out? I am ashamed to do it myself. Get up, or our quarrel will come to blows."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks gave him a black look from under his brows and answered him: "My good fellow, I am doing you no harm in word or deed, and I do not grudge it that anybody should give to you, however big the portion he takes up. This threshold will hold us both, and you have no need to be jealous over other people's goods. You seem to me to be a vagrant, as I am; and as for good fortune, it is the gods who are likely to give us that. But do not provoke me too far with your fists, in case you make me angry and I foul your chest and your lips with blood, old man as I am. Then I should have more peace tomorrow, because I do not think you would come back a second time to the hall of Odysseus, son of Laertes."

Then the vagrant Irus grew angry and said to him: "Listen how glibly the filthy wretch talks, like an old kitchen woman. But I will contrive trouble for him, hitting him left and right, and I will scatter all the teeth out of his jaws on the ground, like a pig caught wasting the corn. Gird yourself up now, so that all these men may know about our fighting. But how are you going to fight a younger man?"

So on the polished threshold in front of the high doors they stirred each other's rage in good earnest. And the strong and mighty Antinous heard the two of them, and broke into a merry laugh and spoke among the suitors:

"Friends, nothing like this has ever happened before: a god has brought sport of this kind into the house. That stranger and Irus are provoking each other to blows. Come, let us set them on quickly."

So he spoke, and they all sprang up laughing and gathered round the tattered beggars. And Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke among them and said:

"Listen to me, proud suitors, and let me say something. There are goats' paunches lying here at the fire, which we set there for supper when we had filled them with fat and blood. Whichever of the two wins and proves himself the better man, let him get up and choose which of these he likes for himself. And besides that, he shall always feast with us, and we will not let any other beggar join our company and beg from us."

So spoke Antinous, and his word pleased them. Then Odysseus of the many tricks spoke among them, with cunning in his mind: "Friends, an old man worn down with trouble has no business fighting a younger one. But my belly, that worker of evil, urges me on, to be beaten down by his blows. But come now, all of you swear me a great oath, that no man will do Irus a favour and deal me a foul blow with a heavy hand, and beat me down for this fellow by force."

So he spoke, and they all swore the oath not to strike him, as he told them. But when they had sworn and finished the oath, the strong young Telemachus spoke among them again:

"Stranger, if your heart and your proud spirit tell you to beat this fellow off, then do not be afraid of any man of the Achaeans, because whoever strikes you will have more than you to fight. I am your host, and the princes agree with me, Antinous and Eurymachus, both men of prudence."

So he spoke, and they all praised his words. But Odysseus girded his rags round his loins and showed his thighs, handsome and big, and his broad shoulders came into view, and his chest and mighty arms. And Athena came near and made the limbs of the shepherd of the people greater. Then all the suitors marvelled exceedingly, and one would say with a glance at his neighbour:

"Irus will very soon be un-Irused, and it will be a ruin of his own bringing, with such a thigh as that old man shows from under his rags."

So they spoke, and the mind of Irus was miserably shaken; but even so the serving men girded him and led him out because they had to, in a state of dread, and the flesh trembled on his limbs. And Antinous scolded him and said to him:

"You would be better off now not living, you braggart, or never having been born, if you quail like this and are so terribly afraid of a man who is old and worn down by the trouble that has come on him. But I tell you outright, and this word will come to pass: if this fellow beats you and proves the better man, I will fling you into a black ship and send you to the mainland, to king Echetus, the maimer of all men, who will cut off your nose and your ears with the pitiless bronze and pull out your vitals and give them raw to the dogs to tear."

So he spoke, and a still greater trembling seized the other man's limbs; and they led him into the ring, and both men put up their hands.

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus was divided in his mind, whether to hit him so that the life should leave him where he fell, or to deal him a light blow and stretch him on the ground. And as he turned it over, this seemed the better course, to deal him a light blow, so that the Achaeans should not take notice of him. So when they had put up their hands, Irus let drive at his right shoulder; but Odysseus hit him on the neck under the ear and crushed in the bones, and the red blood ran out of his mouth at once, and down he fell in the dust with a moan, and gnashed his teeth, kicking the ground with his feet. And the lordly suitors threw up their hands and were nearly dying of laughter.

Then Odysseus took him by the foot and dragged him out through the doorway until he came to the court and the gates of the portico. And he set him down and leaned him against the wall of the court and thrust his staff into his hand and spoke to him with winged words:

"Sit there now and scare off the pigs and dogs, and do not set yourself up as lord over strangers and beggars, miserable as you are, or you may meet with something worse still."

He spoke, and flung his miserable bag round his shoulders, full of holes and slung on a twisted cord; and he went back to the threshold and sat down. And the suitors went in, laughing merrily, and greeted him, saying:

"May Zeus grant you what you want most, stranger, and the other immortal gods, and the dearest wish of your heart, since you have stopped this insatiable fellow from begging in the country. We shall soon take him to the mainland, to king Echetus, the maimer of all men."

So they spoke, and noble Odysseus was glad at the word of omen. And Antinous set the great paunch in front of him, filled with fat and blood; and Amphinomus took two loaves out of the basket and set them in front of him and pledged him in a golden cup and said:

"Greetings, sir stranger; may good fortune be yours in time to come, though at present you are the thrall of many sorrows."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Amphinomus, you seem to me a man of prudence; and your father was such a man too, because I have heard of his good name, that Nisus of Dulichium was brave and wealthy. You are his son, they say, and you seem a man who speaks softly. So I will tell you, and you take heed and listen.

"Earth nurtures nothing feebler than a man, of all the things that breathe and move on the earth. He thinks he will never suffer evil in time to come, as long as the gods give him prosperity and his knees are quick; and when the blessed gods decree him sorrow, he bears that too, badly against his will, with a steady heart. The spirit of men on the earth is just like the day the father of gods and men brings on them. I too was once likely to be prosperous among men, and I did a great many wanton things, giving way to my might and my strength and trusting in my father and my brothers. So let no man ever be lawless at any time, but let him keep in silence whatever gifts the gods give.

"I see the suitors contriving wantonness, wasting the wealth and dishonouring the wife of a man who, I tell you, will not be away from his friends and his own country long; he is very near. And may some god take you home out of here, and may you not meet him when he comes home to his own dear country. Because I do not think the suitors and he will part from one another without bloodshed, once he comes under his own roof."

So he spoke, and poured an offering and drank of the honey-sweet wine, and then gave the cup back into the hands of the marshaller of the people. And Amphinomus went through the hall with a heavy heart, bowing his head; because his spirit foreboded ruin. Yet even so he did not escape his fate: Athena bound him too, to be killed outright at the hands of Telemachus and by his spear. So he sat down again on the chair he had got up from.

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena put it into the heart of the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, to show herself to the suitors, so that she might set their hearts fluttering and win greater honour from her husband and her son than before. Then she laughed a meaningless laugh and said to the nurse:

"Eurynome, my heart longs, though it has never longed before, to show myself to the suitors, hateful as they are. And I would say a word to my son as well that will do him good: that he should not always keep company with the overbearing suitors, who speak him fair and have evil plans afterwards."

Then Eurynome the housekeeper said to her: "Yes, child, all this you have said rightly. Go, then, and tell your son your word and do not hide it. But first wash your body and anoint your face, and do not go as you are, with both cheeks stained with tears. Go; it is a bad thing to grieve for ever without stopping. Your son is of an age now, and it has been your dearest prayer to the immortals to see him a bearded man."

Then wise Penelope answered her again: "Eurynome, do not beguile me like this, in your love for me, telling me to wash my body and anoint myself with oil. The gods who hold Olympus destroyed all the beauty I had on the day my lord went away in the hollow ships. But tell Autonoe and Hippodameia to come to me, so that they can stand by my side in the hall. I will not go among men alone; I am ashamed."

So she spoke, and the old woman went out through the room to bring the women word and tell them to come.

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena thought of something else. She poured sweet sleep over the daughter of Icarius, and she leaned back and slept there on her couch, and all her joints went slack. And meanwhile the beautiful goddess was giving her immortal gifts, so that the Achaeans should marvel at her. First she made her lovely face fair with an ambrosial balm, the kind Cytherea of the fair crown anoints herself with when she goes into the lovely dance of the Graces; and she made her taller too, and statelier to look at, and made her whiter than newly sawn ivory.

Now when she had done this the beautiful goddess went away, and the white-armed women came out of the room, drawing near with the sound of talking. And sweet sleep let Penelope go, and she rubbed her cheeks with her hands and said:

"In my utter wretchedness a soft slumber wrapped me round. I wish pure Artemis would give me a death as soft as that even now, so that I might not go on wasting my life away with sorrow at heart, longing for the many excellences of my dear husband, because he stood out above the Achaeans."

With that she went down from the bright upper room, not alone, because two women went with her. Now when that lovely woman reached the suitors she stood by the doorpost of the well-built hall, holding her shining veil in front of her face, with a faithful maid on either side of her. And the knees of the suitors were loosened at once and their hearts enchanted with love, and every one of them prayed to be the man to lie beside her.

But she spoke to Telemachus, her dear son: "Telemachus, your mind and your thoughts are no longer steady as they used to be. When you were only a child you used to turn more cunning thoughts over in your mind; but now that you are grown and have reached the bounds of manhood, and would be called a rich man's son by anyone from far away who looked only at your height and your looks, your mind and your thoughts are no longer right as they were. What a thing this is that has been done in these halls, that you have let this stranger be maltreated so. What if the stranger, sitting in our house like this, should come to some harm through bad handling? Then shame and disgrace would fall on you among men."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her: "Mother, I do not take it badly that you are angry over this. But I know each thing in my heart and understand it, the good and the bad, whereas before this I was only a child. But I cannot plan everything wisely, because these men here thwart my will, keeping close by me, one on this side and one on that, with evil purpose, and I have nobody to help me. And I can tell you, this fight between the stranger and Irus did not turn out the way the suitors wanted; the stranger proved the better man. Father Zeus, and Athena, and Apollo — I wish the suitors were beaten down like that in our halls even now, and were hanging their heads, some in the court and some inside the hall, and every man's limbs were loosened, the way Irus sits over there now by the gate of the court, hanging his head like a drunken man, and cannot stand upright on his feet or go home wherever it is he goes, because his limbs are loosened."

So they talked to one another. But Eurymachus spoke to Penelope and said: "Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, if all the Achaeans through Iasian Argos could see you, there would be even more suitors feasting in your halls from tomorrow on, because you are ahead of all women in beauty and in stature and in the wise heart inside you."

Then wise Penelope answered him: "Eurymachus, the immortals destroyed every excellence of mine, of beauty and of form, on the day the Argives embarked for Ilios, and my husband Odysseus went with them. If he might only come and watch over this life of mine, my fame would be greater and finer. But now I am in sorrow, so many troubles has some god brought on me.

"When he went out and left his own country, he took my right hand by the wrist and said: 'Wife, I do not think the well-greaved Achaeans will all come back from Troy safe and unhurt. They say the Trojans are men of war, spear-throwers and drawers of the bow and drivers of swift horses, the kind who most quickly decide the great struggle of an equal war. So I do not know whether the god will bring me back, or whether I shall be cut off there in the land of Troy. Have charge of everything here. Remember my father and my mother in the halls as you do now, or more so, while I am far away. And when you see my son a bearded man, marry whom you like and leave your house.'

"That is what he said, and now all of it is coming about. The night will come when a hateful marriage will fall to me, accursed as I am, whose happiness Zeus has taken away. And this has come as a bitter grief to my heart and soul: yours was never the way of suitors before this. Men who want to court a woman of worth, a rich man's daughter, and compete with one another, bring cattle and fine flocks of their own, a banquet for the bride's friends, and give her glorious gifts; they do not eat up somebody else's living without paying for it."

So she spoke, and much-enduring noble Odysseus was glad, because she was drawing gifts out of them and beguiling their souls with gentle words, while her mind was set on something else.

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke to her again and said: "Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, as for gifts, take them, if any man of the Achaeans wants to bring them here; it is not right to refuse a gift. But we shall not go to our lands or anywhere else until you marry whichever of the Achaeans is best."

So spoke Antinous, and his word pleased them, and each man sent a herald to bring his gifts. For Antinous the herald brought a large and beautiful robe, richly embroidered, with golden brooches in it, twelve of them, fitted with curved clasps. And another brought Eurymachus a chain at once, cunningly made of gold and strung with amber beads, bright as the sun. His squires brought Eurydamas a pair of earrings with three clustering drops, and great grace shone from them. And out of the house of lord Peisander, son of Polyctor, his squire brought a necklace, a jewel of extraordinary beauty. So one of the Achaeans brought one fine gift and one another.

And she, that lovely woman, went up to her upper room afterwards, and her women carried the beautiful gifts for her. But the suitors turned to dance and cheerful song, and made merry, and waited for the evening to come on. And as they made merry, the dark evening came on them.

They set up three braziers in the hall at once to give them light, and put dry faggots round them, long seasoned and hard and newly split with the axe; and in the spaces between they set torches. And the women of Odysseus, who endures everything, kindled the flame by turns. Then Odysseus himself, born of Zeus, of the many tricks, spoke among the maids and said:

"Women of Odysseus, who has been gone so long, go to the rooms where your honoured queen is, and twist the yarn beside her and gladden her heart, sitting in the room, or card the wool with your hands. I will give light to all these men. Even if they want to wait for fair-throned Dawn, they will not outlast me; I am a man who can endure a great deal."

So he spoke, and the maids broke into laughter and glanced at one another. And Melantho of the lovely cheeks scolded him shamefully — Melantho, whom Dolius had fathered, but whom Penelope had reared and cherished like her own child and given playthings to whenever she wanted them. Even so she had no sorrow in her heart for Penelope, but loved Eurymachus and used to lie with him. She scolded Odysseus with abusive words:

"Wretched stranger, you are a crack-brained creature, unwilling to go and sleep at a smithy or at a public lodge, but chattering on and on here, unabashed among a crowd of lords, and with no fear in your heart. Wine has certainly mastered your wits, or else your mind is always like this and you babble idly. Are you beside yourself because you beat that vagrant Irus? Take care that a better man than Irus does not stand up against you before long, to beat you about the head with heavy hands and foul you with streams of blood and send you out of the house."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks gave her a black look from under his brows and answered her: "I shall go over there presently, you shameless thing, and tell Telemachus what you say, so that he can cut you limb from limb on the spot."

So he spoke, and with his words scattered the women, who fled through the hall, and the limbs of each of them went slack beneath her in terror, because they thought he spoke the truth.

But Odysseus took his stand by the burning braziers to give light, and looked at all the men; and his heart inside him was turning over other things, which were not to go unfulfilled.

But Athena would not let the proud suitors hold off from bitter outrage at all, so that the pain might sink deeper still into the heart of Odysseus, son of Laertes. So Eurymachus, son of Polybus, began to speak among them, jeering at Odysseus and making sport for his companions:

"Listen to me, suitors of the glorious queen, and let me say what the heart in my breast tells me. This man has not come to the palace of Odysseus without the will of the gods; at any rate there is a glare of torches coming from him — from his head, because there is no hair on it, not a trace."

And with that he called to Odysseus, sacker of cities: "Stranger, would you have a mind to work for hire, if I took you on at an outlying farm — your pay would be assured — gathering stones for walls and planting tall trees? There I would provide you with food the year round and clothe you and give you sandals for your feet. But since you have learned nothing but evil ways, you will not want to busy yourself with work, but would rather go skulking through the country, so that you have something to feed your insatiable belly with."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Eurymachus, I wish the two of us might have a match at working in the spring season, when the long days come, at mowing grass — I with a curved scythe in my hands and you with another like it, and the grass in plenty, so that we might test our work, fasting till late evening. Or I wish there were oxen to drive, the best there are, tawny and big, both of them well fed with grass, of the same age and the same power to bear the yoke, tireless in strength, and a field of four acres, and the soil giving way before the plough: then you would see whether I could cut a straight furrow to the end or not. Or I wish the son of Cronos might bring war on us today from wherever he liked, and I had a shield and two spears and a bronze helmet that fitted my temples well: then you would see me mixing among the front-rank fighters, and you would not prate and taunt me about this belly of mine.

"But you are thoroughly insolent, and your heart is cruel, and you think yourself some great and mighty man because you keep company with a few weak ones. If Odysseus could come back and reach his own country, those doors over there, wide as they are, would prove far too narrow for you as you fled out through the doorway."

So he spoke, and Eurymachus grew angrier still at heart, and gave him a black look from under his brows and spoke winged words to him: "Wretch, I will do you harm presently, for prating like this, unabashed among a crowd of lords, and with no fear in your heart. Wine has certainly mastered your wits, or else your mind is always like this and you babble idly. Are you beside yourself because you beat that vagrant Irus?"

With that he seized a footstool; but Odysseus sat down at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium, in fear of Eurymachus. And so Eurymachus struck a cup-bearer on the right hand, and the wine-jug fell to the ground with a clang, and the boy groaned and fell backwards in the dust.

Then the suitors broke into uproar through the shadowy halls, and one man would say with a glance at his neighbour: "I wish that stranger had died somewhere else in his wanderings before he came here; then he would never have brought all this tumult among us. As it is we are brawling about beggars, and there will be no pleasure in our rich feast, since worse things are winning."

Then the strong young Telemachus spoke among them: "Strange sirs, you are mad, and you no longer hide that you have eaten and drunk; some god must be moving you. Now that you have feasted well, go home and rest, when your spirits tell you to. I drive nobody out."

So he spoke, and they all bit their lips and marvelled at Telemachus, that he spoke so boldly. Then Amphinomus spoke to them — he was the son of the noble prince Nisus, son of Aretias:

"Friends, no man should grow angry at what has been fairly said and answer with quarrelling words. Do not abuse this stranger any more, or any of the slaves in the house of godlike Odysseus. Come, let the bearer pour drops into the cups for an offering, so that we can pour our offerings and go home to rest. And as for this stranger, let us leave him in the halls of Odysseus to be looked after by Telemachus; it is to his house that he has come."

So he spoke, and the words he said pleased them all. Then a bowl was mixed for them by lord Mulius, a herald from Dulichium, who was squire to Amphinomus; and he served it out to all of them, coming up to each in turn. And they poured offerings to the blessed gods and drank the honey-sweet wine. And when they had poured their offerings and drunk as much as they wanted, they went off, each man to his own house, to rest.
