Book Nineteen

So noble Odysseus was left behind in the hall, planning the killing of the suitors with Athena's help; and at once he spoke winged words to Telemachus:

"Telemachus, you must lay the weapons of war away inside, every one of them; and when the suitors miss them and question you, beguile them with gentle words, and say: 'I have put them away out of the smoke, since they are no longer like the ones Odysseus left behind him when he went off to Troy, but are all fouled as far as the breath of the fire has reached them. And a god has put this greater fear in my heart besides: that when you are heated with wine you may start a quarrel among yourselves and wound one another, and so bring shame on your feasting and your courting. Iron draws a man to it of itself.'"

So he spoke, and Telemachus did as his dear father said, and called the nurse Eurycleia and said to her: "Nurse, shut the women up in their rooms, I tell you, while I lay away my father's weapons in the store-room — the fine weapons which lie uncared-for and dulled by the smoke in the hall, since my father went away and I was still a child. Now I mean to lay them away where the breath of the fire will not reach them."

Then his dear nurse Eurycleia answered him: "Yes, child, I wish you would always take thought to look after the house and guard all its wealth. But come, who is to fetch a light and carry it for you, since you would not let the maids go in front of you, who could have given light?"

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her: "This stranger here. I will let no man be idle who touches my portion of meal, even if he has come from far away."

So he spoke, and her word stayed unwinged, and she locked the doors of the stately hall.

Then the two of them sprang up, Odysseus and his glorious son, and set about carrying in the helmets and the bossy shields and the sharp-pointed spears; and Pallas Athena went in front of them carrying a golden lamp and made a most beautiful light. Then Telemachus suddenly said to his father:

"Father, this is a great marvel that my eyes are looking at. The walls of the house and the fine beams and cross-beams of fir and the pillars that reach up high glow before my eyes as if with the light of a blazing fire. Some god must be inside, one of those who hold the wide sky."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Hush, hold back your thought and ask no question. This is the way of the gods who hold Olympus. Go and rest, and I will stay behind here, so that I can stir up the minds of the maids and of your mother still more; and she will ask me about each thing separately, weeping."

So he spoke, and Telemachus went out through the hall by the light of blazing torches, to go to his room and lie down where he always used to rest when sweet sleep came on him. He lay down there now too, and waited for the bright Dawn.

But noble Odysseus was left behind in the hall, planning the killing of the suitors with Athena's help.

Then wise Penelope came out of her room, like Artemis or golden Aphrodite; and they set a chair for her by the fire where she always sat, inlaid with spirals of ivory and silver, which the craftsman Icmalius had made long ago, and had set a footstool below it for the feet, which was part of the chair, and a great fleece used to be laid on it. Wise Penelope sat down on this, and the white-armed maids came out of the women's hall. They set about taking away the plentiful food and the tables and the cups the lordly men had been drinking from, and they threw the embers out of the braziers onto the floor and piled fresh logs on the braziers in plenty, to give light and warmth.

But Melantho started scolding Odysseus a second time: "Stranger, are you still going to be a plague to us through the night, roaming through the house and spying on the women? Get out, you wretch, and be content with your supper, or you will be struck with a torch and go out that way."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks gave her a black look from under his brows and answered her: "My good woman, why do you attack me like this with an angry heart? Is it because I am filthy and wear mean clothes on my body and beg through the country? Necessity drives me to it. That is what beggars and vagabonds are like. I too once lived in a house of my own among men, a rich man in a wealthy house, and often gave gifts to a wanderer, whoever he was and with whatever need he came. And I had slaves past counting and everything else in plenty, the things by which men live well and are reputed wealthy. But Zeus, son of Cronos, brought it all to nothing; that must have been his pleasure.

"So take care, woman, that you do not lose one day all the glory that puts you above the other women now; in case your mistress grows angry and is furious with you, or Odysseus comes home — because there is still room for hope. And if he is dead, as it seems, and is never to come back, then his son is by now such a man, by the favour of Apollo, as he was — Telemachus. It does not escape him if any of the women in the halls behaves wantonly; he is no longer the child he was."

So he spoke, and wise Penelope heard him; and she rebuked the maid and said to her: "You bold and shameless thing, be sure your outrageous behaviour is not hidden from me at all, and you shall wipe out the stain of it with your own head. You knew perfectly well, because you heard it from my own lips, that I meant to question the stranger in my halls about my husband; because I am in bitter distress."

And with that she spoke to Eurynome the housekeeper, and said: "Eurynome, bring a chair here and a fleece on it, so that the stranger can sit down and tell his tale and listen to me; I want to ask him about everything."

So she spoke, and Eurynome quickly brought a polished chair and set it in place, and threw a fleece on it. Then much-enduring noble Odysseus sat down on it, and wise Penelope spoke first:

"Stranger, this is the question I will ask you first myself. Who are you among men, and where from? Where is your city, and where are your parents?"

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Lady, nobody of all the mortals on the boundless earth could find fault with you; your fame goes up to the wide sky, like the fame of some blameless king who, with the fear of the gods in his heart, is lord over many strong men and upholds justice; and the black earth bears wheat and barley, and the trees are loaded with fruit, and the flocks bring forth young without stopping, and the sea yields fish, all from his good leading, and the people prosper under him. So question me now in your house about anything else, but do not ask about my family and my own country, in case you fill my heart with still more pain as I think of it; I am a man of many sorrows. And besides, it is not fitting that I should sit weeping and wailing in another man's house; it is a bad thing to grieve for ever without stopping. I would not have one of your maids, or you yourself, vexed with me and saying that I swim in tears because my mind is heavy with wine."

Then wise Penelope answered him: "Stranger, the immortals destroyed every excellence of mine, of beauty and of form, on the day the Argives embarked for Ilios and my husband Odysseus went with them. If he might only come and watch over this life of mine, my fame would be greater and finer. But now I am in sorrow, so many troubles has some god brought on me. All the princes who hold sway over the islands — Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus — and those who live round about in clear-seen Ithaca itself, all of them court me against my will and lay my house waste. So I take no notice of strangers, or of suppliants, or of heralds at all, whose trade is a public one; but I waste my heart away longing for Odysseus.

"So these men press on my marriage, and I wind a skein of tricks. First some god breathed the thought into my heart to set up a great web in my halls and start weaving a robe — fine in the thread and very wide; and I said to them at once: 'Young men, my suitors, since noble Odysseus is dead, be patient about marrying me, however eager you are, until I finish this robe. I do not want my spinning to be wasted. It is a shroud for lord Laertes, for the time when the cruel fate of death lays him low, so that none of the Achaean women in the country can be angry with me for letting a man who won so much lie without a shroud.'

"That is what I said, and their proud hearts agreed. And then day by day I would weave at the great web, and by night I would unravel it, when I had had torches set beside me. So for three years I kept the Achaeans from finding out, and fooled them; but when the fourth year came, as the seasons rolled on, as the months waned and the many days came round in their course, then with the help of my maids, shameless and reckless creatures, they came on me and caught me, and abused me loudly. So I finished the web because I had to, against my will.

"And now I cannot escape the marriage, and I cannot think of any other plan, and my parents are pressing me to marry, and my son frets while these men eat up his living, and he takes note of it all; because he is a man by now, and quite able to look after a household to which Zeus grants honour. But even so, tell me about your stock and where you come from; you were not born from an oak of the old story, or from a stone."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Honoured wife of Odysseus, son of Laertes, will you never stop asking me about my family? Well, I will tell you, though you will give me over to still more pain than I am held in now; because that is always how it is, when a man has been away from his country as long as I have now, wandering through the many cities of men in bitter distress. But even so I will tell you what you ask and enquire about.

"There is a land called Crete, in the middle of the wine-dark sea, a fine rich land, girt about with water, and there are a great many men in it, past counting, and ninety cities. They do not all have the same speech, but their tongues are mixed. There are Achaeans there, and great-hearted native Cretans, and Cydonians, and Dorians with waving plumes, and fine Pelasgians. Among their cities is the great city of Cnosus, where Minos was king from nine years old, who held converse with great Zeus, and was the father of my father, great-hearted Deucalion. Deucalion fathered me and prince Idomeneus. Idomeneus had gone off in his beaked ships to Ilios with the sons of Atreus; and my own famous name is Aethon. I was the younger by birth, and he was the elder and the better man.

"It was there that I saw Odysseus and gave him guest-gifts. The force of the wind had brought him to Crete too, as he was making for the land of Troy, and drove him off his course past Malea. So he anchored his ships at Amnisus, where the cave of Eilithyia is, in a difficult harbour, and he only just escaped the storm. Then he went up to the city at once and asked for Idomeneus, because he said he was his friend, loved and honoured. But it was the tenth or the eleventh dawn since Idomeneus had gone in his beaked ships to Ilios. So I took him to the house and gave him hospitality with a kindly welcome out of the rich store that was in the house; and to the rest of his companions who came with him I gathered barley meal and flaming wine and bulls for sacrifice out of the public store and gave it out, so that their hearts should be satisfied. There the good Achaeans stayed twelve days, because the strong north wind penned them there and would not let them stand on their feet on the land; some angry god had roused it. But on the thirteenth day the wind dropped and they put to sea."

He spoke, and made the many falsehoods of his tale seem like the truth; and as she listened her tears flowed and her face melted, as the snow melts on the high mountains, the snow which the east wind thaws when the west wind has strewn it, and as it melts the streams of the rivers run full: so her lovely cheeks melted as she wept and mourned for her husband, who was sitting beside her even then. And Odysseus pitied his weeping wife in his heart, but his eyes stood fixed between his lids as though they were horn or iron, and he hid his tears with guile.

But she, when she had had her fill of tearful wailing, answered him again and said: "Now, stranger, I mean to test you, and see whether you really did entertain my husband there in your halls with his godlike companions, as you say. Tell me what kind of clothes he wore on his body, and what kind of man he was himself; and tell me about the companions who went with him."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Lady, it is hard for a man who has been away so long to tell you this; it is the twentieth year now since he went away and left my country. But I will tell you as my mind pictures him. Noble Odysseus wore a fleecy purple cloak, a cloak of double fold; and the brooch on it was made of gold with double clasps, and on the front it was curiously worked: a hound held a dappled fawn in his forepaws and pinned it in his jaws as it writhed. And everyone marvelled at it, how, gold as they were, the hound was pinning the fawn and strangling it and the fawn was writhing with its feet and struggling to get away. And I noticed the tunic on his body, all shining like the sheen on the skin of a dried onion, it was so soft; and it glistened like the sun. A great many women gazed at him in wonder.

"And there is another thing I will tell you, and you must take it to heart. I do not know whether Odysseus was dressed like that at home, or whether one of his companions gave him the clothes when he went aboard the fast ship, or perhaps even some stranger; because Odysseus was dear to a great many men, and few of the Achaeans were his equal. I gave him a bronze sword myself, and a fine purple cloak of double fold and a fringed tunic, and sent him off on his benched ship with every honour. And a herald attended him, a little older than he was, and I will tell you about him too, what kind of man he was. He was round-shouldered, dark of skin, and curly-haired, and his name was Eurybates; and Odysseus honoured him above his other companions, because he was of one mind with him."

So he spoke, and roused in her still more the desire to weep, as she recognised the sure tokens that Odysseus told her of. But when she had had her fill of tearful wailing she answered him and said:

"Now, stranger, though you were pitied before, you shall be dear and honoured in my halls; because it was I who gave him those clothes, since you describe them so, and folded them and brought them out of the store-room, and added the shining brooch to be a joy to him. But my husband I shall never welcome back, coming home to his own dear country. So it was with an evil fate that Odysseus went off in the hollow ship to see evil Ilios, that should never be named."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Honoured wife of Odysseus, son of Laertes, do not spoil your lovely face any more now, and do not waste your heart at all in weeping for your husband. I count it no blame in you; any woman weeps when she has lost the husband she married, to whom she has borne children in her love, even if he were a very different man from Odysseus, who they say is like the gods. But stop weeping and listen to me; I will tell you the sure truth and hide nothing.

"I heard only lately of the homecoming of Odysseus, that he is near at hand in the rich land of the Thesprotians, and alive, and is bringing many rich treasures with him, begging through the country. But he lost his trusty companions and his hollow ship on the wine-dark sea, as he was travelling from the island of Thrinacia; because Zeus and Helios grew angry with him, since his companions had killed the cattle of Helios. So they all died in the surging sea; but he was flung out by the wave on the keel of his ship onto the shore, onto the land of the Phaeacians, who are close kin to the gods. They honoured him heartily as if he were a god, and gave him many gifts, and wanted to send him home unhurt themselves. And Odysseus would have been here long ago, only it seemed to his mind more profitable to gather wealth by roaming over the wide earth; so truly does Odysseus know more gainful ways than any mortal man, and no other mortal could compete with him.

"That is the tale Pheidon, king of the Thesprotians, told me. And he swore in my own presence, as he poured offerings in his halls, that the ship was launched and the men ready who were to convey him to his own dear country. But he sent me off first, because a ship of the Thesprotians happened to be setting out for Dulichium, rich in wheat. And he showed me all the treasure Odysseus had gathered; it would feed his children after him to the tenth generation, so great was the wealth lying stored for him in the king's halls. But Odysseus, he said, had gone to Dodona to hear the will of Zeus from the high-crested oak of the god, and how he might come back to his own dear country after so long an absence, openly or in secret.

"So, as I tell you, he is safe and will come soon; he is very near, and he will not be far from his friends and his own country much longer. And I will give you an oath on it. Let Zeus be my witness first, the highest and best of gods, and the hearth of noble Odysseus that I have come to, that all this will happen exactly as I tell you. In the course of this very month Odysseus will come here, as the old moon wanes and the new appears."

Then wise Penelope answered him: "Stranger, I wish this word of yours might be fulfilled. Then you would soon know kindness and many a gift from me, so that anyone who met you would call you a lucky man. But my heart forebodes how it will be: Odysseus will never come home any more, and you will not get a convoy from here, since there are no masters in the house now such as Odysseus was among men — as surely as there ever was such a man — to send strangers who deserve respect on their way, and to welcome them.

"But still, my maids, wash the stranger's feet and make his bed ready — a bedstead and cloaks and bright coverlets — so that he may come to golden-throned Dawn in warmth and comfort. And early in the morning bathe him and rub him with oil, so that he can think about his food in our house, sitting in the hall beside Telemachus. And it will be the worse for any man among them who vexes this man's soul with pain; he shall accomplish nothing here afterwards, however fierce his anger. Because how are you to learn about me, stranger, whether I am at all ahead of other women in wit and prudent counsel, if you sit at meat in my halls all unkempt and in poor clothes? Men are short-lived. If a man is hard himself and has a hard heart, all mortal men call down troubles on him for the time to come, while he is still alive, and when he is dead they all mock him. But if a man is blameless and has a blameless heart, strangers carry his fame far and wide among all men, and a great many call him a true man."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Honoured wife of Odysseus, son of Laertes, cloaks and bright coverlets became hateful to me on the day I first left the snowy mountains of Crete behind me, travelling on my long-oared ship. I will lie down as I used to rest through sleepless nights in the past; because I have lain many a night on a foul bed and waited for bright-throned Dawn. And baths for the feet give my heart no pleasure either, and no woman shall touch my foot of all those who are serving-women in your hall — unless there is some old true-hearted woman who has suffered as many troubles in her heart as I have; her I would not grudge to touch my feet."

Then wise Penelope answered him again: "Dear stranger, no man as discreet as you, of all the strangers from far away, has ever come to my house as a more welcome guest, so wise and prudent is everything you say. I have an old woman with an understanding heart in her breast, who lovingly nursed and cherished my unlucky husband and took him in her arms on the day his mother bore him. She shall wash your feet, weak with age as she is. Come, wise Eurycleia, get up and wash the feet of a man of the same age as your master. The feet of Odysseus are probably like his now, and his hands too; men grow old quickly in bad fortune."

So she spoke, and the old woman hid her face in her hands and let the hot tears fall, saying words of lamentation: "Oh, my grief for you, child, and I can do nothing. Zeus must have hated you above all men, though you had a god-fearing heart. No mortal ever burned so many fat thigh-pieces to Zeus who hurls the thunderbolt, or so many choice hecatombs, as you gave him, praying that you might reach a sleek old age and rear your glorious son. And now from you alone he has wholly cut off the day of homecoming.

"So women mocked at him too, I suppose, in a strange and distant land, when he came to some man's glorious house, as all these shameless creatures here mock at you. It is to avoid their insults and their many taunts that you will not let them wash your feet; and the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, has told me to do it, and I am not unwilling. So I will wash your feet, both for Penelope's own sake and for yours, because the heart in me is stirred with sorrow. But listen to what I say. Many hard-tried strangers have come here, but I declare I have never yet seen any man so like another as you are like Odysseus, in build and in voice and in your feet."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Old woman, that is what everyone says who has seen the two of us, that we are very like each other, just as you notice and say yourself."

So he spoke, and the old woman took the shining cauldron with the water she was about to wash his feet with, and poured in cold water in plenty and then added the warm. But Odysseus sat down away from the hearth and turned himself at once towards the dark, because he suddenly had a foreboding in his heart that as she handled him she might notice a scar, and the truth would come out.

So she came near and began to wash her lord, and knew the scar of the wound at once, which a boar had dealt him long ago with his white tusk, when Odysseus had gone to Parnassus to visit Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus, his mother's noble father, who was better than any man at thieving and at oaths. It was a god himself who had given him that skill, Hermes; because he used to burn acceptable sacrifices to him of the thighs of lambs and kids, and Hermes befriended him with a ready heart.

Now Autolycus, coming once to the rich land of Ithaca, had found his daughter's son a new-born baby; and when he was finishing his supper Eurycleia laid the child on his knees and said to him: "Autolycus, find a name yourself to give to your child's own child; he has been prayed for a long time."

Then Autolycus answered her and said: "My daughter's husband, and my daughter — give him whatever name I say. Since I have come here as a man who has been angry with a great many, both men and women, over the fruitful earth, let the name the child is named by be Odysseus. And when he is grown and comes to the great house of his mother's kin at Parnassus, where my possessions are, I will give him some of them and send him back rejoicing."

That was why Odysseus had come, so that Autolycus might give him the glorious gifts. And Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus took his hands in welcome and greeted him with gentle words, and Amphithea, his mother's mother, took Odysseus in her arms and kissed his head and both his beautiful eyes. And Autolycus called to his glorious sons to get the meal ready, and they did as he called. At once they led in a bull, five years old, and flayed it and dressed it and cut up all the limbs; and then they sliced them cunningly and pierced them with spits and roasted them skilfully and shared out the portions. So all day long until sunset they feasted, and their hearts lacked nothing of the equal feast. But when the sun set and the dark came on they lay down to rest and took the gift of sleep.

And as soon as the early dawn appeared, rosy-fingered, they went out to the hunt, the hounds and the sons of Autolycus, and noble Odysseus went with them. They climbed the steep mountain Parnassus, clothed with forests, and soon reached its windy hollows. The sun was just striking on the fields, rising from the softly-gliding, deep-flowing Oceanus, when the beaters came to a glade. The hounds went in front of them, tracking the scent, and behind them the sons of Autolycus, and noble Odysseus among them, following close on the hounds, brandishing his long spear.

Now a great wild boar was lying there in a thick lair, through which the strength of the wet winds could never blow, and the rays of the bright sun could not beat, and the rain could not get through, it was so thick; and fallen leaves were in it in plenty. And the noise of the feet of men and dogs came round the boar as they pressed on in the chase, and he came out of his lair against them with his back bristling and his eyes flashing fire, and stood there at bay close in front of them.

Then Odysseus rushed on first of all, holding his long spear high in his strong hand, eager to strike him; but the boar was too quick for him and struck him above the knee, charging at him sideways, and tore a long gash in the flesh with his tusk, but did not reach the man's bone. But Odysseus struck him with sure aim on the right shoulder, and the point of the bright spear went clean through, and the boar fell in the dust with a cry, and his life flew from him.

Then the dear sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the carcase, and bound up the wound of noble godlike Odysseus skilfully, and checked the black blood with a charm, and went back at once to their dear father's house. And when Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus had fully healed him and given him glorious gifts, they sent him back quickly and with joy to his own country, to Ithaca. And his father and his honoured mother rejoiced at his coming, and asked him the whole story, how he got his wound; and he told them the whole truth, how a boar had struck him with his white tusk while he was hunting, when he had gone to Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus.

This scar the old woman knew by the touch when she had taken the limb in the flat of her hands, and she let the foot go. The leg fell into the basin and the bronze vessel rang; it tilted over, and the water was spilled on the ground. Then joy and grief came on her soul in one moment, and both her eyes filled with tears and the flow of her voice was checked. And she touched the chin of Odysseus and said:

"You are Odysseus, dear child, and I did not know you, until I had handled all the body of my lord."

She spoke, and looked towards Penelope with her eyes, wanting to show her that her dear husband was at home. But Penelope could not meet her glance or understand, because Athena had turned her thoughts aside. But Odysseus felt for the woman's throat and seized it with his right hand, and with the other drew her closer to him and said:

"Mother, why do you want to destroy me? You nursed me yourself at this breast of yours, and now after many hard labours I have come in the twentieth year to my own country. But since you have found me out, and a god has put this in your heart, be silent, in case anyone else in the halls learns of it. Because I will tell you outright, and it will happen: if a god beats the lordly suitors down for me, I will not spare you, my nurse though you are, when I kill the other serving-women in my halls."

Then wise Eurycleia answered him: "My child, what a thing to let past your teeth. You know how firm my spirit is, and unyielding; I shall be as close as hard stone or iron. And there is another thing I will tell you, and you must take it to heart. If a god beats the lordly suitors down for you, then I will name over the women in your halls for you, which of them dishonour you and which are innocent."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Mother, why should you speak of them? There is no need at all. I shall mark them well myself and come to know each one. Keep the matter to yourself, and leave the outcome to the gods."

So he spoke, and the old woman went out through the hall to bring water for his feet, because all the first lot was spilled. And when she had washed him and rubbed him richly with oil, Odysseus drew his chair nearer the fire again to warm himself, and hid the scar with his rags.

Then wise Penelope was the first to speak: "Stranger, there is this one small thing more I will ask you myself, because it will soon be the hour for pleasant rest, for anyone at least who can have sweet sleep come over him for all his care. But a god has given me sorrow beyond all measure. Day by day I find my joy in mourning and lamenting while I look to my household tasks and my women's in the house; but when night comes and sleep takes hold of everyone, I lie on my bed, and sharp cares crowd close about my throbbing heart and disquiet me as I mourn.

"As when the daughter of Pandareus, the nightingale of the greenwood, sings sweetly when spring is newly come, perched among the thick leaves of the trees, and pours out her rich voice in many trilling notes, wailing for her child, dear Itylus, whom she once killed with the sword without knowing it, Itylus, the son of king Zethus — so my heart sways to and fro in doubt, whether to stay with my son and keep everything safe, my possessions, my slaves, and my great high-roofed house, respecting my husband's bed and the voice of the people, or to go now with whichever of the Achaeans is best, who courts me in the halls and offers bride-gifts past counting. And my son, as long as he was a child and slack of wit, would not let me marry and leave my husband's house; but now that he is grown and has reached the bounds of manhood, he even begs me to go away out of these halls, because he is vexed for his substance, which the Achaeans eat up at his cost.

"But listen to this dream of mine and interpret it for me. I have twenty geese in the house that come out of the water and eat wheat, and my heart warms with joy as I watch them. But a great eagle with a crooked beak came down from the mountain and broke all their necks and killed them; and they lay strewn in a heap in the halls, while he was carried up to the bright sky. And I wept and wailed, dream as it was, and the fair-haired Achaean women crowded round me while I grieved pitifully, because the eagle had killed my geese.

"Then back he came and perched on a projecting roof-beam, and checked my weeping with the voice of a mortal man, and said: 'Take heart, daughter of far-famed Icarius. This is no dream, but a true vision of good which will really be fulfilled. The geese are the suitors, and I, who was the eagle before, have now come back as your husband, and I will let loose a cruel doom on all the suitors.'

"So he spoke, and sweet sleep let me go; and looking about I saw the geese in the halls, feeding on wheat beside the trough, where they always used to feed."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Lady, there is no way of twisting this dream aside and giving it another meaning, since Odysseus himself has shown you how he will bring it about. The destruction of the suitors is plain to see, for every one of them; not one of them will escape death and the fates."

Then wise Penelope answered him again: "Stranger, dreams are baffling and unclear of meaning, and they are not fulfilled in everything for men. There are two gates of shadowy dreams: one is made of horn and one of ivory. Those dreams that come through the gate of sawn ivory deceive men, bringing words that are never fulfilled; but those that come out through the gate of polished horn bring true things to pass, when any mortal sees them. But I do not think my strange dream came from there. It would have been welcome to me if it had, and to my son.

"But there is another thing I will tell you, and you must take it to heart. This morning of evil name is coming now which is to cut me off from the house of Odysseus; because now I shall set as a contest those axes which he used to set up in a line in his halls, like the props of a ship that is building, twelve in all; and he would stand a long way off and shoot an arrow through them. Now I shall set this contest before the suitors: whoever most easily strings the bow in his hands and shoots an arrow through all twelve axes, with him I will go, and leave this house of my marriage, a house most beautiful and full of livelihood, which I think I shall remember even in my dreams."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Honoured wife of Odysseus, son of Laertes, do not put off this contest in your halls any longer; because I tell you Odysseus of the many tricks will be here before these men, handling this polished bow, have strung it and shot an arrow through the iron."

Then wise Penelope answered him: "If you would only be willing to sit here in my halls and give me pleasure, stranger, sleep would never be shed over my eyelids. But it is not possible for men to be sleepless for ever; the immortals have appointed a proper time for everything on the earth, the giver of grain. But I will go up to my upper room and lie on my bed, which has become a bed of wailing for me, always wet with my tears, since the day Odysseus went to see evil Ilios, that should never be named. I will lie down there; and you lie down here in the hall, when you have strewn bedding on the floor, or let the maids set a bedstead for you."

With that she went up to her bright upper room, not alone, because her women went with her too. And when she had gone up to her upper room with her women, she wept for Odysseus, her dear husband, until grey-eyed Athena put sweet sleep on her eyelids.
