Book Twenty

But noble Odysseus lay down to sleep in the front hall of the house. He spread an undressed ox-hide on the ground and many fleeces of sheep over it, from the sheep the Achaeans kept killing; and Eurynome threw a cloak over him when he had lain down. There Odysseus lay sleepless, turning over evil for the suitors in his heart.

And the women came out of the hall, the ones who had been in the habit of sleeping with the suitors, laughing and joking among themselves. And the heart was stirred in his breast, and he debated a great deal in his mind and heart, whether to rush after them and deal death to each of them, or to let them lie with the insolent suitors for the last and latest time; and his heart growled inside him. As a bitch stands over her tender puppies growling when she sees a man she does not know, and is eager to fight, so his heart growled inside him in his anger at their evil doings. But he struck his breast and rebuked his heart:

"Endure, my heart. You endured a worse thing than this once, on the day the Cyclops, with no check on his daring, devoured my mighty companions; and you endured until cunning got you out of the cave where you thought you were going to die."

So he spoke, chiding the heart in his breast; and his heart stayed bound inside him and endured steadily. But he himself lay tossing this way and that. As a man before a great blazing fire turns a paunch full of fat and blood swiftly this way and that, very eager to have it roasted quickly, so Odysseus tossed from side to side, turning over how he might lay his hands on the shameless suitors, one man as he was against so many.

Then Athena came down from heaven and drew near to him in the likeness of a woman, and stood over his head and said to him: "Why are you awake again, unluckiest of all men? This is your house, and your wife is inside it, and your child, the kind of man anybody might pray to have for a son."

And Odysseus of the many tricks answered her and said: "Goddess, all this you have said rightly. But the heart in my breast is turning over how I may lay my hands on the shameless suitors, all alone as I am, while they stay in the house always in a body. And besides that I turn this other and harder thing over in my mind: even if I killed them by the will of Zeus and of yourself, where should I then find any escape from ruin? I ask you to think about that."

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athena answered him: "Obstinate man, a great many people trust even in a weaker friend than I am, one who is mortal and does not know such wisdom as mine. But I am a god, who guard you to the end in all your labours. And I will tell you openly: if fifty companies of mortal men stood round us, eager to kill us in battle, you would drive off their cattle and their fine sheep even then. Let sleep come over you now. There is weariness in keeping awake on watch the whole night through as well; and you are going to come out of your dangers now."

So she spoke, and poured sleep over his eyelids; and the beautiful goddess went back to Olympus herself.

Now while sleep took hold of him, loosening the cares of his heart, sleep that loosens the limbs of men, his true-hearted wife woke and wept, sitting up on her soft bed. And when her heart had had its fill of weeping, she first of all made her prayer to Artemis, that lovely woman:

"Artemis, mighty goddess, daughter of Zeus, I wish you would fix your arrow in my breast and take my life away this very hour; or that a storm wind would catch me up and carry me off over the murky ways and throw me out at the mouth of backward-flowing Oceanus, as the storm winds once carried off the daughters of Pandareus. The gods had killed their parents, and they were left orphans in the halls; and beautiful Aphrodite tended them with cheese and sweet honey and pleasant wine, and Hera gave them beauty and wisdom above all women, and chaste Artemis gave them stature, and Athena taught them skill in famous handiwork. But while beautiful Aphrodite was going to high Olympus to ask for the girls the accomplishment of a joyful marriage — going to Zeus who hurls the thunderbolt, because he knows everything well, both the happiness and the unhappiness of mortal men — meanwhile the spirits of the storm snatched the girls away and gave them to the hateful Erinyes to deal with.

"I wish those who live on Olympus would blot me out of sight like that, or that fair-haired Artemis would strike me, so that I might go down under the hateful earth with Odysseus before my mind, and never gladden the heart of a lesser man in any way. Yet when a man weeps by day with a heart in bitter distress, and sleep holds him at night, it brings an evil with it that can be borne — because sleep makes one forget everything, the good and the bad, once it wraps the eyelids. But on me a god sends evil dreams as well. This night again one lay beside me who was like him, just as he was when he went out with the army, and my heart was glad, because I thought it was no dream but the truth at last."

So she spoke, and golden-throned Dawn came at once. But noble Odysseus heard her voice as she wept, and thought about it, and it seemed to his heart that she knew him and was standing by his head. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces he had been lying on and laid them on a chair in the hall, and carried the ox-hide out of doors and set it down; and he lifted up his hands and prayed to Zeus:

"Father Zeus, if you gods have brought me over land and sea to my own country of your goodwill, when you had afflicted me badly, let one of those who are waking speak a word of omen for me inside, and let a sign from Zeus be shown outside besides."

So he spoke in prayer, and Zeus the counsellor heard him. At once he thundered from gleaming Olympus, high up out of the clouds; and noble Odysseus was glad.

And a woman grinding at the mill spoke a word of omen from inside the house close by, where the mills of the shepherd of the people were set. Twelve women in all used to work at these mills, making meal of barley and of wheat, the marrow of men. The others were sleeping, because they had ground their wheat; but she alone had not finished yet, because she was the weakest of them all. She stopped her mill now and spoke a word, a sign for her master:

"Father Zeus, who are lord over gods and men, you have thundered loud from the starry sky, and there is not a cloud anywhere: this must be a sign you are showing to somebody. Fulfil for me too, wretched as I am, the word I shall speak. May the suitors hold their glad feast in the halls of Odysseus today for the last and latest time. They have loosened my limbs with bitter labour, making them barley meal; may this be the last supper they eat."

So she spoke, and noble Odysseus was glad at the word of omen and at the thunder of Zeus, because he thought he had got his revenge on the guilty.

Now the other maids in the fine palace of Odysseus had gathered and were kindling an unwearied fire on the hearth. And Telemachus got up from his bed, a godlike man, and put on his clothes. He slung his sharp sword over his shoulder and bound the fine sandals under his shining feet and took his mighty spear, tipped with sharp bronze, and went and stood on the threshold, and said to Eurycleia:

"Dear nurse, have you honoured the stranger in our house with a bed and food, or does he lie all uncared for? That is my mother's way, wise as she is: she honours one mortal man extraordinarily, though he is the worse man, and sends the better away without honour."

Then wise Eurycleia answered him: "You should not blame her in this, child; she is blameless. He sat here and drank wine as long as he wanted; and as for food, he said he had no more hunger, because she asked him. And when he thought about rest and sleep she told the maids to strew his bed. But he, like a man wholly wretched and unlucky, would not sleep on a bed and under blankets, but slept in the front hall on an undressed ox-hide and fleeces of sheep, and we flung a cloak over him."

So she spoke, and Telemachus went out through the hall with his spear in his hand, and two swift hounds went with him. And he went off to the meeting place to join the company of the well-greaved Achaeans.

But Eurycleia, that good lady, daughter of Ops, son of Peisenor, called to her maids: "Come, some of you sweep the hall busily and sprinkle it, and throw purple coverlets over the shapely chairs; and let others wipe all the tables with sponges and clean the mixing-bowls and the well-made double cups; and let others go to the spring for water and bring it here quickly. The suitors will not be away from the hall long, but will come back very early; it is a feast-day for everyone."

So she spoke, and they listened readily and obeyed. Twenty of them went to the spring of dark water, and the others busied themselves in the house there, skilfully. Then the serving-men of the Achaeans came in, and split logs of wood well and skilfully; and the women came back from the spring.

After them came the swineherd, driving three boars, the best in all his herd. He left them to feed in the fine courtyards, and spoke to Odysseus himself with gentle words: "Stranger, do the Achaeans look on you with any more regard, or do they dishonour you in the halls as before?"

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Eumaeus, I wish the gods might take vengeance for the outrage these men contrive in their wantonness, in another man's house, wicked folly, with no room in them for shame."

So they talked to one another. And Melanthius the goatherd came near them, leading she-goats that were the best in all the herds, to make a feast for the suitors, and two herdsmen followed with him. He tethered the goats under the echoing portico and spoke to Odysseus himself with taunting words:

"Stranger, are you still going to be a plague to us here in the hall, asking alms of men, and will you not be gone? I think the two of us will not part company until we taste each other's fists; your begging is not decent in any way. And there are feasts of the Achaeans in other places besides this one."

So he spoke, but Odysseus of the many tricks made no answer; he only shook his head in silence, turning evil over in the depths of his heart.

Besides these a third man came, Philoetius, a leader of men, driving a barren heifer and fat she-goats for the suitors. They had been brought over from the mainland by ferrymen, who send other men on their way too, whoever comes to them. He tethered the beasts carefully under the echoing portico, and came close to the swineherd and questioned him:

"Who is this stranger, swineherd, who has just come to our house? What men does he say he is sprung from? Where are his kinsmen and his native fields? Unlucky man — and yet in build he is like a royal prince. But the gods bring far-wandering men to misery whenever they spin the threads of trouble for them, even if they are kings."

And with that he came up to Odysseus and held out his right hand in greeting and spoke to him with winged words: "Greetings, sir stranger; may good fortune be yours in time to come, though now you are the thrall of many sorrows. Father Zeus, no other god is more deadly than you: you have no pity on men when you have given them birth yourself, but bring them into misery and wretched pain.

"The sweat broke out on me when I noticed this man, and my eyes are full of tears as I think of Odysseus; because he too, I suppose, is dressed in rags like these and wandering among men, if he is still alive and sees the light of the sun. And if he is dead already and in the house of Hades, then my grief is for blameless Odysseus, who set me over his cattle when I was still a boy, in the land of the Cephallenians. And now they have grown past counting; the breed of broad-browed cattle could not increase better for any mortal man in any other way. But strangers tell me to drive these in for themselves to eat, and they care nothing for the son in the house, and do not tremble at the anger of the gods; they are eager now to divide up the possessions of our lord, who has been gone so long.

"Now the heart in my breast keeps turning this matter over: it is a very bad thing, while the son is alive, to go off with my cattle to a land of strangers, to a foreign people; but this is worse still, to stay here and suffer in charge of cattle that are handed over to others. I would have run away long ago and gone to some other of the proud kings, because things are past bearing now; but I still think of that unlucky man, in case he comes back from somewhere and scatters the suitors through his house."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Herdsman, since you seem to be neither an evil man nor a fool, and I can see for myself that you have an understanding heart, I will speak out and swear a great oath to confirm what I say. Let Zeus be my witness above all gods, and this hospitable table, and the hearth of noble Odysseus that I have come to, that while you are here Odysseus will come home, and you will see the killing of the suitors with your own eyes, if you want to, who lord it here."

Then the herdsman of the cattle answered him: "Stranger, I wish the son of Cronos would fulfil that word of yours. Then you would know what kind of might is mine, and how my hands obey me."

And in the same way Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that wise Odysseus might come back to his own home.

So they talked to one another. And the suitors meanwhile were plotting death and doom for Telemachus; but a bird came to them on their left, an eagle flying high, clutching a timid dove. Then Amphinomus spoke in their assembly and said: "Friends, this plan of ours will not run the way we want it to, the killing of Telemachus. Let us think about the feast."

So spoke Amphinomus, and his word pleased them. Then they went into the house of godlike Odysseus and laid their cloaks on the chairs and high seats, and men set about killing great sheep and fat goats, and fatted hogs, and the heifer from the herd. Then they roasted the entrails and served them out, and mixed wine in the bowls, and the swineherd handed out the cups. And Philoetius, a leader of men, handed them bread in a beautiful basket, and Melanthius poured their wine. So they put out their hands to the good food in front of them.

But Telemachus, with crafty thought, made Odysseus sit inside the well-built hall by the stone threshold, and set a mean stool and a little table for him. He set portions of the entrails beside him and poured wine into a golden cup, and said to him:

"Sit down here among the lords and drink your wine; and I will keep off the revilings and the blows of all the suitors from you myself. This is no public resort, but the house of Odysseus, and he won it for me. And you, suitors, keep your minds off rebukes and blows, so that no strife or quarrel arises."

So he spoke, and they all bit their lips and marvelled at Telemachus, that he spoke so boldly. And Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke among them: "Hard as it is, Achaeans, let us accept what Telemachus says, though he threatens us boldly in his speech. Zeus, son of Cronos, did not allow it, or we would have silenced him in the halls before now, clear-voiced talker as he is."

So spoke Antinous, but Telemachus paid no attention to his words.

Meanwhile the heralds were leading the holy hecatomb of the gods through the city, and the long-haired Achaeans gathered under a shady grove of Apollo, the archer god. And when they had roasted the outer flesh and drawn it off the spits they divided the portions and feasted a splendid feast. And those who served set a portion beside Odysseus equal to the one they took themselves, because Telemachus had ordered it, the dear son of godlike Odysseus.

But Athena would not let the proud suitors hold off from bitter outrage at all, so that the pain might sink deeper still into the heart of Odysseus, son of Laertes. There was a man among the suitors with his heart set on lawlessness — Ctesippus was his name, and his home was in Same — who, trusting in his boundless wealth, was courting the wife of Odysseus, who had been gone so long. He spoke now among the haughty suitors:

"Listen to me, proud suitors, and let me say something. The stranger has had a portion for a while now, an equal one, as is right; because it is neither good nor just to rob the guests of Telemachus of their due, whoever comes to this house. Come, I will give him a stranger's gift too, so that he can give a present in his turn either to the bath-woman or to some other of the slaves in the house of godlike Odysseus."

With that he took the hoof of an ox out of the basket where it lay and hurled it with a strong hand. But Odysseus avoided it with a quick turn of his head, and in his heart he smiled a grim and bitter smile; and the ox's hoof struck the well-built wall.

Then Telemachus rebuked Ctesippus and said: "Ctesippus, that turned out more to the profit of your soul. You did not hit the stranger, because he avoided your missile himself; or I would have run you through the middle with my sharp spear, and your father would have been busy with a funeral in this country instead of a wedding. So let nobody make a display of forwardness in my house, I warn you. I notice and understand everything now, the good and the bad, whereas before this I was only a child. And even so we still endure to watch these doings, while sheep are slaughtered and wine drunk and bread eaten up, because it is hard for one man to restrain many. But do me no more harm out of your own wickedness. And if you mean to kill me myself with the sword even now, I would choose that too; it would be far better to die than to go on watching these shameful things, strangers mishandled and men dragging the women through the fine hall in a shameful way."

So he spoke, and they were all hushed and silent; but at last Agelaus, son of Damastor, spoke among them: "Friends, no man should grow angry at what has been fairly said and answer with quarrelling words. Do not abuse the stranger any more, or any of the slaves in the house of godlike Odysseus. But to Telemachus and his mother I would say a gentle word, in case it finds favour in the minds of both. As long as the hearts in your breasts had hope that wise Odysseus would come back to his own house, there was no blame in your waiting and holding the suitors off in your halls; that was the better course, if Odysseus had come back to his house. But now it is plain that he will never come back. So come, sit by your mother and tell her this: that she must marry whichever man is the best and offers the most gifts, so that you may enjoy all your father's heritage in peace, eating and drinking, and she may keep another man's house."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "By Zeus, Agelaus, and by the sufferings of my father, who has died somewhere far from Ithaca or is wandering, I do not delay my mother's marriage in any way. I tell her to marry whatever man she likes, and I offer gifts past counting besides. But I am ashamed to drive her out of the hall against her will with a word of compulsion. May God never bring such a thing to pass."

So spoke Telemachus; but Pallas Athena roused unquenchable laughter among the suitors and turned their wits awry. And now they laughed with alien lips, and the flesh they ate was all dabbled with blood, and their eyes filled with tears and their spirits were set on wailing.

Then godlike Theoclymenus spoke among them: "Wretched men, what evil is this you are suffering? Your heads and your faces and your knees beneath you are shrouded in night; a sound of wailing has been kindled, your cheeks are bathed in tears, and the walls and the fine rafters are sprinkled with blood. And the porch is full of ghosts, and the court is full of them, ghosts hurrying down to Erebus under the dark; and the sun has perished out of heaven, and an evil mist hovers over everything."

So he spoke, but they all laughed merrily at him. And Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the first to speak among them: "The stranger who has just come from abroad is mad. Quick, young men, take him out of doors to go to the meeting place, since he finds it like night here."

Then godlike Theoclymenus answered him: "Eurymachus, I am not asking you to give me guides for my way. I have eyes and ears and my two feet, and a mind in my breast that is not meanly made. With these I will go out of doors, because I can see evil coming on you which not one of the suitors will escape or avoid — all you who insult men in the house of godlike Odysseus and contrive wicked folly."

With that he went out of the stately halls and came to Peiraeus, who received him with a ready heart.

But all the suitors, looking at one another, set about provoking Telemachus by laughing at his guests. And one of the proud young men would say: "Telemachus, nobody is more unlucky in his guests than you, seeing that you keep a filthy vagabond like this man here, always wanting bread and wine, and not skilled in the works of peace or of war either, but a mere burden on the earth. And this other one stood up to prophesy. But it would be far better if you would listen to me: let us fling these strangers aboard a benched ship and send them to the Sicilians, where they would bring you in a fitting price."

So spoke the suitors; but he paid no attention to their words. In silence he watched his father, waiting all the time for the moment when he would lay his hands on the shameless suitors.

But the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had set her beautiful chair opposite them, and heard what every man said in the hall. For they had got their meal ready in the middle of their laughing, a sweet meal and one to satisfy the heart, since they had killed a great many beasts. But no meal could ever have been more graceless than the supper a goddess and a mighty man were soon to set before them. For they had been contriving deeds of shame, and were not provoked to it.
