Book Twenty-One

But the goddess grey-eyed Athena put it into the heart of the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, to set the bow and the grey iron before the suitors in the halls of Odysseus, to be a contest and the beginning of death.

She climbed the high stairway to her room and took the bent key in her strong hand, a fine key of bronze with an ivory handle on it. And she went with her women to a store-room far off, where the treasures of her lord lay, bronze and gold and iron worked with labour. And the back-bent bow lay there, and the quiver that held the arrows, and there were many arrows in it, loaded with groans — gifts which a friend of Odysseus had given him when he met him once in Lacedaemon, Iphitus, son of Eurytus, a man like the immortals.

The two of them had met one another in Messene, in the house of wise Ortilochus. Odysseus had come to collect a debt the whole people owed him, because the men of Messene had lifted three hundred sheep from Ithaca in their benched ships, and the shepherds with them. It was on that embassy that Odysseus had come a long journey, while he was still a boy; his father and the other elders had sent him. And Iphitus for his part had come looking for twelve brood mares he had lost, with sturdy mules at the teat; but they brought him death and doom afterwards, when he came to the stout-hearted son of Zeus, the man Heracles, who knew all about deeds of daring. Heracles killed him, guest though he was, in his own house, ruthlessly, and had no regard for the anger of the gods or for the table he had set in front of him, but killed the man and kept the strong-hoofed mares in his halls himself.

It was while asking for these that Iphitus met Odysseus, and gave him the bow, which great Eurytus had carried in the old days and had left to his son at his death in his high house. And Odysseus gave Iphitus a sharp sword and a mighty spear, as the beginning of a loving friendship; but they never knew each other at the table, because before that could happen the son of Zeus killed Iphitus, son of Eurytus, a man like the immortals, who had given Odysseus the bow. Odysseus would never take this bow with him on the black ships when he went out to war, but it lay in his halls at home as a memorial of a dear friend, and he carried it in his own country.

Now when that lovely woman had come to the store-room and stepped on the threshold of oak, which the carpenter had planed skilfully long ago and made straight to the line — and had fitted doorposts to it and set bright doors on them — she quickly loosed the thong from the handle and thrust in the key and shot the bolts back with sure aim. And as a bull bellows grazing in a meadow, so the fine doors bellowed, struck by the key; and they flew open quickly in front of her.

Then she stepped up onto the high floor, where the chests stood with fragrant clothing stored in them, and stretched out her hand from there and took the bow off its peg, with the bright case that surrounded it. And she sat down there and laid the case on her knees and wept aloud, and took out her lord's bow.

But when she had had her fill of tearful wailing she went to the hall, to the company of the lordly suitors, carrying the back-bent bow in her hands and the quiver that held the arrows, and there were many arrows in it, loaded with groans. And her women carried a chest beside her, with plenty of iron and bronze in it, her lord's battle-gear.

Now when that lovely woman reached the suitors she stood by the doorpost of the well-built hall, holding her shining veil in front of her face, with a faithful maid on either side of her. And at once she spoke among the suitors:

"Listen to me, proud suitors, who have beset this house to eat and drink without end, since its master has been gone so long, and could find no other plea to urge except that you wanted to marry me and take me for a wife. Come then, suitors, since this is shown to be your prize. I will set the great bow of godlike Odysseus in front of you; and whoever most easily strings the bow in his hands and shoots an arrow through all twelve axes, with him I will go, and leave this house of my marriage, a house most beautiful and full of livelihood, which I think I shall remember even in my dreams."

So she spoke, and told Eumaeus, the good swineherd, to set the bow and the grey iron before the suitors. And Eumaeus took them and laid them down, bursting into tears; and in another part of the hall the herdsman wept when he saw his lord's bow.

Then Antinous rebuked them and said: "You foolish country creatures, who mind only the things of the day. Wretched pair, why do you shed tears now and trouble the soul in the lady's breast, when her heart lies low in pain as it is, since she has lost her dear husband? Sit and feast in silence, or go outside and weep, and leave the bow here behind for the suitors as a decisive contest; because I do not think this polished bow will be easy to string. There is no man among all these here such as Odysseus was; I saw him myself, and I remember him, though I was still only a child."

So he spoke; but the heart in his breast hoped that he would string the bow and shoot an arrow through the iron. Yet he was to be the first to taste an arrow from the hands of noble Odysseus, whom he was dishonouring then as he sat in the halls, and urging on all his companions.

Then the strong young Telemachus spoke among them: "Zeus, son of Cronos, must have made me witless. My dear mother, wise as she is, says she will follow another lord and leave this house; and I laugh, and am glad, with a witless mind. Come then, suitors, since this is shown to be your prize — a lady whose like is not in the Achaean land now, not in sacred Pylos or in Argos or in Mycene, nor in Ithaca itself, nor on the dark mainland. But you know that yourselves; what need have I to praise my mother? Come, do not put the matter aside with excuses, and do not turn away any longer from the drawing of the bow, so that we may see the outcome. And I would make trial of the bow myself. If I string it and shoot an arrow through the iron, it will not vex me that my honoured mother should leave this house and go off with another man, since I should be left here able to wield my father's fine battle-gear at last."

With that he flung the scarlet cloak off his back and sprang up, and laid his sharp sword off his shoulders. First he set the axes up, digging a trench, one long trench for all of them, and made it straight to the line, and stamped the earth in about them. And amazement seized everyone who saw him, that he set them out so orderly, when he had never seen it done before.

Then he went and stood on the threshold and began to try the bow. Three times he made it quiver in his eagerness to draw it, and three times he relaxed his effort, though in his heart he hoped to string the bow and shoot an arrow through the iron. And now at last he would have strung it by main strength, as he tried a fourth time to draw the string up; but Odysseus nodded in refusal and checked him in his eagerness.

Then the strong young Telemachus spoke among them again: "I shall be a coward and a weakling in the days to come, it seems, or else I am too young, and have no trust yet in my strength to defend me against a man when one grows angry over nothing. But come, you who are mightier than I am, try the bow and let us end the contest."

With that he set the bow away from him on the ground, leaning it against the jointed polished door, and leaned the swift arrow close by against the fine bow-tip; and then sat down again on the seat he had got up from.

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke among them: "Get up in order, all of you, from left to right, beginning from the place where the cup-bearer pours the wine."

So spoke Antinous, and his word pleased them. Then Leiodes got up first, the son of Oenops, who was their soothsayer and always sat by the fine mixing-bowl in the innermost part of the hall. He alone hated deeds of wanton folly, and was full of indignation at all the suitors. He was the first to take the bow and the swift arrow now, and he went and stood on the threshold and began to try the bow; but he could not string it. His hands grew tired before that, as he tried to draw the string up, his soft unworn hands. And he spoke among the suitors:

"Friends, I am not the one to string it; let another take it. This bow will rob a great many princes of spirit and of life, since it is far better to die than to live on and fail of the thing we always gather here for, waiting expectantly day after day. There is many a man who hopes in his heart even now and wants to marry Penelope, the wife of Odysseus. But when he has tried the bow and seen the outcome, then let him court some other of the fair-robed Achaean women with his gifts and try to win her; and let Penelope marry the man who offers most and comes as her fated husband."

So he spoke, and set the bow away from him, leaning it against the jointed polished door, and leaned the swift arrow close by against the fine bow-tip; and then sat down on the seat he had got up from.

But Antinous rebuked him and said to him: "Leiodes, what a word has escaped the barrier of your teeth, a dreadful and grievous word. It makes me angry to hear it, if this bow is really going to rob princes of spirit and of life, because you are not able to string it. Your honoured mother did not bear you with the kind of strength to draw a bow and shoot arrows; but others of the lordly suitors will string it soon enough."

So he spoke, and called to Melanthius the goatherd: "Come, light a fire in the hall, Melanthius, and set a great seat beside it with a fleece on it, and bring out a great cake of the fat that is inside, so that we young men can warm the bow and rub it with fat, and try it, and end the contest."

So he spoke, and Melanthius at once rekindled the unwearied fire and brought and set a great seat by it with a fleece on it, and brought out a great cake of the fat that was inside. So the young men warmed the bow and tried it; but they could not string it, because they fell far short in strength.

Now Antinous was still holding off, and godlike Eurymachus, leaders of the suitors, who were far the best of them in ability. But those other two had gone out of the hall together, the herdsman and the swineherd of godlike Odysseus; and Odysseus himself went out of the house after them. And when they were outside the gates and the courtyard he spoke to them with gentle words:

"Herdsman, and you too, swineherd, shall I tell you something, or keep it to myself? My spirit tells me to say it. What kind of men would you be to defend Odysseus, if he came from somewhere suddenly like this, and some god brought him? Would you bring help to the suitors or to Odysseus? Speak out as your heart and spirit tell you."

Then the herdsman of the cattle answered him: "Father Zeus, I wish you would fulfil this wish. Grant that that man may come back, and that some god may guide him. Then you would know what kind of might is mine, and how my hands obey me."

And in the same way Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that wise Odysseus might come back to his own home.

But when he knew the minds of these two for certain, he answered and spoke to them again: "I am here at home before you, my very self. After many hard labours I have come in the twentieth year to my own country. And I know that of all my slaves it is you two alone who wanted me to come; of the rest I have not heard a single one praying that I might come back to my home. So I will tell you the truth, exactly as it will be. If a god beats the lordly suitors down for me, I will bring you each a wife, and will give you possessions and a house built near my own, and after that you two will be friends and brothers to Telemachus in my eyes. And more than that, I will show you a plain sign as well, so that you may know me well and be sure in your hearts: the scar of the wound a boar dealt me long ago with his white tusk, when I went to Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus."

With that he drew the rags aside from the great scar. And when the two of them had seen it and taken it all in, they flung their arms round wise Odysseus and wept; and they kissed his head and shoulders in loving welcome, and in the same way Odysseus kissed their heads and hands. And the light of the sun would have gone down on their weeping, if Odysseus himself had not checked them and said:

"Stop weeping and wailing now, in case somebody comes out of the hall and sees us and makes it known inside as well. Go in one after another, not all together — I first and you afterwards. And let this be the sign: all the rest, all the lordly suitors, will not allow the bow and the quiver to be given to me; but you, good Eumaeus, as you carry the bow through the halls, put it into my hands, and tell the women to bar the close-fitting doors of their hall. And if any of them hears groaning or the din of men inside our walls, let them not rush out, but stay where they are in silence at their work. And to you, good Philoetius, I give the charge of fastening the gate of the court with a bar, and quickly throwing a cord over it."

With that he went into the stately house and sat down on the seat he had got up from; and the two slaves of godlike Odysseus went in as well.

Eurymachus was handling the bow by now, warming it on this side and on that in the light of the fire; but even so he was not able to string it. And he groaned in his noble heart, and spoke to them with a burst of anger:

"I am grieved for myself and for all of you. It is not for the marriage that I mourn so much, grieved as I am; there are a great many other Achaean women, some in sea-girt Ithaca itself and some in other cities. But I mourn if we really fall so far short of godlike Odysseus in strength that we cannot string his bow. This is a reproach for men yet to come to hear of."

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, answered him: "Eurymachus, that will not be so, and you know it yourself. Today is the feast of the god through the land, a holy feast. Who would bend a bow on it? Set it quietly by; and as for the axes — what if we let them all stand as they are? Nobody, I think, will come to the hall of Odysseus, son of Laertes, and carry them off. Come, let the bearer pour drops into the cups for an offering, so that we can pour our offerings and lay the curved bow aside. And in the morning tell Melanthius the goatherd to bring she-goats, far the best in all the herds, so that we can lay thigh-pieces on the altar of Apollo, the famous archer; and then try the bow and end the contest."

So spoke Antinous, and his word pleased them. Then the heralds poured water over their hands, and boys filled the bowls to the brim and served them out to all, pouring the first drops into the cups for an offering. But when they had poured their offerings and drunk as much as they wanted, then Odysseus of the many tricks spoke among them, with cunning in his mind:

"Listen to me, suitors of the glorious queen, so that I can say what the heart in my breast tells me. It is to Eurymachus most of all that I make my plea, and to godlike Antinous, because this word of his was rightly spoken too, that you should stop trying the bow for the present and leave the outcome to the gods; and in the morning the god will give the victory to whoever he likes. But give me the polished bow, so that I can prove my hands and my strength among you, and see whether I still have the might I once had in my supple limbs, or whether my wanderings and my lack of food have destroyed it by now."

So he spoke, and they were all exceedingly angry, afraid he might string the polished bow. And Antinous rebuked him and said to him:

"Wretched stranger, you have no wits, not a trace of them. Are you not content to feast undisturbed in our proud company, and go short of nothing at the banquet, and hear our words and our talk, when no other stranger and beggar hears our words? It is wine that wounds you, honey-sweet wine, which does harm to others too, if a man takes it in great gulps and drinks beyond measure. It was wine that made even the centaur foolish, glorious Eurytion, in the hall of great-hearted Peirithous, when he went to the Lapiths. And when his heart had been made foolish with wine, in his madness he did evil in the house of Peirithous. Then grief seized the heroes, and they leapt up and dragged him out through the gateway when they had sheared his ears and his nostrils off with the pitiless bronze; and he went off with his heart made foolish, carrying the curse of his sin with him in the folly of his heart. That is where the feud between the centaurs and mankind began; but it was for himself first that he found the evil, being heavy with wine.

"So I declare great harm for you, if you string the bow. You will meet with no kindness at anyone's hands in our country, and we will send you straight away in a black ship to king Echetus, the maimer of all men, out of whose hands you will not get away alive. So be still and drink your wine, and do not compete with men younger than you are."

Then wise Penelope answered him: "Antinous, it is neither good nor just to rob the guests of Telemachus of their due, whoever comes to this house. Do you think that if that stranger strings the great bow of Odysseus, trusting in his strength and his might, he will take me home and make me his wife? He has no such hope in his own breast, I am sure of it. So let none of you sit at meat here with sorrow in your heart on that account; that would be quite unseemly."

Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered her: "Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, it is not that we think the man will take you home — that would be quite unseemly. It is that we dread the talk of men and women, in case some base fellow among the Achaeans should say afterwards: 'Truly, men far weaker are courting the wife of a noble man, and cannot string his polished bow. But another man, a beggar, who came in his wanderings, strung the bow easily and shot through the iron.' That is what men will say, and it would become a reproach to us."

Then wise Penelope answered him again: "Eurymachus, there can be no good report in the land for men who dishonour and consume the house of a prince. Why do you make this matter a reproach? This stranger is very tall and well built, and says he was born the son of a good father. Come, give him the polished bow and let us see. I tell you outright, and this word will come to pass: if he strings the bow, and Apollo grants him the glory, I will dress him in a cloak and tunic, good clothes, and give him a sharp javelin to keep off dogs and men, and a two-edged sword; and I will give him sandals to bind under his feet, and send him wherever his heart and spirit tell him to go."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her: "Mother, as for the bow, no man of the Achaeans has a better right than I have to give it or refuse it to whoever I like — not one of all those who lord it in rocky Ithaca or in the islands towards horse-pasturing Elis. Not one of them shall thwart me against my will, even if I wanted to give this bow outright to the stranger to carry away with him. But go to your room and see to your own work, the loom and the distaff, and tell the women to get on with theirs. The bow will be the men's business, all of them, and mine most of all: the authority in this house is mine."

She went back to her room astonished, taking her son's good sense to heart. She went up to her upper room with her women, and wept for Odysseus, her dear husband, until grey-eyed Athena put sweet sleep on her eyelids.

Now the good swineherd had taken the curved bow and was carrying it, and the suitors all cried out in the halls. And one of the proud young men would say: "Where are you carrying the curved bow, you miserable swineherd, you distracted creature? Soon the swift hounds will devour you among your pigs, alone and apart from men, hounds you reared yourself — if only Apollo is gracious to us, and the other immortal gods."

So they spoke, and he set the bow down where he was carrying it, seized with fear because so many men were shouting in the halls. But Telemachus called out threateningly from the other side: "Father, carry the bow on — you will soon regret it if you listen to everybody — or I will drive you off to the fields, young as I am, and pelt you with stones; I am the better man in strength. I wish I were as much better in strength and might than all the suitors in the house; then I would soon send many a one of them out of our house to go on his way in a bad state, because they contrive wickedness."

So he spoke, and all the suitors laughed merrily at him, and relaxed the bitterness of their anger against Telemachus. And the swineherd carried the bow through the hall and came up to wise Odysseus and put it in his hands. Then he called the nurse Eurycleia out and said to her:

"Telemachus tells you, wise Eurycleia, to bar the close-fitting doors of the hall; and if any of the women hears groaning or the din of men inside our walls, they are not to rush out, but to stay where they are in silence at their work."

So he spoke, and her word stayed unwinged, and she barred the doors of the stately halls. And Philoetius hurried out of the house in silence and barred the gates of the well-fenced court. Now the cable of a curved ship was lying under the portico, made of byblus plant, and he made the gates fast with it, and then went inside himself. Then he came and sat down on the seat he had got up from, and gazed at Odysseus.

He was already handling the bow, turning it round and round and trying it this way and that, in case worms had eaten the horns while its lord was away. And one man would say with a glance at his neighbour: "He has a shrewd eye, and he is a cunning rogue with a bow. Perhaps he has bows like this stored away at home himself, or else he means to make one, the way he turns it this way and that in his hands, the rascally vagabond."

And another of the proud young men would say: "I hope the fellow finds profit in just the measure that he proves able to string this bow."

So the suitors spoke. But Odysseus of the many tricks, as soon as he had lifted the great bow and looked it over on every side — as a man well skilled in the lyre and in song stretches a string easily round a new peg, making the twisted sheep-gut fast at either end — so without effort Odysseus strung the great bow. And he held it in his right hand and tried the string, which sang sweetly under his touch, like a swallow in tone.

But great grief came on the suitors, and the colour of their faces changed; and Zeus thundered loud, showing his signs. Then much-enduring noble Odysseus was glad at heart, that the son of crooked-counselling Cronos had sent him an omen; and he took up a swift arrow, which lay by him on the table, bare, while the others were stored inside the hollow quiver — the ones the Achaeans were soon to taste. He took this and laid it on the bridge of the bow and drew the bowstring and the notched arrow, from the very chair where he sat, and let the shaft fly with sure aim; and he did not miss the end of the handle of a single one of the axes, but the bronze-weighted arrow passed clean through and out at the end.

And he said to Telemachus: "Telemachus, the stranger sitting in your halls brings no shame on you. I did not miss the mark at all, and I did not labour long in stringing the bow; my strength is unbroken still — not as the suitors taunt me and hold me in scorn. But now it is time that supper should be made ready for the Achaeans too, while there is still light; and after that there must be other sport as well, with song and with the lyre, since those are the accompaniments of a feast."

He spoke, and made a sign with his brows; and Telemachus, the dear son of godlike Odysseus, girded his sharp sword about him and took his spear in his grasp and stood by the chair at his father's side, armed in gleaming bronze.
