Book Twenty-Four

Meanwhile Cyllenian Hermes called out the spirits of the suitors. He held his wand in his hands, a fine wand of gold, with which he lulls the eyes of whoever he likes to sleep, and wakes others again out of their slumber. With this he roused them and led them, and they followed gibbering. As bats flit about gibbering in the innermost recess of a marvellous cave when one of them has fallen off the rock from the chain they cling to one another in, so these went with him gibbering; and Hermes the Helper led them down the dank ways.

They went past the streams of Oceanus, past the rock Leucas, past the gates of the sun and the land of dreams, and quickly came to the meadow of asphodel, where the spirits live, the phantoms of men who have done with their labours.

There they found the spirit of Achilles, son of Peleus, and the spirits of Patroclus and of faultless Antilochus and of Ajax, who was the finest of all the Danaans in looks and in build after the faultless son of Peleus. So these were thronging round Achilles, and the spirit of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, came near them, sorrowing; and round about him others were gathered, the spirits of all those who were killed with him in the house of Aegisthus and met their fate.

And the spirit of the son of Peleus was the first to speak to him: "Son of Atreus, we thought that of all heroes you were dear to Zeus who hurls the thunderbolt all your days, because you were lord over many mighty men in the land of the Trojans, where we Achaeans suffered so much. But deadly doom was to come to you too, far too early, the doom that nobody who is born avoids. I wish you had met death and fate in the land of the Trojans, in the pride of the honour you held. Then the whole army of the Achaeans would have made you a tomb, and you would have won great glory for your son as well in the days to come. But as it is, it was decreed that you should be cut off by the most pitiful death."

Then the spirit of the son of Atreus answered him: "Fortunate son of Peleus, godlike Achilles, who were killed in the land of Troy far from Argos, and others fell round you, the best of the sons of the Trojans and the Achaeans, fighting over your body; and you lay in the whirl of dust, mighty in your mightiness, forgetful of your horsemanship. We fought the whole day long, and would never have stopped fighting if Zeus had not stopped us with a storm.

"But when we had carried you to the ships out of the fighting, we laid you on a bier and cleaned your fine flesh with warm water and with ointment, and the Danaans shed a great many hot tears round you and sheared their hair. And your mother came out of the sea with the immortal sea-nymphs when she heard the news, and an extraordinary cry went up over the deep, and trembling took hold of all the Achaeans at it. And they would all have sprung up and rushed to the hollow ships, if a man wise in the wisdom of old had not stopped them — Nestor, whose counsel had proved the best before. He meant it kindly, and spoke to their gathering:

"'Hold, Argives; do not run, Achaean youths. It is his mother coming out of the sea with the immortal sea-nymphs, to look on the face of her dead son.'

"So he spoke, and the great-hearted Achaeans stopped their flight. Then the daughters of the old man of the sea stood round you wailing pitifully, and clothed you in immortal clothing. And the Muses, nine in all, answering one another with sweet voices, led the dirge. There you could not have seen an Argive who was not in tears, so deeply did the clear-toned Muse move their hearts.

"So for seventeen days, by night and by day alike, we mourned for you, immortal gods and mortal men; and on the eighteenth we gave you to the fire, and killed many well-fatted sheep round you, and sleek cattle. So you were burned in the clothing of the gods and in plenty of unguents and sweet honey; and many Achaean warriors moved in their armour about the pyre while you were burning, both footmen and charioteers, and a great din rose up.

"But when the flame of Hephaestus had finished with you, in the morning we gathered your white bones, Achilles, and laid them in unmixed wine and unguents. Your mother had given a two-handled golden urn, and said it was the gift of Dionysus and the handiwork of famous Hephaestus. Your white bones lie in that, glorious Achilles, and mingled with them the bones of the dead Patroclus, son of Menoetius; and apart from them lie the bones of Antilochus, whom you honoured above all the rest of your companions after the dead Patroclus. And over them we heaped up a great and fine tomb, we the mighty host of Argive spearmen, on a jutting headland by the broad Hellespont, so that it might be seen from far off over the sea both by men who are alive now and by those who are born hereafter.

"And your mother asked the gods for beautiful prizes and set them in the middle of the field for the chiefs of the Achaeans. You have been present before now at the funeral games of many men who were warriors, when the young men gird themselves at the death of a king and make ready for the contests; but if you had seen that sight you would have marvelled most in your heart, at the beautiful prizes the goddess set there in your honour, silver-footed Thetis; because you were very dear to the gods. So not even in death did you lose your name, but you will have fair renown among all men for ever, Achilles.

"But as for me, what pleasure have I in this now, that I wound up the skein of the war? On my homecoming Zeus contrived a miserable doom for me at the hands of Aegisthus and my accursed wife."

So they talked to one another. But the messenger, the slayer of Argus, came near, leading down the spirits of the suitors whom Odysseus had killed; and the two of them, seized with wonder, went straight towards them when they saw them. And the spirit of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, recognised the dear son of Melaneus, glorious Amphimedon, who had been his host, living in Ithaca.

And the spirit of the son of Atreus spoke to him first: "Amphimedon, what has happened to you, that you have come down under the dark earth, all of you picked men and of the same age? Nobody would make another choice, if he were to pick the best men in a city. Did Poseidon strike you aboard your ships, when he had roused cruel winds and long waves? Or did enemies do you harm on land, while you were cutting off their cattle and their fine flocks of sheep, or while they were fighting in defence of their city and their women? Tell me what I ask; I declare that I am a friend of your house. Do you not remember when I came to your house there with godlike Menelaus, to urge Odysseus to go with us to Ilios on the benched ships? It took us a whole month to cross the wide sea, because we could hardly win Odysseus over to our will, the sacker of cities."

Then the spirit of Amphimedon answered him and said: "Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, I remember all of it, you whom Zeus brought up, exactly as you tell it; and I will tell you the whole truth in my turn, how an evil end of death was brought about for us.

"We courted the wife of Odysseus, who had been gone so long; and she would not refuse the marriage, which she hated, and would not ever make an end, contriving death and black fate for us. And here is another trick she thought up in her heart. She set up a great web in her halls and started weaving — fine in the thread and very wide; and she said to us at once:

"'Young men, my suitors, since noble Odysseus is dead, be patient about marrying me, however eager you are, until I finish this robe. I do not want my spinning to be wasted. It is a shroud for lord Laertes, for the time when the cruel fate of death lays him low, so that none of the Achaean women in the country can be angry with me for letting a man who won so much lie without a shroud.'

"That is what she said, and our proud hearts agreed. And then day by day she would weave at the great web, and by night she would unravel it, when she had had torches set beside her. So for three years she kept the Achaeans from finding out by her craft, and fooled them; but when the fourth year came, as the seasons rolled on, as the months waned and the many days came round in their course, then one of her women who knew all about it told us, and we caught her unravelling the splendid thing. So she finished it because she had to, against her will.

"Now when she had shown us the robe, after weaving the great web and washing it, and it shone like the sun or the moon, then some cruel god brought Odysseus from somewhere to the edge of the country, where the swineherd lived. And the dear son of godlike Odysseus came there too, back from sandy Pylos in his black ship. And the two of them, when they had planned an evil death for the suitors, came to the famous city — Odysseus later, and Telemachus leading the way in front of him.

"Now the swineherd brought his master, dressed in mean clothing, in the likeness of a miserable old beggar leaning on a staff, and the clothes he wore on his body were wretched. And not one of us could tell it was he when he appeared so suddenly, not even the older men; and we attacked him with evil words and with missiles. He endured being pelted and taunted in his own halls with a steady heart for a while; but when at last the will of Zeus who holds the aegis roused him, he took all the beautiful arms with the help of Telemachus and laid them away in the store-room and made the bolts fast.

"Then in his great cunning he told his wife to set his bow and the grey iron in front of the suitors, to be a contest for us ill-fated men and the beginning of death. And not one of us was able to stretch the string of that mighty bow; we fell far short of that strength. But when the great bow came into the hands of Odysseus, then we all cried out aloud not to give him the bow, however much he might say; and Telemachus alone urged him on and told him to take it. Then much-enduring noble Odysseus took the bow in his hand and strung it easily and sent an arrow through the iron. Then he went and stood on the threshold and poured out the swift arrows, glaring about him terribly, and struck king Antinous. And after that he let his shafts fly at the others with sure aim, loaded with groans, and the men fell thick and fast. Then it was plain that some god was their helper; because at once they rushed on through the halls in their fury and killed men left and right, and a hideous groaning rose from it as heads were struck, and the whole floor swam with blood.

"That is how we died, Agamemnon; and even now our bodies still lie uncared for in the halls of Odysseus. Our friends in each man's home know nothing about it yet — our friends who might wash the black blood off our wounds and lay our bodies out with wailing; because that is what is due to the dead."

Then the spirit of the son of Atreus answered him: "Happy son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many tricks, the wife you won was full of every excellence, and faultless Penelope, the daughter of Icarius, had so good an understanding, and was so loyally mindful of Odysseus, her wedded husband. So the fame of her virtue will never perish, and the immortals will make a pleasant song among men on earth in honour of steady Penelope. It was not so that the daughter of Tyndareus contrived evil deeds and killed the husband she had married; and the song about her will be hateful among men, and she brings an evil reputation on all womankind, even on the woman who does right."

So the two of them talked to one another, standing in the house of Hades under the depths of the earth.

But Odysseus and his men, when they had gone down from the city, quickly came to the fine well-ordered farm of Laertes, which he had won for himself in the past and had laboured hard for. His house was there, and the sheds ran all round it where the slaves who were his servants ate and sat and slept, the ones who did what he wanted. And inside the house there was an old Sicilian woman, who tended the old man with kindly care there at the farm, far from the city.

Then Odysseus spoke to the servants and to his son: "Go inside the well-built house now, and kill the best of the pigs for dinner straight away. And I will make trial of my father, and see whether he will recognise me and know me by sight, or whether he will fail to know me, since I have been away so long."

With that he gave his battle-gear to the slaves, and they went quickly to the house; but Odysseus went towards the fruitful vineyard on his quest.

He did not find Dolius as he went down into the great orchard, or any of his slaves or his sons; as it happened they had gone to gather stones for the vineyard wall, and the old man was leading them. But he found his father alone in the well-ordered vineyard, digging round a plant. He was wearing a filthy tunic, patched and wretched, and he had stitched greaves of ox-hide bound about his shins to guard against scratches, and gloves on his hands because of the thorns, and a goatskin cap on his head; and he was nursing his sorrow.

Now when much-enduring noble Odysseus saw him, worn with old age and loaded with great grief at heart, he stood still under a tall pear tree and shed tears. And he debated in his mind and heart whether to kiss his father and embrace him and tell him everything, how he had come home to his own country, or whether to question him first and try him on every point. And as he turned it over, this seemed the better course, to try him first with mocking words. So with that in mind noble Odysseus went straight towards him.

He was holding his head down, digging round a plant; and his glorious son came up to him and said:

"Old man, you have no lack of skill at tending a garden; your care is good, and there is nothing at all in the whole field, plant or fig tree or vine, or olive or pear or garden-plot, that lacks care. But I will tell you another thing, and do not store up anger about it in your heart: you enjoy no good care yourself. You bear a miserable old age, and you are filthy and unkempt with it, and dressed in mean clothes. It is surely not because you are idle that your master takes no care of you; and there is nothing about you that looks like a slave, either in build or in stature. You are like a king — like a man who, when he has bathed and eaten, should sleep soft; that is the way with old men.

"But tell me this, and tell me the truth. Whose slave are you, and whose orchard do you tend? And tell me this too, truly, so that I know for certain: is this really Ithaca that we have come to, as a man told me who met me just now on my way here? He was not over sound of wit; he did not deign to tell me about each thing, or to listen to what I said, when I questioned him about a friend of mine, whether he is still alive or is dead now and in the house of Hades. I will tell you, and you take heed and listen. I once entertained a man in my own dear country who came to our house, and no other stranger who lives far away ever came to my house as a more welcome guest. He said he came from Ithaca by descent, and said that his own father was Laertes, son of Arceisius. So I took him to the house and gave him hospitality with a kindly welcome out of the rich store that was inside, and I gave him friendship gifts, as is fitting. I gave him seven talents of well-worked gold, and a mixing bowl all of silver, embossed with flowers, and twelve cloaks of single fold, and as many coverlets, and as many fine mantles, and as many tunics besides; and women too, skilled in fine handiwork, four handsome women, whom he chose himself."

Then his father answered him, weeping: "Stranger, you have come to the country you ask about; but wanton and reckless men hold it now. And you bestowed all those gifts in vain, the countless gifts you gave. If you had found him still alive in the land of Ithaca, he would have sent you on your way with a full return of gifts and good entertainment; that is what is due to the man who begins the kindness.

"But tell me this, and tell me the truth. How many years have gone by since you entertained that guest, that unlucky guest, my son — as surely as there ever was such a man — my ill-starred son, whom the fishes have devoured in the deep, far from his friends and his own country, or who has become the spoil of beasts and birds on some shore? His mother did not deck him for burial and weep over him, nor did his father, we who gave him life; and his wife, wooed with so many gifts, steady Penelope, did not mourn her own husband on the bier as she should have, when she had closed his eyes in death; and that is what is due to the dead. And tell me this too, truly, so that I know for certain: who are you among men, and where from? Where is your city, and where are your parents? Where is the fast ship moored that brought you here with your godlike companions? Or did you come as a passenger on somebody else's ship, and did they go off when they had set you ashore?"

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Then I will tell you all of it plainly. I come from Alybas, where I have a glorious house, and I am the son of Apheidas, son of lord Polypemon, and my own name is Eperitus. But a god drove me wandering from Sicania to come here against my will, and my ship lies over there off the tilled land, away from the city. As for Odysseus, it is five years now since he went away and left my country. Unlucky man — and yet he had birds of good omen when he set out, birds on the right. So I was glad of them as I sent him on his way, and he went out gladly, and our hearts hoped that we should meet again as host and guest and give one another glorious gifts."

So he spoke, and a dark cloud of grief wrapped Laertes round; and he took the dark dust in both his hands and strewed it over his grey head, groaning without stopping. Then the heart of Odysseus was stirred, and a keen pang shot up through his nostrils as he looked at his dear father. And he sprang towards him and clasped him in his arms and kissed him, and said:

"Father, here I am, my very self, the man you are asking about. I have come in the twentieth year to my own country. But stop grieving and stop your tearful lamenting; I will tell you everything, though there is great need of haste. I have killed the suitors in our halls, and taken vengeance for their grievous insolence and their evil deeds."

Then Laertes answered him again and said: "If you really are Odysseus, my son, come home, tell me some clear sign now, so that I can be sure."

And Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "First mark this scar with your eyes, the scar of the wound a boar dealt me with his white tusk on Parnassus, when I had gone there. It was you who sent me out, you and my honoured mother, to Autolycus, my mother's father, so that I might get the gifts he promised and agreed to give me when he came here. And I will tell you the trees in the well-ordered garden which you once gave me, when I was only a child following you through the garden and asking you for this and that. We passed through these very trees, and you named them and told me about each one. You gave me thirteen pear trees and ten apple trees and forty fig trees. And you promised to give me rows of vines too, just as I say, fifty of them, which ripened separately at different times — and there are clusters of every kind on them — whenever the seasons of Zeus weighed them down from above."

So he spoke, and his father's knees were loosened where he stood, and his heart melted, as he knew the sure tokens Odysseus told him. He flung both his arms round his dear son, and much-enduring noble Odysseus caught him as he fainted. But when he came round and his spirit came back into his breast, he answered again and said:

"Father Zeus, you gods still hold sway on high Olympus, if the suitors have really paid the price of their wanton insolence. But now I have a terrible dread at heart, that all the men of Ithaca will come here against us at once, and send messengers everywhere to the cities of the Cephallenians."

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Take heart, and do not let these things distress you. Let us go to the house, which is near the orchard; I sent Telemachus on there, and the herdsman and the swineherd, to get our meal ready as fast as they could."

So the two of them spoke, and went off to the fine house. And when they came to the stately house they found Telemachus and the herdsman and the swineherd carving meat in plenty and mixing the flaming wine.

Meanwhile the Sicilian woman bathed great-hearted Laertes in his house and rubbed him with oil and threw a fine cloak round him. And Athena came near and made the limbs of the shepherd of the people greater, and made him taller than before and mightier to look at. Then he came out of the bath, and his dear son marvelled at him, seeing him like the immortal gods in presence; and he spoke to him with winged words:

"Father, some one of the gods who live for ever has made you finer to look at, in beauty and in stature."

Then wise Laertes answered him: "Father Zeus, and Athena, and Apollo — I wish that in the strength I had when I took Nericus, the well-built citadel on the shore of the mainland, when I was lord of the Cephallenians, I had stood beside you yesterday in our house with my armour on my shoulders and had beaten the suitors back. Then I would have loosened the knees of a great many of them in the halls, and your heart would have been glad in you."

So they talked to one another. And when the others had finished their work and got the meal ready, they sat down in order on the chairs and the high seats. And they were about to put their hands to the food when the old man Dolius came up, and the old man's sons with him, worn out with their work in the fields; because their mother, the old Sicilian woman, had gone out and called them — she who saw to their food and tended the old man with kindly care, now that old age had laid hold of him.

And when they saw Odysseus and took him in, they stood in the halls lost in wonder. But Odysseus spoke to them with gentle words and said: "Old man, sit down to dinner, and all of you forget your wonder. We have been waiting a long while in the halls, eager to put our hands to the food, and expecting you all the time."

So he spoke, and Dolius ran straight towards him with both hands stretched out, and took the hand of Odysseus and kissed it on the wrist, and spoke to him with winged words:

"Dear master, since you have come back to us, who longed for you badly and had no more thought of seeing you, and the gods themselves have brought you — greetings, and every welcome, and may the gods grant you happiness. And tell me this too, truly, so that I know for certain: does wise Penelope know for sure that you have come back here, or shall we send her a messenger?"

Then Odysseus of the many tricks answered him and said: "Old man, she knows already; why should you busy yourself with that?"

So he spoke, and the other sat down again on the polished chair. And in the same way the sons of Dolius gathered round glorious Odysseus and greeted him and clasped his hands; and then they sat down in order beside Dolius, their father.

So they were busy with their meal in the halls. But meanwhile Rumour, the messenger, went swiftly through the whole city, telling of the terrible death and fate of the suitors. And the people heard it all at once, and gathered from every side with moaning and wailing in front of the palace of Odysseus. They brought their dead out of the halls, each man his own, and buried them; and those from other cities they sent home, each to his own place, putting them aboard fast ships for the seamen to carry. And they themselves went together to the meeting place, sad at heart.

Now when they were assembled and met together, Eupeithes stood up and spoke among them, because a comfortless grief for his son lay heavy on his heart, for Antinous, the first man noble Odysseus had killed. Weeping for him, he spoke to the gathering and said:

"Friends, this man has contrived a monstrous thing against the Achaeans. He led many good men off in his ships, and lost the hollow ships and lost the men utterly; and now he has come home and killed others, far the best of the Cephallenians. Come then, before the fellow gets quickly away to Pylos or to fine Elis where the Epeans hold sway — let us go out. We shall be disgraced for ever, even in the days to come. This is a shame for men yet to be born to hear of, if we do not take vengeance on the killers of our sons and our brothers. Life would be no more sweet to me then; I would rather die at once and be among the dead. Let us go, before they get across the sea ahead of us."

So he spoke, weeping, and pity took hold of all the Achaeans. Then Medon came near them, and the divine singer, from the halls of Odysseus, because sleep had let them go; and they took their stand in the middle, and wonder seized every man. And Medon, who had good sense, spoke among them:

"Listen to me now, men of Ithaca. It was not without the will of the immortal gods that Odysseus contrived these deeds. I saw an immortal god myself, who stood close beside Odysseus and looked in every way like Mentor. And now as an immortal god he would appear in front of Odysseus, heartening him, and now again he would rage through the hall, scaring the suitors; and they fell thick and fast."

So he spoke, and pale fear seized them all. Then the old lord Halitherses spoke among them, son of Mastor, because he alone saw before and after; he meant it kindly, and spoke to the gathering:

"Listen to me now, men of Ithaca, and hear what I have to say. It is through your own cowardice, friends, that these things have come to pass; you would not obey me, or Mentor, shepherd of the people, and make your sons stop their folly. They did a monstrous thing in their blind and wanton wickedness, wasting the wealth and dishonouring the wife of a prince, who they said would never come back again. Now let it be like this: listen to me, as I tell you. Let us not go out, in case some man finds a ruin that he has brought on himself."

So he spoke; but they sprang up with loud cries, more than half of them, while the rest stayed together in their seats; because his speech was not to their liking, and they listened to Eupeithes. And soon after that they rushed for their arms. And when they had clothed their bodies in gleaming bronze they gathered together in front of the spacious city. And Eupeithes led them in his folly, thinking he would avenge the killing of his son; but he was never to come back himself, and was to meet his doom there.

But Athena spoke to Zeus, son of Cronos: "Father of us all, son of Cronos, highest of the powers, tell me, since I ask you, what purpose your mind is hiding now. Will you bring on evil war still further, and the dreadful din of battle, or will you establish friendship between the two sides?"

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered her and said: "My child, why do you ask and question me about this? Did you not plan this yourself, that Odysseus should take vengeance on these men when he came? Do as you like; but I will tell you what is fitting. Now that noble Odysseus has taken vengeance on the suitors, let them swear a solemn oath, and let him be king all his days; and let us bring about a forgetting of the killing of their sons and their brothers, and let them love one another as before, and let wealth and peace abound."

With that he roused Athena, who was eager already, and she went darting down from the heights of Olympus.

But when they had eaten the honey-hearted food they wanted, much-enduring noble Odysseus was the first to speak among his company: "Let one of you go out and see whether they are not drawing near by now."

So he spoke, and a son of Dolius went out as he told him; he went and stood on the threshold and saw them all close at hand, and at once spoke winged words to Odysseus: "Here they are, close at hand. Quick, let us arm."

So he spoke, and they got up and arrayed themselves in armour. Odysseus and his men were four, and the sons of Dolius six; and Laertes and Dolius put their armour on among them, grey-headed as they were, warriors because they had to be. And when they had clothed their bodies in gleaming bronze they opened the doors and went out, and Odysseus led them.

Then Athena, daughter of Zeus, came near them in the likeness of Mentor, in shape and in voice; and much-enduring noble Odysseus was glad at the sight of her, and at once said to Telemachus, his dear son: "Telemachus, now you will learn this — having come yourself to the place of battle, where the best warriors are put to the test — not to bring disgrace on the house of your fathers; because we have always been outstanding in strength and in courage over all the earth."

And clear-headed Telemachus answered him: "You will see me, if you like, dear father, in the temper I am in now, bringing no disgrace on your house, just as you say."

So he spoke, and Laertes was glad and said: "What a day this is for me, kind gods. I am truly glad: my son and my son's son are competing with one another in courage."

Then grey-eyed Athena came near him and said: "Son of Arceisius, far the dearest of all my friends, make a prayer to the grey-eyed maiden and to father Zeus, and then raise your long spear high at once and hurl it."

So spoke Pallas Athena, and breathed great might into him. Then he prayed to the daughter of great Zeus, and raised his long spear high at once and hurled it, and struck Eupeithes through the helmet with its bronze cheek-piece. It did not stop the spear; the bronze went through, and he fell with a thud and his armour clanged about him.

Then Odysseus and his glorious son fell on the front-rank fighters and thrust at them with swords and double-pointed spears. And now they would have killed them all and cut them off from coming home, if Athena, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis, had not shouted aloud and checked the whole host:

"Hold off from grievous war, men of Ithaca, so that you may part as quickly as possible, and without bloodshed."

So spoke Athena, and pale fear seized them. And in their terror the weapons flew out of their hands and fell one and all to the ground as the goddess uttered her voice; and they turned towards the city, eager to save their lives.

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus gave a terrible shout, and gathered himself together and swooped on them like an eagle of lofty flight. And at that moment the son of Cronos cast a flaming thunderbolt, and down it fell in front of the grey-eyed daughter of the mighty father.

Then grey-eyed Athena said to Odysseus: "Son of Laertes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of the many tricks, hold your hand, and make the strife of equal war stop, in case the son of Cronos grows angry with you, Zeus, whose voice carries far."

So spoke Athena, and he obeyed her and was glad at heart. And then a solemn covenant between the two sides was made for all time to come by Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis, in the likeness of Mentor, in shape and in voice.
