Tale of the Bull and the Ass

Know, my daughter, that there was once a merchant who had a great deal of money and a great many men under him, and who was rich in cattle and camels. He had a wife and children too, and he lived out in the country, where he was an experienced farmer and devoted to his land.

Now Allah Most High had given him the gift of understanding the speech of every kind of beast and bird — but on pain of death if he ever told anyone he had it. So he kept it secret, out of plain fear.

In his cowshed he had a Bull and an Ass, each tied up in his own stall, right next to one another. And one day, as the merchant was sitting nearby with his servants and his children were playing around him, he heard the Bull say to the Ass:

"Health and joy to you, Father of Waking! You get rest and good service. Everything under you is swept clean and freshly watered. Men wait on you and feed you, and your ration is sifted barley and your drink is clean spring water — while I, wretched creature, am taken out in the middle of the night, and they put the plough on my neck and a thing they call a Yoke, and I wear myself out splitting the ground from sunrise to sunset. I am made to do more than I can, and to put up with every sort of ill-treatment from one night to the next; and then they take me back with my sides torn and my neck flayed and my legs aching and my eyelids raw with tears. Then they shut me in the byre and throw me beans and chopped straw with dirt and chaff in it, and I lie in dung and filth and stink all night long.

"But you — you are always in a place that has been swept and watered and cleaned out, and you are always lying at your ease, except now and then, and rarely enough, when the master has business and rides you into town and comes straight back with you. So it works out that I am worked and worn while you take your rest; you sleep while I lie awake; I am hungry while you eat your fill; and I get contempt while you get goodwill."

When the Bull had finished, the Ass turned to him and said, "Broad-Brow, you poor lost creature — whoever named you Bull-head was not lying. You have no forethought and no cunning, Father of a Bull; you are the simplest of simpletons, and you know nothing about taking good advice. Have you never heard what the wise man said?

	For other men I carry these hardships and this work,
	and theirs is the pleasure and mine is the care —
	like the bleacher who blackens his own face in the sun
	to whiten the clothes that other men will wear.

"But you, you fool, are full of eagerness. You slave and sweat in front of the master; you tear yourself and wear yourself out and kill yourself for somebody else's comfort. Have you never heard the saying, no one to guide you and you wander off the road? You go out at the call to dawn prayer and you do not come back until sundown, and all the long day you put up with every kind of hardship — beating and belabouring and foul language.

"Now listen to me, Sir Bull. When they tie you to that stinking manger, you paw the ground with your front hooves and lash out with your back ones and butt with your horns and bellow, and so they think you are contented. And when they throw down your fodder you fall on it greedily and hurry to line that fine fat belly of yours.

"If you take my advice it will go better for you, and you will have an easier life than mine. When you go out to the field and they lay that thing called a Yoke on your neck, lie down and do not get up again, even if they thrash you; and if you do get up, lie down a second time. And when they bring you home and offer you your beans, fall over backwards and only sniff at your food and back away from it and do not taste it, and be content with the chopped straw and the chaff. That way you can pretend to be ill. Keep it up for a day, or two days, or even three, and you will get a rest from all your toil and trouble."

When the Bull heard all this he knew the Ass was his friend, and thanked him. "Your advice is sound," he said, and prayed that every blessing might repay him, and cried, "Father of Waking, you have made up for everything I lack!"

(And the merchant, my daughter, understood every word of it.)

The next day the driver took the Bull and settled the plough on his neck and set him to work as usual; but the Bull began to shirk his ploughing, exactly as the Ass had advised. The ploughman beat him until he broke the yoke and bolted; but the man caught him and leathered him until the beast despaired of his life. Even so, he would do nothing but stand still and then drop down again, and he kept it up until the evening.

Then the herdsman led him home and put him in his stall. But he backed away from his manger, and did not stamp or rear or butt or bellow the way he usually did, which puzzled the man. He brought him the beans and the husks, and the Bull sniffed at them and left them, and lay down as far from them as he could get, and passed the whole night without eating.

The farmhand came back next morning, and seeing the manger still full of beans, the chopped straw untouched, and the ox lying on his back in a pitiful state with his legs stuck out and his belly swollen, he was worried about him and said to himself, "By Allah, he has certainly fallen sick — that is why he would not plough yesterday."

So he went to the merchant and reported, "Master, the Bull is ailing. He refused his fodder last night, and what is more he has not touched a scrap of it this morning."

Now the merchant knew perfectly well what all this meant, because he had overheard the conversation between the Bull and the Ass. So he said, "Take that rascal of a donkey, and put the yoke on his neck, and tie him to the plough, and make him do the Bull's work."

So the ploughman took the Ass and worked him the whole day long at the Bull's task; and when he flagged from weakness the man fed him the stick until his ribs were sore and his sides were sunken and his neck was flayed by the yoke. When he came home in the evening he could hardly drag one leg after another, front or back.

The Bull, meanwhile, had spent the day lying stretched out at full length and had eaten his fodder with an excellent appetite, and he never stopped calling down blessings on the Ass for his good advice — not knowing what had happened to the Ass on his account.

So when night came and the Ass came back into the byre, the Bull rose up to honour him and said, "May good news gladden your heart, Father of Waking! Thanks to you I have rested all day and eaten my food in peace and quiet."

But the Ass did not answer a word, for rage and heartburning and exhaustion and the beating he had taken; and he repented with the bitterest repentance there is, and said to himself, "This is what comes of my folly in giving good advice. As the saying goes — I was sitting at my ease, and nothing but my own meddling brought me unease. But I will keep my own worth in mind, and the nobility of my nature. For what does the poet say?

	Does the beautiful colour of the basil fail
	because a beetle has crawled over the leaf?
	And if a spider and a fly are living in it,
	does disgrace attach to the royal hall?
	The cowrie shell, I know, will pass as currency —
	but does that make the clear drop of the pearl worth less?

"And now I must think, and play a trick on him, and get him back to his place, or else I die."

Then he went wearily to his manger, while the Bull thanked him and blessed him.

"And in just the same way, my daughter," said the vizier, "you will die for want of sense. So sit still and say nothing, and do not put your life in this kind of danger — for by Allah, I am giving you the best advice I have, and it comes out of my love for you and my care for you."

"Father," she answered, "I must go up to this King, and I must be married to him."

"Do not do it," he said.

"I truly will," she said.

"If you will not be quiet and stay where you are," he replied, "I will do to you exactly what the merchant did to his wife."

"And what did he do?" she asked.

Know then, said the vizier, that after the Ass came back the merchant went out onto the terrace roof with his wife and his children, because it was a moonlit night with the moon at the full. The terrace looked down over the cowshed; and as he sat there with his children playing round him, the trader heard the Ass say to the Bull:

"Tell me, Father Broad-Brow — what do you mean to do tomorrow?"

"What else," the Bull answered, "but go on following your advice? It could not have been better, and it has given me rest and quiet, and I shall not depart from it by a hair. So when they bring me my food I shall refuse it, and blow my belly out, and play sick."

The Ass shook his head. "Do nothing of the sort, Father of a Bull."

"Why not?" asked the Bull.

"Because," said the Ass, "I am about to give you the best advice you have ever had. I heard our owner say to the herdsman: If the Bull does not get up from his place and do his work this morning, and if he backs off from his fodder again today, hand him over to the butcher to have his throat cut, and give the meat to the poor and make a bit of leather out of the hide. Now I am afraid for you on account of that. So take my advice before a disaster falls on you: when they bring your fodder, eat it, and get up, and bellow, and paw the ground — or our master will most certainly kill you. And peace be with you."

At that the Bull got up and lowed aloud and thanked the Ass, and said, "Tomorrow I will go out with them gladly." And he ate up all his food at once and licked the manger clean.

(All of this happened, and the owner was listening to every word.)

Next morning the trader and his wife went and sat down by the Bull's crib, and the driver came and led the Bull out; and the Bull, seeing his owner, whisked his tail and broke wind and frisked about so energetically that the merchant burst out laughing, and went on laughing until he fell over on his back.

His wife asked him, "What are you laughing at like that?"

"I laughed," he said, "at a secret something I heard and saw, and I cannot tell you or I shall die."

"You must tell me," she said, "and you must say why you were laughing, even if it kills you."

"I cannot reveal what beasts and birds say in their own language," he answered. "I would die."

"By Allah, you are lying," she said. "This is a mere excuse. You are laughing at nobody but me, and now you want to hide something from me. But by the Lord of the Heavens, if you do not tell me why, I will not live with you another day. I am leaving." And she sat down and cried.

"Curse it," said the merchant, "what are you crying for? Fear Allah, and leave this alone, and ask me no more questions."

"You have got to tell me why you laughed," she said.

"You know," he replied, "that when I prayed to Allah to grant me the understanding of the speech of beasts and birds, I swore a vow never to tell the secret to anybody, on pain of dropping dead on the spot."

"Never mind that," she cried. "Tell me what passed between the Bull and the Ass, and die this very hour if that is what you want." And she went on badgering him until he was worn out and quite beside himself.

So at last he said, "Send for your father and your mother, and our relatives, and some of the neighbours." Which she did; and he sent for the judge and his witnesses, meaning to make his will, and tell her the secret, and die.

He loved her very much — she was his cousin, his father's brother's daughter, and the mother of his children, and he had lived with her for a hundred and twenty years.

So when the whole family and all the neighbours had assembled, he said to them, "There is a strange business hanging over me, and it is of such a kind that if I tell the secret to anybody, I am a dead man."

At that every single person there said to the woman, "In Allah's name, drop this sinful obstinacy and admit that this is how the matter stands, before you end up killing your husband and the father of your children."

But she answered, "I will not let go of it until he tells me, even if it kills him."

So they gave up urging her; and the trader got up from among them and went off to an outbuilding to wash for prayer, meaning to come back afterwards and tell them the secret and die.

Now, daughter Shahrazad, that merchant kept about fifty hens in his outbuildings with a single rooster over them. And while he was getting himself ready to say goodbye to his household, he heard one of his many farm dogs address the Rooster in the Rooster's own language. The Rooster was flapping his wings and crowing at the top of his voice and jumping from one hen's back to another and treading them all in turn.

"Rooster," said the Dog, "how small your wits are, and how shameless your behaviour is! Bad luck to whoever raised you. Are you not ashamed of yourself, carrying on like that on a day like this?"

"And what," asked the Rooster, "has happened today?"

"Do you not know," said the Dog, "that our master is getting ready to die today? His wife is determined that he shall tell her the secret Allah taught him, and the moment he does, he dies. We dogs are all in mourning. And you clap your wings and crow your loudest and tread one hen after another. Is this an hour for amusing yourself and taking your pleasure? Have you no shame?"

"Then by Allah," said the Rooster, "our master is a half-wit and a man with no sense in him. If he cannot manage one single wife, his life is not worth keeping. Now I have about fifty ladies of my own. I please this one and cross that one; I starve one and stuff another; and by good government I have the lot of them well under control. And this master of ours claims to have wit and wisdom, and he has one wife, and does not know how to manage her."

"Then what," asked the Dog, "should the master do to get himself out of this fix?"

"He should get up this instant," said the Rooster, "and take a few switches off that mulberry tree, and give her a good thorough beating across the back and the ribs until she cries: I repent, my lord! I will never ask you a question as long as I live! And then let him beat her once more, and soundly. And when he has done that he can sleep without a care and enjoy his life. But this master of ours has neither sense nor judgement."

"Now, daughter Shahrazad," the vizier went on, "I will do to you what that husband did to that wife."

"And what did he do?" said Shahrazad.

He replied: When the merchant heard the wise words his Rooster spoke to his Dog, he got up in a hurry and went to his wife's room, cutting some mulberry switches on the way and hiding them there. Then he called to her, "Come into the inner room, so that I can tell you the secret where nobody can see me, and then die."

She went in with him, and he locked the door, and came down on her with such a beating — back and shoulders, ribs, arms and legs — saying all the while, "Are you going to spend your life asking questions about what does not concern you?" — that she was very nearly senseless.

Presently she cried out, "I am one of the repentant! By Allah, I will never ask you another question. I repent, truly and thoroughly."

Then she kissed his hands and his feet, and he led her out of the room as obedient as a wife should be. Her parents and the whole company were delighted, and the sadness and the mourning turned into joy and gladness. So the merchant learned how to run a household from his Rooster, and he and his wife lived together as happily as any two people until they died.

"And you too, my daughter," the vizier went on. "Unless you turn back from this business I will do to you what that trader did to his wife."

But she answered him very firmly. "I will never give it up, father, and this tale is not going to change my mind. Leave off this talk and this chatter. I will not listen to you; and if you refuse me, I will marry myself to him in spite of your nose. And I will go up to the King myself, alone, and say to him: I begged my father to marry me to you, and he refused, because he was determined to disappoint his lord and grudged the like of me to the like of you."

Her father asked, "Does it have to be?"

"It does," she answered.

At which the vizier, worn out with lamenting and arguing and persuading and dissuading her, all to no purpose, went up to King Shahryar and blessed him and kissed the ground before him, and told him the whole story of the dispute with his daughter from beginning to end, and how he intended to bring her to him that night.

The King was astonished beyond measure, because he had made a particular exception of the vizier's daughter. "Most faithful of my counsellors," he said, "how can this be? You know I have sworn by the Raiser of the Heavens that after I have gone in to her tonight I shall say to you tomorrow morning: Take her and kill her. And if you do not kill her, I will kill you in her place, without fail."

"May Allah guide you to glory and lengthen your life, O King of the age," the vizier answered. "It is she who has decided this. I have told her all that and more, but she will not listen to me, and she insists on spending this coming night with the King's Majesty."

So Shahryar was greatly pleased, and said, "Very well. Go and get her ready, and bring her to me tonight."

The vizier went back to his daughter and reported the order, saying, "May Allah not leave your father desolate by the loss of you!"

But Shahrazad was overjoyed. She got ready everything she needed, and said to her younger sister Dunyazad, "Pay close attention to what I am asking you to do. When I have gone in to the King I will send for you; and when you come to me, and see that he has had what he wants of me, then say to me: Sister, if you are not sleepy, tell me some new story, something delightful and delicious, to help the waking hours along. And I will tell you a tale which will be our deliverance, if it pleases Allah, and which will turn the King away from this blood-thirsty habit of his."

Dunyazad answered, "With love and gladness."

So when night came their father the vizier brought Shahrazad to the King, who was pleased at the sight of her and asked, "Have you brought me what I need?"

"I have," he answered.

But when the King took her to his bed and began to play with her and wanted to go in to her, she wept; which made him ask, "What is the matter?"

"O King of the age," she replied, "I have a younger sister, and I should dearly like to say goodbye to her tonight before I see the dawn."

So he sent for Dunyazad at once, and she came and kissed the ground between his hands, and he let her take a seat near the foot of the bed. Then the King got up and took his bride's maidenhead, and the three of them fell asleep.

But at midnight Shahrazad woke, and signalled to her sister Dunyazad, who sat up and said, "In Allah's name, sister, tell us some new story, something delightful and delicious, to pass away the waking hours of the last of the night."

"With joy and goodwill," answered Shahrazad, "if this pious and fortunate King will permit me."

"Tell on," said the King, who happened to be sleepless and restless and was therefore pleased at the prospect of hearing a story.

So Shahrazad was glad; and on the first night of the Thousand Nights and a Night she began with the
