King Sindibad and His Falcon

It is said — though Allah alone knows — that there was once a king among the kings of Fars who was fond of amusement and diversion, and especially of coursing and hunting. He had raised a falcon which he carried all night on his fist, and whenever he went hunting he took the bird with him; and he had a little golden cup made for her, hung round her neck, so that she could be given water out of it.

One day, as the King was sitting quietly in his palace, the chief falconer of the household suddenly spoke up: "O King of the age, this is a day made for hunting birds."

So the King gave the orders and set out with the hawk on his fist; and they rode cheerfully on until they came to a valley, where they set out a ring of nets for the hunt. And a gazelle came into the trap, and the King cried, "Whoever lets that gazelle spring over his head and loses her — that man I shall certainly kill."

They drew the nets in tighter round the gazelle, and she came near the King's own position; and there she planted herself on her haunches and crossed her forelegs over her breast, as though she were about to kiss the ground in front of him. He bent his head low to the creature in acknowledgement — and she bounded high over his head and made off into the waste.

At which the King turned round to his troops and saw them winking at one another and pointing at him. "Vizier," he asked, "what are my men saying?"

And the minister answered, "They are saying that you proclaimed that whoever let the gazelle spring over his head should be put to death."

"Now by the life of my own head," said the King, "I will go after her until I bring her back."

So he set off at a gallop on the gazelle's trail, and did not give up tracking her until he came to the foothills of a mountain range, where the quarry made for a cave. Then the King cast the falcon off at it, and she caught the gazelle up at once and swooped down and drove her talons into its eyes, dazing it and blinding it; and the King drew his mace and struck a blow that rolled the animal over. Then he dismounted, and cut the gazelle's throat and skinned the body and hung it from the pommel of his saddle.

Now this was the hour of the midday rest, and the country was parched and dry, and there was no water to be found anywhere; and the King was thirsty, and so was his horse. So he went about looking, until he saw a tree with water dripping from its branches, like melted butter.

The King was wearing leather gauntlets to protect him against poisons. He took the cup from the hawk's neck and filled it with the water and set it down in front of the bird — and the falcon struck at it with her claws and knocked the liquid over.

The King filled it a second time from the falling drops, thinking his hawk was thirsty; and again the bird struck the cup with her talons and overturned it.

Then the King grew angry with the hawk, and filled the cup a third time and offered it to his horse; and the hawk knocked it over with a flick of her wings.

"Allah confound you," said the King, "unluckiest of all flying things! You keep me from drinking, and you deprive yourself as well, and the horse too."

And he struck the falcon with his sword and cut off her wing. But the bird lifted her head and said to him by signs, "Look at the thing hanging in that tree."

So the King lifted his eyes, and saw a nest of vipers, whose drops of poison he had taken for water. And he was sorry then that he had struck off his falcon's wing; and he mounted and rode on with the dead gazelle until he reached the camp he had started from.

He threw the game to the cook, saying, "Take this and grill it," and sat down in his chair with the falcon still on his fist — and suddenly the bird gasped, and died. At which the King cried out in sorrow and remorse for having killed the falcon that had saved his life.

Now that is what happened in the case of King Sindibad; and I am certain that if I did what you want me to do, I should be as sorry as the man who killed his parrot.

"And how was that?" said the vizier.

And the King began to tell
