The Tale of the Ensorcelled Prince

Know then, my lord, that once my father was King of this city, and his name was Mahmud, and he was called Lord of the Black Islands, and owner of what are now these four mountains. He ruled seventy years, and then went to the mercy of the Lord, and I reigned as Sultan in his place.

I took as my wife my cousin, my father's brother's daughter, and she loved me with such an overflowing love that whenever I was away she would not eat and would not drink until she saw me again. She lived with me for five years — until a certain day when she went out to the baths, and I told the cook to hurry and get everything ready for our supper.

And I came into this palace and lay down on the bed where I usually slept, and told two of the girls to fan my face, one sitting at my head and the other at my feet. But I was troubled and made restless by my wife's absence and could not sleep; for although my eyes were shut, my mind and my thoughts were wide awake.

Presently I heard the slave girl at my head say to the one at my feet, "Mas'udah, how miserable our master is, and how wasted in his youth — and oh, the pity of his being betrayed like this by our mistress, the accursed whore."

The other answered, "Yes indeed. Allah curse every faithless and adulterous woman. But a man like our master, with all his fine qualities, deserves something better than this harlot who lies out every night."

Then the one at my head said, "Is our lord dumb, or good for nothing but blowing bubbles, that he never questions her?"

And the other said, "Shame on you. Does our lord know her ways? Does she leave him any choice? Why, does she not drug the cup she gives him every night before bedtime, and put bhang in it? So he sleeps and knows nothing about where she goes or what she does. But we know that after giving him the drugged wine she puts on her richest clothes and perfumes herself and goes out and stays out till daybreak; and then she comes back to him and burns a pastille under his nose, and he wakes out of that deathlike sleep."

When I heard what the slave girl said, the light went black in front of my eyes, and I thought night would never come.

Presently my uncle's daughter came back from the baths; and they laid the table for us, and we ate, and sat together a good half hour drinking our wine as we always did. Then she called for the particular wine I used to drink before sleeping, and handed me the cup; and I seemed to drink it as usual, but poured the contents into the breast of my robe, and lay down, and let her hear that I was asleep.

And then she cried, "Sleep out the night and never wake again! By Allah, I loathe you, and I loathe your whole body, and my soul turns in disgust from lying with you; and I cannot see the moment when Allah will snatch your life away."

Then she got up and put on her finest dress and perfumed herself and slung my sword over her shoulder; and opening the gates of the palace, she went out on her wicked way.

I got up and followed her out of the palace, and she threaded through the streets until she came to the city gate, where she spoke words I could not understand, and the padlocks dropped off by themselves as though they had been broken, and the leaves of the gate swung open. Out she went — and I after her, without her noticing anything — until at last she came to the mounds outside the city, and a reed fence built round a round-roofed hut of mud brick.

As she went in at the door I climbed onto the roof, from where I could see into the inside — and there my beautiful cousin had gone in to a hideous slave, a Black man whose upper lip was like the lid of a pot and whose lower lip was like the pot itself, lips that could have swept the gravel up off the floor of the hut. He was a leper besides, and a paralytic, lying on a heap of sugar-cane trash and wrapped in an old blanket and the filthiest rags and tatters.

She kissed the ground in front of him, and he lifted his head far enough to see her and said, "Damn you — what call had you to stay away all this time? Several of my brothers have been here, and drank their wine, and each of them had his young woman with him, and I was not willing to drink, because you were not here."

Then she said, "My lord, love of my heart, coolness of my eyes — do you not know that I am married to my cousin, whose very look I loathe, and that I hate myself when I am in his company? And if I were not afraid on your account, I would not let a single sun rise before I made his city a heap of ruins, where the raven would croak and the owl hoot, and the jackal and the wolf would den and hunt; no, I would have carried its very stones to the far side of Mount Kaf."

"You are lying, damn you," the slave answered. "Now I swear an oath by the courage and the honour of Black men — and do not imagine our manhood is the poor manhood of white men — that from this day on, if you stay away till this hour again, I will not keep company with you, and I will not put my body against your body. Do you play fast and loose with us, you cracked pot, so that we can satisfy your dirty lusts? Stinker! Bitch! Vilest of the vile whites!"

When I heard what he said, and saw with my own eyes what passed between those two wretches, the world went dark in front of my face and my soul did not know what place it was in.

But my wife stood there humbly weeping in front of him, and coaxing him, and saying, "My beloved, the very fruit of my heart — there is nobody left to cheer me but your dear self; and if you cast me off, who will take me in, my beloved, light of my eyes?" And she went on weeping and abasing herself to him until he condescended to be reconciled with her.

Then she was delighted, and got up and took off her clothes, down to her petticoat trousers, and said, "My master, what have you here for your servant to eat?"

"Uncover the basin," he grumbled. "You will find at the bottom of it the grilled bones of some rats we had for dinner. Pick at those. And then go to that slop pot, where you will find some leavings of beer you can drink."

So she ate, and drank, and washed her hands, and went and lay down beside the slave on the cane trash; and stripping herself stark naked, she crept in with him under his filthy coverlet and his rags and tatters.

When I saw my wife, my cousin, my uncle's daughter, do this thing, I clean lost my wits; and climbing down from the roof I went in and took the sword she had brought with her and drew it, determined to cut the pair of them down. I struck first at the slave's neck, and thought the sentence of death had fallen on him:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Eighth Night,

she went on: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the young enchanted prince said to the King:

When I struck the slave, meaning to take his head off, I thought I had killed him, for he gave a loud hissing groan. But I had cut only the skin and flesh of the throat and the two arteries. It woke my uncle's daughter; so I sheathed the sword and went out and back to the city, and came into the palace and lay down on my bed and slept till morning — when my wife roused me, and I saw she had cut off her hair and put on mourning clothes.

She said, "Cousin, do not blame me for what I am doing. Word has just reached me that my mother is dead, and that my father has been killed in a holy war, and that of my brothers one has died of a snakebite and the other by falling down a precipice. I can do nothing and should do nothing but weep and lament."

When I heard this I held back from any reproach, and said only, "Do as you like. I certainly will not thwart you."

She went on sorrowing and weeping and wailing for a whole year from one end of its circle to the other; and when the year was up she said to me, "I want to build myself a tomb in your palace, with a dome on it, which I will set apart for my mourning and will call the House of Lamentations."

And again I said, "Do as you like."

So she built herself a memorial tomb to mourn in, and set at the centre of it a dome, under which there showed a grave like a holy man's sepulchre. And there she carried the slave, and lodged him; but he was exceedingly weak from his wound and could do her no love service. He could only drink wine; and from the day he was hurt he never spoke a word, and yet he lived on, because his appointed hour had not come.

Every day, morning and evening, my wife went to him and wept and wailed over him and gave him wine and strong soups; and she did not leave off doing this for a second year. And I bore with her patiently and paid no attention.

One day, however, I went in to her unexpectedly, and found her weeping and beating her face and crying, "Why are you gone from my sight, delight of my heart? Speak to me, my life. Talk to me, my love." And then she recited:

	For love of you my patience fails, and though you may forget,
	I cannot, nor can my heart answer to any other love.
	Carry my body and carry my soul wherever you go,
	and where you pitch the camp let my body be buried;
	call my name over my grave, and an answer will come back —
	the moaning of my bones answering your cry.

Then she recited, weeping bitterly all the while:

	The day of my delight is the day when you come near,
	and the day of my terror is the day when you turn away.
	Though I tremble all night in my bitter dread of death,
	when I hold you in my arms I am free of all fear.

And once more she began:

	Though I might wake one morning with every happiness in my hand,
	though the whole world were mine and I reigned like the kings of Persia,
	all of it would be worth the wing of a gnat to me
	if I could not see your face, if I looked for you in vain.

When she had finished her words and her weeping for a moment, I said to her, "Cousin, let this mourning of yours be enough. There is little profit in pouring out tears."

"Do not thwart me," she answered, "in anything I do, or I will lay violent hands on myself."

So I held my peace and left her to go her own way; and she went on crying and keening and indulging her grief for yet another year.

At the end of the third year I grew weary of this long-drawn-out mourning; and one day I happened to go into the tomb chamber vexed and angry about some matter that had crossed me, and I suddenly heard her say, "My lord, I never hear you grant me a single word. Why do you not answer me, my master?" And she began reciting:

	O tomb! O tomb! is his beauty put into shadow?
	Have you darkened that face that was as bright as noon?
	O tomb! you are neither earth to me nor heaven —
	then how does it come about that in you my sun and my moon are joined?

When I heard verses like that, rage was heaped on top of my rage, and I cried out, "Well away! How long is this sorrow going to last?" And I began reciting back at her:

	O tomb! O tomb! is his horribleness put into shadow?
	Have you darkened that face that turns the stomach?
	O tomb! you are neither cesspool to me nor cooking pot —
	then how does it come about that in you soil and coal are joined?

When she heard this she sprang to her feet, crying, "Shame on you, you dog! All this is your doing. You wounded my heart's darling and worked me this bitter grief; and you have wasted his youth, so that for these three years he has lain in bed more dead than alive."

In my fury I cried, "You foulest of harlots and filthiest of whores — you who have been had by every slave you hire to have at you! Yes indeed, it was I who did this good deed." And snatching up my sword I drew it and went at her to cut her down.

But she laughed my words and my intention to scorn, and cried, "To heel, dog that you are! Alas for the past, which will never come again — and nobody can raise the dead. Allah has now delivered into my hand the man who did this to me, a deed that has burnt my heart with a fire that has not died and a flame that could not be quenched."

Then she stood up, and pronouncing some words I could not understand, she said, "By virtue of my sorcery, become half stone and half man." And I became what you see — unable to stand or to sit, neither dead nor alive.

What is more, she put a spell on the city with all its streets and gardens; and by her magic she turned the four islands into the four mountains round the tarn you were asking me about. And the citizens, who were of four different faiths — Muslim, Christian, Jew and Magian — she transformed by her enchantments into fish: the Muslims are the white ones, the Magians the red, the Christians the blue and the Jews the yellow.

And every day she tortures me and flogs me with a hundred strokes, each one of which draws floods of blood and cuts the skin of my shoulders into strips; and last of all she puts a hair shirt on my upper half and then throws these robes over it.

At this the young man shed tears again and began reciting:

	In patience, O my God, I endure my lot and my fate;
	I will bear whatever state You will for me.
	They oppress me; they torture me; they make my life a misery —
	and yet perhaps the happiness of Heaven will make up for my hard case.
	Yes, my life is narrowed by the ruin and the hatred of enemies,
	but Mustafa and Murtaza shall open Heaven's gate to me.

After this the Sultan turned to the young prince and said, "Young man, you have taken one grief away only to add another. But now, my friend — where is she? And where is the tomb the wounded slave is lying in?"

"The slave lies under that dome," said the young man, "and she sits in the chamber facing that door. Every day at sunrise she comes out and first strips me and whips me with a hundred strokes of the leather scourge, and I weep and shriek, but there is no power of movement in my lower limbs to keep her off me. When she has finished tormenting me she goes and visits the slave, bringing him wine and boiled meat. And tomorrow she will be here early."

"By Allah, young man," said the King, "I shall certainly do you a good turn that the world will not willingly let die, and an act of daring that will be talked about long after I am dead and gone."

Then the King sat down beside the young prince and talked with him until nightfall, when he lay down and slept. But as soon as the false dawn showed he got up and took off his outer clothes and bared his blade and hurried to the place where the slave lay.

There he found candles and lamps lit, and the smell of incense and ointments; and guided by these, he made for the slave and struck him one blow and killed him on the spot. After which he lifted him onto his back and threw him into a well in the palace. Then he came back, and putting on the slave's clothes, lay down full length inside the tomb chamber with the drawn sword close along his side.

An hour or so later the accursed witch came. First she went to her husband and stripped his clothes off, and taking a whip, flogged him cruelly while he cried out, "Ah — the state I am in is enough for me! Take pity on me, cousin!"

But she answered, "Did you take pity on me, and spare the life of the man I truly loved?"

Then she drew the hair shirt over his raw and bleeding skin, and threw the robe over the top of it, and went down to the slave with a goblet of wine and a bowl of meat broth in her hands. She came in under the dome weeping and wailing, "Well away!" and crying, "My lord, speak a word to me! My master, talk to me a while!" And she began to recite:

	How long is this harshness, this unlovingness, going to last?
	Are the floods of tears you have seen not enough for you?
	You draw out our separation on purpose —
	and if you meant to please my enemy, then you are satisfied.

Then she wept again and said, "My lord, speak to me! Talk to me!"

The King lowered his voice, and twisted his tongue, and spoke thickly and indistinctly, the way a man speaks who is very weak and whose throat has been cut: "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great."

Now when she heard the words she shouted for joy, and fell to the ground in a faint; and when her senses came back she asked, "My lord, can it be true that you have the power of speech?"

And the King, making his voice small and faint, answered, "My curse — do you deserve that I should talk to you and speak with you?"

"Why? What do you mean?" she said.

And he replied, "What I mean is that all the livelong day you torment your husband, and he keeps calling on heaven for help, until sleep is a stranger to me from evening till morning; and he prays and swears, cursing the two of us, you and me, and gives me no quiet and a great deal of trouble. If it were not for that I should have got my health back long ago. And that is what prevents me from answering you."

"With your leave," she said, "I will release him from the spell he is under."

"Release him," said the King, "and let us have some rest."

"To hear is to obey," she cried. And going from the tomb chamber to the palace, she took a metal bowl and filled it with water and spoke certain words over it that made the contents bubble and boil as a cauldron seethes over a fire. And with this she sprinkled her husband, saying, "By virtue of the dreadful words I have spoken — if you became like this by my spells, then come out of that form into your own former form."

And the young man shivered and shook; and then he rose to his feet, and rejoicing at his deliverance, cried aloud, "I testify that there is no god but God, and that truly Mohammed is His Apostle, whom Allah bless and keep!"

Then she said to him, screaming it into his face, "Get out, and do not come back here — for if you do I shall certainly kill you."

So he went out from between her hands; and she went back to the dome, and down into the tomb, and said, "My lord, come out to me, so that I can look at you and at your handsomeness."

The King answered in a faint, low voice, "What have you done? You have rid me of the branch but not of the root."

"My darling! My black one!" she asked. "What is the root?"

And he answered, "Shame on you, my curse. The people of this city and of the four islands, every night when it is half over, lift their heads out of the tank you have turned them into fish in, and cry to Heaven and call down its anger on me and on you; and that is the reason my body is baulked of its health. Go at once and set them free; then come to me and take my hand and raise me up, for a little strength is already coming back into me."

When she heard the King's words — and she still thought he was the slave — she cried joyfully, "My master, on my head and on my eyes be your command. In Allah's name!"

So she sprang to her feet, full of joy and gladness, and ran down to the tarn and took a little of its water in the palm of her hand:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Ninth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the young woman, the sorceress, took some of the tarn water in her hand and spoke words over it that could not be understood, the fish lifted their heads and stood up in that instant like men, the spell on the people of the city being lifted.

What had been a lake became a crowded capital again; the markets were thronged with people buying and selling, every citizen busy with his own trade; and the four hills became islands as they had been before.

Then the young woman, the wicked sorceress, went back to the King and — still thinking he was the slave — said to him, "My love, stretch out your honoured hand so that I can help you up."

"Come nearer to me," said the King in his faint, feigned voice.

She came close, as if to embrace him — and he took up the sword that lay hidden by his side and struck her across the breast, so that the point showed gleaming out behind her back. Then he struck her a second time and cut her in two, and threw her on the ground in two halves.

After that he went out and found the young man, now free of the spell, waiting for him, and wished him joy of his release; and the prince kissed his hand with many thanks.

"Will you stay in this city," said the King, "or come with me to my capital?"

"O King of the age," said the young man, "do you not know how far it is between you and your city?"

"Two and a half days," he answered.

At which the other said, "If you are asleep, O King, wake up. Between you and your city is a year's march for a well-girt walker; and you would not have come here in two and a half days except that the city was under enchantment. And I, O King, will never leave you — not even for the blink of an eye."

The King was delighted at this and said, "Thanks be to Allah, who has bestowed you on me! From this hour you are my son, and my only son, for in all my life I have never been blessed with a child."

At which they embraced and were overjoyed. And reaching the palace, the prince who had been under the spell informed his lords and his great men that he was about to visit the Holy Places as a pilgrim, and told them to get ready everything necessary for the occasion.

The preparations took ten days, after which he set out with the Sultan, whose heart was burning with longing for the city he had been absent from for a whole twelvemonth. They travelled with an escort of Mamluks carrying all sorts of precious gifts and rarities, and they did not stop travelling day or night for a full year, until they came near the Sultan's capital and sent messengers on ahead to announce that they were coming.

Then the vizier and the whole army came out to meet him in joy and gladness, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their King again; and the troops kissed the ground before him and wished him joy of his safe return. He came in and took his seat on his throne, and the minister came before him; and when he had been told everything that had happened to the young prince, he congratulated him on his narrow escape.

When order had been restored throughout the land, the King gave gifts to a great many of his people, and said to the vizier, "Bring me the fisherman who brought us the fish."

So he sent for the man who had been the first cause of the city and its citizens being delivered from enchantment; and when he came into the presence, the Sultan gave him a robe of honour and asked him about his circumstances and whether he had any children. The fisherman told him he had two daughters and a son. So the King sent for them, and took one daughter as his wife and gave the other to the young prince, and made the son his head treasurer.

Furthermore he invested his vizier with the sultanate of the City in the Black Islands, which had belonged to the young prince, and sent with him the escort of fifty armed slaves, together with robes of honour for all the emirs and grandees. The vizier kissed his hands and went on his way; while the Sultan and the prince stayed at home in all the comfort and delight of life. And the fisherman became the richest man of his age, and his daughters were married to kings, until death came to them all.

And yet, O King — this is not more wonderful than the story of
