The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad
(Part 1 of 3)

Once upon a time there was a porter in Baghdad, a bachelor, and one who meant to stay unmarried.

It happened one day, as he was standing about in the street leaning idly on his carrying-crate, that a respectable woman came and stood in front of him, in a cloak of Mosul silk embroidered with gold and edged with brocade; her walking shoes were worked with gold as well, and her hair hung down in long plaits. She lifted her face veil and showed two black eyes fringed with jet lashes, whose glances were soft and languishing and whose perfect beauty never stopped coaxing; and she spoke to the porter in the smoothest tones and the choicest language.

"Take up your crate and follow me."

The porter was so dazzled he could hardly believe he had heard her right, but he shouldered his basket in a great hurry, saying to himself, "O day of good luck! O day of Allah's grace!" And he walked after her until she stopped at the door of a house.

There she knocked, and an old man came out to her, a Christian, to whom she gave a gold piece and got in return what she wanted of strained wine, as clear as olive oil; and she set it carefully in the hamper and said, "Lift, and follow."

"By Allah," said the porter, "this is a lucky day indeed, a day fit for the granting of everything a man could wish for."

He hoisted the crate up again and followed her, until she stopped at a fruiterer's shop and bought Syrian apples and Ottoman quinces and Omani peaches, and cucumbers grown on the Nile, and Egyptian limes and Sultani oranges and citrons; and besides these, jasmine from Aleppo, scented myrtle berries, Damascus water lilies, privet flower and camomile, blood-red anemones, violets, pomegranate blossom, sweet briar and narcissus. She set the whole lot in the porter's crate and said, "Up with it."

So he lifted, and followed her, until she stopped at a butcher's stall and said, "Cut me ten pounds of mutton." She paid him his price, and he wrapped it in a banana leaf, and she laid it in the crate and said, "Hoist, porter."

He hoisted accordingly, and followed her as she walked on until she stopped at a grocer's, where she bought dried fruit and pistachio kernels, raisins from Tihamah, shelled almonds and everything else wanted for dessert; and she said to the porter, "Lift, and follow me."

So up he went with his hamper and after her, until she stopped at the confectioner's, and there she bought an earthenware platter and piled it with every kind of sweet in the shop — open-worked tarts and fritters scented with musk, and soap-cakes, and lemon loaves and preserved melon, and Zaynab's combs, and ladies' fingers, and judge's titbits, and goodies of every description — and put the platter in the porter's crate.

At which he said, being a cheerful man, "You should have told me, and I would have brought a pony or a she-camel along to carry all this shopping."

She smiled, and gave him a little cuff on the back of the neck, and said, "Step out, and do not overdo the talking. Your wage will not be lacking, Allah willing."

Then she stopped at a perfumer's and took ten sorts of scented water from him — rose scented with musk, orange flower, water lily, willow flower, violet and five others. She also bought two loaves of sugar, a bottle for spraying perfume, a lump of male incense, aloe-wood, ambergris and musk, and candles of Alexandrian wax; and she put the whole lot into the basket, saying, "Up with your crate, and after me."

He did it, and followed until she stood in front of the greengrocer's, where she bought pickled safflower and olives, in brine and in oil, with tarragon and cream cheese and hard Syrian cheese; and she stowed them away in the crate and said, "Take up your basket and follow me."

He did, and went after her until she came to a fine mansion fronted by a spacious court — a tall, handsome place to which columns gave both strength and grace; and the gate had two leaves of ebony inlaid with plates of red gold.

The lady stopped at the door and, turning her face veil aside, knocked softly with her knuckles, while the porter stood behind her thinking of nothing at all except her beauty and her loveliness.

Presently the door swung back and both leaves opened; and he looked to see who had opened it — and it was a lady of tall figure, some five feet high, a model of beauty and loveliness, brilliance and symmetry and perfect grace. Her forehead was flower-white; her cheeks like the anemone, ruddy and bright; her eyes were the eyes of the wild heifer or the gazelle, with eyebrows like the crescent moon that ends Sha'aban and begins Ramadan; her mouth was the ring of Solomon; her lips coral red, and her teeth like a line of strung pearls or of camomile petals. Her throat recalled the antelope's; and her breasts, like two pomegranates of exactly the same size, stood as though at bay; her body rose and fell in waves under her dress like the folds of a length of brocade; and her navel would have held an ounce of benzoin ointment. In short she was the woman the poet meant when he said:

	Cast your eye on the sun and moon of the palace;
	enjoy her flower-like face and her fragrant light.
	Your eyes will never see hair so black
	framing a brow so purely white.
	The ruddy rose of her cheek makes her claim for her,
	though we cannot name the name of the beauty we describe.
	As her walk sways, I smile at hips so wide
	and weep to see how slight the waist is that carries them.

When the porter looked at her his wits were waylaid and his senses stormed, so that the crate very nearly fell off his head; and he said to himself, "Never in my life have I seen a day more blessed than this one."

Then the lady who kept the door said to the lady who had done the shopping, "Come in from the gate and relieve this poor man of his load."

So the caterer went in, followed by the doorkeeper and the porter, and they went on until they reached a spacious ground-floor hall, built with admirable skill and decorated with every kind of colour and carving, with upper balconies and groined arches and galleries and cupboards and alcoves with curtains hanging in front of them. In the middle stood a great basin full of water with a fine fountain in it; and at the upper end, on the raised dais, was a couch of juniper wood set with gems and pearls, with a canopy over it like mosquito curtains, of red satin silk, looped up with pearls as big as filberts and bigger.

And on the couch sat a lady bright of face, with a brow beaming brilliance, the dream philosophy dreams of; whose eyes were loaded with the magic of Babylon and whose eyebrows were arched like a bow for archery; whose breath breathed ambergris and perfume, and whose lips were sugar to taste and carnelian to look at. Her figure was straight as a single upright stroke of the pen, and her face shamed the noon sun's radiance; and she was like a galaxy, or a dome with golden inlay, or a bride displayed in her choicest finery, or a noble girl of Arabia. The poet sang of her exactly right when he said:

	Her smiles show two rows of pearls,
	camomile buds or a spray of frost.
	Her hair strays down like night let loose
	and her light shames the light of dawn.

The third lady rose from the couch and came forward with a gracefully swaying walk until she reached the middle of the room, and said to her sisters, "Why are you standing about? Take it down off this poor man's head."

So the caterer went and stood in front of him, and the doorkeeper behind him, while the third helped them; and they lifted the load off the porter's head, and emptied it of everything in it, and put each thing in its place. And finally they gave him two gold pieces and said, "Off you go, porter."

But he did not go. He stood looking at the ladies and admiring what uncommon beauty they had, and what pleasant manners and kind natures — he had never seen better — and he looked wistfully at that good store of wines and sweet-scented flowers and fruit and everything else. He was astonished too, beyond all astonishment, particularly at seeing no man about the place; and he lingered.

At which the eldest lady said, "What is the matter with you, that you do not go? Perhaps your wage is too small?" And turning to her sister the caterer, she said, "Give him another dinar."

But the porter answered, "By Allah, my lady, it is not the wage. My hire is never more than two dirhams. But the truth is that my heart and my soul are taken up with you and with your situation. I wonder to see you on your own with never a man about you, and not a soul to keep you company. And you know perfectly well that a minaret topples over unless it stands on four legs — and you are wanting that same fourth. And women's pleasure without a man is short measure, as the poet said:

	Do you not see that for our joy we want four things in all:
	the harp and the lute, the flute and the flageolet;
	and let them be companioned by four scents —
	rose, myrtle, anemone and violet.
	And all eight will not please if you withhold four more:
	good wine, and youth, and gold, and a pretty companion.

"You are three, and you want a fourth, who should be a person of good sense and discretion, sharp-witted and able to keep a secret carefully."

His words pleased them and amused them a great deal, and they laughed at him and said, "And who is going to give us any guarantee of that? We are unmarried women, and we are afraid to trust our secret where it may not be kept — for we have read in a certain chronicle the lines of one Ibn al-Sumam:

	Hold your secret fast and unfold it to nobody;
	a secret is lost the moment that secret is told.
	If your own breast fails to hold your secret in,
	how can you hope that another man's breast will hold it?

"And Abu Nowas said it well on the same subject:

	Whoever puts his secret into another man's hand
	deserves to have the brand burnt on his forehead."

When the porter heard this he answered, "By your lives! I am a man of sense and discretion, who has read books and studied chronicles. I reveal what is fair and conceal what is foul, and I act as the poet advises:

	None but the good keep a secret,
	and good men keep it unrevealed.
	With me it is a well-shut house
	with the locks keyless and the door sealed."

When the young women heard his verse and the way he applied it to them, they said, "You know we have laid out all our money on this place. Now tell us — have you anything to offer us in return for entertainment? For we certainly will not let you sit in our company and be our drinking companion and look at faces as fair and rare as ours without paying a round sum. Do you not know the saying:

	Without hope of gain, Love is not worth a grain?"

To which the doorkeeper added, "If you bring something, you are something; if nothing, be off with you — you are nothing."

But the caterer broke in and said, "No, sisters, leave off teasing him. By Allah, he has not failed me today; anyone else would never have kept his patience with me. Whatever his charge comes to, I will take it on myself."

The porter, overjoyed, kissed the ground before her and thanked her, saying, "By Allah, this money is the first fruit this day has given me."

Hearing this they said, "Sit down, and welcome to you." And the eldest lady added, "By Allah, we cannot let you join us except on one condition, and this is it: that no questions are asked about what does not concern you, and that being contrary is soundly flogged."

"I agree to that, my lady," the porter answered. "On my head and my eyes be it. Look — I am dumb. I have no tongue."

Then the caterer got up, and tightening her girdle, set the table by the fountain and put the flowers and sweet herbs in their jars, and strained the wine and ranged the flasks in a row and made everything else ready. Then she sat down, she and her sisters, with the porter in the middle of them — and he kept thinking he must be dreaming.

She took up the wine flagon and poured the first cup and drank it off, and a second, and a third. After that she filled a fourth cup and handed it to one of her sisters; and last of all she crowned a goblet and passed it to the porter, saying:

	"Drink the dear draught, drink free and glad —
	the drink that heals every grief and pain."

He took the cup in his hand and, bowing low, gave her his best thanks, and improvised:

	"Do not drain the bowl except with a trusted friend,
	a man of worth whose good old blood is known to everybody.
	For wine, like the wind, takes its sweetness from what is sweet,
	and stinks when it happens to blow over a stench."

And he added:

	"Do not drain the bowl except from a dear hand like yours.
	The cup calls your gifts to mind — and you are the gift of wine."

After reciting this couplet he kissed their hands and drank, and was drunk, and sat swaying from side to side, and went on:

	"Every drink with blood in it the Law holds unclean
	except one — the blood shed by the vine.
	Fill! Fill! take all my wealth, inherited or earned;
	you fawn! a willing ransom for those eyes of yours."

Then the caterer crowned a cup and gave it to the doorkeeper, who took it from her hand and thanked her and drank. Then she poured again and passed it to the eldest lady, sitting on the couch; and filled yet another and handed it to the porter. He kissed the ground before them, and after drinking and thanking them began reciting again:

	"Here! Here! by Allah, here!
	Cups of the sweet, the dear!
	Fill me a brimming bowl —
	it is the Fountain of Life I ask for."

Then the porter stood up in front of the mistress of the house and said, "My lady, I am your slave, your Mamluk, your bondsman, your very own property." And he began reciting:

	"A slave of slaves is standing at your door,
	praising your generous kindness and your gifts.
	Beauty! may he come in a while to enjoy
	your charms? for Love and I will never part."

She said to him, "Drink; and health and happiness go with your drinking."

So he took the cup and kissed her hand and recited these lines in a sing-song:

	"I gave her good old wine that, like her cheeks,
	blushed red, or like flame flaring up out of a furnace.
	She kissed the brim and said, smiling all over,
	how dare you serve people's cheeks for people to drink?
	'Drink!' said I. 'These are my tears, and their colour
	is heart's blood that sighs have boiled in the cup.'"

She answered him with this couplet:

	"If you have shed tears of blood for me, my friend,
	then let me drink them up, by your head and your eyes!"

Then the lady took the cup and drank it off to her sisters' health; and they did not stop drinking, with the porter in the middle of them, and dancing and laughing and reciting verses and singing ballads and refrains.

All this time the porter was carrying on with them — kissing, playing, biting, handling, groping, fingering; while one of them thrust a dainty morsel into his mouth and another slapped him, and this one cuffed his cheeks and that one threw sweet flowers at him. And he was in the very paradise of pleasure, as though he were sitting in the seventh sphere among the houris, who are the maidens of Heaven.

They went on like this until the wine started playing tricks in their heads and getting the better of their wits. And when the drink had beaten them, the doorkeeper stood up and pulled her clothes off until she was stark naked. She did let her hair down over her body by way of a shift; and then she threw herself into the basin and disported herself and dived like a duck and swam up and down, and took water into her mouth and squirted it all over the porter, and washed her limbs, and between her breasts, and inside her thighs, and all round her navel.

Then she came up out of the cistern and threw herself down on the porter's lap and said, "My lord, my love, what do you call this?" — pointing to herself.

"I call that your slit," said the porter.

"Wah! wah!" she said. "Are you not ashamed to use a word like that?" And she caught him by the collar and cuffed him soundly.

"Your womb, then," he said; and she struck him a second slap, crying, "Oh fie, oh fie — that is another ugly word. Have you no shame in you at all?"

"Your cunny," he said; and she cried, "You! Are you completely destitute of modesty?" and thumped him and bashed him.

Then the porter cried, "Your clitoris" — at which the eldest lady came down on him with a still sorer beating, and said, "No."

"It is so," he said. And the porter went on calling the same article by a variety of other names; and whatever he said, they beat him more and more, until his neck ached and swelled with the blows he had taken. And in this way they made a butt of him and a laughing stock.

At last he turned on them and asked, "And what do you women call it?"

To which the girl answered, "The basil of the bridges."

"Thank Allah for my safety!" cried the porter. "Help me and be kind to me, O basil of the bridges!"

They passed the cup round and tossed the bowl off again; and then the second lady stood up, and stripping off all her clothes, threw herself into the cistern and did as the first had done. Then she came out of the water and threw her naked body down on the porter's lap and pointed to herself and said, "Light of my eyes, do tell me the name of this."

He answered as before, "Your slit."

"Has a word like that no shame for you?" she said; and cuffed him and buffeted him until the room rang with the blows. And then she said, "Oh fie! Oh fie! How can you say that without blushing?"

He suggested, "The basil of the bridges." But she would not have it, and said, "No! No!" and struck him and slapped him on the back of the neck.

So he began calling out every name he knew — "Your slit, your womb, your cunny, your clitoris" — and the girls kept saying, "No! No!"

So he said, "I stick to the basil of the bridges." And all three of them laughed until they fell over on their backs, and laid slaps on his neck, and said, "No! No! That is not its proper name."

At which he cried, "Sisters — what is its name?"

And they answered, "What do you say to the husked sesame seed?"

Then the caterer put her clothes back on, and they fell to carousing again; but the porter kept moaning, "Oh! and Oh!" over his neck and shoulders, and the cup went merrily round and round for a good hour.

After that the eldest and handsomest lady stood up and stripped her clothes off — at which the porter took his own neck in his hands and rubbed it and massaged it, saying, "My neck and shoulders are on the way of Allah!"

Then she threw herself into the basin and swam and dived, disported herself and washed; and the porter looked at her naked figure as though she were a slice of the moon, and at her face with the sheen of the full moon on it, or like the dawn when it brightens; and he took in her noble height and shape and those glorious forms that quivered as she moved, for she was as naked as the Lord made her.

Then he cried, "Alack! Alack!" and began to address her, putting it into these couplets:
