The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad
(Part 2 of 3)

	"If I compare your shape to the green bough
	my comparison fails and I make a bad mistake;
	for the bough is at its finest the more it is clothed
	and you are at your finest stark naked."

When the lady heard his verses she came up out of the basin and, seating herself on his lap and knees, pointed to herself and said, "My little lord, what is the name of this?"

"The basil of the bridges," he said.

"Bah, bah!" she said.

"The husked sesame," he said.

"Pooh, pooh!" she said.

Then he said, "Your womb"; and she cried, "Fie, fie! Are you not ashamed of yourself?" and cuffed him on the back of the neck.

And whatever name he gave, declaring, "That is it," she beat him and cried, "No! no!" — until at last he said, "Sisters, what is its name?"

She replied, "It is called the Inn of Abu Mansur."

At which the porter said, "Ha, ha! Allah be praised for a safe deliverance! O Inn of Abu Mansur!"

Then she came out and dressed, and the cup went round for a full hour.

At last the porter got up and stripped off all his clothes and jumped into the tank, and swam about and washed under his bearded chin and under his arms, exactly as they had done. Then he came out and threw himself into the first lady's lap, and rested his arms on the doorkeeper's lap, and laid his legs in the caterer's lap, and pointed to himself and said, "My mistresses — what is the name of this article?"

They all laughed at him until they fell over on their backs, and one said, "Your pintle!"

But he answered, "No!" and gave each of them a bite by way of a forfeit.

Then they said, "Your pizzle!" and he cried, "No," and gave each of them a hug:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Tenth Night,

her sister Dunyazad said, "Finish your story for us." And she answered, "With joy and goodwill."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the girls did not stop saying to the porter, "Your prickle, your pintle, your pizzle," and he did not stop kissing and biting and hugging until his heart was satisfied, and they laughed until they could laugh no more.

At last one of them said, "Well then, brother — what is it called?"

"Do you not know?" said he.

"No!" said they.

"Its true name," he said, "is the mule Burst-all, which browses on the basil of the bridges, and munches the husked sesame, and spends the night at the Inn of Abu Mansur."

Then they laughed until they fell over on their backs, and went back to their carousing; and they went on like this until night began to fall.

Then they said to the porter, "In Allah's name, master — up, and on with those sorry old shoes of yours, and turn your face and show us the breadth of your shoulders."

"By Allah," he said, "parting with my soul would be easier for me than parting from you. Come, let us join the night to the day, and tomorrow morning each of us will go his own way."

"On my life," said the caterer, "let him stay with us, so that we can laugh at him. We could live out our whole lives and never meet his like; he really is a merry rogue and a witty one."

So they said, "You may not stay with us tonight except on the condition that you submit to our orders, and that whatever you see, you ask no questions about it and do not inquire into the reason for it."

"All right," he answered.

And they said, "Go and read the writing over the door."

So he got up and went to the entrance, and there he found written in gold wash: Whoever speaks of what does not concern him shall hear what does not please him.

The porter said, "Be witnesses against me that I will not speak of what does not concern me."

Then the caterer got up and set food in front of them and they ate; after which they moved from one drinking place to another, and she lit the lamps and the candles and burned ambergris and aloe-wood, and set out fresh fruit and the wine service; and they fell to carousing and talking about their lovers.

And they did not stop eating and drinking and chatting, nibbling dried fruit and laughing and playing tricks, for a good hour — when there came a knock at the gate.

The knocking did not disturb the party in the least, but one of them got up to see what it was, and came back presently saying, "Truly our pleasure tonight is going to be perfect."

"How is that?" they asked.

"At the gate," she answered, "there are three Persian kalandars — wandering holy beggars under a vow — with their beards and their heads and their eyebrows all shaved off; and all three of them blind in the left eye, which is certainly a strange coincidence. They are foreigners from the land of Rum, with the marks of travel plain on them; they have only just arrived in Baghdad, this being their first visit to our city; and the reason they are knocking at our door is simply that they cannot find a lodging.

"Indeed one of them said to me: perhaps the owner of this house will let us have the key of his stable, or some old outbuilding where we can pass the night. For evening had caught them out, and being strangers in the country they knew nobody who would shelter them. And sisters — each one of them is a figure of fun in his own way; and if we let them in we shall have something to make sport of."

She went on persuading them until they said, "Let them in — and make the usual condition with them, that they do not speak of what does not concern them, in case they hear what does not please them."

So she was delighted, and went to the door, and came back with the three one-eyed men, whose beards and moustaches were shaved clean off. They gave their greetings and stood well back out of respect; but the three ladies rose to them and welcomed them and wished them joy of their safe arrival, and made them sit down.

The kalandars looked round the room and saw it was a pleasant place, swept clean and decorated with flowers, the lamps burning and the smoke of the perfumes spiralling up into the air; and besides the dessert and the fruit and the wine there were three lovely girls who might well be unmarried. So they exclaimed all in one voice, "By Allah, this is good!"

Then they turned to the porter and saw he was a merry-faced fellow, though by no means sober, and sore after his slappings. So they took him for one of themselves and said, "A beggar like us — Arab or foreigner, whichever."

But when the porter heard this he got up and, fixing his eyes fiercely on them, said, "Sit there and do not overdo the talking! Have you not read what is written over the door? It hardly suits fellows who come to us like paupers to wag their tongues at us."

"We beg your pardon, fakir," they answered, "and our heads are between your hands."

The ladies laughed themselves silly at the squabble; and making peace between the kalandars and the porter, they seated their new guests in front of food, and they ate. Then they all sat together, and the doorkeeper served them with drink; and as the cup went merrily round, the porter said to the beggars, "And you, brothers — have you no story or rare adventure to entertain us with?"

Now the warmth of the wine had gone to their heads, and they called for musical instruments; and the doorkeeper brought them a tambourine from Mosul, a lute from Iraq and a Persian harp. And each beggar took one and tuned it — this one the tambourine and those two the lute and the harp — and struck up a merry tune, while the ladies sang so lustily that there was a tremendous noise.

And while they were carrying on, somebody knocked at the gate, and the doorkeeper went to see what the matter was.

Now the reason for that knocking, O King (said Shahrazad), was this. The Caliph, Harun al-Rashid, had come out of the palace as he did now and then, to amuse himself in the city that night and to see and hear what new thing was stirring. He was dressed as a merchant, and he was attended by Ja'afar his vizier and by Masrur his executioner.

As they walked about the city their way led them towards the house of the three ladies, where they heard the loud noise of musical instruments and singing and merriment. So the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "I have a great desire to go into this house and hear those songs and see who is singing them."

"O Commander of the Faithful," said Ja'afar, "these people are certainly drunk on wine, and I am afraid some mischief may come to us if we get among them."

"There is no help for it, I must go in," the Caliph replied. "And I want you to think up some pretext for our turning up among them."

"I hear and I obey," said Ja'afar; and he knocked at the door, at which the doorkeeper came out and opened it.

Then Ja'afar came forward and, kissing the ground before her, said, "My lady, we are merchants from the town of Tiberias. We arrived in Baghdad ten days ago, and put up at the merchants' caravanserai, and sold all our goods. Now a certain trader invited us to an entertainment tonight; so we went to his house and he set food before us and we ate; then we sat drinking with him for an hour or so, when he gave us leave to go. And we went out from him in the darkness of the night, and being strangers we could not find our way back to our inn. So perhaps out of your kindness and courtesy you will let us stay with you tonight — and Heaven will reward you."

The doorkeeper looked them over, and seeing them dressed as merchants and looking grave and substantial men, she went back to her sisters and repeated Ja'afar's story; and they took pity on the strangers and said to her, "Let them in."

She opened the door to them, and they said, "Have we your leave to come in?"

"Come in," she said. And the Caliph came in, followed by Ja'afar and Masrur; and when the girls saw them they rose in respect and made them sit down and saw to their wants, saying, "Welcome, and well come, and good cheer to our guests — but on one condition."

"What is that?" they asked.

And one of the ladies answered, "Do not speak of what does not concern you, in case you hear what does not please you."

"Just so," they said; and sat down to their wine and drank deep.

Presently the Caliph looked at the three kalandars and, seeing every one of them blind in the left eye, wondered at the sight; then he looked at the girls and was startled, and marvelled beyond all marvelling at their beauty and loveliness.

They went on carousing and talking, and said to the Caliph, "Drink!"

But he replied, "I am under a vow to go on pilgrimage," and drew back from the wine.

At that the doorkeeper got up and spread a tablecloth worked with gold in front of him, and set a porcelain bowl on it, into which she poured willow-flower water with a lump of snow and a spoonful of sugar candy. The Caliph thanked her, and said to himself, "By Allah, I will repay her tomorrow for the kindness she has done me."

The others turned back to talking and carousing; and when the wine had got the better of them, the eldest lady, who ruled the house, stood up and made them a bow and took the caterer by the hand and said, "Get up, sister, and let us do what we have to do."

They both answered, "Just so."

Then the doorkeeper stood up and set about removing the table service and the remains of the feast; and she renewed the pastilles and cleared the middle of the room. Then she made the kalandars sit on a sofa at the side of the dais, and seated the Caliph and Ja'afar and Masrur on the other side of the room; after which she called the porter and said, "How poor your manners are! You are not a stranger now — you are one of the household."

So he stood up and, tightening his waistcloth, asked, "What would you like me to do?"

And she answered, "Stand where you are."

Then the caterer got up and set a low chair in the middle of the room; and opening a closet, called to the porter, "Come and help me."

So he went to help her — and saw two black bitches with chains round their necks.

"Take hold of them," she said. And he took them and led them into the middle of the room.

Then the lady of the house got up and tucked her sleeves back above her wrists, and taking a scourge, said to the porter, "Bring one of the bitches forward."

He brought her forward, dragging her by the chain, and the bitch wept and shook her head at the lady; but the lady came down on her with blows on the skull, and the bitch howled, and the lady did not stop beating her until her own forearm gave out.

Then, throwing the scourge out of her hand, she pressed the bitch to her breast and wiped away her tears with her hands and kissed her head.

Then she said to the porter, "Take her away and bring the second." And when he brought her, she did to her exactly as she had done to the first.

Now the Caliph's heart was touched at these cruel doings; his chest tightened and he lost all patience in his desire to know why the two bitches were beaten like that. He threw a wink at Ja'afar, wanting him to ask; but the minister turned to him and said with a sign, "Be silent."

Then the doorkeeper said to the mistress of the house, "My lady, get up and go to your place, so that I in my turn can do what I have to do."

She answered, "Just so"; and taking her seat on the couch of juniper wood, decorated with gold and silver, she said to the doorkeeper and the caterer, "Now do what you have to do."

At which the doorkeeper sat down on a low seat by the side of the couch; but the caterer went into a closet and brought out of it a satin bag with green fringes and two gold tassels. She stood in front of the lady of the house and shook the bag and drew a lute out of it, which she tuned by tightening the pegs; and when it was in perfect order she began to sing these verses:
