The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad
(Part 3 of 3)

	"You are what I wish for, you are what I aim at,
	and when, O Love, I see your face
	the mansion of heaven opens;
	but I see Hell when I lose the sight of you.
	From you comes madness — and no less
	from you come the highest joy and ecstasy.
	Nor, in my love for you, do I fear
	shame or blame, hatred or spite.
	When Love was enthroned inside my heart
	I tore the veil of modesty apart;
	and Love does not stop tearing that veil
	and bringing disgrace down on grace.
	I put on the robe of sickness then,
	but secrecy was torn to rags.
	And so my love and my longing heart
	proclaim your highest and most supreme power;
	the teardrop running down my cheek
	tells the tale of my dishonour;
	and everything hidden was seen by everybody
	and my whole riddle was read out right.

	Heal me of my sickness, then, for you
	are both the sickness and the cure!
	But the woman whose cure is in your hand
	will never be free of ruin and blight.
	Burn me with those eyes that rain light down;
	kill me with the swords of imagination.
	How many has the sword of Love laid low
	for all their high position?
	And yet I will never stop pining,
	nor will I run away into forgetting.
	Love is my health, my faith, my joy,
	in public and in private, right or wrong.
	Happy are the eyes that see your charms,
	that gaze on you as much as they please!
	Yes — of my purest wish and my own will,
	the slave of Love is what I shall always be called."

When the girl heard this lament in quatrains she cried out, "Alas! Alas!" and tore her clothes, and fell to the ground in a faint. And the Caliph saw the scars of the palm rod on her back and the welts of the whip, and marvelled beyond all wondering.

Then the doorkeeper got up and sprinkled water on her and brought her a fresh and very fine dress and put it on her.

But when the company saw all this their minds were troubled, because they had no idea of the situation and did not know the story behind it. So the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "Did you not see the scars on that girl's body? I cannot keep quiet or be easy until I learn the truth about her condition, and the story of this other girl, and the secret of the two black bitches."

But Ja'afar answered, "Our lord, they made it a condition with us that we should not speak of what does not concern us, in case we hear what does not please us."

Then the doorkeeper said, "By Allah, sister, come here and finish this service for me."

"With joy and goodwill," the caterer replied. So she took the lute and leaned it against her breast and swept the strings with her fingertips, and began to sing:

	"Give my eyes back the sleep that has been stolen from them so long,
	and tell me where my reason has fled to.
	I learned that once I gave your love a place,
	sleep became the mortal enemy of my eyelids.
	They said, 'We used to think you an upright woman — who waylaid
	your soul?' 'Go and ask his glorious eyes,' I said.
	I pardon him all the blood he chose to spill,
	granting that his own troubles drove him to shed it.
	He cast a sunlike brightness on the mirror of my mind
	whose keen reflection bred a fire in my vitals.
	Let Allah waste the Waters of Life however He likes;
	those dewy red lips are wage enough for me.
	If you speak to my love you will find cause enough
	for complaint and tears, or for pity, or for desire.
	His face will greet your eyes in clear water
	when the bowl fails and you need not drink wine at all."

Then she quoted from the same ode:

	"I drank, but the draught was his glance, not wine,
	and his swaying walk swayed these eyes of mine to sleep.
	It was not grape juice that gripped me but the grip of the past;
	it was not the bowl that overcame me but gifts from heaven.
	His coiling little curls netted my soul
	and his cruel will outwitted all my wits."

After a pause she went on:

	"If we complain of absence, what are we to say?
	Or if pain afflicts us, which way are we to go?
	If I hire an interpreter to tell my tale —
	a lover's complaint is not told for pay.
	If I put on patience, a lover's life
	will not last a day after love is lost.
	Nothing is left me now but regret and repining
	and tears flooding my cheeks for ever and ever.
	O you who have fled from the babies of these eyes,
	you are housed in a heart that will never stray.
	Would to heaven I knew — have you kept our pact,
	to hold firmest faith as long as the stream flows?
	Or have you forgotten the weeping slave
	whom groans afflict and whom griefs waylay?
	Ah, when the separation ends and we lie side by side,
	I will blame you for your hardness and scold you for your pride!"

Now when the doorkeeper heard her second ode she shrieked aloud and said, "By Allah, that is very good!" — and laying hands on her clothes, tore them as she had the first time, and fell to the ground in a faint.

At which the caterer rose and sprinkled water on her and brought her a second change of clothes. She came round and sat up, and said to her sister the caterer, "On you go, and help me with my duty, for there is only this one song left."

So the caterer brought out the lute again and began to sing these verses:

	"How long is this to last, how long this hardness full of grief?
	Are all these tears you see running not enough for you?
	You deliberately draw out our parting with a cruel purpose —
	is it not enough to gladden the heart of an envious enemy?
	If this lying world had once been true to a lover's heart
	he would not have watched out the weary night in tears.
	Oh pity me, whom your cruel will has overwhelmed;
	my lord, my king, it is time you showed me some mercy.
	To whom shall I tell my wrongs, you who have murdered me?
	Sad is the one who must suffer the pangs of broken faith.
	My wild love for you grows hour by hour,
	and the days of exile lengthen minute by slow minute.
	O Muslims, claim vengeance for this slave of Love,
	whose sleep Love always wastes, whose patience Love lays low.
	Does the law of Love allow you, my heart's desire, to lie
	wrapped in another's arms and cry Go! to me?
	And yet in your presence — tell me — what joys shall I enjoy
	when the man I love works only to overthrow my love?"

When the doorkeeper heard the third song she cried out aloud, and laying hands on her clothes, tore them right down to the hem and fell to the ground in a faint for the third time, showing the scars of the scourge again.

Then the three kalandars said, "Would to Heaven we had never come into this house, but had spent the night on the rubbish mounds outside the city! Truly our visit has been spoiled by sights that cut a man to the heart."

The Caliph turned to them and asked, "Why is that?"

And they answered, "Our minds are badly troubled by this business."

"Are you not of the household?" said the Caliph.

"No," they said, "nor did we ever set eyes on the place until an hour ago."

At this the Caliph marvelled, and said, "This man sitting next to you — would he not know the secret of the matter?" And saying it he winked and made signs at the porter.

So they questioned the man, but he answered, "By the Almighty power of Allah, in love we are all alike! I am Baghdad born and bred, and yet in all my born days I never darkened these doors until today; and my keeping company with them was a curious business."

"By Allah," they said, "we took you for one of them, and now we see you are one like ourselves."

Then the Caliph said, "We are seven men, and they are only three women without even a fourth to help them; so let us question them about their situation. And if they will not answer us, we shall be answered by force."

Every one of them agreed to this except Ja'afar, who said, "That is not my reckoning. Let them be. We are their guests, and as you know they made a compact and a condition with us which we accepted and promised to keep. So it is better that we say nothing about the matter; and since there is little of the night left, let each and every one of us go his own way."

Then he winked at the Caliph and whispered to him, "There is only one hour of darkness left, and I can bring them before you tomorrow, when you can question them all about their story as much as you like."

But the Caliph raised his head haughtily and cried out at him in anger, "I have no patience left, for my longing to hear about them. Let the kalandars ask them straight away."

"That is not my advice," said Ja'afar.

Then words ran high and talk answered talk, and they argued about who should put the question first; but at last they all settled on the porter.

And as the racket grew, the mistress of the house could not help noticing it, and asked them, "You people — what is this matter you are all talking so loudly about?"

Then the porter stood up respectfully in front of her and said, "My lady, this company earnestly wants you to tell them the story of the two bitches, and what makes you punish them so cruelly, and then makes you fall to weeping over them and kissing them; and last of all they want to hear the tale of your sister, and why she has been beaten with palm rods like a man. These are the questions they have charged me to put. And peace be with you."

At which the lady of the house said to her guests, "Is this true, what he says on your behalf?"

And all of them answered, "Yes" — except Ja'afar, who kept silent.

When she heard this she cried, "By Allah, guests, you have wronged us, and grievously. When you came in to us we made a compact and a condition with you: that whoever spoke of what did not concern him should hear what did not please him. Was it not enough for you that we took you into our house and fed you with the best food we had? But the fault is not so much yours as hers, who let you in."

Then she pulled her sleeves back from her wrists and struck the floor three times with her hand, crying, "Come quickly!"

And a closet door opened, and out of it came seven Black slaves with drawn swords in their hands, to whom she said, "Pinion these chatterers' elbows and tie them to one another."

They did as she said, and asked her, "O veiled and virtuous one, is it your high command that we strike off their heads?"

But she answered, "Leave them a while, so that I can question them about their situation, before their necks feel the sword."

"By Allah, my lady!" cried the porter, "do not kill me for somebody else's sin. All these men gave the offence and deserve the penalty for the crime, except me. By Allah, our night would have been charming if we had escaped the mortification of these one-eyed kalandars, whose arrival in a crowded city would turn it into a howling wilderness."

Then he recited these verses:

	"How fine a thing is pity that a strong man does not smother —
	and finest of all when it is shown to the weakest brother.
	By the holy tie of Love itself between the two of us,
	let one man not suffer for the sin of another."

When the porter had finished his verse the lady laughed:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Eleventh Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the lady, having laughed at the porter in spite of her anger, came up to the party and spoke to them.

"Tell me who you are," she said, "for you have only an hour to live. And if you were not men of rank, and perhaps notables among your own people, you would not have been so contrary, and I would have hurried your doom along."

Then the Caliph said, "Confound you, Ja'afar — tell her who we are, or we shall be killed by mistake; and speak fair to her before some horror comes down on us."

"It is no more than you deserve," he replied.

At which the Caliph cried out at him, "There is a time for witty words and there is a time for serious work."

Then the lady turned to the three kalandars and asked them, "Are you brothers?"

"No, by Allah," they answered. "We are nothing but beggars and foreigners."

Then she said to one of them, "Were you born blind in one eye?"

"No, by Allah," he said. "It was a marvellous business and a strange mischance that caused my eye to be torn out; and my tale is one which, if it were engraved with needles on the inner corners of the eye, would be a warning to anyone willing to take warning."

She questioned the second and the third kalandar, and both answered like the first. "By Allah, mistress, each one of us comes from a different country, and all three of us are the sons of kings, sovereign princes ruling over vassals and capital cities."

At that she turned to them and said, "Let every one of you tell me his tale in turn, and explain what brought him to our house; and if his story pleases us, let him rub his head and be on his way."

The first to come forward was the porter, who said, "My lady, I am a man, and a porter. This lady, the caterer, hired me to carry a load, and took me first to a wine-seller's shop, then to a butcher's stall; from there to a fruiterer's; from there to a grocer who also sold dried fruit; from there to a confectioner and a perfumer-and-druggist; and from him to this place, where what happened to me with you happened. That is my story, and peace be on us all."

At this the lady laughed and said, "Rub your head and be on your way."

But he cried, "By Allah, I will not stir a foot until I have heard my companions' stories."

Then one of the one-eyed men came forward and began to tell her
