The Second Kalandar's Tale

Know, my lady, that I was not born one-eyed, and mine is a strange story; if it were engraved with needles on the inner corners of the eye, it would be a warning to anyone willing to take warning.

I am a king and the son of a king, and I was brought up like a prince. I learned to chant the Koran according to the seven schools; I read books of every kind and held disputations on what was in them with the scholars and the men of science; I studied the lore of the stars and the fine sayings of the poets; and I trained myself in every branch of learning until I surpassed everybody of my time. My skill in calligraphy was greater than any scribe's, and my fame was carried abroad over every region and city, and all the kings came to know my name.

Among others, the King of India heard of me, and sent to my father to invite me to his court, with offerings and presents and rarities such as suit royalty. So my father fitted out six ships for me and my people; and we put to sea and sailed for a full month until we made land. Then we brought out the horses we had with us in the ships, and after loading the camels with our presents for the prince, we set off inland.

But we had gone only a little way when a cloud of dust flew up and grew until it walled off the whole horizon. After an hour or so the veil lifted, and showed underneath it fifty horsemen, ravening lions to look at, dressed in steel armour.

We watched them closely — and they were highwaymen, wild as the wildest of the desert Arabs. When they saw that we were only four, and had nothing with us but the ten camels carrying the presents, they charged down on us with their lances levelled.

We signalled to them with our fingers, as if to say, "We are messengers of the great King of India, so do us no harm." But they answered the same way, "We are not in his dominions to obey him, and we are not subject to his rule."

Then they set on us and killed some of my slaves and put the rest to flight; and I fled too, after taking a wound, a bad one, while the Arabs were busy with the money and the presents we had with us.

I went off without knowing where I was going, having become as poor as I had been powerful; and I travelled until I came to the crest of a mountain, where I sheltered for the night in a cave. When day came I set out again, and did not stop until I arrived at a fine, well-filled city.

Now it was the season when winter was turning away with his frost, and spring was coming to greet the world with his flowers, and the young blossoms were opening and the streams were running and ringing and the birds were singing sweetly — as the poet says about a certain city, describing it:

	A place secure from every thought of fear;
	safety and peace lord it here for ever.
	Its beauties seem to make its people beautiful,
	and its happy folk look as though they were in Heaven.

I was glad to have arrived, for I was worn out with the road and yellow in the face with weakness and want; but my situation was pitiable and I had no idea where to turn.

So I went up to a tailor sitting in his little shop and greeted him. He returned my greeting and made me kindly welcome and wished me well and spoke gently to me, and asked how I came to be a stranger there. I told him my whole past from beginning to end; and he was concerned for me and said, "Young man, do not tell your secret to anybody. The king of this city is your father's greatest enemy, and there is a blood feud between them, and you have reason to fear for your life."

Then he set food and drink in front of me, and I ate and drank and he with me; and we talked freely until nightfall, when he cleared a place for me in a corner of his shop and brought me a carpet and a coverlet.

I stayed with him three days, at the end of which he said to me, "Do you know no trade you could earn a living by, my son?"

"I am learned in the law," I replied, "and a doctor of doctrine; an adept in art and science, a mathematician, and a notable penman."

"Your calling is worth nothing in our city," he answered, "where not a soul understands science, or even writing, or anything at all except making money."

"By Allah," I said, "I know nothing but what I have told you."

And he answered, "Gird up your middle, and take a hatchet and a rope, and go and cut wood in the country for your daily bread, until Allah sends you relief. And tell nobody who you are, or they will kill you."

Then he bought me an axe and a rope and put me in the charge of some woodcutters; and with these guardians I went out into the forest, where I cut firewood all day long and came back in the evening carrying my bundle on my head. I sold it for half a dinar, and with part of that I bought food and laid the rest by.

I spent a whole year at this work. And when the year was over I went out one day as usual into the wilderness, and wandering away from my companions, I came across a thickly grown hollow where there was plenty of wood.

So I went in, and found the gnarled stump of a great tree, and loosened the ground round it and shovelled the earth away. And presently my hatchet rang on a copper ring; so I cleared the soil away, and there was the ring, fixed to a wooden trapdoor.

I raised it, and underneath there appeared a staircase. I went down the steps to the bottom and came to a door, which I opened — and found myself in a noble hall, strongly made and beautifully built, where there was a girl like a pearl of great price, whose face banished every grief and care and trouble from my heart, and whose soft speech healed a soul in despair, and captivated the wise and the wary.

Her figure measured five feet in height; her breasts were firm and upright; her cheek was a very garden of delight; her colour was lively and bright; her face gleamed like the dawn through curly hair that was dark as night, and above the snows of her breast glittered teeth of a pearly white. As the poet said about somebody like her:

	A slim-waisted darling crowned with jet-black hair,
	a willow wand growing on a sandy mound.

And as another says:

	Four things that never meet, unless they meet here,
	to shed my heart's blood and carry off my soul:
	the most brilliant forehead; hair jet and bright;
	cheeks red as roses; and a figure dressed in beauty.

When I looked at her I bowed down before Him who had created her, for the beauty and loveliness He had shaped in her; and she looked at me and said, "Are you a man or a jinni?"

"I am a man," I answered.

"Then who brought you to this place," she said, "where I have lived twenty-five years without ever yet seeing a man in it?"

I said — and I found her words wonderfully sweet, and my heart was melted to the core by them — "My lady, my good fortune led me here, to drive away my cares and troubles."

Then I told her all my misfortunes from beginning to end, and my case struck her as terribly hard; so she wept and said, "I will tell you my story in my turn.

"I am the daughter of King Ifitamus, lord of the Ebony Islands, who married me to my cousin, my father's brother's son. But on my wedding night an ifrit named Jirjis son of Rajmus — first cousin, that is, mother's sister's son, of Iblis the Foul Fiend — snatched me up and flew away with me like a bird and set me down in this place, and brought here everything I needed of fine stuffs, clothing and jewels and furniture, and food and drink and the rest.

"Once every ten days he comes here and lies a single night with me, and then goes his way; for he took me without his family's consent. And he has agreed with me that if ever I need him, by night or by day, I have only to pass my hand over those two lines engraved on the alcove there, and he will appear to me before my fingers have stopped touching.

"Four days have gone by now since he was here; and since there are six days left before he comes again — tell me, will you stay with me five days, and go away the day before he comes?"

I replied, "Yes, and yes again! And how wonderful, if all this is not a dream."

At this she was delighted, and springing to her feet she took my hand and led me through an arched doorway to a bathhouse, a fine hall and richly decorated. I took off my clothes and she took off hers; then we bathed and she washed me. And when that was done we came out of the bath, and she seated me at her side on a high divan and brought me sherbet scented with musk.

When we had cooled after the bath she set food in front of me, and we ate, and fell to talking. But presently she said, "Lie down and rest, for you must certainly be tired."

So I thanked her, my lady, and lay down and slept soundly, forgetting everything that had happened to me. When I woke I found her rubbing and massaging my feet; so I thanked her again and blessed her, and we sat a while and talked.

She said, "By Allah, I have been sad at heart, having lived alone underground these twenty-five years; and praise be to Allah, who has sent me somebody to talk to!"

Then she asked, "Young man, what do you say to wine?"

And I answered, "Do as you like."

At which she went to a cupboard and took out a sealed flask of good old wine, and set out the table with flowers and scented herbs, and began to sing these lines:

	"Had we known you were coming, we would gladly have spread out
	the cores of our hearts or the balls of our eyes;
	we would have thrown down our cheeks as a carpet to greet you
	and strewn our eyelids for your feet to walk on."

Now when she had finished her verse I thanked her; for indeed love of her had taken hold of my heart, and my grief and my anguish were gone.

We sat talking and drinking until nightfall, and I spent the night with her — such a night as I never spent in all my life. And next day delight followed delight until midday, by which time I had drunk wine so freely that I had lost my wits; and I stood up, staggering to right and to left, and said, "Come, my charmer, and I will carry you up out of this underground vault and deliver you from your jinni's spell."

She laughed and answered, "Content yourself and hold your peace. Of every ten days, one is for the ifrit and the other nine are yours."

Said I — and in good truth the drink had got the better of me — "This very instant I will break down the alcove with the talisman engraved on it, and summon the ifrit so that I can kill him; for killing ifrits is a practice of mine."

When she heard this her colour went pale and she said, "By Allah, do not!" And she began reciting:

	"This is a thing with destruction lying in it;
	I advise you to shun it, if your wits are sound."

And these lines too:

	"You who go looking for separation, draw in the rein
	of your swift horse and do not press so far forward.
	Ah, stop! for treachery is the rule of life,
	and the sweets of meeting end in parting."

I heard her verse and paid no attention to her words — no, I raised my foot and gave the alcove a mighty kick:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Thirteenth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the second kalandar went on with his tale to the lady:

But when I kicked that alcove with a mighty kick, my mistress, the air went stark and dark and thundered and lightened; the earth trembled and quaked and the world went out of sight. In that instant the fumes of the wine left my head, and I cried to her, "What is the matter?"

And she answered, "The ifrit is on us! Did I not warn you of this? By Allah, you have brought ruin on me. But fly for your life, and go up the way you came down."

So I fled up the staircase; but in the excess of my fear I forgot my sandals and my hatchet. And when I had climbed two steps I turned to look for them — and I saw the earth split apart, and out of it rose an ifrit, a monster of hideousness, who said to the girl, "What trouble and uproar is this that you disturb me with? What misfortune has come on you?"

"No misfortune has come on me," she answered, "except that my chest was tight and my heart heavy with sadness; so I drank a little wine to open it and hearten myself; and then I got up to relieve myself, but the wine had gone to my head and I fell against the alcove."

"You are lying, like the whore you are!" shrieked the ifrit. And he looked round the hall, right and left, until he caught sight of my axe and my sandals, and said to her, "What are these but the belongings of some mortal who has been in your company?"

She answered, "I never set eyes on them until this moment; they must have been carried in here clinging to your own clothes."

"These words are absurd, you harlot! you strumpet!" said the ifrit.

Then he stripped her stark naked and stretched her out on the floor and tied her hands and feet to four stakes, like someone crucified, and set about torturing her and trying to make her confess.

I could not bear to stand there listening to her cries and her groaning; so I climbed the stair shaking with fear, and when I reached the top I put the trapdoor back and covered it with earth.

Then I was sorry for what I had done, sorry beyond all sorrow; and I thought of the lady and her beauty and loveliness, and the tortures she was suffering at the hands of that accursed ifrit after her quiet life of twenty-five years, and how everything that had happened to her had happened because of me. And I thought of my father and his royal position, and how I had become a woodcutter; and how, after my life had been calm for a while, the world had gone thick and troubled on me again.

So I wept bitterly and repeated this couplet:

	When the tyranny of Fate weighs on you hardest,
	consider: one day will gladden you and one will grieve you.

Then I walked on until I reached the house of my friend the tailor, whom I found anxiously waiting for me — he was, as the saying goes, on coals of fire on my account. And when he saw me he said, "All night long my heart has been heavy, fearing for you from wild beasts or some other mischance. Now praise be to Allah for your safety."

I thanked him for his kind concern and, going off to my corner, sat pondering and brooding on what had happened to me, and blamed and scolded myself for my meddling folly and my perversity in kicking the alcove.

I was calling myself to account when my friend the tailor came to me and said, "Young man, there is an old man in the shop, a Persian, who is looking for you. He has your hatchet and your sandals, which he had taken to the woodcutters, saying: I was going out at the hour when the muezzin began the call to dawn prayer, when I came across these things and do not know whose they are; so direct me to their owner. The woodcutters recognised your hatchet and directed him to you. He is sitting in my shop, so go out to him and thank him and take your axe and your sandals."

When I heard this I turned yellow with fear and felt stunned as though by a blow; and before I could recover myself, the floor of my private room split apart, and up out of it rose the Persian — who was the ifrit.

He had tortured the lady with terrible tortures, and even so she would confess nothing to him; so he had taken the hatchet and the sandals and said to her, "As surely as I am Jirjis of the seed of Iblis, I will bring you back the owner of these!" Then he had gone to the woodcutters with the pretence I have described and, being directed to me, and having waited a while in the shop until the fact was confirmed, he now suddenly snatched me up as a hawk snatches a mouse, and flew high into the air; and then came down and plunged with me under the earth — I in a dead faint all the while — and at last set me down in the underground palace where I had spent that blissful night.

And there I saw the lady stripped to the skin, her limbs bound to four stakes, and blood welling from her sides. At the sight my eyes ran over with tears; but the ifrit covered her body and said, "You wanton — is this man not your lover?"

She looked at me and answered, "I do not know him, and I have never seen him before this hour."

"What!" said the ifrit. "All this torture and still no confession?"

And she said, "I have never seen this man in all my born days, and it is not lawful in Allah's sight to tell lies about him."

"If you do not know him," said the ifrit, "then take this sword and strike off his head."

She took the sword in her hand and came right up to me; and I signalled to her with my eyebrows, my tears running down my cheeks all the while. She understood me and answered, also by signs, "How could you bring all this evil down on me?" And I answered the same way, "This is the moment for mercy and forgiveness."

And the mute tongue of my situation spoke aloud, saying:

	My eyes were interpreters for my tongue when it was tied
	and told out clearly the love I would gladly have hidden.
	When last we met and tears came down in torrents,
	my glances gave evidence for a tongue struck dumb.
	She signed with a glance of the eye while her lips were silent;
	I signed with my fingers and she knew what was meant.
	Our eyebrows did all the work between the two of us —
	and we being speechless, Love spoke loud and plain.

Then, my mistress, the lady threw the sword away and said, "How am I to strike the neck of a man I do not know, and who has done me no harm? Such a deed would not be lawful by my law." And she held her hand.

Said the ifrit, "It is hard for you to kill your lover; and because he has lain with you, you endure these torments and obstinately refuse to confess. After this it is clear enough to me that only like loves and pities like."

Then he turned to me and asked, "Man — perhaps you do not know this woman either?"

To which I answered, "And who might she be? I certainly never saw her until this instant."

"Then take the sword," said he, "and strike off her head, and I will believe you do not know her, and I will leave you free to go and will not deal harshly with you."

"That I will do," I replied. And taking the sword I went forward briskly and raised my hand to strike.

But she signalled to me with her eyebrows, "Have I failed you in any part of love? And is this how you pay me back?"

I understood what her looks meant, and answered her with a glance, "I will sacrifice my soul for you." And the tongue of the situation wrote these lines in our hearts:

	How many a lover speaks with his eyebrows
	to the woman he loves, as his passion pleads:
	with flashing eyes he breathes his passion into her
	and she sees perfectly well what his pleading needs.
	How sweet is the look when each one gazes at the other,
	and with what swiftness and what certainty it travels:
	and this one writes out all his passion with his eyebrows,
	and that one reads all his passion with her eyes.

Then my eyes filled with tears and overflowed, and I threw the sword out of my hand and said, "Mighty ifrit and hero — if a woman, lacking wits and lacking faith, thinks it unlawful to strike off my head, how can it be lawful for me, a man, to strike the neck of a woman I have never seen in my whole life? I cannot do such a wrong, though you make me drink the cup of death and destruction."

Then said the ifrit, "The two of you are showing me how well you understand one another. But I will let you see how such doings end."

He took the sword and struck off the lady's hands first, with four strokes, and then her feet; while I stood looking on and made certain of my own death, and she said goodbye to me with her dying eyes.

So the ifrit shouted at her, "You play the whore and make a cuckold of me with your eyes!" — and struck her so that her head went flying.

Then he turned to me and said, "Mortal, we have it in our law that when a wife commits adultery it is lawful for us to kill her. As for this girl, I snatched her away on her wedding night when she was twelve years old, and she knew nobody but me. I used to come to her once every ten days and lie with her the night, in the shape of a man, a Persian; and when I was well satisfied that she had cuckolded me, I killed her.

"But as for you, I am not well satisfied that you have wronged me in her. All the same I must not let you go unharmed; so ask a favour of me and I will grant it."

Then I rejoiced, my lady, beyond all rejoicing, and said, "What favour shall I ask of you?"

He replied, "Ask me this: what shape I am to bewitch you into. Will you be a dog, or an ass, or an ape?"

I answered — and indeed I had been hoping some mercy might be shown me — "By Allah, spare me, so that Allah may spare you for sparing a Muslim, and a man who never wronged you." And I humbled myself before him with the utmost humility, and stood there in his presence saying, "I am sorely oppressed by circumstance."

He replied, "Do not talk me a long talk. It is in my power to kill you; but instead I am giving you your choice."

Said I, "Ifrit, it would become you to pardon me, exactly as the Envied man pardoned the Envier."

"And how was that?" said he.

And I began to tell him
