The Tale of the Envier and the Envied
(Part 1 of 2)

They tell, ifrit, that in a certain city there were two men who lived in houses next door to one another, sharing a party wall; and one of them envied the other and looked on him with an evil eye, and did everything he could to injure him. And although he was jealous of his neighbour all the time, his malice grew on him at last until he could hardly eat or enjoy the sweetness of sleep.

But the Envied man did nothing except prosper; and the harder the other tried to injure him, the more he got and gained and throve.

At last the malice of his neighbour, and the man's constant efforts to do him harm, came to his notice. So he said, "By Allah, God's earth is wide enough for the people in it." And leaving the neighbourhood, he went to another city, where he bought himself a piece of land with a dried-up draw-well on it, old and in ruins. There he built himself a place of prayer, and furnishing it with a few necessaries, took up his home in it and gave himself over to praying and worshipping Allah Almighty. And holy beggars and mendicants flocked to him from every quarter, and his fame went abroad through the city and the country round it.

Presently the news of what good fortune had come to him, and how the notables of the city had become his disciples, reached his envious neighbour. So he travelled to the place and presented himself at the holy man's hermitage, and was met by the Envied man with welcome and greeting and every honour.

Then the Envier said, "I have a word to say to you; that is why I have come here, and I want to give you a piece of good news. So come with me to your cell."

At which the Envied man got up and took the Envier by the hand, and they went into the innermost part of the hermitage. But the Envier said, "Tell your beggars to go back to their cells, for I will not tell you what I have to say except in private, where nobody can hear us."

So the Envied man said to his beggars, "Go back to your own cells." And when they had all done as he told them, he set off with his visitor and walked a little way, until the two of them reached the ruinous old well.

And as they stood on the brink of it, the Envier gave the Envied man a push that tumbled him headlong into it, with nobody to see it; and then he came out and went his way, thinking he had killed him.

Now this well happened to be haunted by the jinn, who, seeing what had happened, held him up and lowered him little by little until he reached the bottom, and then seated him on a large stone.

Then one of them asked the others, "Do you know who this man is?"

And they answered, "No."

"This man," the speaker went on, "is the one called the Envied, who ran from the Envier and came to live in our city, and founded this holy house here; and he has edified us with his prayers and his readings from the Koran. But the Envier set out and travelled until he found him again, and cunningly contrived to trick him and throw him into the well we are in now.

"But the fame of this good man has this very night reached the Sultan of our city, who means to visit him tomorrow on account of his daughter."

"What is wrong with his daughter?" asked one.

And another answered, "She is possessed by a spirit; for Maymun, son of Damdam, is madly in love with her. But if this pious man knew the remedy, curing her would be as easy as anything."

At which one of them asked, "And what is the medicine?"

And he replied, "The black tomcat that is with him in the oratory has, on the end of his tail, a white spot the size of a dirham. Let him pluck seven white hairs out of that spot, and then fumigate her with them, and the marid will flee out of her and not come back; and she will be in her right mind for the rest of her life."

All this took place, ifrit, within earshot of the Envied man, who listened eagerly.

When dawn broke and the morning rose in its brightness and shone, the beggars went to look for their master, and found him climbing up the wall of the well — which made him greater still in their eyes. Then, knowing that nothing but the black tomcat could supply him with the remedy he needed, he plucked the seven tail hairs from the white spot and laid them by him.

And hardly had the sun risen before the Sultan came into the hermitage with the great lords of his court, telling the rest of his retinue to wait outside. The Envied man gave him a hearty welcome, and seating him at his side, asked him, "Shall I tell you why you have come?"

The King answered, "Yes."

He went on, "You have come on the pretext of paying a visit; but what is in your heart is to ask me about your daughter."

"That is exactly so, holy man," replied the King.

And the Envied man went on, "Send and fetch her, and I trust to heal her at once — if such is the will of Allah."

The King, overjoyed, sent for his daughter, and they brought her in with her arms pinioned and her feet fettered. The Envied man made her sit down behind a curtain, and taking out the hairs, fumigated her with them — at which the thing that was in her head cried out and left her.

The girl was restored to her right mind that instant, and veiling her face, said, "What has happened? Who brought me here?"

The Sultan rejoiced with a joy nothing could exceed, and kissed his daughter's eyes and the holy man's hand; then, turning to his great lords, he asked, "What do you say? What fee does the man deserve who has made my daughter whole?"

And they all answered, "He deserves to have her as his wife."

And the King said, "You speak truly."

So he married him to her, and the Envied man became the King's son-in-law.

And after a little the vizier died, and the King said, "Whom can I make minister in his place?"

"Your son-in-law," replied the courtiers. So the Envied man became a vizier.

And after a while the Sultan died too, and the people said, "Whom shall we make king?" And they all cried, "The vizier." So the vizier was made Sultan straight away, and he became a reigning king, and a true ruler of men.

One day, when he had mounted his horse and was riding in all the eminence of his kingship among his emirs and viziers and the great men of his realm, his eye fell on his old neighbour, the Envier, standing on foot in his path. So he turned to one of his ministers and said, "Bring that man here, and do not frighten him."

The vizier brought him, and the King said, "Give him a thousand gold miskals out of the treasury, and load him ten camels with goods to trade with, and send him back to his own town under escort."

Then he said goodbye to his enemy and sent him away, and held back from punishing him for all the many and great evils he had done him.

See, ifrit, the mercy of the Envied man to the Envier, who had hated him from the beginning, and had borne him such bitter malice, and had never met him without causing him trouble; who had driven him out of house and home, and had then made a journey for the sole purpose of taking his life by throwing him into the well. And yet he did not pay back his injurious dealing, but forgave him, and was generous to him.

Then I wept in front of him, my lady, and wept bitterly — never was there bitterer weeping — and I recited:

	"Pardon my fault, for it is the wise man's custom
	to pardon every fault and let revenge go.
	Truly I contain in myself every kind of fault —
	so be pleased of your goodness to show mercy and grace.
	Whoever begs pardon from on High
	should hold his own hand back from the sinners down here."

Said the ifrit, "Do not lengthen your words. As for my killing you, do not fear it; and as for my pardoning you, do not hope for it. But from my bewitching you there is no escape."

Then he tore me from the ground, which closed under my feet, and flew up with me into the sky until I saw the earth like a great white cloud, or a saucer in the middle of the waters. Presently he set me down on a mountain, and taking a little dust and muttering some magic words over it, sprinkled me with it, saying, "Leave that shape and take the shape of an ape!"

And in that instant I became an ape — a tailless baboon, a hundred years old.

Now when he had left me, and I saw myself in this ugly and hateful shape, I wept for myself; but I resigned my soul to the tyranny of Time and Circumstance, knowing well that Fortune is fair and constant to nobody.

I came down the mountain and found a desert plain at the foot of it, long and broad, over which I travelled for a month, until my course brought me to the edge of the salt sea. After standing there a while, I noticed a ship out in the offing, running before a fair wind and making for the shore. I hid myself behind a rock on the beach and waited until the ship came near, and then I leaped aboard.

I found her full of merchants and passengers, and one of them cried, "Captain, this ill-omened brute will bring us bad luck!" And another said, "Turn this ill-omened beast out from among us." The captain said, "Let us kill it." Another said, "Kill it with a sword"; a third, "Drown it"; and a fourth, "Shoot it with an arrow."

But I sprang up and took hold of the captain's skirt, and shed tears that poured down my chops. The captain took pity on me and said, "Merchants! this ape has appealed to me for protection and I will protect him. From now on he is in my charge; so let nobody do him any hurt or harm, or there will be bad blood between us."

Then he treated me kindly; and whatever he said I understood, and I saw to his every want and served him like a servant, although my tongue would not obey my wishes — so that he came to love me.

The ship sailed on with a fair wind for fifty days, at the end of which we anchored under the walls of a great city, in which there was a world of people, and learned men above all, whose number nobody could tell but Allah.

No sooner had we arrived than we were visited by certain Mamluk officials from the King of that city, who came aboard and greeted the merchants and wished them joy of their safe arrival, and said, "Our King welcomes you, and sends you this roll of paper, on which each and every one of you must write a line. For you should know that the King's minister, a calligrapher of great renown, is dead, and the King has sworn a solemn oath that he will make nobody vizier in his place who cannot write as well as he could."

Then he gave us the scroll, which measured ten cubits long by one wide; and each of the merchants who knew how to write wrote a line on it, down to the last of them. After which I stood up — still in the shape of an ape — and snatched the roll out of their hands.

They were afraid I would tear it or throw it overboard, so they tried to stop me and scare me off; but I signed to them that I could write, at which they all marvelled, saying, "We have never yet seen an ape write."

And the captain cried, "Let him write; and if he scribbles and scrawls we will kick him out and kill him; but if he writes a fair and scholarly hand, I will adopt him as my son. For I certainly never yet saw a more intelligent and better-mannered monkey than this one. Would to Heaven my own son were his match in morals and manners."

I took the reed pen, and stretching out my paw, dipped it in ink and wrote, in the hand used for letters, these two couplets:

	Time has recorded the gifts she gave to the great,
	but she never recorded yours, which are far higher.
	May Allah never orphan men by the loss of you,
	who are the mother of Goodness and the father of Bounty.

And I wrote in Rayhani, the larger and elegantly curving letters:

	You hold a reed of good counsel for every land,
	whose driving makes the whole world thrive.
	The Nile of Egypt is nothing beside your gifts,
	you who make misery smile with five fingers.

Then I wrote in the Thuluth character:

	There is no writer who shall escape from Death,
	but what his hand has written men will repeat.
	Write nothing, therefore, but what will serve you when
	you see it on Judgement Day — if see it you do.

Then I wrote in the Naskh character:

	When Fate dooms our love to a bitter parting
	and Destiny decrees a life far off,
	we make the lips of the inkhorn complain of our pains
	and give our speech a tongue with the talking reed.

And I wrote in the Tumar character:

	Kingdom lasts with nobody; and if you deny
	this truth, then where are the kings of the earlier earth?
	Plant trees of goodness while your rule lasts,
	and when you have fallen they will speak your worth.

And I wrote in the Muhakkak character:

	When the inkhorn of your wealth and fame is opened,
	take ink from a generous heart and a gracious hand;
	write brave and noble deeds while you still can write,
	and win yourself praise from the point of the pen and of the sword.

Then I gave the scroll to the officials; and after we had all written our lines, they carried it before the King.

When he saw the paper, no writing pleased him except mine; and he said to the assembled courtiers, "Go and find the writer of these lines, and dress him in a splendid robe of honour; then mount him on a she-mule, and let a band of music go in front of him, and bring him into my presence."

At these words they smiled, and the King was angry with them and cried, "You accursed people! I give you an order and you laugh at me?"

"O King," they replied, "if we laugh it is not at you, and not without a reason."

"And what is it?" he asked.

And they answered, "O King, you order us to bring into your presence the man who wrote these lines. Now the truth is that the one who wrote them is not one of the sons of Adam, but an ape, a tailless baboon belonging to the ship's captain."

"Is this true, what you say?" said he.

"It is — by the rights of your own munificence!" said they.

The King marvelled at their words and shook with laughter, and said, "I have a mind to buy this ape from the captain."

Then he sent messengers to the ship with the mule, the robe, the guard and the state drums, saying, "All the same, you are to dress him in the robe of honour and mount him on the mule and let him be surrounded by the guards and preceded by the band."

They came to the ship and took me from the captain and robed me in the robe of honour, and mounting me on the she-mule, carried me in a state procession through the streets, while the people were amazed and amused. And people said to one another, "Hello! is our Sultan about to make an ape his minister?" And they all came crowding agog to stare at me, and the town was astir and turned upside down on my account.

When they brought me up to the King and set me in his presence, I kissed the ground before him three times, and once before the High Chamberlain and the great officers; and he told me to be seated, and I sat respectfully back on my shins and knees, and everybody there marvelled at my fine manners, and the King most of all.

At that he ordered the rest to withdraw; and when nobody was left except His Majesty, the eunuch on duty and a little white slave, he had the table of food set before me, with every kind of bird on it — everything that hops and flies and treads in a nest, such as quail and sand grouse.

Then he signed to me to eat with him; so I got up and kissed the ground before him, and then sat down and ate with him. And when the table had been taken away I washed my hands in seven waters, and took the pen case and the reed, and wrote these lines instead of speaking:

	Wail for the little partridges on porringer and plate;
	cry for the ruin of the fries and the well-marinated stews.
	Keen as I keen for the loved and lost daughters of the sand grouse,
	and for omelette heaped round fine browned fowls.
	O the fire in my heart for fish — those two fine fish I saw
	bedded on new-made scones and cakes piled up to be torn apart.
	For you, O vermicelli, my very stomach aches! I hold
	that without you every taste and joy is clean annihilated.
	Those eggs rolled their yellow eyes in the torturing pains of the fire
	before they came served with hash and hot fritters, that daintiest dish.
	Praise be to Allah for His baked meats and His roast — and ah! how good
	are these pulses, these pot-herbs steeped in oil and mixed with vinegar.
	When my hunger was satisfied I propped myself on an elbow and fell back
	on the meat pudding, in which gleamed the bangles that confound my wits.
	Then I woke my sleeping appetite to eat as though in play
	sweets from brocaded trays, and the most elaborate of trifles.
	Be patient, soul of mine! Time is a haughty, jealous creature;
	today he looks dark and lowering, and tomorrow fair to see.

Then I got up and seated myself at a respectful distance while the King read what I had written; and he marvelled and exclaimed, "The miracle of it — that an ape should be gifted with this graceful style and this power of penmanship! By Allah, it is a wonder of wonders."

Presently they set choice wines before the King in glass flagons, and he drank; and then he passed the cup on to me, and I kissed the ground and drank and wrote on it:
