The Tale of the Envier and the Envied
(Part 2 of 2)

	With fire they boiled me to loosen my tongue,
	and gave me pain and patience for company.
	And so it comes about that the hands of men hold me up high
	and I sip honey-dew from the lips of a girl.

And these lines as well:

	Morning says to Night, "Withdraw, and let me shine";
	so let us drain draughts that dull all pain and pining.
	The glass is so fine and the wine so clear, I am in doubt
	whether it is the wine in the glass or the glass in the wine.

The King read my verse and said with a sigh, "If these gifts were in a man, he would surpass everybody of his time and his age."

Then he called for the chessboard and said, "Tell me — will you play with me?" And I signed with my head, "Yes."

Then I came forward and set out the pieces and played two games with him, and won them both. He was speechless with surprise; so I took the pen case and, drawing out a reed, wrote these two couplets on the board:

	Two armies go fighting the whole day long
	and their battling is never finished,
	until, when the dark closes round about them,
	the two of them go and sleep in a single bed.

The King read these lines with wonder and delight and said to his eunuch, "Mukbil, go to your mistress, Sitt al-Husn, and say to her: come, the King calls you here to amuse yourself with the sight of this truly wonderful ape."

So the eunuch went out and came back presently with the lady; and when she saw me she veiled her face and said, "Father! have you lost all sense of honour? How is it you are pleased to send for me and show me to strange men?"

"Sitt al-Husn," said he, "there is no man here except this little foot page, and the eunuch who brought you up, and I, your father. So who are you veiling your face from?"

She answered, "The one you take for an ape is a young man — clever and polite, wise and learned, and the son of a king. But he is under a spell; the ifrit Jirjis, who is of the seed of Iblis, laid it on him, after putting his own wife to death — the daughter of King Ifitamus, lord of the Ebony Islands."

The King marvelled at his daughter's words, and turning to me, said, "Is this true, what she says about you?"

And I signed with a nod of my head, "Yes, truly," and wept bitterly.

Then he asked his daughter, "How did you know he was under a spell?"

And she answered, "Dear father, when I was a child there was an old woman with me, a cunning and a wise one and a witch besides, and she taught me the theory of magic and its practice; and I took notes in writing and grew perfect in it, and I have committed to memory a hundred and seventy chapters of magical formulas, by the least of which I could carry the stones of your city away behind Mount Kaf and the encircling ocean, or turn the site of it into a pit of sea and its people into fish swimming about in the middle of it."

"My daughter," said her father, "I beg you, by my life — disenchant this young man, so that I may make him my vizier and marry you to him; for he is an ingenious young man and a deeply learned one."

"With joy and goodwill," she replied. And taking in her hand an iron knife with the name of Allah inscribed on it in Hebrew characters, she drew a wide circle:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Fourteenth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the kalandar went on with his tale like this:

My lady, the King's daughter took in her hand a knife with Hebrew characters inscribed on it and drew a wide circle in the middle of the palace hall, and inside it wrote mysterious names and talismans in Kufic letters; and she spoke words and muttered charms, some of which we understood and some of which we did not.

Presently the world went dark in front of our eyes, until we thought the sky was falling on our heads — and the ifrit presented himself in his own shape and appearance. His hands were like many-pronged pitchforks, his legs like the masts of great ships, and his eyes like torches of gleaming fire.

We were in terrible fear of him; but the King's daughter shouted at him, "No welcome to you and no greeting, dog!"

At which he changed into the shape of a lion and said, "Traitress, how is it you have broken the oath we swore, that neither of us would cross the other?"

"Accursed thing," she answered, "how could there be any agreement between me and the like of you?"

Then he said, "Take what you have brought on yourself." And the lion opened his jaws and rushed at her. But she was too quick for him; and plucking a hair from her head, she waved it in the air, muttering over it as she did — and the hair became instantly a keen sword blade, with which she struck the lion and cut him in two.

Then the two halves flew away into the air, and the head changed into a scorpion; and the princess became a huge serpent and set on the accursed scorpion, and the two of them fought, coiling and uncoiling, a stiff fight for a good hour.

Then the scorpion changed into a vulture, and the serpent became an eagle which set on the vulture and hunted him for an hour, until he became a black tomcat, which yowled and grinned and spat.

At that the eagle changed into a piebald wolf, and these two battled about the palace for a long time, until the cat, seeing himself beaten, changed into a worm and crept into a huge red pomegranate lying beside the jetting fountain in the middle of the palace hall.

At which the pomegranate swelled up in the air to the size of a watermelon; and falling on the marble pavement of the palace, it broke to pieces, and all the seeds fell out and were scattered about until they covered the whole floor.

Then the wolf shook himself and became a snow-white cock, which fell to picking up the seeds, meaning not to leave a single one. But by the doom of destiny one seed rolled to the edge of the fountain and lay there hidden.

The cock fell to crowing and clapping his wings and signing to us with his beak, as if to ask, "Are there any seeds left?" But we did not understand what he meant; and he called out to us with so loud a cry that we thought the palace would fall on us.

Then he ran all over the floor until he saw the seed that had rolled to the fountain's edge, and rushed eagerly to pick it up — and it sprang into the middle of the water and became a fish and dived to the bottom of the basin.

At which the cock changed into a big fish and plunged in after the other, and the two of them disappeared for a while; and then we heard loud shrieks and cries of pain that made us tremble.

After this the ifrit rose up out of the water, and he was like a burning flame, throwing fire and smoke out of his mouth and his eyes and his nostrils. And immediately the princess came out of the basin too, and she was one live coal of flame; and these two, she and he, battled for the space of an hour, until their fires completely surrounded them and their thick smoke filled the palace.

As for us, we panted for breath, being very nearly suffocated, and we longed to plunge into the water for fear of being burnt up and utterly destroyed.

And the King said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah the Glorious, the Great! Truly we are Allah's and to Him we are returning. Would to Heaven I had never urged my daughter to try to disenchant this ape fellow, by which I have laid on her the terrible task of fighting that accursed ifrit, against whom all the ifrits in the world could not prevail. And would to Heaven we had never seen this ape — may Allah never bless the day he came! We thought to do a good deed by him in the sight of Allah, and to release him from enchantment, and now we have brought this trouble and travail down on our own hearts."

But I, my lady, was tongue-tied and powerless to say a word to him.

Suddenly, before we knew anything about it, the ifrit yelled out from under the flames and, coming up to us as we stood on the dais, blew fire in our faces. The girl overtook him and breathed blasts of fire at his face, and the sparks from her and from him rained down on us. Her sparks did us no harm; but one of his sparks landed on my eye and destroyed it, making me a one-eyed ape; and another fell on the King's face, scorching the lower half of it, burning off his beard and his moustaches and making his lower teeth fall out; while a third landed on the eunuch's chest and killed him on the spot.

So we despaired of life and made certain of death — when a voice repeated the saying, "Allah is Most High! Allah is Most High! Help and victory to all who believe the Truth; and disappointment and disgrace to all who do not believe the religion of Mohammed, the Moon of Faith."

The speaker was the princess, who had burnt the ifrit up; and he had become a heap of ashes.

Then she came up to us and said, "Bring me a cup of water." They brought it to her, and she spoke words over it that we did not understand, and sprinkling me with it, cried, "By virtue of the Truth, and by the Most Great Name of Allah, I charge you to return to your former shape."

And I shook, and became a man as before — except that I had entirely lost one eye.

Then she cried out, "The fire! The fire! Dear father, an arrow from the accursed one has wounded me to death, for I am not used to fighting the jinn. If he had been a man I would have killed him at the beginning. I had no trouble at all until the moment the pomegranate burst and the seeds scattered; but I overlooked the seed that had the jinni's very life in it. If I had picked it up he would have died on the spot; but as Fate and Fortune decreed, I did not see it. So he came on me completely unawares, and there was a hard struggle between him and me under the earth and high in the air and in the water; and every time I opened one gate on him he opened another and a stronger one on me, until at last he opened on me the gate of fire — and few are saved on whom the door of fire opens.

"But Destiny willed that my cunning should beat his cunning; and I burned him to death, after urging him in vain to embrace the religion of Islam. As for me, I am a dead woman. May Allah supply my place to you."

Then she called on Heaven for help and did not stop begging for relief from the fire — when a black spark shot up from her robed feet to her thighs; and then it flew to her breast and from there to her face.

When it reached her face she wept and said, "I testify that there is no god but God, and that Mohammed is the Apostle of God."

And we looked at her and saw nothing but a heap of ashes, beside the heap that had been the ifrit.

We mourned for her, and I wished I had been in her place, so that I might not have seen that lovely face, which had done me so much good, turned into ashes. But there is no gainsaying the will of Allah.

When the King saw his daughter's terrible death he plucked out what was left of his beard and beat his face and tore his clothes; and I did as he did, and we both wept over her.

Then the chamberlains and the great men came in and were amazed to find two heaps of ashes and the Sultan in a dead faint; so they stood round him until he revived and told them what had happened to his daughter through the ifrit. At which their grief was very grievous, and the women and the slave girls shrieked and keened; and they kept up their lamentations for seven days.

What is more, the King ordered a great vaulted tomb built over his daughter's ashes, and wax tapers and funeral lamps to be burnt in it. But as for the ifrit's ashes, they scattered them on the winds and sent them off to the curse of Allah.

Then the Sultan fell into a sickness that very nearly brought him to his death, and it lasted a month. And when his health came back to him, and his beard grew again, and he had been converted by the mercy of Allah to Islam, he sent for me and said:

"Young man, Fate had decreed for us the happiest of lives, safe from all the chances and changes of Time — until you came to us, when troubles fell on us. Would to Heaven we had never seen you, or that foul face of yours! For we took pity on you, and by doing it we have lost everything we had.

"On your account I have lost, first, my daughter, who was worth a hundred men to me; secondly I have suffered what happened to me by the fire and the loss of my teeth; and my eunuch was killed as well.

"I do not blame you, for it was out of your power to prevent it: the doom of Allah was on you as it was on us, and thanks be to the Almighty that my daughter delivered you, even though she lost her own life doing it.

"Go out now, my son, from this city of mine; and let what has happened to us through you be enough, even though it was decreed for us. Go in peace — and if I ever see you again, I shall certainly kill you." And he shouted at me.

So I went out of his presence, my lady, weeping bitterly and hardly able to believe in my escape, and not knowing which way to go. And I recalled everything that had happened to me — my meeting with the tailor, my love for the girl in the palace under the earth, and my narrow escape from the ifrit even after he had determined to put me to death; and how I had entered the city as an ape and was now leaving it a man again.

Then I gave thanks to Allah and said, "My eye and not my life!" And before leaving the place I went into the baths and shaved my head and my beard and my moustaches and my eyebrows; and I threw ashes on my head and put on the coarse black woollen robe of a kalandar.

Then I set out, my lady; and every day I turned over all the disasters that had come on me, and I wept and repeated these lines:

	"I am distraught, and yet truly His mercy stays with me,
	though whole armies of troubles gather round me from I cannot see where.
	Patient I will be, until Patience herself grows impatient with me;
	patient for ever, until the Lord fulfils my destiny.
	Patient I will stay without complaining, a wronged and beaten man;
	patient as a sun-parched creature crossing the desert's sea of sand.
	Patient I will be until the aloe itself admits, without knowing it,
	that I am patient under bitterer things than the bitterest aloes.
	There is nothing bitterer for mankind than aloes or than patience —
	and yet bitterer to me than either was the treachery of Patience.
	My dry and seamed and scorched forehead would interpret my pain
	if a soul could search my spirit and unlock the secret there.
	If the hills had to carry the load I carry they would crumble under it;
	it would still the roaring wind, it would quench the flame's hot tongue.
	And whoever says the world is sweet will certainly see a day
	with more than the bitterness of aloes and more than their pungency."

Then I journeyed through many regions and saw many a city, making for Baghdad, so that I might get an audience in the House of Peace with the Commander of the Faithful and tell him everything that had happened to me.

I arrived here this very night and found my brother in Allah, this first kalandar, standing about like a man at a loss; so I greeted him with "Peace be upon you," and we fell into conversation. Presently up came our brother, this third kalandar, and said to us, "Peace be with you! I am a stranger"; to which we replied, "And we are strangers too, who have come here this blessed night."

So all three of us walked on together, none of us knowing the others' history, until Destiny drove us to this door and we came in to you.

So that is my story, and that is the reason for my shaving my beard and my moustaches, and that is what caused the loss of my eye.

Said the mistress of the house, "Your tale is a rare one indeed. So rub your head and be on your way."

But he replied, "I will not budge until I have heard my companions' stories."

Then the third kalandar came forward and said, "Illustrious lady, my history is not like these comrades' of mine, but stranger and far more marvellous. In their case Fate and Fortune came down on them without warning; but I drew destiny down on my own head and brought sorrow on my own soul, and shaved my own beard and lost my own eye. Hear then
