The Third Kalandar's Tale
(Part 1 of 3)

Know, my lady, that I too am a king and the son of a king, and my name is Ajib son of Khazib.

When my father died I succeeded him; and I ruled and did justice and dealt fairly with all my subjects. I took great delight in sea trips, for my capital stood on the shore with the ocean stretching far and wide in front of it; and close at hand were many great islands with forts and garrisons on them out in the middle of the water. My fleet numbered fifty merchantmen, and as many yachts for pleasure, and a hundred and fifty sail fitted out and ready for holy war against the unbelievers.

It happened that I had a mind to enjoy myself among those islands, so I took ship with my people in ten vessels; and carrying a month's provisions with me, I set out on a twenty-day voyage.

But one night a head wind struck us, and the sea rose against us in huge waves; the billows buffeted us badly and a thick darkness settled round us. We gave ourselves up for lost, and I said, "Whoever puts his days in danger deserves no praise, even if he escapes."

Then we prayed to Allah and begged Him; but the gale did not stop blowing against us, nor the surges striking us, until morning broke, when the wind fell and the seas sank to a mirror stillness and the sun shone kindly and clear on us.

Presently we made an island, where we landed and cooked some food and ate heartily and rested for a couple of days. Then we set out again and sailed another twenty days, the seas broadening and the land shrinking.

Presently the current ran against us, and we found ourselves in strange waters, where the captain had lost his reckoning and was completely bewildered in that sea. So we said to the lookout man, "Get to the masthead and keep your eyes open."

He swarmed up the mast and looked out, and cried aloud, "Captain, I see something dark to starboard, very like a fish floating on the surface of the sea; and to larboard there is a looming shape out in the middle of the water, now black and now bright."

When the captain heard the lookout's words he dashed his turban down on the deck and plucked out his beard and beat his face, saying, "Good news indeed! We are all dead men; not one of us can be saved."

And he began to weep, and all of us wept at his weeping, and for our own lives besides. And I said, "Captain, tell us what it is the lookout saw."

"My prince," he answered, "you must know that we lost our course on the night of the storm, which was followed next day by a two-day calm during which we made no way; and we have been going astray for eleven days from that night, with never a wind to bring us back onto our proper course.

"Tomorrow, by the end of the day, we shall come to a mountain of black stone called the Magnet Mountain; for the currents are carrying us there whether we like it or not. As soon as we are under its lee, the ship's sides will open, and every nail in every plank will fly out and stick fast to the mountain; for Almighty Allah has given the loadstone a mysterious power and a love for iron, and because of it everything made of iron travels towards it. And on this mountain there is a great deal of iron — how much nobody knows but the Most High — from all the vessels that have been lost there since the old days.

"The bright spot on the summit is a dome of yellow brass from Andalusia, vaulted on ten columns; and on the crown of it is a horseman riding a horse of brass and holding a brass lance in his hand; and there hangs on his breast a tablet of lead engraved with names and talismans."

And presently he added, "And, O King, nobody destroys people except that rider on his horse; and the enchantment will not be broken until he falls from his mount."

Then, my lady, the captain wept beyond all weeping, and every one of us made certain of our doom, and each said goodbye to his friend and charged him with his last will and testament, in case he should be the one saved.

We did not sleep that night; and in the morning we found ourselves much closer to the Magnet Mountain, where the waters were driving us with a violent set. When the ships were close under its lee they opened, and the nails flew out, and all the iron in them made for the Magnet Mountain and clung to it like a net; so that by the end of the day we were all struggling in the waves round about the mountain.

Some of us were saved, but more were drowned; and even the ones who escaped did not know one another, they were so stupefied by the beating of the billows and the raving of the winds.

As for me, my lady, Allah — exalted be His name — preserved my life so that I might suffer whatever He willed for me of hardship and misfortune and calamity; for I scrambled onto a plank from one of the ships, and the wind and the water threw it up at the foot of the mountain.

There I found a practicable path, leading up by steps carved out of the rock to the summit; and I called on the name of Allah Almighty:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Fifteenth Night,

she went on: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the third kalandar said to the lady — the rest of the party sitting there tied up, and the slaves standing over them with drawn swords:

And after calling on the name of Almighty Allah and passionately begging Him for help, I breasted the climb, clinging to the steps and notches cut in the stone, and mounted little by little. And the Lord stilled the wind and helped me in the climb, so that I managed to reach the summit.

There I found nowhere to rest but the dome, which I went into, overjoyed at my escape; and I made the ritual washing and prayed a prayer of two prostrations, in thanks to God for preserving me. Then I fell asleep under the dome, and in my dream I heard a mysterious voice saying:

"Son of Khazib! When you wake from your sleep, dig under your feet and you will find a bow of brass and three leaden arrows, inscribed with talismans and magical characters. Take the bow and shoot the arrows at the horseman on the top of the dome, and free mankind from this terrible calamity.

"When you have shot him he will fall into the sea, and the horse will drop at your feet: then bury it in the place where the bow was. That done, the sea will swell and rise until it is level with the mountain top, and there will appear on it a skiff carrying a man of brass — not the one you shot — holding a pair of oars in his hands. He will come to you, and you are to go aboard with him; but beware of saying In Allah's name, or of naming Allah Almighty in any other way.

"He will row you for ten days, until he brings you to certain islands called the Islands of Safety, and from there you will easily reach a port and find people to carry you to your own country. And all this will be fulfilled for you provided you do not call on the name of Allah."

Then I started up out of my sleep in joy and gladness; and hurrying to do what the mysterious voice had told me, I found the bow and the arrows and shot at the horseman and tumbled him into the sea, while the horse dropped at my feet; so I took it and buried it.

Presently the sea surged up and rose until it reached the top of the mountain; and I had not long to wait before I saw a skiff out in the offing coming towards me. I gave thanks to Allah; and when the skiff came up to me I saw in it a man of brass with a tablet of lead on his breast inscribed with talismans and magical characters; and I went aboard without saying a word.

The boatman rowed on with me through the first day and the second and the third, ten whole days in all, until I caught sight of the Islands of Safety — at which I was overjoyed, and in the stress of my gladness exclaimed, "Allah! Allah! In the name of Allah! There is no god but God, and Allah is Almighty."

At which the skiff instantly turned over and threw me into the sea; and then it righted itself and sank down into the depths.

Now I am a good swimmer, so I swam the whole day until nightfall, when my forearms and shoulders were numb with exhaustion and I felt as though I were dying; so I made my profession of faith, expecting nothing but death.

The sea was still surging under the violence of the winds; and presently there came a billow like a hill, and lifting me high in the air, threw me with a long cast onto dry land, so that His will might be fulfilled.

I crawled up the beach and took my clothes off and wrung them out to dry and spread them in the sun; then I lay down and slept the whole night.

As soon as it was day I put my clothes on and got up to see which way I should walk. Presently I came to a thicket of low trees; and making a circuit of it, I found that the place I was standing on was an islet, a mere holm, ringed on all sides by the ocean. At which I said to myself, "Whatever frees me from one great calamity throws me into a greater one."

But while I was pondering my situation and longing for death, I saw a ship in the distance making for the island; so I climbed a tree and hid myself among the branches.

Presently the ship anchored and put ten Black slaves ashore, carrying iron hoes and baskets, who walked on until they reached the middle of the island. There they dug deep into the ground until they uncovered a metal plate, which they lifted, opening a trapdoor.

After this they went back to the ship and brought from it bread and flour, honey and fruit, clarified butter, leather bottles of liquor and a great many household goods; and furniture too, and table service and mirrors, rugs and carpets — in fact everything needed to furnish a dwelling. And they kept going to and fro and down through the trapdoor until they had carried everything that was in the ship into the dwelling.

After this the slaves went aboard again and came back with the richest clothing you could imagine; and in the middle of them came an old, old man, of whom very little was left, for Time had dealt hard and harshly with him, and all that remained of him was a bone wrapped in a rag of blue cloth with the winds whistling through it, east and west. As the poet says of such a man:

	Time makes me tremble — ah, how sore the check —
	while Time in the pride of his strength goes stalking on.
	Time was when I walked and never once felt tired;
	now I am tired, though I never walk at all.

And the old man held by the hand a young man cast in beauty's own mould, all elegance and perfect grace, so fair that his good looks deserved to become proverbial; for he was like a green bough, or the young of the roe deer, ravishing every heart with his loveliness and subduing every soul with his coquetry and his charm. It was of him the poet spoke when he said:

	They brought Beauty along with him to make a comparison,
	but Beauty hung her head in shame and confusion.
	They said, "Beauty, have you ever seen his like?"
	And Beauty cried, "His like? Nowhere at all!"

They did not stop their coming and going, my lady, until all of them had gone down through the trapdoor; and they did not reappear for an hour or more, at the end of which the slaves and the old man came up without the young man. And replacing the iron plate and carefully closing the door slab as it had been before, they went back to the ship and made sail and were lost to my sight.

When they had turned away to go, I came down from the tree and, going to the place I had seen them fill in, scraped off and cleared away the earth; and I possessed my soul in patience until I had cleared the whole of it away.

Then the trapdoor appeared, which was made of wood and was the shape and size of a millstone; and when I lifted it, it disclosed a winding staircase of stone.

At this I marvelled; and going down the steps until I reached the last, I found a fine hall spread with all kinds of carpets and silks, in which a young man was sitting on a raised couch and leaning back on a round cushion, with a fan in his hand and nosegays and posies of sweet-scented herbs and flowers in front of him. But he was alone, without a soul near him in that great vault.

When he saw me he turned pale; but I greeted him courteously and said, "Set your mind at ease and calm your fears; no harm will come near you. I am a man like yourself, and the son of a king into the bargain, whom the decrees of Destiny have sent to keep you company and cheer you in your loneliness. But now tell me — what is your story, and what makes you live like this, alone under the ground?"

When he was satisfied that I was of his own kind and not a jinni, he was delighted and his good colour came back; and drawing me close to him he said:

"Brother, my story is a strange one, and it is this. My father is a merchant-jeweller with great wealth, who has white slaves and Black slaves travelling and trading on his account in ships and on camels, and dealing with the most distant cities; but he was not blessed with a child, not even one.

"Now on a certain night he dreamed a dream that he would be given a son who would be short-lived; and so the morning dawned on my father bringing him grief and weeping. On the following night my mother conceived, and my father noted down the date she became pregnant.

"When her time was up she bore me — at which my father rejoiced and gave banquets and called the neighbours together and fed the holy beggars and the poor, because he had been blessed with a child near the end of his days.

"Then he assembled the astrologers and the astronomers who knew the places of the planets, and the wizards and the wise men of the time, and the men learned in horoscopes and nativities; and they drew up the scheme of my birth and said to my father:

"'Your son will live to fifteen years, but in his fifteenth there is a sinister aspect; and if he gets safely past it he will reach a great age. And the thing that threatens him with death is this. In the Sea of Peril there stands a mountain called the Magnet Mountain, on the summit of which is a horseman of yellow brass seated on a horse of brass and carrying a tablet of lead on his breast. Fifty days after that rider falls from his horse, your son will die; and his killer will be the man who shoots the horseman down, a prince named Ajib son of King Khazib.'

"My father grieved beyond all grieving to hear this; but he brought me up in the tenderest way and educated me excellently well until my fifteenth year was reached.

"Ten days ago news came to him that the horseman had fallen into the sea, and that the man who shot him down was named Ajib son of King Khazib. At which my father wept bitterly at having to part with me, and became like a man possessed by a jinni. However, being in mortal fear for me, he built me this place under the earth; and stocking it with everything needed for the few days still to run, he brought me here in a ship and left me.

"Ten of them have gone by already; and when the forty have passed without harm coming to me, he will come and take me away — for he has done all this only out of fear of Prince Ajib. So that is my story, and that is the reason I am here alone."

When I heard his history I marvelled, and said to myself, "I am the very Prince Ajib who has done all this; but as Allah is with me, I certainly will not kill him."

So I said to him, "My lord, may this hurt and harm stay far from you; and then, please Allah, you shall suffer no care or worry or unease at all. For I will stay here with you and serve you as a servant, and then go on my way; and after keeping you company through the forty days, I will go with you to your home, where you shall give me an escort of some of your Mamluks to travel back with me to my own city. And the Almighty will repay you on my behalf."

He was glad to hear this; and I got up and lit a large wax candle and trimmed the lamps and the three lanterns, and set out food and drink and sweets. We ate and drank and sat talking about one thing and another until most of the night was gone; and then he lay down to rest, and I covered him up and went to sleep myself.

Next morning I got up and warmed a little water; then I lifted him gently so as to wake him, and brought him the warm water, and he washed his face and said to me, "Heaven repay you on my behalf with every blessing, young man! By Allah, if I get clear of this danger and am saved from the man whose name is Ajib son of Khazib, I will make my father reward you and send you home healthy and wealthy; and if I die, then my blessing be on you."

I answered, "May the day never dawn on which any evil comes to you; and may Allah make my last day come before your last day."

Then I set some food in front of him and we ate; and I got perfumes ready to fumigate the hall with, which pleased him. What is more I made him a mancala board; and we played and ate sweets and played again and enjoyed ourselves until nightfall, when I got up and lit the lamps and set something in front of him to eat, and sat telling him stories until the hours of darkness were far gone. Then he lay down to rest, and I covered him up and rested too.

And I went on doing this, my lady, for days and nights; and affection for him took root in my heart and my sorrow was eased, and I said to myself, "The astrologers lied when they predicted that he would be killed by Ajib son of Khazib. By Allah, I will not kill him."

I did not stop looking after him and talking with him and drinking with him and telling him all kinds of tales for thirty-nine days.

On the fortieth night the young man was overjoyed and said, "Brother — praise be to Allah, who has preserved me from death; and this is by your blessing and the blessing of your coming to me. And I pray God that He restores you to your own country. But now, brother, I should like you to warm me some water for a washing, and be kind enough to bathe me and change my clothes."

I replied, "With love and gladness"; and I heated plenty of water and carried it in to him and washed his whole body, the washing of health, with lupin meal, and rubbed him well and changed his clothes and spread him a high bed, on which he lay down to rest, being drowsy after the bath.

Then he said, "Brother, cut me up a watermelon and sweeten it with a little sugar candy."

So I went to the storeroom, and bringing out a fine watermelon I found there, set it on a platter and laid it before him and said, "My master, have you not a knife?"

"Here it is," he answered, "over my head, on the high shelf."

So I got up in a hurry and took the knife and drew it out of its sheath; but my foot slipped as I stepped down, and I fell heavily onto the young man with the knife in my hand — which hurried to fulfil what had been written on the Day the destinies of men were decided, and buried itself, as though it had been planted there, in the young man's heart.

He died that instant.

When I saw that he was killed, and knew that I had killed him in spite of myself, I cried out with a loud and bitter cry and beat my face and tore my clothes and said:

"Truly we are Allah's and to Him we are returning! Muslims! People who love Allah! There was only one day left of the forty dangerous days that the astrologers and the learned men had foretold for him — and the predestined death of this beautiful boy had to come at my hand. Would to Heaven I had never tried to cut that watermelon.

"What a dreadful misfortune this is that I must bear, whether I like it or not! What a disaster! What an affliction! O my Allah, I beg your pardon and declare to You that I am innocent of his death. But what God wills — let that come to pass":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
