The Third Kalandar's Tale
(Part 3 of 3)

	To match her with a green bough would be useless;
	he is a fool who finds her beauties in the roe deer.
	When did the roe have those lively, lovely limbs,
	or honey-dew those lips of hers alone can give?
	Those eyes — those soul-piercing eyes, that kill with love,
	that bind their victim with the arrows that lay him low?
	They coaxed my heart back into a second childhood.
	No wonder: a love-sick man is a child again.

And I repeated to her the poet's words:

	"No other charms but yours shall meet my eyes,
	no other image can take my heart by surprise.
	Your love, my lady, has captured all my thoughts,
	and on that love I shall die and shall rise again."

So I lay with her that night; I never knew a lovelier. And when it was morning the girls carried me off to the baths and bathed me and dressed me in the finest clothes. Then they served food, and we ate and drank and the cup went round until nightfall, when I chose from among them one lovely in form and face, soft-sided and a model of grace — the kind of woman the poet described when he said:

	On her fair breast I saw two caskets,
	sealed fast with seals of musk to hold lovers off;
	her eyes stand guard over them with arrowy glances
	whose shafts would shoot whoever dared put out a hand.

With her I spent a very fine night. And, to be brief, my mistress, I stayed with them in all the comfort and delight of life, eating and drinking, talking and carousing, and every night lying with one or another of them.

But at the head of the new year they came to me in tears and said goodbye, weeping and crying out and clinging to me; at which I wondered, and said, "What can be the matter? Truly you are breaking my heart."

They exclaimed, "Would to Heaven we had never known you! For though we have kept company with a great many, we never saw a pleasanter man than you or a more courteous." And they wept again.

"But tell me more clearly," I asked, "what is causing this weeping, which is making my gall bladder ready to burst?"

And they answered, "Our lord and master, it is separation that makes us weep; and you, and only you, are the cause of our tears. If you will listen to us we need never be parted; and if you will not listen, we part for ever. But our hearts tell us that you will not listen to what we say, and that is the cause of our tears and our crying."

"Tell me how the matter stands."

"Know, our lord, that we are the daughters of kings, who have met here and lived together for years; and once every year we are obliged to be away for forty days; and afterwards we come back and stay here for the rest of the twelve months, eating and drinking and taking our pleasure and enjoying ourselves.

"We are about to go, according to our custom; and we are afraid that once we are gone you will go against our charge and disobey what we tell you. Now here we put into your hands the keys of the palace, which has forty rooms; and of these you may open thirty-nine — but beware, and we beg you by Allah and by our own lives, of opening the fortieth door, for behind it is the thing that will separate us for ever."

Said I, "I certainly will not open it, if it holds the cause of my being separated from you."

Then one of them came up to me and fell on my neck and wept and recited these lines:

	"If Time brings us together after a while apart,
	the world will stop frowning harshly and smile on our lot;
	and if your face will condescend to adorn my eyes,
	I will pardon Time its past wrongs and its old deceits."

And I recited the following:

	"When she drew near to say goodbye, with her heart unstrung,
	while care and longing wrung her breast that day,
	she wept wet pearls, and mine rolled down like red carnelians,
	and joined in a sad necklace, they hung about her throat."

When I saw her weeping I said, "By Allah, I will never open that fortieth door — never, and in no way at all." And I said goodbye to her.

At which they all departed, flying away like birds, signalling their farewells with their hands as they went, and leaving me alone in the palace.

When evening drew near I opened the door of the first room, and going in, found myself in a place like one of the pleasure gardens of Paradise. It was a garden with trees of the freshest green and ripe fruit of a yellow sheen; and its birds were singing clear and keen, and rills ran winding through the fair terrain.

The sight and the sounds brought comfort to my spirit; and I walked among the trees and smelt the breath of the flowers on the breeze, and heard the little birds singing their melodies, hymning the One, the Almighty, in the sweetest litanies. And I looked at the apple, whose colour is part red and part yellow, as the poet says:

	Apple, whose colour joins in a mellow union
	my beloved's red cheek and her luckless lover's yellow one.

Then I looked at the quince, and breathed in its fragrance, which puts musk and ambergris to shame, as the poet has said:

	The quince joins every taste in one; in her are found
	the gifts that have crowned the quince queen of the fruits.
	Her taste is wine, her scent the waft of musk;
	her colour pure gold, and her shape the moon's fair round.

Then I looked at the pear, whose taste surpasses sherbet and sugar; and at the apricot, whose beauty strikes the eye with admiration, as though she were a polished ruby.

Then I went out of the place and locked the door as it had been before.

Next day I opened the second door; and going in, I found myself on a spacious plain set with tall date palms and watered by a running stream, whose banks were bushed with rose and jasmine, while privet and sweet briar, ox-eye, violet and lily, narcissus, marjoram and the winter gillyflower carpeted the borders. And the breath of the breeze swept over all these sweet-smelling growths, spreading their delicious scents right and left, perfuming the world and filling my soul with delight.

After enjoying myself there a while I went out and, having shut the door as it had been before, opened the third door — where I saw a high open hall inlaid with parti-coloured marbles and costly stonework and other precious stones, and hung with cages of sandalwood and eagle-wood, full of birds making sweet music: the thousand-voiced nightingale, and the wood pigeon, the blackbird, the turtle dove and the Nubian ring dove.

My heart was filled with pleasure at it; my grief was driven off, and I slept in that aviary until dawn.

Then I unlocked the door of the fourth room, and inside found a grand saloon with forty smaller chambers opening off it. All their doors stood open; so I went in, and found them full of pearls and jacinths and beryls and emeralds and corals and carbuncles, and every kind of precious gem and jewel that the tongue of man cannot describe.

My thoughts were stunned at the sight, and I said to myself, "These, I think, are things gathered together that could not be found except in the treasuries of a King of Kings; nor could all the monarchs of the world have collected the like of them."

And my heart swelled and my sorrows stopped. "For," said I, "now truly I am the monarch of the age, since by Allah's grace all this enormous wealth is mine; and I have forty girls under my hand, and there is nobody to claim them but myself."

Then I did not leave off opening one place after another until thirty-nine days had gone by, and in that time I had gone into every room except the one whose door the princesses had charged me not to open.

But my thoughts, my mistress, ran always on that forbidden fortieth, and Satan urged me to open it for my own undoing; and I had not the patience to hold back, although there was only a single day left before they were due.

So I stood in front of that room and, after a moment's hesitation, opened the door, which was plated with red gold, and went in.

I was met by a perfume the like of which I had never smelt before; and the scent was so sharp and so subtle that it made my senses drunk as with strong wine, and I fell to the ground in a fainting fit that lasted a full hour.

When I came to myself I put strength into my heart and, going in, found myself in a chamber whose floor was strewn with saffron and blazing with light from branched candelabra of gold and lamps fed with costly oils, which gave off the scent of musk and ambergris. I saw there two great censers as well, each as big as a drinking bowl, flaming with aloes-wood, nadd perfume, ambergris and honeyed scents; and the place was full of their fragrance.

Presently, my lady, I caught sight of a noble horse, black as the murk of the murkiest night, standing ready saddled and bridled — and his saddle was of red gold — in front of two mangers, one of clear crystal holding husked sesame, and the other also of crystal holding rose water scented with musk.

When I saw this I marvelled, and said to myself, "There must certainly be some wonderful mystery in this animal." And Satan tricked me; so I led him out of the palace and mounted him — but he would not stir from the spot.

So I hammered his sides with my heels, and he did not move; and then I took the rein-whip and struck him with it. And when he felt the blow he neighed a neigh with a sound like deafening thunder, and opening a pair of wings, flew up with me into the sky, far beyond the reach of any man's eyesight.

After a full hour of flight he came down and landed on a terrace roof; and shaking me off his back, he lashed me across the face with his tail and gouged out my left eye, so that it rolled down my cheek. Then he flew away.

I came down from the terrace and found myself among the ten one-eyed young men again, sitting on their ten couches with the blue covers; and they cried out when they saw me, "No welcome to you, and nothing of good cheer! We all lived the happiest of lives, and ate and drank of the best; we took our rest on brocades and cloth of gold and slept with our heads on beauty's breast — and we could not wait one day to gain the delights of a whole year."

Said I, "Look — I have become one like you; and now I want you to bring me a tray full of blackness, so that I can blacken my face and be received into your society."

"No, by Allah," they said. "You shall not stay with us. Now get out."

So they drove me away. And finding them reject me like that, I foresaw that things would go hard with me; and I remembered all the miseries that Destiny had written on my forehead, and I went out from among them heavy-hearted and with tears in my eyes, repeating to myself the words, "I was sitting at my ease, and nothing but my own meddling brought me unease."

Then I shaved my beard and my moustaches and my eyebrows, renouncing the world, and wandered about Allah's earth in a kalandar's clothes; and the Almighty decreed safety for me until I reached Baghdad, which was on the evening of this very night.

Here I met these other two kalandars standing about at a loss; so I greeted them, saying, "I am a stranger!" and they answered, "And we are strangers too!" By the freak of Fortune we were like to like — three kalandars and three one-eyed men, all blind in the left eye.

Such, my lady, is the reason for the shearing of my beard, and that is how I lost an eye.

Said the lady to him, "Rub your head and be on your way."

But he answered, "By Allah, I will not go until I have heard the stories of these others."

Then the lady turned to the Caliph and Ja'afar and Masrur and said, "You men — give an account of yourselves as well."

At which Ja'afar stood forward and told her what he had told the doorkeeper as they were coming into the house; and when she heard his story of their being merchants and Mosul men who had outrun the watch, she said, "I grant you your lives, each for the other's sake. And now away with you, all of you."

So they all went out; and when they were in the street the Caliph said to the kalandars, "Where are you going now, my friends, seeing that the morning has not yet dawned?"

They said, "By Allah, our lord, we do not know where to go."

"Come and spend the rest of the night with us," said the Caliph. And turning to Ja'afar, "Take them home with you, and tomorrow bring them into my presence, so that we can put their adventures on record."

Ja'afar did as the Caliph ordered him, and the Commander of the Faithful went back to his palace; but sleep gave no sign of visiting him that night, and he lay awake turning over the misfortunes of the three kalandar princes and impatient to know the history of the ladies and the two black bitches.

No sooner had morning dawned than he went out and sat on the throne of his sovereignty; and turning to Ja'afar, after all his grandees and officers of state had assembled, he said, "Bring me the three ladies and the two bitches and the three kalandars."

So Ja'afar went out and brought them all before him — the ladies veiled. Then the minister turned to them and said in the Caliph's name:

"We pardon you for your ill treatment of us and your lack of courtesy, in consideration of the kindness that went before it, and because you did not know who we were. However, I would have you know now that you are standing in the presence of the fifth of the sons of Abbas — Harun al-Rashid, brother of the Caliph Musa al-Hadi, son of Al-Mansur, son of Mohammed the brother of Al-Saffah son of Mohammed, who was the first of the royal house. So speak before him the truth, and the whole truth."

When the ladies heard Ja'afar's words about the Commander of the Faithful, the eldest came forward and said, "O Commander of the Faithful, my story is one which, if it were engraved with needles on the inner corners of the eye, would be a warning to anyone willing to take warning, and an example to anyone who can profit by an example":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Seventeenth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that she stood forward before the Commander of the Faithful and began to tell
