The Hunchback's Tale

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that in the old days, and in the old time before them, there lived in a certain city of China a tailor, an open-handed man who loved pleasure and merrymaking, and who used to go out with his wife from time to time to amuse themselves at the public entertainments.

One day they went out at first light and were coming home in the evening when they fell in with a hunchback, whose appearance would raise a laugh out of care itself and drive off the horrors of despair. So they went over to enjoy the look of him, and invited him home to talk and drink with them that night.

He agreed, and walked home with them; at which the tailor went out to the market — night having just set in — and bought a fried fish and bread and lemons and dried sweets for dessert, and set the food in front of the hunchback, and they ate.

Presently the tailor's wife took a great chunk of fish and gave it to the hunchback in one lump, stopping his mouth with her hand and saying, "By Allah, you must get it down at a single gulp; I am not giving you time to chew it."

So he bolted it. But there was a stiff bone in it, which stuck in his throat; and his hour having come, he died:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Twenty-fifth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the tailor's wife gave the hunchback that mouthful of fish which ended his term of days, he died on the instant.

Seeing it, the tailor cried aloud, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! Alas that this poor wretch should have died in such a stupid way, and at our hands!"

And the woman answered, "Why all this idle talk? Have you not heard the man who said:

	Why then do I waste my time in grief, until I
	find no friend to carry my weight of woe?
	How am I to sleep on a fire that is never put out?
	To rest on the flames would be hard enough!"

Her husband asked, "And what am I to do with him?"

And she answered, "Get up and take him in your arms and spread a silk cloth over him; then I will go out with you following me, this very night; and if you meet anybody, say: this is my son, and his mother and I are carrying him to the doctor to have him looked at."

So he got up and took the hunchback in his arms and carried him along the streets, with his wife going in front of him crying, "My son, Allah keep you! Which part is hurting you, and where has this smallpox got at you?" So that everybody who saw them said, "It is a child sick with smallpox."

They went along asking for the doctor's house, until people directed them to the house of a physician who was a Jew. They knocked at the door, and a black slave girl came down and opened it; and seeing a man carrying a baby, with a woman beside him, she said, "What is the matter?"

"We have a little one with us," answered the tailor's wife, "and we want to show him to the physician. So take this quarter dinar and give it to your master and let him come down and see my son, who is very sick."

The girl went up to tell her master — at which the tailor's wife stepped into the hallway and said to her husband, "Leave the hunchback here and let us run for our lives."

So the tailor carried the dead man to the top of the stairs and propped him upright against the wall, and away he ran, he and his wife.

Meanwhile the girl went in to the Jew and said, "At the door there is a man and a woman with a sick child, and they have given me a quarter dinar for you, so that you will go down and look at the little one and prescribe for it."

As soon as the Jew saw the quarter dinar he was delighted, and got up quickly in his eagerness for the money, and went out in a hurry in the dark. But he had hardly taken a step before he tripped over the corpse and knocked it over, and it rolled to the bottom of the staircase.

So he shouted to the girl to hurry up with the light, and she brought it; and he went down and examined the hunchback and found him stone dead.

At which he cried out, "O Ezra! O Moses! O Aaron! O Joshua son of Nun! O the Ten Commandments! I have tripped over the sick man and he has fallen downstairs and he is dead! How am I to get this man I have killed out of my house? O by the hooves of the ass of Ezra!"

Then he picked the body up and carried it into the house and told his wife what had happened; and she said to him, "Why are you sitting still? If you keep him here till daybreak we shall both lose our lives. Let the two of us carry him up to the terrace roof and drop him over into the house of our neighbour the Muslim; for if he stays there a night the dogs will come down on him from the next-door terraces and eat him up."

Now this neighbour was a steward, the controller of the Sultan's kitchen, and he used to bring home a great store of oil and fat and scraps of meat; but the cats and the rats used to eat it, or if the dogs smelt a fat sheep's tail they would come down off the nearest roofs and tear at it; and in this way the animals had already done a good deal of damage to what he brought home.

So the Jew and his wife carried the hunchback up to the roof, and letting him down by his hands and feet through the ventilator shaft into the steward's house, propped him against the wall and went their way.

They had hardly done it when the steward, who had been spending the evening with friends listening to a recitation of the Koran, came home and opened the door; and going up with a lighted candle, found a son of Adam standing in the corner under the ventilator.

When he saw this he said, "Well! By Allah, very good indeed! So the thing that has been robbing my stores is nothing but a man."

Then he turned to the hunchback and said, "So it is you who steal the meat and the fat! I thought it was the cats and the dogs, and I kill the dogs and cats of the quarter and sin against them by killing them. And all the while it is you, coming down from the house terrace through the ventilator. But I will avenge myself on you with my own hand!"

So he snatched up a heavy hammer and set on him and struck him full in the chest, and he fell down. Then he examined him, and finding that he was dead, cried out in horror, thinking he had killed him, and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"

And he was afraid for his own life, and added, "Allah curse the oil and the meat and the grease and the sheep's tails into the bargain! How has fate given this man his quietus at my hand?"

Then he looked at the body, and seeing it was a hunchback, said, "Was it not enough for you to be a hunchback, without being a thief as well and pinching meat and fat? O Thou the Veiler, deign to veil me with Thy curtain of concealment!"

So he took him up on his shoulders, and going out with him from his house towards the end of the night, carried him to the nearest end of the market, where he set him on his feet against the wall of a shop at the head of a dark lane, and left him and went away.

After a while up came a Christian, the Sultan's broker, who was very much the worse for drink and was heading for the baths, his drunkenness whispering in his ear, "Truly the call to morning prayer is close."

He came plodding along and staggering about until he got near the hunchback, and squatted down to relieve himself opposite him; when he happened to glance round and saw a man standing against the wall.

Now somebody had snatched the Christian's turban off him earlier in the night; so when he saw the hunchback close by, he imagined that this one meant to steal his headdress too. At which he clenched his fist and struck him on the neck, felling him to the ground, and called out for the market watchman; and he came down on the body in his drunken fury and went on pounding it and throttling it.

Presently the watchman came up and, finding a Christian kneeling on a Muslim and beating him, asked, "What harm has this man done?"

And the broker answered, "The fellow meant to snatch my turban off."

"Get up off him," said the watchman.

So he got up; and the watchman went over to the hunchback and, finding him dead, exclaimed, "By Allah, good indeed! A Christian killing a Muslim!"

Then he seized the broker and tied his hands behind his back and carried him off to the Governor's house — the Christian saying to himself all the way, "O Messiah! O Virgin! how did I come to kill this fellow? And what a hurry he must have been in to leave this life, dying of a single blow!"

Presently, as his drunkenness left him, misery came in its place.

So the broker and the body were kept at the Governor's place until the morning came, when the Governor came out and gave orders to hang the supposed murderer, and commanded the executioner to proclaim the sentence.

They set up a gallows at once and made the Christian stand under it, and the torch-bearer, who was also the hangman, threw the rope round his neck and passed one end through the pulley and was about to hoist him up — when the steward, passing by, saw the broker about to be hanged; and making his way through the crowd, shouted to the executioner, "Stop! Stop! I am the man who killed the hunchback!"

The Governor asked, "What made you kill him?"

And he answered, "I went home last night and found this man, who had come down the ventilator to steal my property; so I hit him on the chest with a hammer, and he died on the spot. Then I picked him up and carried him to the market and stood him against the wall in such a place, near such a lane." And he added, "Is it not enough for me to have killed a Muslim, without killing a Christian as well? So hang nobody but me."

When the Governor heard this he released the broker and said to the torch-bearer, "Hang this man, on his own confession."

So he loosed the cord from the Christian's neck and threw it round the steward's, and stood him under the gallows tree, and was about to string him up — when the Jewish physician pushed through the crowd and shouted to the executioner:

"Stop! Stop! It was I and nobody else who killed the hunchback! Last night I was sitting at home when a man and a woman knocked at the door carrying this hunchback, who was sick, and gave my maid a quarter dinar, telling her to hand me the fee and tell me to come down and see him.

"While she was gone, the man and the woman brought him into the house and set him on the stairs and went away; and presently I came down and did not see him, because I was in the dark, and tripped over him, and he fell to the foot of the staircase and died that instant.

"Then my wife and I took him up and carried him to the top terrace; and this steward's house being next door to mine, we let the body down through the ventilator. When he came home and found the hunchback in his house he thought he was a thief and hit him with a hammer, so that he fell to the ground, and our neighbour made certain he had killed him.

"Now is it not enough for me to have killed one Muslim without knowing it, without burdening myself with taking another Muslim's life knowingly?"

When the Governor heard this he said to the hangman, "Set the steward free and hang the Jew."

At which the torch-bearer took him and slung the cord round his neck — when the tailor pushed through the crowd and shouted to the executioner:

"Stop! Stop! It was I and nobody else who killed the hunchback, and this is how it happened. I had been out enjoying myself yesterday, and coming back for supper, fell in with this hunchback, who was drunk and drumming away and singing loudly to his tambourine.

"So I got talking to him and took him home and bought a fish, and we sat down to eat. Presently my wife took a chunk of fish and made a lump of it and crammed it into his mouth; but some of it went down the wrong way or stuck in his throat, and he died on the instant.

"So my wife and I lifted him up and carried him to the Jew's house, where the slave girl came down and opened the door to us, and I said to her: tell your master there is a man and a woman and a sick person for him to see. I gave her a quarter dinar and she went up to tell her master; and while she was gone I carried the hunchback to the top of the staircase and propped him against the wall, and went off with my wife. When the Jew came down he tripped over him and thought he had killed him."

Then he asked the Jew, "Is this the truth?"

And the Jew answered, "It is."

At which the tailor turned to the Governor and said, "Let the Jew go and hang me."

When the Governor heard the tailor's tale he marvelled at this business of the hunchback and exclaimed, "Truly this is an adventure that ought to be written down in books!"

Then he said to the hangman, "Let the Jew go and hang the tailor, on his own confession."

The executioner took the tailor and put the rope round his neck and said, "I am tired of this slow work. We bring out this one and change him for that one, and nobody gets hanged after all."

Now the hunchback in question, they say, was jester to the Sultan of China, who could not bear him out of his sight. So when the fellow got drunk and did not turn up that night or the next day until noon, the Sultan asked some of his courtiers about him, and they answered:

"Our lord, the Governor came upon him dead and has ordered his murderer to be hanged; but as the hangman was about to hoist him up there came a second man, and a third, and a fourth, and each of them said, 'It is I and nobody else who killed the hunchback!' and each gave a full and detailed account of how the jester came to be killed."

When the King heard this he called out to the chamberlain in waiting, "Go down to the Governor and bring me all four of them."

So the chamberlain went down at once to the place of execution, where he found the torch-bearer on the point of hanging the tailor, and shouted to him, "Stop! Stop!"

Then he gave the King's command to the Governor, who took the tailor, the Jew, the Christian and the steward — the hunchback's body being carried on men's shoulders — and went up with the whole lot of them to the King.

When he came into the presence he kissed the ground and told the ruler the whole story, which there is no need to repeat; for, as they say, there is no use in a tale told three times.

The Sultan, hearing it, marvelled and was moved to laughter, and commanded the story to be written down in letters of liquid gold, saying to the people about him, "Did you ever hear a more wonderful tale than that of my hunchback?"

At which the Christian broker came forward and said, "O King of the age, with your leave I will tell you something that happened to myself, and which is still more wonderful and marvellous and pleasing and delightful than the tale of the hunchback."

Said the King, "Tell us what you have to say."

So he began in these words
