The Christian Broker's Story
(Part 1 of 2)

O King of the age, I came to this country of yours with merchandise, and Destiny kept me here among you; but the place of my birth was Cairo in Egypt, where I was brought up as well, for I am one of the Copts, and my father was a broker before me. When I came of age he departed this life and I took over his business.

One day, as I was sitting in my shop, there came up to me a young man as handsome as could be, wearing sumptuous clothes and riding a fine donkey. When he saw me he greeted me, and I stood up to do him honour; and then he took out a handkerchief with a sample of sesame in it and asked, "How much is this worth an ardabb?" — which is the great Egyptian measure for grain.

I answered, "A hundred dirhams."

Said he, "Take porters and gaugers and measurers and come tomorrow to the Khan al-Jawali, by the Gate of Victory quarter, where you will find me."

Then he went off, leaving the sample of sesame with me in his handkerchief; and I went round my customers and established that every ardabb would fetch a hundred and twenty dirhams.

Next day I took four measurers and walked with them to the khan, where I found him waiting for me. As soon as he saw me he got up and opened his storehouse, and we measured the grain until the store was empty; and we found the contents came to fifty ardabbs, making five thousand pieces of silver.

Then he said, "Let ten dirhams on every ardabb be your brokerage; so take the price and keep four thousand five hundred dirhams on deposit for me; and when I have finished selling the other goods in my warehouses I will come to you and collect the amount."

"Very good," I replied; and kissing his hand, I went away, having made a profit of a thousand dirhams that day.

He was gone a month, at the end of which he came to me and asked, "Where are the dirhams?"

I got up and greeted him and said, "Will you not eat something in my house?"

But he refused, with the remark, "Get the money ready and I will come back presently and take it." Then he rode away.

So I brought out the dirhams and sat down to wait for him; but he stayed away another month, and then came back and said, "Where are the dirhams?"

I got up and greeted him and asked, "Will you not eat something in my house?"

But again he refused, adding, "Get the money ready for me and I will come back presently and take it." Then he rode off.

So I brought out the dirhams and sat down to wait for him; but he stayed away from me a third month, and I said, "Truly this young man is generosity in human form."

At the end of the month he came up, riding a she-mule and wearing a suit of sumptuous clothes; and he was like the moon on the night of its fullness, and he seemed fresh from the baths, with his cheeks rosy bright and his brow flower-white and a mole like a grain of ambergris delighting the sight — as the poet said about such a man:

	The full moon and the sun rose in a single house
	and shone in the brightest splendour and good fortune,
	changing every spirit with their happy brilliance.
	Hail to the thing that rewards prayer with such a gift!
	Their charms and their grace have reached perfection's height;
	they have conquered every heart and won over every wit.
	Praise to the Lord for works so strange and wonderful,
	and for whatever the Almighty wills His hand has done.

When I saw him I rose and called down blessings on him and asked, "My lord, will you not take your money?"

"Why the hurry?" said he. "Wait till I have finished my business and then I will come and take it." And again he rode away.

And I said to myself, "By Allah, when he comes next time I really must make him my guest; for I have traded with his dirhams and made large profits by them."

At the end of the year he came again, dressed in a suit even more sumptuous than the last; and when I begged him, by the Gospel, to come down at my house and eat my guest-food, he said, "I agree, on condition that whatever you spend on me comes out of my own money that is still in your hands."

I answered, "So be it"; and I sat him down while I got ready everything necessary in the way of food and drink and the rest, and set the tray in front of him with the invitation, "In Allah's name!"

Then he drew up to the tray and put out his left hand and ate with me; and I wondered at his not using his right hand.

When we had finished eating I poured water over his hand and gave him something to dry it with. At which we sat down to talk, after I had set some sweets in front of him; and I said to him, "My master, please relieve my mind and tell me why you eat with your left hand. Is there something wrong with the other one?"

When he heard this he recited these lines:

	"Dear friend, do not ask what burns in my breast,
	in case you see fiery pains no eye ever saw.
	It is not that my heart chooses to house Salma
	in place of Layla's love — but need has never a law."

And he put his right arm out of his sleeve — and the hand was cut off, a wrist without a fist.

I was astounded at it; but he said, "Do not be surprised, and do not think I ate with my left hand out of conceit or bad manners, but out of necessity. And the cutting off of my right hand came about by the strangest adventure."

I asked, "And what caused it?"

And he answered: Know that I am one of the sons of Baghdad, and my father was among the notables of that city. When I came of age I heard the pilgrims and travellers, the wayfarers and the merchants, talking about the land of Egypt, and their words sank deep into my mind; until my father died, when I took a large sum of money and fitted myself out for trade with stuffs from Baghdad and Mosul, and packing them into bales, set out on my travels. And Allah decreed safety for me until I came into this city of yours.

Then he wept, and began repeating:

	The bleary-eyed escapes the pits
	that the lynx-eyed falls into.
	A word will kill the wise man
	and save the simpleton.
	The Muslim goes short of food
	while the unbeliever feasts in hall.
	What art or act belongs to a man?
	The will of God binds everybody.

Now when he had finished his verse he said:

So I came into Cairo and took off my loads and stored my goods in the Khan al-Masrur. Then I gave the servant a few silver pieces to buy me some food, and lay down to sleep a while. When I woke I went to the street called Bayn al-Kasrayn — Between the Two Palaces — and came back presently and spent the night at the khan.

When morning came I opened a bale and took out some cloth, saying to myself, "I will go off and walk through some of the markets and see the state of trade." So I loaded the stuff onto some of my slaves and went out until I reached the Exchange of Jaharkas, where the brokers, who knew I had come, came out to meet me.

They took the stuffs and cried them for sale, but could not get even the prime cost of them. I was vexed at this; however, the chief of the brokers said to me:

"My lord, I will tell you how you may make a profit on your goods. You should do as the merchants do, and sell your merchandise on credit for a fixed term, on a contract drawn up by a notary and properly witnessed; and employ a money-changer to collect your dues every Monday and Thursday. That way you will gain two dirhams and more for every one; and you will amuse yourself and pass the time seeing Cairo and the Nile."

Said I, "This is sound advice," and took the brokers back to the khan. They took my stuffs and went with them to the Exchange, where I sold them well, taking bonds for the value. These bonds I deposited with a money-changer, who gave me a receipt, and I went back to the khan with it.

Here I stayed a whole month, breaking my fast every morning with a cup of wine and making my meals on pigeon and mutton and sweets, until the time came for my receipts to fall due. So every Monday and Thursday I used to go to the Exchange and sit in the shop of one merchant or another, while the notary and the money-changer went round collecting the money from the traders, until after the hour of afternoon prayer, when they brought me the amount; and I counted it and sealed the bags and went back with them to the khan.

On a certain day, which happened to be a Monday, I went to the baths and from there back to my khan; and sitting in my own room, broke my fast with a cup of wine, after which I slept a little. When I woke I ate a chicken, and perfuming myself, went to the shop of a merchant called Badr al-Din the Gardener, who made me welcome; and we sat talking a while until the market should open.

And presently up came a lady of stately figure, wearing the most magnificent headdress, perfumed with the sweetest of scents and walking with a gracefully swaying step; and seeing me, she lifted her veil enough to let me glimpse her beautiful black eyes.

She greeted Badr al-Din, who returned her greeting and stood up and talked with her; and the moment I heard her speak, the love of her took hold of my heart.

Presently she said to Badr al-Din, "Have you by you a cut piece of cloth woven with thread of pure gold?"

So he brought out a piece from those he had bought from me, and sold it to her for a thousand two hundred dirhams; at which she said, "I will take the piece home with me and send you the price of it."

"That is impossible, my lady," the merchant replied, "for here is the owner of the cloth, and I owe him a share of the profit."

"Shame on you!" she cried. "Do I not regularly take whole rolls of costly stuff from you, and give you a greater profit than you expect, and send you the money?"

"Yes," he answered, "but I am in pressing need of the price this very day."

At which she took up the piece and threw it back into his lap, saying, "Out on you! Allah confound the whole tribe of you, who value nobody at their proper worth." And she turned to go.

I felt my very soul going with her; so I stood up and stopped her, saying, "I beg you by the Lord, my lady, do me the favour of retracing your gracious steps."

She turned back with a smile and said, "For your sake I will," and took a seat opposite me in the shop.

Then I said to Badr al-Din, "What is the price they asked you for this piece?"

And he said, "Eleven hundred dirhams."

I answered, "The odd hundred shall be your profit. Bring me a sheet of paper and I will write you a discharge for it." And I wrote him a receipt in my own hand and gave the piece to the lady, saying, "Take it away with you; and if you like, bring me the price of it next market day — or better still, accept it as my guest-gift to you."

"Allah reward you with good," she answered, "and make you my husband and lord and master of everything I have."

And Allah granted her prayer.

I saw the Gates of Paradise swing open in front of me, and said, "My lady, let this piece of cloth be yours now, and another like it is ready for you; only let me have one look at your face."

So she raised her veil, and I saw a face the sight of which left me a thousand sighs, and my heart was so captured by love of her that I was no longer master of my own reason.

Then she let her face veil fall, and taking up the piece of cloth, said, "My lord, do not make me desolate by staying away!" And she turned away and vanished from my sight.

I stayed sitting at the Exchange until past the hour of afternoon prayer, lost to the world by the love that had mastered me; and the violence of my passion forced me to ask the merchant about her, and he answered, "This is a lady and a rich one: she is the daughter of a certain emir who died lately and left her a large fortune."

Then I took my leave of him and went home to the khan, where they set supper in front of me; but I could not eat for thinking of her, and when I lay down to sleep, sleep did not come near me.

So I lay awake until morning, when I got up and put on a change of clothes and drank a cup of wine; and after breaking my fast on a trifle, I went to the merchant's shop, where I greeted him and sat down beside him.

Presently up came the lady as usual, followed by a slave girl and wearing a dress more sumptuous than before; and she greeted me without taking any notice of Badr al-Din, and said, in fluent graceful speech — I never heard a voice softer or sweeter — "Send somebody with me to take the thousand two hundred dirhams, the price of the piece."

"Why this hurry?" I asked.

And she answered, "May we never lose you!" and handed me the money.

Then I sat talking with her; and presently I signed to her in dumb show, so that she understood that I longed to enjoy her; and she got up in a hurry with a show of displeasure.

My heart clung to her, and I went out of the market and followed after her. As I was walking, a black slave girl suddenly stopped me and said, "My master, come and speak with my mistress."

At this I was surprised, and replied, "There is nobody who knows me here."

But she answered, "My lord, how quickly you have forgotten her! My lady is the same one who was at such a merchant's shop today."

Then I went with her to the money-changer's, where I found the lady, who drew me to her side and said, "My beloved, your image is firmly stamped on my imagination, and love of you has taken hold of my heart. From the hour I first saw you, neither sleep nor food nor drink has given me any pleasure."

I replied, "Double that suffering is mine, and my own state saves me the trouble of complaining."

Then she said, "My beloved — at your house, or at mine?"

"I am a stranger here and have no place to receive you but the khan; so by your leave, it shall be at your house."

"So be it. But this is Friday night, and nothing can be done till tomorrow after the public prayers. Go to the mosque and pray; then mount your donkey and ask for the Habbaniyah quarter; and when you are there, look for the mansion of Al-Nakib Barakat, who is generally known as Abu Shamah the Syndic — for that is where I live. So do not be late, as I shall be expecting you."

I rejoiced at this with still greater joy, and took my leave of her and went back to my khan, where I passed a sleepless night.

I had hardly made sure that morning had dawned when I got up and changed my clothes and perfumed myself with essences and sweet scents; and taking fifty dinars in a handkerchief, went from the Khan al-Masrur to the Zuwaylah gate, where I hired a donkey and said to its owner, "Take me to the Habbaniyah."

So he set off with me and brought up in the twinkling of an eye at a street called Darb al-Munkari, where I said to him, "Go in and ask for the Syndic's mansion."

He was gone a while and then came back and said, "Get down."

"Go in front of me to the house," said I, and added, "Come back at first light and take me home." And he answered, "In Allah's name"; at which I gave him a quarter dinar of gold, and he took it and went his way.

Then I knocked at the door, and out came two white slave girls, both young, high-bosomed maidens, and they were like two moons; and they said to me, "Come in, for our mistress is expecting you, and she has not slept all night for her delight in you."

I passed through the entrance hall into a great room with seven doors, floored with parti-coloured marbles and furnished with curtains and hangings of coloured silks. The ceiling was panelled with gold and corniced with inscriptions emblazoned in lapis lazuli; and the walls were plastered with Sultani gypsum that gave back the face of anybody looking at it.

Round the room were latticed windows overlooking a garden full of every kind of fruit, whose streams were railing and rilling and whose birds were trilling and shrilling; and in the heart of the hall was a jetting fountain, at whose corners stood birds fashioned in red gold, crusted with pearls and gems, spouting water crystal clear.

When I came in and took a seat:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Twenty-sixth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the young merchant went on:

When I came in and took a seat, the lady came in at once, crowned with a diadem of pearls and jewels; her face dotted with artificial moles in indigo, her eyebrows pencilled with kohl, and her hands and feet reddened with henna.

When she saw me she smiled into my face and took me into her arms and clasped me to her breast; then she put her mouth to my mouth and sucked my tongue, and I did the same; and she said, "Can it be true, my darling, that you have come to me?" And she added, "Welcome and good cheer to you! By Allah, from the day I saw you sleep has not been sweet to me and food has not been pleasant."

Said I, "That has been my case too; and I am your slave, your bondsman."

Then we sat down to talk, and I hung my head towards the ground out of bashfulness; but she did not wait long before she set a tray of the most exquisite food in front of me — marinated meats, fritters soaked in bees' honey, and chickens stuffed with sugar and pistachio nuts — and we ate our fill of them.

Then they brought a basin and a ewer, and I washed my hands; and we scented ourselves with musked rose water and sat down again to talk. And she began repeating these lines:
