The Steward's Tale

Know, O King, that last night I was at a party where they made a full reading of the Koran and got together doctors of law and religion skilled in recitation and chanting; and when the readers had finished, the table was spread, and among other things they set in front of us was a marinated ragout flavoured with cumin seed.

So we sat down; but one of our number held back and refused to touch it. We begged him to eat some, but he swore he would not; and when we pressed him again, he said, "Do not press me. What has already happened to me through eating it is enough." And he began reciting:

	"Shoulder your tray and go straight to your goal;
	and if this kohl suits you — why, then, use this kohl."

When he had finished his verse we said to him, "In Allah's name, tell us your reason for refusing to eat the cumin ragout."

"If it must be so," he replied, "and I have to eat some of it, I will not do it unless I wash my hand forty times with soap, forty times with potash and forty times with galangal — a hundred and twenty washings in all."

At which our host told his slaves to bring water and everything else he needed; and the young man washed his hand as he had said. Then he sat down, looking disgusted and frightened at the same time, and dipping his hand into the ragout, began to eat, showing signs of anger as he did.

And we wondered at him beyond all wondering, for his hand trembled and the morsel in it shook, and we saw that his thumb had been cut off and he was eating with four fingers only.

So we said to him, "In Allah's name — what happened to your thumb? Is your hand like that by God's own creation, or has some accident happened to it?"

"My brothers," he answered, "it is not only this thumb, but the other one too, and both my great toes, as you shall see."

And saying that, he uncovered his left hand and his feet; and we saw that the left hand was like the right, and that each of his feet was likewise missing its great toe.

When we saw him like that our amazement grew greater still, and we said to him, "We have hardly the patience to wait for your history, and to hear how your thumbs came to be cut off, and why you wash both hands a hundred and twenty times."

Know then, said he, that my father was chief of the merchants and the wealthiest of them all in the city of Baghdad, in the reign of the Caliph Harun al-Rashid; and he was much given to wine drinking and to listening to the lute and the other instruments of pleasure, so that when he died he left nothing.

I buried him and had full readings of the Koran made for him, and mourned for him days and nights; then I opened his shop and found he had left few goods in it, while his debts were many. However, I made an arrangement with his creditors for time to settle their claims, and set about buying and selling, paying them something from week to week on account; and I did not stop doing this until I had cleared his obligations entirely and begun adding to my capital.

One day, as I was sitting in my shop, suddenly and unexpectedly there appeared in front of me a young lady, fairer than any I ever saw, wearing the richest clothes and ornaments and riding a she-mule, with one Black slave walking in front of her and another behind.

She drew rein at the head of the exchange market and came in, followed by a eunuch who said to her, "My lady, come out and away without telling anybody, in case you light a fire that burns the whole lot of us up." And he stood in front of her, keeping her from being seen, while she looked at the merchants' shops.

She found none open except mine; so she came up, with the eunuch behind her, and sat down in my shop and greeted me. I never heard anything fairer than her speech or sweeter than her voice.

Then she unveiled her face, and I saw that she was like the moon; and I stole a glance at her that cost me a thousand sighs, and my heart was captured with love of her; and I kept looking again and again at her face, repeating these lines:

	"Say to the charmer in the dove-coloured veil,
	death would be welcome if it eased your sorrow!
	Do me the favour of your favours, so that I may live:
	see, I hold out my palm to take what you give."

When she heard my verse she answered me, saying:

	"I have lost all patience through your unkindness;
	my heart knows nothing but its pledge of love to you.
	If I look on anything but those bright charms of yours,
	may my parting from you never end in the sight of you.
	I swear I will never forget what is owed to you,
	and this breast would gladly soar to the height of you.
	You made me drain the cup of love, and gladly
	would I hold a cup of love for your delight.
	Take this body of mine wherever you go, and when
	you die, bury me in the same place as you.
	Call to me in my grave, and you will hear my bones
	sigh their answers to the sound of your cry.
	And if I were asked, 'What would you have of God?'
	I would answer: first His will, and then your decree."

When she had finished her verse she asked me, "Young man, have you any fine stuffs by you?"

And I answered, "My lady, your slave is a poor man; but be patient until the merchants open their shops, and I will suit you with whatever you want."

Then we sat talking, she and I — and I was drowned in the sea of her love and lost in the desert of my passion — until the merchants opened their shops; when I got up and fetched her everything she wanted, to the tune of five thousand dirhams.

She gave the goods to the eunuch, and going out by the door of the Exchange, mounted her mule and rode away without telling me where she came from; and I was ashamed to speak about such a trifle.

When the merchants dunned me for the price, I made myself answerable for five thousand dirhams and went home, drunk with love of her. They set supper in front of me and I ate a mouthful, thinking of nothing but her beauty and loveliness, and tried to sleep, but sleep would not come.

And that was my condition for a whole week, when the merchants asked me for their money; but I persuaded them to be patient another week, at the end of which she appeared again, mounted on a she-mule and attended by her eunuch and two slaves.

She greeted me and said, "My master, we have been a long time bringing you the price of the goods; but now fetch the money-changer and take your money."

So I sent for the money-changer, and the eunuch counted out the coin in front of him and handed it over to me. Then we sat talking, she and I, until the market opened, when she said to me, "Get me this and that."

So I got her from the merchants whatever she wanted, and she took it and went away without saying a word to me about the price.

As soon as she was out of sight I regretted what I had done; for the value of the goods bought for her came to a thousand dinars, and I said in my soul, "What kind of love is this? She has brought me five thousand dirhams and has taken goods worth a thousand dinars."

I was afraid of being beggared by having to pay the merchants their money, and I said, "They know nobody but me; this lovely lady is nothing but a cheat and a swindler, who has diddled me with her beauty and her grace; for she saw I was a mere boy and laughed at me for not asking her address."

I did not stop being troubled by these doubts and fears, as she was gone more than a month, until the merchants pestered me for their money and were so hard on me that I put my property up for sale and stood on the very brink of ruin.

However, as I was sitting in my shop one day, drowned in melancholy thoughts, she suddenly rode up and, dismounting at the market gate, came straight over to me. When I saw her all my cares fell away from me and I forgot every trouble.

She came right up to me and greeted me in her sweet voice and pleasant speech, and presently said, "Fetch the money-changer and weigh your money."

So she gave me the price of the goods I had got for her, and more; and fell to talking freely with me, until I was ready to die of joy and delight.

Presently she asked me, "Have you a wife?"

And I answered, "Indeed no; I have never known a woman" — and began to shed tears.

Said she, "Why are you weeping?"

Said I, "It is nothing."

Then, giving the eunuch some of the gold pieces, I begged him to be a go-between in the matter; but he laughed and said, "She is more in love with you than you are with her. She has no use at all for the stuffs she has bought from you, and did the whole thing only for love of you; so ask her whatever you like and she will refuse you nothing."

When she saw me giving the dinars to the eunuch she came back and sat down again; and I said to her, "Be charitable to your slave and pardon him what he is about to say."

Then I told her what was in my mind; and she agreed, and said to the eunuch, "You shall carry my message to him" — adding to me, "And do whatever the eunuch tells you."

Then she got up and went away; and I paid the merchants their money and they all profited by it. But as for me, all I gained was regret at the breaking off of our meetings; and I did not sleep the whole of that night.

However, before many days had passed her eunuch came to me, and I treated him honourably and asked him after his mistress.

"Truly she is sick with love of you," he replied.

And I answered, "Tell me who and what she is."

Said he, "The Lady Zubaydah, queen consort of Harun al-Rashid, brought her up in her own household and has advanced her to be stewardess of the harem, and given her the right to come and go as she pleases. She spoke to her lady about you and begged her to marry her to you; but she said, 'I will not do it until I see the young man; and if he is worthy of you, I will marry you to him.'

"So now we are looking for the moment to smuggle you into the palace; and if you manage to get in secretly you will get your wish and marry her. But if the affair gets about, the Lady Zubaydah will strike your head off. What do you say to that?"

I answered, "I will go with you and take the risk you speak of."

Then he said, "As soon as it is night, go to the mosque the Lady Zubaydah built on the Tigris, and pray the night prayers and sleep there."

"With love and gladness," I cried.

So at nightfall I went to the mosque, where I prayed and passed the night. At the first light of dawn a number of eunuchs came in a skiff with a quantity of empty chests, which they set down in the mosque; and then they all went their way except one — and looking at him closely, I saw he was our go-between.

Presently in came the girl, my mistress, walking straight over to us; and I got up to her and embraced her, while she kissed me and shed tears. We talked a while; after which she made me get into one of the chests, which she locked on me.

Presently the other eunuchs came back with a quantity of packages, and she set about stowing them into the chests, which she locked down one by one until all were shut. When it was done the eunuchs loaded the chests into the boat and set off for the Lady Zubaydah's palace.

At this, misgivings began to trouble me and I said to myself, "Truly your lust and your recklessness will be the death of you; and after all this, the question is whether you get your wish or not."

And I began to weep, boxed up as I was in the box and suffering from cramp; and I prayed to Allah to deliver me from the dangerous position I was in — while the boat did not stop going on until it reached the palace gate, where they lifted out the chests, and mine among them.

Then they carried them in, passing a troop of eunuchs, the guardians of the harem and of the ladies behind the curtain, until they came to the post of the Chief Eunuch, who started up out of his sleep and shouted at the girl, "What is in those chests?"

"They are full of goods for the Lady Zubaydah."

"Open them, one by one, so that I can see what is in them."

"And what do you want to open them for?"

"Give me no words and do not overdo the talking! These chests must and shall be opened."

And saying that, he sprang to his feet; and the first one they brought him to open was the one I was in. And when I felt his hands on it my senses left me and I wet myself in my terror, so that the water ran out of the box.

Then she said to the Chief Eunuch, "Steward! You will get me killed and yourself too, for you have damaged goods worth ten thousand dinars. This chest holds coloured dresses and four gallon-flasks of Zamzam water; and now one of them has come unstoppered and the water is running out over the clothes and will spoil their colours."

The eunuch answered, "Take up your boxes and get out, to the curse of God!"

So the slaves carried off all the chests, mine included, and hurried on with them — when suddenly I heard a voice saying, "Alack, and alack! The Caliph! The Caliph!"

When that cry struck my ears I died in my skin, and said the saying that has never yet shamed the man who said it: "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I and nobody else have brought this calamity on myself."

Presently I heard the Caliph say to my mistress, "A plague on you — what is in those boxes?"

And she answered, "Dresses for the Lady Zubaydah."

At which he said, "Open them in front of me!"

When I heard this I died my death outright, and said to myself, "By Allah, today is the very last of my days in this world. If I come safely out of this I am to marry her and there is no more to be said; but discovery is staring me in the face and my head is as good as struck off."

Then I repeated the profession of faith, saying, "There is no god but God, and Mohammed is the Apostle of God!":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Twenty-eighth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the young merchant went on as follows:

Now when I had testified, "I bear witness that there is no god but God," I heard my mistress the handmaid declare to the Caliph, "These chests, Commander of the Faithful, have been committed to my charge by the Lady Zubaydah, and she does not want their contents seen by anybody."

"No matter," said the Caliph. "They must be opened; I will see what is in them." And he called out to the eunuchs, "Bring the chests here in front of me."

At this I made certain of death, beyond any doubt, and fainted away.

Then the eunuchs brought the chests up to him one after another and he set about inspecting the contents; but he saw in them nothing but perfumes and cloths and fine dresses. And they did not stop opening the chests and he did not stop looking at what was in them, finding nothing but clothes and such things, until none was left unopened but the box I was boxed in.

They put out their hands to open it — but my mistress made haste and said to the Caliph, "This one you shall see only in the presence of the Lady Zubaydah, for what is in it is her own secret."

When he heard this he gave orders to carry the chests in; so they took up the one I was in and carried it with the rest into the harem and set it down in the middle of the great room; and truly my spittle was dried up with sheer fear.

Then my mistress opened the box and took me out, saying, "Do not be afraid; no harm and no dread will come to you now. Broaden your chest and strengthen your heart and sit down until the Lady Zubaydah comes, and you shall certainly get your wish of me."

So I sat down; and after a while in came ten maids, virgins like moons, and ranged themselves in two rows, five facing five; and after them twenty other girls, high-bosomed virgins, surrounding the Lady Zubaydah, who could hardly walk for the weight of her clothes and her ornaments.

As she came near, the slave girls parted from around her, and I came forward and kissed the ground between her hands. She signed to me to sit; and when I had sat down in front of her chair, she began questioning me about my forebears and my family and my circumstances, to which I gave such answers as pleased her; and she said to my mistress, "Our raising of you, girl, has not disappointed us."

Then she said to me, "Know that this girl is to us as our own child, and she is a trust committed to you by Allah."

I kissed the ground before her again, well pleased that I should marry my mistress; and she told me to stay ten days in the palace.

So I stayed there ten days, in which time I saw neither my mistress nor anybody else except one of the concubines, who brought me my morning and evening meals.

After this the Lady Zubaydah consulted the Caliph about the marriage of her favourite handmaid, and he gave his leave and assigned her a wedding portion of ten thousand gold pieces. So the Lady Zubaydah sent for the judge and the witnesses, who wrote out our marriage contract; after which the women made ready sweets and rich dishes and distributed them among all the chambers of the harem.

They did this for another ten days, at the end of which my mistress went to the baths.

Meanwhile they set in front of me a tray of food with all sorts of meats on it; and among those dishes, which were enough to daze a man's wits, was a bowl of cumin ragout with chicken breasts in it, larded and flavoured with sugar, pistachios, musk and rose water.

Then, by Allah, good sirs, I did not hesitate long; but took my seat in front of the ragout and fell to and ate of it until I could eat no more. After this I wiped my hands, but forgot to wash them; and sat until it grew dark, when the wax candles were lit and the singing women came in with their tambourines and set about displaying the bride in one dress after another and carrying her in procession from room to room all round the palace, getting their palms crossed with gold as they went.

Then they brought her to me and undressed her.

When I found myself alone with her on the bed I put my arms round her, hardly able to believe we were together; but she smelled the strong odour of the ragout on my hands, and instantly cried out with a very loud cry, at which the slave girls came running to her from every side.

I trembled with alarm, not knowing what the matter was; and the girls asked her, "What is the matter, sister?"

She answered them, "Take this madman away from me. I thought he was a man of sense!"

Said I to her, "What makes you think me mad?"

Said she, "You madman! What made you eat cumin ragout and forget to wash your hand? By Allah, I will pay you back for your bad manners. Is a man like you to come to bed with a woman like me with unclean hands?"

Then she took a plaited scourge from her side and came down with it on my back and the place where I sit, until her forearms were numb and I had fainted away from the beating; when she said to the maids, "Take him and carry him to the Chief of Police, so that he may strike off the hand he ate the cumin ragout with and did not wash."

When I heard this I said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! Will you cut off my hand because I ate a cumin ragout and did not wash?"

The maids interceded with her too, and kissed her hand, saying, "Sister, this man is a simpleton; do not punish him for what he has done this once."

But she answered, "By Allah, there is no help for it: I must dock him of something, and of the offending member above all."

Then she went away, and I saw no more of her for ten days, in which time she sent me food and drink by a slave girl, who told me she had fallen ill from the smell of the cumin ragout.

After that she came to me and said, "You disgrace! I will teach you how to eat cumin ragout without washing your hands."

Then she called out to the maids, who pinioned me; and she took a sharp razor and cut off my thumbs and my great toes, exactly as you see, good company.

At which I fainted away; and she sprinkled some powdered healing herbs on the stumps, and when the blood had been staunched I said, "Never again will I eat cumin ragout without washing my hands forty times with potash and forty times with galangal and forty times with soap!"

And she made me swear an oath and bound me by a covenant to that effect.

So when you brought me the cumin ragout my colour changed, and I said to myself, "This is the very dish that caused the cutting off of my thumbs and my great toes"; and when you forced me, I said, "I must fulfil the oath I have sworn."

"And what happened to you after that?" asked the people there.

And he answered: When I had sworn to her, her anger was appeased, and I slept with her that night.

We lived like that a while, until one day she said to me, "Truly the Caliph's palace is not a pleasant place for us to live in, and nobody ever entered it but you — and you only by the grace of the Lady Zubaydah. Now she has given me fifty thousand dinars," she added; "take this money and go out and buy us a fine house."

So I went out and bought a fine, spacious mansion, to which she moved all the wealth she owned and what riches I had made in cloth and costly rarities.

Such is the cause of the cutting off of my thumbs and my great toes.

We ate (the steward went on), and were going home when there happened to me with the hunchback that business you know about. That is my story, and peace be with you.

Said the King, "This story is in no way more delightful than the story of the hunchback; no, it is rather less so, and there is no help for it: the whole lot of you must be hanged."

Then the Jewish physician came forward and, kissing the ground, said, "O King of the age, I will tell you a history more wonderful than that of the hunchback."

"Tell on," said the King of China. So he began the
