Tale of the Jewish Doctor

A truly marvellous thing happened to me in my youth. I was living in Damascus in Syria, studying my art; and one day, as I was sitting at home, a Mamluk came to me from the Viceroy's household and said, "Speak with my lord!"

So I followed him to the Viceroy's house; and going into the great hall, saw at the head of it a couch of cedar plated with gold, on which lay a sickly young man, and a handsome one at that — you could not see a fairer.

I sat down by his head and prayed to Heaven for a cure; and he made me a sign with his eyes. So I said to him, "My lord, favour me with your hand, and may safety be with you."

Then he put out his left hand; and I marvelled at it and said to myself, "By Allah, it is strange that this handsome young man, the son of a great house, should have so little in the way of manners. This can be nothing but pride and conceit."

However, I felt his pulse and wrote him a prescription, and went on visiting him for ten days, at the end of which he recovered and went to the baths; at which the Viceroy gave me a handsome robe of honour and appointed me superintendent of the hospital in Damascus.

I went with him to the baths, the whole of which they had kept private for his use; and the servants came in with him and took off his clothes inside; and when he was stripped I saw that his right hand had been cut off, and not long before — and this was the cause of his weakness.

At this I was amazed and grieved for him; and then, looking at his body, I saw on it the scars of scourge-strokes that he had been putting ointments on. I was troubled at the sight, and my concern showed in my face.

The young man looked at me and, understanding, said, "Physician of the age, do not marvel at my case; I will tell you my story as soon as we leave the baths."

Then we washed, and going back to his house, ate a little food and rested a while; after which he asked me, "What do you say to amusing yourself by looking over the supper hall?"

And I answered, "So let it be."

At which he ordered the slaves to carry out the necessary carpets and cushions, and to roast a lamb and bring us some fruit. They did as he said, and we ate together, he using his left hand for it.

After a while I said to him, "Now tell me your tale."

"Physician of the age," he replied, "hear what happened to me.

"Know that I am one of the sons of Mosul, where my grandfather died leaving nine children, of whom my father was the eldest. They all grew up and took wives, but not one of them was blessed with children except my father, to whom Providence granted me. So I grew up among my uncles, who rejoiced in me exceedingly, until I came of age.

"One day, which happened to be a Friday, I went to the cathedral mosque of Mosul with my father and my uncles, and we prayed the congregational prayers; after which the people went out, except my father and my uncles, who sat talking about wonderful things in foreign parts and the marvellous sights of strange cities.

"At last they mentioned Egypt, and one of my uncles said, 'Travellers tell us that there is nothing on the face of the earth finer than Cairo and her Nile' — and these words made me long to see Cairo.

"Said my father, 'Whoever has not seen Cairo has not seen the world. Her dust is golden and her Nile a miracle to behold; and her women are as fair as the maidens of Paradise, painted puppets, beautiful pictures; her houses are rare palaces; her water is sweet and light and her mud a commodity and a medicine beyond compare — just as the poet says in this poem of his:

	The Nile flood today is the gain you own;
	you alone dwell among such gains and bounties.
	The Nile is the flood of my own tears at separation,
	and here nobody is forlorn but I alone.

"'What is more, her air is temperate and mixed with a fragrance that surpasses aloes-wood in scent; and how should it be otherwise, she being the Mother of the World? And Allah favour the man who wrote these lines:

	If I leave Cairo and her pleasure gardens,
	where can I go to find such gladdening ways?
	Shall I abandon that place, whose grateful scents
	delight every soul and call for the loudest praise?
	Where every palace, like another Eden,
	displays its richly worked carpets and cushions;
	a city that woos the eye and the spirit to gladness,
	where Saint meets Sinner and each enjoys his craze;
	where friend meets friend, brought together by Providence
	in green gardens and in mazes of palm.
	People of Cairo — and by Allah's decree
	I travel — in my thoughts I live with you always.
	Do not whisper Cairo in the ear of the west wind,
	in case he robs her of her garden scents.

"'And if your eyes saw her earth, and how it is adorned with blossom and embroidered with every kind of flower, and the islands of the Nile and how much there is in them of wide and handsome prospect; and if you turned your sight on the Abyssinian Pond, your glance would not come back from the scene without wonder; for nowhere would you see the fellow of that lovely view. Indeed the two arms of the Nile embrace the most luxuriant green, as the white of the eye encloses its black, or like filigreed silver surrounding chrysolites. And a divinely gifted poet said these lines about it:

	By the Abyssinian Pond, O divine day,
	in the morning twilight and in the sunny shine!
	The water imprisoned in its green walls
	like the flash of a sabre before shrinking eyes.
	And in the Garden we sat while it drank
	a slow draught, its embroidered banks dyed the finest.
	The stream is rippled by the hands of the clouds,
	and we too go rippling as we lie back on our rugs,
	passing round pure wine; and whoever leaves us there
	shall never rise up from the fall his woes have designed.
	Draining long draughts from large and brimming bowls,
	administering the only medicine for thirst — wine.

"'And what is there to compare with the Observatory and its charms, of which every viewer says as he comes near it, "Truly this spot has every kind of excellence to itself"? And if you speak of the Night of the Nile at its full, then give away the rainbow and share it out! And if you saw the Garden in the evening, with the cool shadows sloping far and wide, you would see a marvel and would incline to Egypt in ecstasy. And if you were by Cairo's river when the sun is sinking and the stream puts on its coat of mail and its hauberk over its other clothes, you would be quickened to new life by its gentle breezes and by its all-sufficient shade.'

"So he spoke; and the rest of them fell to describing Egypt and her Nile. As I listened to their accounts my thoughts dwelt on the subject; and when they had talked their fill and all got up and went their ways, I lay down to sleep that night, but sleep would not come, because of my violent longing for Egypt; and neither food nor drink pleased me.

"After a few days my uncles fitted themselves out for a trading journey to Egypt; and I wept in front of my father until he got suitable merchandise ready for me, and consented to my going with them — saying, however, 'Do not let him enter Cairo, but leave him to sell his goods at Damascus.'

"So I said goodbye to my father, and we set out from Mosul and did not stop travelling until we reached Aleppo, where we halted some days. Then we marched on until we made Damascus; and we found her a city that might have been a Paradise, full of trees and streams and birds and fruit of every kind.

"We put up at one of the khans, where my uncles stayed a while selling and buying; and they bought and sold on my account too, each dirham turning a profit of five on the prime cost, which pleased me mightily.

"After this they left me alone and set their faces towards Egypt, while I stayed in Damascus, where I had rented from a jeweller, for two dinars a month, a house whose beauties would beggar the tongue. Here I stayed, eating and drinking and spending what money I had, until one day, as I was sitting at the door of my house, there came past a young lady in the costliest clothes my eyes ever saw.

"I gave her a look, and she stepped inside without hesitating and stood there. I went in with her and shut the door on the two of us; at which she raised her face veil and threw off her cloak — and I found her like a moon in a painting, of a rare and marvellous loveliness; and love of her took hold of my heart.

"So I got up and brought a tray of the most delicate food and fruit and whatever else suited the occasion; and we ate and played, and after that drank until the wine turned our heads. Then I lay with her the sweetest of nights; and in the morning I offered her ten gold pieces — at which her face darkened and her eyebrows drew together, and shaking with anger she cried, "Shame on you, my sweet companion! Do you think I want your money?"

"Then she took fifteen dinars out of the breast of her shift and laid them in front of me and said, "By Allah, unless you take these I will never come back to you."

"So I accepted them, and she said, "My beloved, expect me again in three days' time, when I will be with you between sunset and supper; and with these dinars prepare us the same entertainment as last night."

"And saying that, she took her leave and went away, and all my senses went with her.

"On the third day she came again, dressed in cloth woven with gold wire, and wearing clothes and ornaments finer than before. I had got the place ready for her before she arrived and the meal was waiting; so we ate and drank and lay together as we had done, until the morning, when she gave me another fifteen gold pieces and promised to come again in three days.

"So I got ready for her; and at the appointed time she appeared, more richly dressed than on the first and second occasions, and said to me, "My lord, am I not beautiful?"

"'Yes, by Allah, you are,' I answered.

"And she went on, 'Will you let me bring with me a young lady fairer than I am and younger in years, so that she can play with us, and you and she can laugh and make merry and gladden her heart? For she has been very sad this long while, and has asked me to take her out and let her spend the night away with me.'

"'Yes, by Allah!' I replied.

"And we drank until the wine turned our heads, and slept until morning, when she gave me another fifteen dinars, saying, 'Add something to your usual provision on account of the young lady who is coming with me.'

"Then she went away; and on the fourth day I got the house ready as usual, and soon after sunset she came, with another girl wrapped carefully in her cloak. They came in and sat down; and when I saw them I repeated these lines:

	'How dear our day is and how lucky our lot
	when the cynic is away with his spiteful tongue!
	When love and delight and the swimming of the head
	send cleverness trotting off — the best gift of wine.
	When the full moon shines out from the cloudy veil
	and the little branch sways in its shining greenery;
	when the red rose blooms in the freshest cheek
	and Narcissus opens his love-sick eyes;
	when pleasure with the people I love is so sweet
	and friendship with the people I love is complete.'

"I was delighted to see them, and lit the candles after welcoming them with gladness and delight. They took off their heavy outer clothes, and the new girl uncovered her face — and I saw she was like the moon at the full; I never saw anything more beautiful.

"Then I got up and set food and drink in front of them, and we ate and drank; and I kept giving mouthfuls to the newcomer and crowning her cup and drinking with her, until the first girl, growing inwardly jealous, asked me, 'By Allah, is she not more delicious than I am?'

"To which I answered, 'Yes, by the Lord.'

"'It is my wish that you lie with her tonight; for I am your mistress, but she is our guest. On my head be it, and on my eyes.'

"Then she got up and spread the carpets for our bed; and I took the young lady and lay with her that night until morning, when I woke and found myself wet, as I thought, with sweat.

"I sat up and tried to wake the girl; but when I shook her by the shoulders my hand came away crimson with blood, and her head rolled off the pillow.

"At which my senses left me and I cried out aloud, 'O All-powerful Protector, grant me Your protection!' And then, finding her neck had been cut through, I sprang up, and the world went black in front of my eyes; and I looked for the lady, my first love, and could not find her.

"So I knew it was she who had murdered the girl out of jealousy, and I said, 'There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! What is to be done now?'

"I thought a while; then, taking off my clothes, I dug a hole in the middle of the courtyard, in which I laid the murdered girl with her jewellery and her gold ornaments; and throwing the earth back over her, replaced the slabs of the marble pavement.

"After this I made the full washing and put on clean clothes; then, taking what money I had left, I locked up the house and gathered my courage and went to its owner, to whom I paid a year's rent, saying, 'I am about to join my uncles in Cairo.'

"Presently I set out, and travelling to Egypt, met up with my uncles, who were delighted to see me; and I found they had finished selling their merchandise. They asked me, 'What is the reason for your coming?' And I answered, 'I longed for a sight of you' — but I did not let them know that I had any money with me.

"I stayed with them a year, enjoying the pleasures of Cairo and her Nile and squandering the rest of my money on feasting and carousing, until the time drew near for my uncles to leave, when I ran from them and hid myself. They made enquiries and searched for me; but hearing nothing, they said, 'He will have gone back to Damascus.'

"When they had gone I came out of my hiding place and stayed in Cairo three years, until nothing was left of my money.

"Now every year I used to send the rent of the Damascus house to its owner, until at last I had nothing left but enough to pay him one year's rent; and my chest was tight with worry. So I travelled to Damascus and put up at the house, whose owner the jeweller was glad to see me; and I found everything locked up as I had left it.

"I opened the cupboards and took out my clothes and necessaries, and came upon — underneath the bed where I had lain that night with the girl who was beheaded — a golden necklace set with ten gems of surpassing beauty.

"I picked it up and cleaned the blood off it, and sat gazing at it and weeping a while.

"Then I stayed in the house two days, and on the third went to the baths and changed my clothes. I had no money by me now; so Satan whispered temptation to me, that the Decree of Destiny might be carried out.

"Next day I took the jewelled necklace to the market and handed it to a broker, who sat me down in the shop of the jeweller, my landlord, and told me to be patient until the market filled up; when he carried the ornament off and cried it for sale, privately and without my knowledge.

"The necklace was priced as worth two thousand dinars; but the broker came back to me and said, 'This collar is copper, a mere counterfeit made after the fashion of the Franks, and a thousand dirhams have been bid for it.'

"'Yes,' I answered, 'I knew it was copper; we had it made for a certain person so as to play a joke on her. Now my wife has inherited it and we want to sell it; so go and take the thousand dirhams'":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Twenty-ninth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the handsome young man said to the broker, "Take the thousand dirhams"; and when the broker heard this, he knew the case was suspicious.

So he carried the collar to the head of the market, and the head of the market took it to the Governor, who was also prefect of police, and told him, falsely enough, "This necklace was stolen from my house, and we have found the thief dressed as a trader."

So before I knew anything about it the watch surrounded me and made me their prisoner and carried me before the Governor, who questioned me about the collar. I told him the tale I had told the broker; but he laughed and said, "These words are not true."

Then, before I knew what was happening, the guards stripped my clothes off and came down on my ribs with palm rods, until for the smart of the sticks I confessed, "It was I who stole it" — saying to myself, "It is better to say you stole it than to let them know its owner was murdered in your house, for then they would kill you to avenge her."

So they wrote down that I had stolen it, and they cut off my hand and scalded the stump in oil, at which I fainted away for the pain; but they gave me wine to drink and I recovered, and picking up my hand, was going back to my fine house — when my landlord said to me, "Since this has happened to you, my son, you must leave my house and look for another lodging, as you have been convicted of theft. You are a handsome young man, but who will pity you after this?"

"My master," I said, "bear with me two days or three, until I find another place."

He answered, "So be it," and went away and left me.

I went back into the house, where I sat weeping and saying, "How shall I go back to my own people with my hand cut off, when they do not know I am innocent? Perhaps even after this Allah may arrange something for me."

And I wept beyond all weeping; grief besieged me, and I stayed in bitter trouble for two days.

But on the third day my landlord came suddenly in to me, and with him some of the guards and the head of the market who had falsely accused me of stealing the necklace. I went up to them and asked, "What is the matter?" — but without any more talk they pinioned my arms and threw a chain round my neck, saying, "The necklace that was on you has turned out to be the property of the Wazir of Damascus, who is also her Viceroy." And they added, "It went missing from his house three years ago, at the same time as his younger daughter."

When I heard this my heart sank inside me, and I said to myself, "Your life is gone beyond any doubt! By Allah, I must tell the Chief my story; and if he likes let him kill me, and if he pleases let him pardon me."

So they carried me to the Wazir's house and stood me in front of him. When he saw me he glanced at me out of the corner of his eye and said to those present, "Why did you cut off his hand? This man is unfortunate, and there is no fault in him; indeed you have wronged him by cutting off his hand."

When I heard this I took heart, and my soul promising me something good, I said to him, "By Allah, my lord, I am no thief; but they slandered me with a vile slander, and they scourged me in the middle of the market, telling me to confess, until for the pain of the rods I lied against myself and confessed the theft, although I am entirely innocent of it."

"Do not be afraid," said the Viceroy. "No harm shall come to you."

Then he ordered the head of the market to be imprisoned, and said to him, "Give this man the blood money for his hand; and if you delay I will hang you and seize all your property."

What is more he called his guards, who took the man and dragged him away, leaving me with the Chief.

Then at his command they loosed the chain from my neck and unbound my arms; and he looked at me and said, "My son, be truthful with me, and tell me how this necklace came to you." And he recited these lines:

	"Truth suits you best, even though the truth
	should bring you to burn in the fire you were threatened with."

"By Allah, my lord," I answered, "I will tell you nothing but the truth."

Then I told him everything that had passed between me and the first lady, and how she had brought me the second and had killed her out of jealousy; and I set the tale out for him in full.

When he heard my story he shook his head and struck his right hand upon his left; and putting his handkerchief over his face, wept a while, and then recited:

	"I see the woes of the world in plenty,
	and worldly people sick with spleen and grief;
	there is One who will part the meeting of any two,
	and those who are not parted are few and far between."

Then he turned to me and said:

"Know, my son, that the elder girl who first came to you was my daughter, whom I used to keep closely guarded. When she grew up I sent her to Cairo and married her to her cousin, my brother's son. After a while he died and she came back — but she had learnt wantonness and bad manners from the people of Cairo; so she visited you four times, and at last brought her younger sister.

"Now they were full sisters and much attached to each other; and when that adventure happened to the elder, she disclosed her secret to her sister, who wanted to go out with her. So she asked your leave and brought her to you; after which she came back alone; and finding her weeping, I questioned her about her sister, but she said, 'I know nothing about her.'

"However, she presently told her mother privately what had happened and how she had cut off her sister's head; and her mother told me. Then she did not stop weeping and saying, 'By Allah, I shall cry for her till I die.' Nor did she leave off mourning until her heart broke and she died; and that is how things fell out.

"So you see, my son, what has come to pass. And now I want you not to cross me in what I am about to offer you: I mean to marry you to my youngest daughter, for she is a virgin and born of another mother; and I will take no dowry from you but on the contrary will settle an allowance on you, and you shall live with me in my house in the place of a son."

"So be it," I answered, "and how could I hope for such good fortune?"

Then he sent at once for the judge and the witnesses and had my marriage contract with his daughter written out, and I went in to her. What is more, he got me a large sum of money out of the head of the market, and I stood in high favour with him.

During that year news came to me that my father was dead; and the Wazir sent a courier with letters bearing the royal signature to fetch me the money my father had left behind. And now I am living in all the comfort of life.

Such was the manner of the cutting off of my right hand.

I marvelled at his story (the Jew went on), and I stayed with him three days, after which he gave me a great deal of wealth; and I set out and travelled eastwards until I reached this city of yours, and the place suited me very well; so I settled here — and there happened to me what you know about with the hunchback.

At this the King of China shook his head and said, "This story of yours is not stranger or more wonderful or more marvellous or more delightful than the tale of the hunchback; and so I must hang the whole number of you. However, there still remains the tailor, who is the head of the whole offence." And he added, "Tailor, if you can tell me anything more wonderful than the story of the hunchback, I will pardon you all your offences."

At which the man came forward and began to tell the
