Tale of the Tailor
(Part 1 of 2)

Know, O King of the age, that the most marvellous thing happened to me only yesterday, before I fell in with the hunchback.

It so happened that early in the day I was at the wedding feast of one of my friends, who had got together in his house some twenty of the craftsmen of this city — tailors and silk-spinners and carpenters and others of the same sort.

As soon as the sun had risen they set food in front of us so that we could eat; when in came the master of the house, and with him a young stranger, a good-looking man from Baghdad, wearing clothes as handsome as could be; and he was a very fine figure, except that he was lame in one leg.

He came and greeted us, and we stood up to receive him; but when he was about to sit down he caught sight among us of a certain man who was a barber, at which he refused to sit and would have gone away.

But we stopped him, and our host stopped him too, swearing he should not leave us, and asked, "What is the reason for your coming in and going straight out again?"

To which he answered, "By Allah, my lord, do not hinder me; the reason I am turning back is that barber over there — that man of ill omen, that disgrace, that good-for-nothing."

When the master of the house heard this he marvelled greatly and said, "How does this young man, who comes from Baghdad, come to be so troubled and put out by this barber?"

Then we looked at the stranger and said, "Explain the reason for your anger against the barber."

"Good company," said the young man, "I had a strange adventure with this barber in Baghdad, which is my native city. He was the cause of my leg being broken and of my lameness, and I have sworn never to sit in the same place as he does, nor even to stay in any town where he happens to be living. I said goodbye to Baghdad and travelled far from it and came to stay in this city of yours; and I had hardly passed one night before I meet him again. But not another day shall go by before I leave here."

Said we to him, "In Allah's name, tell us the tale."

And the young man began — the barber changing colour from brown to yellow as he spoke:

Know, good company, that my father was one of the chief merchants of Baghdad, and Almighty Allah had blessed him with no son but me. When I grew up and came of age my father was received into the mercy of Allah, whose Name be exalted, and left me money and eunuchs, servants and slaves; and I used to dress well and eat well.

Now Allah had made me a hater of womankind; and one day, as I was walking along a street in Baghdad, a party of women met me face to face on the footway; so I fled from them, and going into an alley that was a dead end, sat down on a stone bench at the far end of it.

I had not been sitting there long before the latticed window of one of the houses opposite was thrown open, and at it there appeared a young lady like the full moon at its fullest; I never in my life saw her like; and she began watering some flowers on the window sill.

She turned right and left, and seeing me watching her, shut the window and went away. At which a fire was suddenly kindled in my heart; my mind was possessed with her, and my hatred of women turned into love of women.

I went on sitting there, lost to the world, until sunset — when the judge of the city came riding by with his slaves in front of him and his eunuchs behind, and dismounted and went into the house where the girl had appeared.

By this I knew he was her father; so I went home miserable and threw myself down on my bed in grief. Then my maids came flocking in and sat about me, not knowing what was wrong with me; but I did not say a word to them, and they wept and wailed over me.

Presently in came an old woman, who looked at me and saw at a glance what the matter was; so she sat down by my head and spoke kindly to me, saying, "My son, tell me all about it and I will be the means of your being joined with her."

So I told her what had happened; and she answered, "My son, this girl is the daughter of the judge of Baghdad, who keeps her in the closest seclusion; and the window where you saw her is her floor, while her father occupies the great hall on the lower storey. She is often there alone, and I am in the habit of visiting the house; so you will not get to her except through me. Now set your wits to work and take heart."

With these words she went away; and I took heart at what she had said, and my household rejoiced that day, seeing me get up in the morning safe and sound.

By and by the old woman came back looking crestfallen, and said, "My son, do not ask me how I got on with her! When I told her, she cried at me: 'If you do not hold your peace, you hag of ill omen, and leave off such talk, I will treat you as you deserve and put you to the foulest of deaths.' But I must have another try at her."

When I heard this it added illness to my illness; and the neighbours came to visit me and judged that I was not long for this world.

But after some days the old woman came to me and, putting her mouth close to my ear, whispered, "My son, I claim from you the gift for good news."

With this my soul came back into me and I said, "Whatever you want shall be yours."

At which she began: "Yesterday I went to the young lady, who, seeing me broken in spirit and shedding tears from reddened eyes, asked me, 'Auntie, what is the matter, that I see your chest so tight with trouble?'

"And I answered, weeping bitterly, 'My lady, I have just come from the house of a young man who loves you and who is about to die for your sake.'

"Said she — and her heart was softened — 'And who is this young man you speak of?'

"And I said, 'He is like a son to me and the fruit of my own body. He saw you some days ago at the window watering your flowers; and catching sight of your face and your wrists, he fell in love at first sight. I let him know what happened to me the last time I was with you, at which his illness grew worse; he took to his bed, and he is nothing now but a dead man, and there is no doubt about it at all.'

"At this she turned pale and asked, 'All this for my sake?'

"And I answered, 'Yes, by Allah! What would you have me do?'

"Said she, 'Go back to him and greet him for me and tell him that I am twice as heartsick as he is. And on Friday, before the hour of public prayer, tell him to come to the house, and I will come down and open the door for him. Then I will take him up to my room and be with him a while, and let him go before my father comes back from the mosque.'"

When I heard the old woman's words all my sickness suddenly fell away from me, my anguish stopped and my heart was comforted. I took off the clothes I had on and gave them to her; and as she turned to go she said, "Keep a good heart."

"I have not a jot of sorrow left," I replied.

My household and my friends rejoiced at my recovery; and I stayed like that until Friday, when the old woman came in and asked how I was, to which I answered that I was well and in good case.

Then I put on my clothes and perfumed myself and sat down to wait for the congregation to go in to prayers, so that I could go to her.

But the old woman said to me, "You have time and to spare; so you would do well to go to the baths and have your hair shaved off — especially after your illness — so as not to show the traces of it."

"That is the best way," I answered. "I have only just bathed in hot water, but I will have my head shaved."

Then I said to my page, "Go to the market and bring me a barber — a discreet fellow, and one not given to meddling or impertinent curiosity, or likely to split my head with too much talk."

The boy went out at once and came back with this wretched old man, this creature of ill omen.

When he came in he greeted me and I returned his greeting; and then he said, "Truly I see you are thin in the body."

And I said, "I have been ill."

He went on, "May Allah drive far away from you your woe and your sorrow and your trouble and your distress."

"Allah grant your prayer," said I.

He continued, "All gladness to you, my master, for recovery has certainly come to you. Do you wish to be shaved, or to be bled? For it was a tradition of Ibn Abbas — Allah accept of him — that the Apostle said, 'Whoever cuts his hair on a Friday, the Lord shall turn seventy calamities away from him.' And it is related of him also that he said, 'Cupping on a Friday preserves a man from loss of sight and from a host of diseases.'"

"Leave this talk," I cried. "Come and shave my head at once, for I cannot stand it."

So he got up and put out his hand in the most leisurely way and took out a handkerchief and unfolded it — and inside it was an astrolabe with seven parallel plates mounted in silver.

Then he went into the middle of the courtyard and raised his head and the instrument towards the sun's rays, and looked for a long while. When that was over he came back and said to me:

"Know that there have elapsed of this our day, which is Friday, and this Friday being the tenth of the month Safar in the six hundred and fifty-third year since the Flight of the Apostle — on whom be the best of blessings and peace — and the seven thousand three hundred and twentieth year of the era of Alexander: eight degrees and six minutes.

"Furthermore, the ascendant of this our day is, according to the most exact science of computation, the planet Mars; and it so happens that Mercury is in conjunction with him, indicating an auspicious moment for haircutting. And this also makes plain to me that you desire union with a certain person, and that your dealings with her will not be favourable. But after this there occurs a sign concerning a matter which will befall you, and of which I will not speak."

"You there," I cried, "by Allah, you weary me and scatter my wits, and your forecast is anything but good. I sent for you to shave my head and nothing else; so up and shave me, and do not draw out your speech."

"By Allah," he replied, "if you only knew what is about to happen to you, you would do nothing at all today; and I advise you to act as I tell you, by the computation of the constellations."

"By Allah," said I, "I never saw a barber who excelled in judicial astrology except you; but I think, and I know, that you are extremely prodigal of frivolous talk. I sent for you only to shave my head, and you come and pester me with this sorry prattle."

"What more would you have?" he replied. "Allah has generously bestowed on you a barber who is an astrologer; one learned in alchemy and white magic; in syntax, grammar and lexicology; in the arts of logic, rhetoric and elocution; in mathematics, arithmetic and algebra; in astronomy, astromancy and geometry; in theology, the Traditions of the Apostle and the Commentaries on the Koran.

"Furthermore I have read books by the score and digested them, and I have had experience of affairs and understood them. In short I have learned the theory and the practice of all the arts and sciences; I know them all by heart, and I am a past master in everything that can be known.

"Your father loved me for my lack of officiousness; therefore, to serve you is a religious duty laid on me. I am no busybody, as you seem to suppose; and on that account I am known as The Silent Man, and also The Modest Man. So it behoves you to give thanks to Allah Almighty and not to cross me, for I am a true counsellor to you and kindly disposed towards you. I only wish I were in your service a whole year, so that you might do me justice; and I would ask you no wage for any of it."

When I heard this flow of words I said to him, "You will certainly be the death of me today":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Thirtieth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the young man said to the barber, "You will certainly be the death of me this very day!"

"My good master," he replied, "I am the one called The Silent Man, by reason of the fewness of my words, to distinguish me from my six brothers. For the eldest is called Al-Bakbuk, the Prattler; the second Al-Haddar, the Babbler; the third Al-Fakik, the Gabbler; the fourth — his name is Al-Kuz al-Aswani, the Long-Necked Jug, from his everlasting chattering; the fifth is Al-Nashshar, the Tattler and Teller of Tales; the sixth is Shakashik, or Many Clamours; and the seventh is famous as Al-Samit, The Silent Man — and that is my noble self."

While he redoubled his talk I thought my gall bladder would burst; so I said to the servant, "Give him a quarter dinar and get rid of him, and let him go from me in the name of the God who made him. I will not have my head shaved today."

"What words are these, my lord?" he cried. "By Allah, I will accept no hire from you until I have served you and attended to your wants; and I do not care if I never take money from you at all. If you do not know my quality, I know yours; and I owe your father, an honest man — on whom Almighty Allah have mercy — a great many kindnesses, for he was a liberal soul and a generous one.

"By Allah, he sent for me one day, just as it might be this blessed day, and I went in to him and found a party of his intimates about him. Said he to me, 'Bleed me.' So I pulled out my astrolabe and, taking the sun's altitude for him, found that the ascendant was inauspicious and the hour unfavourable for bleeding. I told him so, and he did as I bade him and waited for a better opportunity. So I made these lines in his honour:

	I went to my patron to let a little blood,
	but found that the moment was far from good;
	so I sat and I talked of all sorts of strange things
	and wooed his goodwill with jests and with jokes.
	They pleased him, and he cried, 'O man of wit,
	you have proved yourself perfect in a merry mood!'
	Said I, 'O Lord of men, unless you lend me
	art and wisdom, I am a drunken fool;
	in you gather grace, gift, bounty and courtesy,
	and I reward the world with learning, science and gravity.'

"Your father was delighted and called out to the servant, 'Give him a hundred and three gold pieces with a robe of honour!' The man obeyed, and I waited for an auspicious moment and then bled him; and he did not baulk me — no, he thanked me, and I was thanked and praised by everybody there.

"When the bloodletting was over I had no power to keep silent, and asked him, 'By Allah, my lord, what made you say to the servant, Give him a hundred and three dinars?'

"And he answered, 'One dinar was for the astrological observation, another for your pleasant conversation, the third for the bloodletting, and the remaining hundred and the robe were for your verses in my praise.'"

"May Allah show small mercy to my father," I exclaimed, "for ever knowing the like of you!"

He laughed and said, "There is no god but God and Mohammed is the Apostle of God! Glory to Him that changes and is not changed! I took you for a man of sense, but I see you babble and wander from your illness. Allah has said in the Blessed Book, 'Paradise is prepared for the good, who bridle their anger and forgive men' — and so on; and in any case you are excused.

"Yet I cannot conceive the cause of your hurry and flurry; and you should know that your father and your grandfather did nothing without consulting me. Indeed it has been truly enough said, 'Let the adviser be prized'; and, 'There is no vice in advice'; and it is said too, in certain sayings, 'Whoever has no counsellor older than himself will never be an elder himself.' And the poet says:

	Whatever necessary thing you undertake,
	consult the experienced man and do not cross him.

"And truly you will never find a man better versed in affairs than I am; and here I stand on my feet to serve you. I am not vexed with you: why should you be vexed with me? But whatever happens I will bear with you patiently, in memory of the great kindness your father showed me."

"By Allah," I cried, "you with a tongue as long as a jackass's tail, you persist in pestering me with your prattle, and you grow longer and longer in your long speeches — when all I want of you is to shave my head and be on your way."

Then he lathered my head, saying, "I perceive you are vexed with me, but I will not take it ill of you, for your wits are weak and you are only a lad; it was no longer ago than yesterday that I used to take you on my shoulder and carry you to school."

"Brother," said I, "for Allah's sake do what I want and go your way!" And I tore my clothes.

When he saw me do that he took the razor and set about sharpening it, and did not leave off stropping it until my senses were very nearly leaving me. Then he came up to me and shaved part of my head; and then he stopped his hand, and then he said:

"My lord, haste is Satan's way, whereas patience is of Allah the Compassionate. But you, my master — I know you do not know my rank; for truly this hand comes down on the heads of kings and emirs and viziers, and sages and doctors learned in the law. And the poet said of a man like me:

	All crafts are like necklaces strung on a string,
	but this barber is the one great pearl of the row;
	he ranks high over every other craftsman, and why?
	Because the heads of kings are under his hand."

Then I said, "Do leave off talking about what does not concern you; indeed you have tightened my chest and distracted my mind."

Said he, "It seems to me you are a hasty man."

And said I, "Yes! Yes! Yes!"

And he, "I advise you to practise self-restraint, for haste is Satan's stock-in-trade, and bequeaths nothing but repentance and ruin; and He, upon whom be blessings and peace, has said, 'The best of works is the work that deliberation lurks in.' But by Allah, I have some doubt about this affair of yours; and so I should like you to let me know what it is you are in such haste to do, for I am afraid it is something other than good."

Then he went on, "It wants three hours yet to prayer time; but I do not wish to be in doubt about the matter — no, I must know the moment exactly; for truly, 'A guess shot in a time of doubt often brings harm about'; and especially in the case of a man like myself, a superior person whose merits are famous among mankind at large. It would not suit me to talk at random, as the common sort of astrologers do."

And saying that, he threw down the razor and took up the astrolabe and went out into the sun and stood there a long time; after which he came back and, counting on his fingers, said to me, "There remain to prayer time three full hours and complete, neither more nor less, according to the most learned astronomers and the wisest makers of almanacs."

"Allah upon you," I cried, "hold your tongue with me, for you are breaking my liver in pieces."

So he took the razor and, after sharpening it as before and shaving another two hairs off my head, stopped his hand again and said, "I am concerned about your hastiness, and truly you would do well to let me into the cause of it; it would be the better for you, as you know that neither your father nor your grandfather ever did a single thing except by my advice."

When I saw there was no escaping him I said to myself, "The time for prayer is drawing near, and I want to go to her before the people come out of the mosque. If I am held up much longer I do not know how I am to get to her."

Then I said aloud, "Be quick and cut short this talk and this impertinence, for I have to go to a party at the house of some friends of mine."

When he heard me speak of a party he said, "This day of yours is a blessed day for me! In very truth it was only yesterday that I invited a company of my friends, and I have forgotten to provide anything for them to eat. This very moment I was thinking about it. Alas, how disgraced I shall be in their eyes!"

"Do not be distressed about that," I answered. "Have I not told you that I am invited to an entertainment today? So everything in my house, food and drink both, shall be yours, if only you will get through your work and make haste to shave my head."

He replied, "Allah reward you with good! Tell me exactly what is in your house for my guests, so that I know about it."

Said I, "Five dishes of meat and ten chickens with browned breasts and a roast lamb."

"Set them in front of me," said he, "so that I can see them."

So I told my people to buy them, borrow them or steal them, and bring them in any way they could; and I had the lot set in front of him.

When he saw it he cried, "The wine is missing."

And I replied, "I have a flagon or two of good old grape juice in the house."

And he said, "Have it brought out."

So I sent for it, and he exclaimed, "Allah bless you for a generous disposition! But there are still the essences and the perfumes."

So I had a box set in front of him containing nadd, the best of compound perfumes, together with fine aloes-wood, ambergris and unmixed musk, the whole lot worth fifty dinars.

Now the time was growing short and my heart grew tight with it; so I said to him, "Take the whole of it, and finish shaving my head, by the life of Mohammed, whom Allah bless and keep."

"By Allah," said he, "I will not take it until I see everything that is in it."

So I told the page to open the box; and the barber laid down the astrolabe, leaving the greater part of my head unshaved, and sitting down on the ground, turned over the scents and the incense and the aloes-wood and the essences until I was very nearly out of my mind.

Then he took the razor and, coming up to me, shaved off a few more hairs and repeated these lines:
