Tale of the Tailor
(Part 2 of 2)

	"The boy will surely take after his father,
	as the tree grows out of its parent root."

Then he said, "By Allah, my son, I do not know whether to thank you or your father; for my entertainment today is entirely owing to your bounty and your kindness. And although not one of my company is worthy of it, still I have a set of honourable men — namely Zantut the bath-keeper; and Sali'a the corn-chandler; and Silat the bean-seller; and Akrashah the greengrocer; and Humayd the scavenger; and Sa'id the camel-man; and Suwayd the porter; and Abu Makarish the bathman; and Kasim the watchman; and Karim the groom.

"There is not among the whole lot of them a bore or a bully in his cups, nor a meddler, nor a man mean with his money; and every one of them has some dance of his own that he dances and some verses of his own that he sings. And the best of them is that, like your servant here, your slave, they do not know what too much talking is, nor what forwardness means.

"The bath-keeper sings to the drum a song that enchants you; and he stands up and dances and chants:

	I am going, O mother, to fill up my pot.

"As for the corn-chandler, he brings more skill to it than anybody; he dances and sings:

	O keening woman, O sweetheart, you fall not short —

and he leaves nobody's insides sound for laughing at him.

"But the scavenger sings so that the birds stop to listen to him, and dances and sings:

	What my wife knows is not locked up in a box!

"And he has the privilege of it, for he is a shrewd rogue and a witty one; and speaking of how good he is, I am in the habit of saying:

	My life for the scavenger! I love him well;
	like a waving bough he is sweet to my sight.
	Fate joined us one night, and I said to him
	— while I grew weak and love gained more might —
	'Your love burns my heart!' 'And no wonder,' said he,
	'when the drawer of dung turns into a stoker.'

"And truly each of them is perfect in whatever can charm a man's wits with joy and jollity." And presently he added, "But hearing is not seeing; and truly, if you would make up your mind to join us and put off going to your friends, it would be better for us and for you.

"The marks of your illness are still on you, and it may be that you are going among people who are mighty talkers, men who discuss together what does not concern them; or there may be among them some forward fellow who will split your head — and you half your size from sickness."

"This shall be for some other day," I answered, and laughed with my heart full of anger. "Finish your work and go, in Almighty Allah's keeping, to your friends, for they will be expecting you."

"My lord," he replied, "I am only trying to introduce you to these fellows of infinite mirth, the sons of men of worth, among whom there is neither impudence nor gossip nor chatter; for never, since I came to years of discretion, could I bear to keep company with anybody who asks questions about what does not concern him, nor have I ever spent time with any but men who are, like myself, men of few words. Truly, if you were to keep company with them, or even to see them once, you would give up all your own friends."

"Allah fulfil your enjoyment of them," said I. "I must certainly come among them some day or other."

But he said, "I wish it were this very day, for I had set my heart on your making one of us. Still, if you must go to your friends today, I will take these good things you have honoured and favoured me with to my guests and leave them to eat and drink and not wait for me; while I will come back to you in haste and go with you to your little party — for there is no ceremony between me and my intimates to stop me leaving them. Do not be afraid, I shall soon be back with you and go with you wherever you go. There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"

I shouted, "Go to your friends and make merry with them, and do let me go to mine and be with them today, for they are expecting me."

But the barber cried, "I will not let you go alone."

And I replied, "The truth is that nobody can go in where I am going except me."

He came back, "I suspect that today you have an assignation with some woman, or else you would have taken me with you. And yet I am the very man to take, one who could help you to the end you want. But I am afraid you are running after strange women and will lose your life over it; for in this city of Baghdad a man cannot do anything in that line, and especially on a day like Friday: our Governor is an angry man and a mighty sharp blade."

"Shame on you, you wicked, bad old man!" I cried. "Be off! What are these words you are giving me?"

"You cold-witted creature," he cried, "you say to me what is not true and you hide your mind from me. But I know the whole business for certain, and I only want to help you today with my best endeavours."

I was afraid my people or my neighbours would hear the barber's talk; so I kept quiet a long while, and in that time he finished shaving my head — by which time the hour of prayer had come and the sermon was about to follow.

When he had done I said to him, "Go to your friends with their meat and drink, and I will wait for you to come back. Then we will go together." I hoped in this way to pour oil on the troubled waters and trick the accursed fool, and so perhaps be rid of him.

But he said, "You are cozening me, and you mean to go alone to your appointment and throw yourself into a danger there will be no escaping from. Now by Allah, and again by Allah, do not go until I come back, so that I can go with you and watch how your business turns out."

"So be it," I replied. "Do not be gone long."

Then he took all the meat and drink I had given him, and the rest of it, and went out of my house — but the accursed fellow gave it to a porter to carry to his home and hid himself in one of the alleys.

As for me, I got up that instant, for the muezzins had already called the Friday salutation to the Apostle; and I dressed in a hurry and went out alone, and hurrying to the street, took up my position by the house where I had seen the young lady.

I found the old woman on guard at the door waiting for me, and went up with her to the upper storey, to the girl's rooms. I had hardly got there when the master of the house came back from prayers and, going into the great hall, shut the door.

I looked down out of the window and saw this barber — Allah's curse on him — sitting right opposite the door, and said, "How did this devil find me out?"

At that very moment, as Allah had decreed for the tearing of my veil of secrecy, one of the master's maids happened to commit some offence, for which he beat her. She shrieked out, and his slave ran in to intercede for her, at which the judge beat him too, and he roared out as well.

The damned barber imagined it was I who was being beaten; so he began shouting too, and tore his clothes and threw dust on his head and kept on shrieking and crying, "Help! Help!"

So the people gathered round him, and he went on yelling, "My master is being murdered in the judge's house!"

Then he ran off clamouring to my house with the crowd after him, and told my people and my servants and my slaves; and before I knew what was happening, up they came tearing their clothes and letting their hair down and shouting, "Alas, our master!" — with this barber leading the rout, his clothes torn and in the sorriest state, shouting like a madman and saying, "Alas for our murdered master!"

And the whole lot of them made an assault on the house I was in.

The judge, hearing the yelling and the uproar at his door, said to one of his servants, "See what the matter is"; and the man went out and came back and said, "My master, at the gate there are more than ten thousand souls, what with men and women, and all of them crying, 'Alas for our murdered master!' — and they keep pointing at our house."

When the judge heard this the matter looked serious, and he grew angry; so he got up and opened the door and saw a great crowd of people; at which he was astounded and said, "Good people! What is the matter?"

"You accursed thing! You dog! You hog!" my servants replied. "It is you who have killed our master!"

Said he, "Good people, and what has your master done to me that I should kill him?":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Thirty-first Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the judge said to the servants, "What has your master done to me that I should kill him? This is my house, and it is open to all of you."

Then the barber said, "You beat him, and I heard him cry out."

And the judge said, "But what was he doing that I should beat him? And what brought him into my house? And where did he come from and where did he go?"

"Do not be a wicked, perverse old man," cried the barber, "for I know the whole story. And the long and the short of it is that your daughter is in love with him and he loves her; and when you found out he had come into the house, you told your servants to beat him and they did. By Allah, nobody shall judge between us and you but the Caliph. Or else bring our master out so that his people can take him, before they go in and rescue him from your house by force and you are put to shame."

Then said the judge — his tongue bridled and his mouth stopped with confusion in front of all those people — "If you speak the truth, then come in yourself and fetch him out."

At which the barber pushed forward and went into the house.

When I saw this I looked about for some means of escape and flight, but could see no hiding place except a great chest in the upper room where I was. So I got into it and pulled the lid down over myself and held my breath.

The barber was hardly in the room before he began looking about for me; then he turned right and left and came straight to the place where I was, and stepped up to the chest and lifted it onto his head and made off as fast as he could go.

At this my reason left me, for I knew he would not leave me alone; so I took my courage in both hands and opened the chest and threw myself out onto the ground. My leg was broken in the fall; and the door being open, I saw a great crowd of people looking in.

Now I carried in my sleeve a good deal of gold and some silver, which I had put by against a bad day and just such an occasion as this; so I kept scattering it among the people to distract their attention from me, and while they were busy scrambling for it I set off, hopping as fast as I could through the back streets of Baghdad, shifting and turning right and left.

But wherever I went this damned barber would go in after me, crying aloud, "They would have robbed me of my ma-a-aster! They would have killed the man who was a benefactor to me and my family and my friends! Praise be to Allah, who made me prevail against them and delivered my lord out of their hands!"

And then to me: "Where will you go now? You would persist in following your own wicked devices, until you brought yourself to this pass; and if Allah had not granted me to you, you would never have escaped the strait you had fallen into, for they would have thrown you into a disaster you could never have got clear of. But I will not call you to account for your ignorance, since you are so little in your wits and so inconsequential and so given to hastiness."

Said I to him, "Is what you have brought on me not enough for you, without your running after me and talking such talk to me in the market streets?"

And I very nearly gave up the ghost for sheer rage against him.

Then I took refuge in a weaver's shop in the middle of the market and asked the owner's protection, and he drove the barber away; and sitting in the back room, I said to myself, "If I go home I shall never be able to get rid of this curse of a barber, who will be with me night and day; and I cannot bear the sight of him even for the space of a breath."

So I sent out at once for witnesses and made a will, dividing the greater part of my property among my people, and appointed a guardian over them, to whom I gave charge of great and small alike, directing him to sell my houses and my estates.

Then I set out on my travels, so as to be free of this pimp; and I came and settled in your town, where I have lived some time. When you invited me and I came here, the first thing I saw was this accursed pander sitting in the place of honour.

How, then, can my heart be glad and my stay be pleasant in the company of this fellow who brought all this on me, and who was the cause of the breaking of my leg and of my exile from my home and my native land?

And the young man refused to sit down, and went away.

When we heard his story (the tailor went on) we were amazed beyond measure, and amused; and we said to the barber, "By Allah, is it true, what this young man says about you?"

"By Allah," he replied, "I dealt with him like that out of my courtesy and my sound sense and my generosity. If it had not been for me he would have perished, and nobody but me was the cause of his escape. It was a good thing for him that he suffered in his leg and not in his life!

"If I had been a man of many words, a meddler, a busybody, I would never have acted so kindly by him. But now I will tell you a tale of something that happened to me, so that you may be quite satisfied that I am a man sparing of speech, in whom there is no forwardness, and a very different person from those six brothers of mine. And this is it."
