The Barber's Tale of His First Brother

Know then, Commander of the Faithful, that my first brother, Al-Bakbuk the Prattler, is a hunchback who took to tailoring in Baghdad. He used to sew in a shop rented from a man of great wealth, who lived over the shop; and there was a flour mill in the basement as well.

One day, as my brother the hunchback was sitting in his shop tailoring, he happened to raise his head and saw a lady like the rising full moon at a balconied window of his landlord's house, looking out at the passers-by.

When my brother saw her his heart was taken with love of her, and he spent the whole day gazing at her and neglected his tailoring until evening.

Next morning he opened his shop and sat down to sew; but every time he made a stitch he looked up at the window and saw her as before, and his passion and his infatuation grew.

On the third day, as he sat in his usual place gazing at her, she caught sight of him; and seeing that he had been captivated with love of her, she laughed in his face, and he smiled back at her. Then she disappeared, and presently sent her slave girl to him with a bundle containing a piece of red flowered silk.

The maid came up to him and said, "My lady greets you, and asks that of your skill and goodwill you will make her a shift out of this piece, and sew it handsomely with your best sewing."

He replied, "Hearing and obedience"; and he cut out a chemise for her and finished sewing it that same day.

When the morning came the girl came back and said, "My lady greets you and asks how you passed last night; for she has not tasted sleep, her heart being so taken up with you."

Then she laid a piece of yellow satin in front of him and said, "My lady tells you to cut her two pairs of petticoat trousers out of this piece, and sew them this very day."

"Hearing and obedience," he replied. "Greet her for me with many greetings, and tell her: your slave is obedient to your order, so command him as you like."

Then he set about cutting out, and worked hard at sewing the trousers; and after an hour the lady appeared at the lattice and greeted him by signs, now casting her eyes down, now smiling into his face; and he began to assure himself that he would soon make a conquest.

She did not let him stir until he had finished both pairs of trousers; when she withdrew and sent the maid, to whom he handed them over; and she took them and went her way.

When night came he threw himself on his bed and lay tossing from side to side until morning, when he got up and sat down in his place.

Presently the girl came to him and said, "My master calls for you."

Hearing this he was extremely frightened; but the slave girl, seeing his fright, said, "No harm is meant to you: nothing but good is waiting for you. My lady wants you to make my lord's acquaintance."

So my brother the tailor, overjoyed, went with her; and when he came into the presence of his landlord, the lady's husband, he kissed the ground before him, and the master of the house returned his greeting and gave him a great piece of linen, saying, "Cut me shirts out of this stuff and sew them well."

And my brother answered, "To hear is to obey."

At which he fell to work at once, snipping, shaping and sewing, until he had finished twenty shirts by supper time, without stopping to taste food.

The master of the house asked him, "How much is the wage for this?"

And he answered, "Twenty dirhams."

So the gentleman called out to the slave girl, "Bring me twenty dirhams" — and my brother did not say a word; but the lady signed to him, "Take nothing from him"; at which my brother said, "By Allah, I will take nothing from your hand."

And he carried off his tailor's gear and went back to his shop, though he was destitute down to his last penny.

Then he applied himself to their work; eating, in his zeal and diligence, nothing but a bit of bread and drinking only a little water, for three days. At the end of that time the maid came and said to him, "What have you done?"

Said he, "They are finished" — and carried the shirts to the lady's husband, who would have paid him his hire; but he said, "I will take nothing," for fear of her; and going back to his shop, passed the night without sleep for hunger.

Now the lady had told her husband how things stood — my brother knowing nothing about it — and the two of them had agreed to make him their tailor for nothing, the better to mock him and laugh at him.

Next morning he went to his shop; and as he sat there the maid came and said, "Speak with my master."

So he went with her to the husband, who said to him, "I want you to cut me out five long-sleeved robes."

So he cut them out and took the stuff away. Then he sewed them and carried them to the gentleman, who praised his sewing and offered him a purse of silver. He put out his hand to take it — but the lady signed to him from behind her husband not to; and he replied, "My lord, there is no hurry, we have time enough for that."

Then he went out of the house meaner and meeker than a donkey; for truly five things were gathered together in him — love, beggary, hunger, nakedness and hard labour. Even so, he kept his spirits up with the hope of gaining the lady's favours.

When he had finished all their jobs they played him another trick, and married him to their slave girl; but on the night he expected to go in to her, they said, "Sleep tonight in the mill, and tomorrow all will go well."

My brother concluded there was some good reason for it, and spent the night alone in the mill.

Now the husband had set the miller on to make the tailor turn the mill; so when the night was half gone the man came in to him and began saying, "This bull of ours has become useless and stands still instead of going round; he will not turn the mill tonight, and yet we have a great store of corn to grind. However, I shall yoke him whether he likes it or not, and make him finish grinding it before morning, as the people are impatient for their flour."

So he filled the hoppers with grain; and going up to my brother with a rope in his hand, tied it round his neck and said, "Gee up! Round with the mill! You, bull, would do nothing but grub and stale and dung!"

Then he took a whip and laid it on my brother's shoulders and calves, and my brother began to howl and bellow; but nobody came to help him, and he was forced to grind the wheat until close on dawn, when the master of the house came in and, seeing my brother still tethered to the yoke and the man flogging him, went away again.

At daybreak the miller went home and left him still yoked and half dead; and soon afterwards in came the slave girl, who untied him and said, "My lady and I are very sorry for what has happened, and we have shared your grief with you."

But he had no tongue to answer her with, for the excess of beating and mill-turning.

Then he went off to his lodging; and the clerk who had drawn up the marriage deed came and greeted him, saying, "Allah give you long life! May your wedding be blessed! That face of yours tells of pleasant doings and dalliance and kissing and embracing from dusk to dawn."

"Allah grant the liar no peace, you thousandfold cuckold," my brother replied. "By Allah, I did nothing but turn the mill in the place of the bull all night till morning."

"Tell me your tale," said he. And my brother recounted what had happened to him; and he said, "Your star does not agree with her star; but if you like I can alter the contract for you" — adding, "Take care there is not another cheat in store for you."

And my brother answered, "See whether you have not another device."

Then the clerk left him; and he sat in his shop looking out for somebody to bring him a job, so that he could earn his day's bread.

Presently the maid came and said, "Speak with my lady."

"Be off, my good girl," he replied. "There shall be no more dealings between me and your lady."

The maid went back to her mistress and told her what my brother had said; and presently she put her head out of the window, weeping and saying, "Why, my beloved, are there to be no more dealings between me and you?"

But he made her no answer. Then she wept and begged him, swearing that everything that had happened to him in the mill was done without her knowledge, and that she was innocent of the whole business.

When he looked at her beauty and loveliness and heard the sweetness of her speech, the sorrow that had possessed him passed out of his heart; he accepted her excuse and rejoiced at the sight of her. So he greeted her and talked with her, and sat tailoring a while — after which the maid came and said, "My mistress greets you and informs you that her husband means to sleep out tonight at the house of some close friends of his; so when he has gone, come to us and spend the night with my lady in the most delightful enjoyment till the morning."

Now her husband had asked her, "How shall we manage to turn him away from you?" And she had answered, "Leave me to play him another trick and make him a laughing stock for the whole town." But my brother knew nothing of the malice of women.

As soon as it was dusk the slave girl came and took him to the house; and when the lady saw him she said, "By Allah, my lord, I have been longing for you terribly."

"By Allah," he cried, "kiss me quickly before you give me anything else."

He had hardly spoken when the lady's husband came in from the next room and seized him, saying, "By Allah, I will not let you go until I have handed you over to the chief of the town watch."

My brother humbled himself to him, but he would not listen, and carried him before the Prefect, who gave him a hundred lashes with a whip and, mounting him on a camel, paraded him round the city, while the guards proclaimed aloud, "This is the reward of the man who violates the households of honourable men!"

What is more, he fell off the camel and broke his leg, and so became lame. Then the Prefect banished him from the city; and he went off not knowing where to go. But I heard of him, and fearing for him, went out after him and brought him back secretly to the city and restored him to health, and took him into my house, where he is living still.

The Caliph laughed at my story and said, "You have done well, Samit — Silent Man, sparing of speech!" And he told me to take a present and go away.

But I said, "I will accept nothing from you until I have told you what happened to all my other brothers; and do not think me a man of many words."

So the Caliph gave ear to
