The Barber's Tale of His Second Brother

Know, Commander of the Faithful, that my second brother's name was Al-Haddar, that is the Babbler, and he was the paralysed one.

It happened to him one day, as he was going about his business, that an old woman came up to him and said, "Stop a moment, my good man, so that I can tell you of something which, if it is to your liking, you may do for me; and I will pray Allah to give you good of it."

My brother stopped, and she went on, "I will put you in the way of a certain thing, provided you are not prodigal of speech."

"Go on with your talk," said he.

And she said, "What do you say to handsome quarters, and a fine garden with running water, flowers blooming and fruit growing and old wine going round, and a pretty young face whose owner you may hold in your arms from dark till dawn? If you do whatever I tell you, you will see something greatly to your advantage."

"And is all this in the world?" asked my brother.

And she answered, "It is, and it shall be yours — provided you are sensible and leave off idle curiosity and too much talk, and do as I say."

"I will indeed, my lady," said he. "But how is it you have chosen me for this before all other men, and what is it about me that pleases you so much?"

Said she, "Did I not tell you to be sparing of speech? Hold your peace and follow me. Know that the young lady I am taking you to loves to have her own way and hates being thwarted and hates anybody who contradicts her; so if you humour her, you will get what you want of her."

And my brother said, "I will not cross her in anything."

Then she went on and my brother followed her, hungering after everything she had described, until they came into a fine large house, handsome and choicely furnished, full of eunuchs and servants and showing signs of prosperity from top to bottom.

And she was taking him up to the upper storey when the people of the house said to him, "What are you doing here?"

But the old woman answered them, "Hold your peace and do not trouble him; he is a workman, and we have need of him."

Then she brought him into a fine great pavilion with a garden in the middle of it — eyes never saw a fairer — and sat him down on a handsome couch.

He had not been sitting long before he heard a loud noise, and in came a troop of slave girls surrounding a lady like the moon on the night of its fullness. When he saw her he got up and made her a bow, at which she welcomed him and told him to be seated.

So he sat down, and she said to him, "Allah advance you to honour! Is all well with you?"

"My lady," he answered, "all is very well with me."

Then she ordered food brought in, and they set delicate dishes before her; so she sat down to eat, making a show of affection towards my brother and joking with him — though the whole time she could not stop laughing; but every time he looked at her she made a sign towards her maids, as though she were laughing at them.

My brother, the ass, understood nothing of it; but in the excess of his ridiculous passion he imagined that the lady was in love with him and would soon grant him what he wanted.

When they had finished eating they set on the wine; and in came ten girls like moons, with lutes ready strung in their hands, and fell to singing with full voices, sweet and sad; at which delight took hold of him, and he took the cup from the lady's hands and drank it standing.

Then she drank a cup of wine, and my brother, still standing, said "Health!" to her and bowed. She handed him another cup and he drank it off — at which she slapped him hard on the back of the neck.

At this my brother would have gone out of the house in anger; but the old woman followed him and winked at him to come back. So he came back, and the lady told him to sit down, and he sat down without a word. Then she slapped him on the back of the neck again; and the second slapping was not enough for her — she had to make all her maids slap him and cuff him too, while he kept saying to the old woman, "I never saw anything nicer than this."

And she for her part kept exclaiming, "Enough, enough, I beg you, mistress!" — but the women slapped him until he very nearly fainted away.

Presently my brother got up and went out to relieve himself; but the old woman overtook him and said, "Be patient a little and you will get what you want."

"How much longer have I to wait?" my brother replied. "This slapping has made me feel faint."

"As soon as she is warm with the wine," she answered, "you shall have your desire."

So he went back to his place and sat down; at which all the maids stood up, and the lady told them to perfume him with pastilles and sprinkle his face with rose water.

Then she said to him, "Allah advance you to honour! You have come into my house and have put up with my conditions; for whoever thwarts me I turn away, and whoever is patient gets what he wants."

"My mistress," said he, "I am your slave and in the hollow of your hand."

"Know then," she went on, "that Allah has made me passionately fond of a frolic; and whoever falls in with my humour comes by whatever he wishes."

Then she ordered her maids to sing at the tops of their voices until the whole company was delighted; after which she said to one of them, "Take your lord and do what is necessary for him, and bring him straight back to me."

So the girl took my brother — and he not knowing what she meant to do with him. But the old woman overtook him and said, "Be patient; there is only a little more to do."

At this his face brightened, and he stood up in front of the lady while the old woman kept saying, "Be patient; you will get your wish this instant!" — until he said, "Tell me what she wants the girl to do with me."

"Nothing but good," she replied, "as I am your sacrifice! She only wants to dye your eyebrows and pluck out your moustaches."

Said he, "As for dyeing my eyebrows, that will come off with washing; but as for plucking out my moustaches, that is a somewhat painful business."

"Be careful how you cross her," cried the old woman, "for she has set her heart on you."

So my brother patiently let her dye his eyebrows and pluck out his moustaches; after which the girl went back to her mistress and told her.

Said she, "Now there is only one other thing to be done: you must shave off his beard and make him smooth-faced."

So the girl went back and told him what her mistress had ordered; and my brother, the blockhead, said, "How am I to do a thing that will disgrace me in front of everybody?"

But the old woman said, "She only wants it so that you may be like a beardless youth, and so that no hair is left on your face to scratch and prick her delicate cheeks; for truly she is passionately in love with you. So be patient and you will get what you are after."

My brother was patient and did as she said, and let his beard be shaved off. And when he was brought back to the lady — there he was, dyed red as to his eyebrows, plucked of both moustaches, shorn of his beard and rouged on both cheeks.

At first she was startled at him; and then she made a mockery of him, and laughing until she fell over on her back, said, "My lord, you have truly won my heart by your good nature!"

Then she begged him, by her own life, to stand up and dance; and he got up and capered about — and there was not a cushion in the house that she did not throw at his head, and all her women did the same, and they kept pelting him with oranges and lemons and citrons besides, until he fell down senseless from the cuffing on the neck, the cushions and the fruit.

"Now you have got what you wanted," said the old woman when he came round. "There are no more blows in store for you, and there is only one small thing left to do. It is her habit, when she is in her cups, to let nobody have her until she has taken off her dress and her trousers and is stark naked. Then she will tell you to take your clothes off and run; and she will run ahead of you as though she were flying from you; and you are to follow her from room to room until you are fully roused, when she will give herself to you." And she added, "Strip your clothes off at once."

So he got up, very nearly out of his mind with ecstasy, and taking off his clothes, showed himself stark naked:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Thirty-second Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the old woman said to the barber's second brother, "Take your clothes off," he got up very nearly out of his mind with ecstasy, and stripping off his clothes, showed himself stark naked.

At which the lady stripped too, and said to my brother, "If you want anything, run after me until you catch me."

Then she set off at a run and he ran after her, while she rushed into one room after another and out of one room after another, my brother scampering after her in a rage of desire like a downright madman, and fully roused.

After a good deal of this she dashed into a darkened place and he dashed in after her — but suddenly he trod on a spot that gave way under his weight; and before he knew where he was, he found himself in the middle of a crowded market, part of the leather-sellers' bazaar, where they were crying the prices of skins and hides and buying and selling.

When they saw him in that state — naked, roused, shorn of beard and moustaches, his eyebrows dyed red and his cheeks reddened with rouge — they shouted and clapped their hands at him, and set about flogging him with hides across his bare body until a faint came over him.

Then they threw him on the back of a donkey and carried him to the Chief of Police.

Said the Chief, "What is this?"

Said they, "This fellow fell suddenly on us out of the Wazir's house in this state."

So the Prefect gave him a hundred lashes and then banished him from Baghdad. However, I went out after him and brought him back secretly into the city and made him a daily allowance to live on — although, if it were not for my generous nature, I could not have put up with the likes of him.

Then the Caliph gave ear to
