The Barber's Tale of His Third Brother

My third brother's name was Al-Fakik, the Gabbler, and he was blind.

One day Fate and Fortune drove him to a fine large house, and he knocked at the door, wanting a word with its owner so as to beg something of him.

Said the master of the house, "Who is at the door?"

But my brother did not say a word; and presently he heard him repeat in a loud voice, "Who is this?"

Still he made no answer; and immediately he heard the master walk to the door and open it and say, "What do you want?"

My brother answered, "Something for Almighty Allah's sake."

"Are you blind?" asked the man; and my brother answered, "I am."

Said the other, "Hold out your hand to me."

So my brother put out his hand, thinking he would give him something — but he took it and, drawing him into the house, carried him up from stair to stair until they reached the terrace on the roof, my brother thinking all the while that he would certainly give him something in the way of food or money.

Then he asked my brother, "What do you want, blind man?"

And he answered, "Something for the Almighty's sake."

"May Allah open some other door for you!"

"You there! Why not say so when I was down at the bottom of the stairs?"

"You beggar, why not answer me when I first called out to you?"

"And what do you mean to do for me now?"

"There is nothing in the house to give you."

"Then take me down the stairs."

"The way is in front of you."

So my brother got up and made his way downstairs, until he came within twenty steps of the door, when his foot slipped and he rolled to the bottom and broke his head open.

Then he went out, not knowing which way to turn; and presently he fell in with two other blind men, companions of his, who said to him, "What did you take today?"

He told them what had happened to him, and added, "Brothers, I want to take some of the money we have in hand and provide for myself out of it."

Now the master of the house had followed him and was listening to what they said; but neither my brother nor his companions knew anything about it.

So my brother went to his lodging and sat down to wait for his companions, and the owner of the house came in after him without being noticed.

When the other blind men arrived, my brother said to them, "Bolt the door and search the house, in case some stranger has followed us in."

The man, hearing this, caught hold of a cord that hung from the ceiling and clung to it, while they went round the house and searched and found nobody. So they came back and sat down beside my brother and brought out their money, which they counted — and it came to twelve thousand dirhams.

Each of them took what he wanted, and they buried the rest in a corner of the room. Then they set out food and sat down to eat.

Presently my brother, hearing a strange pair of jaws chewing beside him, said to his friends, "There is a stranger among us"; and putting out his hand, caught hold of the house-owner's.

At which they all fell on him and beat him; and when they were tired of belabouring him they shouted, "Muslims! A thief has got in among us and wants to take our money!"

A crowd gathered round them, at which the intruder clung to them and complained along with them, and shut his eyes as they did, so that nobody should doubt he was blind, and cried out, "Muslims! I take refuge with Allah and with the Governor, for I have a matter to lay before him!"

Suddenly up came the watch and, laying hands on the whole lot of them — my brother among them — drove them off to the Governor's, who set them in front of him and asked, "What is your news?"

Said the intruder, "Look and find out for yourself; not a word will be got out of us except by torture. So begin by beating me, and after me beat this man, our leader." And he pointed at my brother.

So they threw the man down at full length and gave him four hundred strokes on his backside. The beating hurt him, at which he opened one eye; and as they redoubled the blows, he opened the other.

When the Governor saw this he said, "What have we here, you accursed thing?"

To which he replied, "Give me the pledge of pardon! The four of us have shammed blindness, and we impose on people so as to get into their houses and look on the unveiled faces of their women and contrive to corrupt them. We have made a great deal of money this way, and our store comes to twelve thousand dirhams.

"I said to my companions, 'Give me my share, three thousand'; but they set on me and beat me and took my money away; and I take refuge with Allah and with you. Better you should have my share than they. So if you want to know whether what I say is true, beat each of the others more than you have beaten me, and he will certainly open his eyes."

The Governor gave orders for the questioning to begin with my brother; and they tied him to the whipping post, and the Governor said, "You scum of the earth, do you abuse the gracious gifts of Allah and pretend to be blind?"

"Allah! Allah!" cried my brother. "By Allah, there is not one of us who can see."

Then they beat him until he fainted away, and the Governor cried, "Leave him until he comes round, and then beat him again."

After this he had each of the companions given more than three hundred strokes, while the impostor kept saying to them, "Open your eyes, or you will be beaten again."

At last the man said to the Governor, "Send somebody with me to bring you the money; for these fellows will not open their eyes, in case they are disgraced in front of everybody."

So the Governor sent to fetch the money, and gave the man his pretended share, three thousand dirhams; and keeping the rest for himself, banished the three blind men from the city.

But I, Commander of the Faithful, went out and overtook my brother and questioned him about his case; at which he told me what I have told you. So I brought him secretly into the city and appointed him — in the strictest privacy — an allowance for meat and drink.

The Caliph laughed at my story and said, "Give him a gift and let him go."

But I said, "By Allah, I will take nothing until I have made known to the Commander of the Faithful what happened with the rest of my brothers; for truly I am a man of few words and sparing of speech."

Then the Caliph gave ear to
