The Barber's Tale of His Fourth Brother

Now as for my fourth brother, Commander of the Faithful — Al-Kuz al-Aswani, called the Long-Necked Jug from his brimming over with words, the one who was blind in one eye — he became a butcher in Baghdad, and sold meat and fattened rams; and great men and rich men bought their meat from him, so that he amassed a good deal of wealth and got himself cattle and houses.

He went on like this a long while, until one day, as he was sitting in his shop, an old man with a long beard came up and laid down some silver and said, "Give me meat for this."

He gave him his money's worth of meat and the old man went his way. My brother examined the old man's silver, and seeing that the dirhams were white and bright, put them away in a place by themselves.

The greybeard kept coming back to the shop regularly for five months, and my brother did not stop laying up all the coin he got from him in its own box.

At last he thought he would take the money out and buy sheep with it; so he opened the box and found nothing in it but bits of white paper cut round to look like coins. At which he beat his own face and cried aloud until the people gathered round him; and then he told them his tale, which astonished them a great deal.

Then he got up as usual, and slaughtering a ram, hung it up inside his shop; after which he cut off some of the meat and hung it outside, saying to himself all the while, "O Allah, if only that ill-omened old fellow would come!"

And not an hour had passed before the old man came with his silver in his hand — at which my brother got up and caught hold of him, calling out, "Come and help me, Muslims, and hear my story about this villain!"

When the old man heard this he said to him quietly, "Which will be better for you — to let go of me, or to be disgraced by me in front of everybody?"

"And how will you disgrace me?"

"By showing that you sell human flesh for mutton."

"You lie, you accursed thing!"

"No — the accursed man is the one who has a human being hanging up in his shop by way of meat. If the matter is as you say, I give you lawful leave to take my money and my life."

Then the old man cried out aloud, "Ho, people! If you want to prove the truth of what I say, go into this man's shop."

The people rushed in — and found that the ram had become a dead man hung up for sale. So they set on my brother, crying out, "Infidel! Villain!"; and his best friends fell to cuffing and kicking him and kept saying, "Do you make us eat the flesh of the sons of Adam?"

What is more, the old man struck him in the eye and put it out.

Then they carried the carcass, with its throat cut, before the Chief of the city watch, to whom the old man said, "Emir, this fellow butchers men and sells their flesh for mutton, and we have brought him to you; so rise and carry out the judgements of Allah, to whom be honour and glory."

My brother would have defended himself, but the Chief refused to hear him, and sentenced him to receive five hundred strokes and to forfeit the whole of his property. And indeed, if it had not been for that same property, which he laid out in bribes, they would certainly have killed him.

Then the Chief banished him from Baghdad; and my brother travelled at random until he came to a great town, where he thought it best to set up as a cobbler; so he opened a shop and sat there doing what he could to make a living.

One day, as he went out about his business, he heard the distant tramp of horses; and asking what it was, was told that the King was going out hunting and coursing. So my brother stopped to look at the fine procession.

It so happened that the King's eye met my brother's — at which the King hung his head down and said, "I take refuge with Allah from the evil of this day!" And he turned his horse's reins and went home with his whole retinue.

Then he gave orders to his guards, who seized my brother and beat him with such a painful beating that he was very nearly dead; and my brother had no idea what the cause of his ill-treatment could be. After it he went back to his place in the sorriest state.

Soon afterwards he went to one of the King's household and told him what had happened; and the man laughed until he fell over on his back, and cried, "Brother, you must know that the King cannot bear the sight of a one-eyed man, and especially one blind in the right eye — in which case he never lets him go without killing him."

When my brother heard this he decided to fly from that city; so he went out of it to another, where nobody knew him, and there he stayed a long while.

One day, being full of sorrowful thoughts about what had happened to him, he went out to console himself; and as he was walking along he heard the distant tramp of horses behind him, and said, "The judgement of Allah is on me!" — and looked about for somewhere to hide, and could find nowhere.

At last he saw a closed door which he pushed hard; it gave way, and he went into a long gallery and took shelter there. But he had hardly done so when two men set on him, crying out, "Allah be thanked for delivering you into our hands, enemy of God! These three nights you have robbed us of our rest and our sleep, and truly you have made us taste the cup of death."

My brother asked, "Good people, what is the matter with you?"

And they answered, "You give us the slip and you go about to disgrace us, and you are planning some plot to cut the throat of the master of the house! Is it not enough that you have brought him to beggary, you and your fellows? But now hand over the knife you threaten us with every night."

Then they searched him and found in his belt the knife he used for shoe leather; and he said, "Good people, have the fear of Allah before your eyes and do not ill-treat me; for you must know that my story is a very strange one."

"And what is your story?" said they.

So he told them what had happened to him, hoping they would let him go; but they paid no attention to what he said, and instead of showing him any consideration, beat him grievously and tore his clothes off. And then, finding the scars of a beating with rods on his sides, they said, "You accursed thing! These marks are the plain signs of your guilt."

They carried him before the Governor, while he said to himself, "I am being punished now for my sins, and nobody can deliver me but Almighty Allah."

The Governor, addressing my brother, asked him, "You villain, what made you go into their house with the intention of murder?"

And my brother answered, "I beg you by Allah, Emir, hear my words and do not be hasty in condemning me."

But the Governor cried, "Are we to listen to the words of a robber who has beggared these people, and who carries the scars of the whip on his back?" And he added, "They would surely never have done that to you except for some great crime."

So he sentenced him to receive a hundred strokes of the scourge, after which they set him on a camel and paraded him round the city, proclaiming, "This is the reward, and only too small a reward, for the man who breaks into other people's houses."

Then they thrust him out of the city; and my brother wandered at random until I heard what had happened to him; and going to look for him, questioned him about his case. So he told me his story and all his misfortunes, and I carried him secretly to the city, where I made him an allowance for his meat and drink.

Then the Caliph gave ear to
