The Barber's Tale of His Fifth Brother

My fifth brother, Al-Nashshar the Tattler, the one who was cropped of both ears, Commander of the Faithful, was a beggar, in the habit of asking from people by night and living on their alms by day.

Now when our father, who was an old man well on in years, fell sick and died, he left us seven hundred dirhams, of which each son took his hundred; but when my fifth brother got his share he was at a loss and did not know what to do with it.

While he was in this uncertainty he took it into his head to lay it out on glassware of all sorts and turn an honest penny on the price of it. So he bought a hundred dirhams' worth of glass and, putting it into a big tray, sat down to sell it on a bench at the foot of a wall, with his back leaning against the wall.

As he sat there with the tray in front of him he fell to musing, and said to himself:

"Know, my good self, that the head of my wealth, my capital invested in this glassware, is a hundred dirhams. I shall certainly sell it for two hundred, with which I shall buy other glass straight away and make four hundred by it; nor shall I stop selling and buying in this way until I have got four thousand, and soon find myself the master of a great deal of money.

"With these coins I shall buy merchandise and jewels and perfumes and make a great profit on them, until, Allah willing, I shall have made my capital a hundred thousand dirhams. Then I shall buy a fine house with white slaves and eunuchs and horses; and I shall eat and drink and enjoy myself; nor shall I leave a singing man or a singing woman in the city, but I shall summon them to my palace and make them perform in front of me."

All this he counted over in his mind, while the tray of glassware worth a hundred dirhams stood on the bench in front of him; and after looking at it he went on:

"And when, if Allah wills, my capital has become a hundred thousand dirhams, I shall send out marriage brokers to ask for me in marriage the daughters of kings and viziers; and I shall demand as my wife the eldest daughter of the Prime Minister, for it has reached me that she is perfect in beauty and first in loveliness and rare in accomplishments.

"I shall give a marriage settlement of a thousand dinars; and if her father consents, well and good; and if not, I shall take her by force from under his very nose.

"When she is safely housed with me, I shall buy ten little eunuchs, and for myself a robe such as kings and sultans wear; and get myself a saddle of gold and a bridle set thick with precious gems. Then I shall ride out with my Mamluks going in front of me and all round me, and I shall make a circuit of the city while the people salute me and bless me.

"After that I shall go to the vizier, the girl's father, with armed white slaves in front of me and behind me and on my right and my left. When he sees me the vizier will stand up and seat me in his own place and sit down well below me, since I am to be his son-in-law.

"Now I shall have two eunuchs with me carrying purses, each with a thousand dinars in it; and of these I shall hand him the thousand that is his daughter's marriage settlement, and make him a free gift of the other thousand, so that he may have reason to know my generosity and my liberality, and the greatness of my spirit and the littleness of the world in my eyes. And for every ten words he addresses to me I shall answer him two.

"Then back I go to my house; and if anybody comes to me from the bride's side, I shall make him a present of money and throw a robe of honour over him; but if he brings me a gift, I shall give it back to him and refuse to accept it, so that they may learn what a proud spirit is mine, which never condescends to lower itself. In this way I shall establish my rank and my standing.

"When that is done I shall appoint her wedding night and decorate my house showily and gloriously. And when the time comes for the bride to be paraded, I shall put on my finest clothes and sit down on a mattress of gold brocade, propping my elbow on a pillow and turning neither to the right nor to the left, but looking only straight ahead, out of the haughtiness of my mind and the gravity of my understanding.

"And there in front of me will stand my wife in her clothes and her ornaments, as lovely as the full moon; and I, in my loftiness and my dreadful lordliness, shall not glance at her until those present say to me, 'Our lord and master, your wife, your handmaid, is standing before you; grant her one look, for standing tires her.'

"Then they will kiss the ground in front of me a great many times; at which I shall raise my eyes and cast one single glance at her and turn my face down to the ground again.

"Then they will carry her off to the bridal chamber, and I shall get up and change my clothes for a far finer suit; and when they bring the bride in a second time, I shall not deign to throw her a look until they have begged me a great many times; after which I shall glance at her out of the corner of one eye, and then bend my head down.

"I shall go on behaving like this until the parading and displaying are finished":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Thirty-third Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the barber's fifth brother went on:

"Then I shall bend my head down and go on behaving like this until her parading and displaying are finished. At which I shall order one of my eunuchs to bring me a bag of five hundred dinars, which I shall give as a largesse to the dressing-women there, and tell them, all of them, to lead me into the bridal chamber.

"When they leave me alone with her I shall neither look at her nor speak to her, but lie down at her side with my face to the wall, showing my contempt, so that every one of them may remark again how high and haughty I am.

"Presently her mother will come in to me, and kissing my head and my hand, will say, 'My lord, look on your handmaid, who longs for your favour; heal her broken spirit!'

"I shall give her no answer; and when she sees this she will get up and kiss my feet a great many times and say, 'My lord, truly my daughter is a beautiful girl who has never known a man; and if you show her this coldness and dislike, her heart will break; so incline to her and speak to her and soothe her mind and her spirit.'

"Then she will get up and fetch a cup of wine, and say to her daughter, 'Take it and hand it to your lord.'

"But as she comes up to me I shall leave her standing between my hands, and sit propping my elbow on a round cushion edged with gold thread, leaning back lazily and not looking at her, in the majesty of my spirit, so that she may reckon me a very sultan and a mighty man.

"Then she will say to me, 'My lord, in Allah's name, do not refuse to take the cup from the hand of your handmaid, for truly I am your bondswoman.'

"But I shall not speak to her; and she will press me, saying, 'There is no help for it, you must drink it' — and she will put it to my lips.

"Then I shall shake my fist in her face and kick her with my foot — like this."

And he let out with his toe and knocked over the tray of glassware, which fell off the bench to the ground, and everything on it was broken to bits.

"You foulest of pimps, this comes of the pride of my spirit!" cried my brother. And then, Commander of the Faithful, he beat his own face and tore his clothes and went on weeping and beating himself.

The people who were flocking to their Friday prayers saw him; and some of them looked at him and pitied him, while others paid no attention; and in this way my brother lost both his capital and his profit.

He stayed there weeping a long while; and at last up came a beautiful lady with the scent of musk breathing off her, going to Friday prayers on a mule with a golden saddle and followed by several eunuchs.

When she saw the broken glass and my brother weeping, her kind heart was moved to pity for him, and she asked what was wrong with him, and was told that he had had a tray full of glassware which he hoped to make his living by selling, but it was broken; "and there happened to him," they said, "what you see."

At which she called up one of her eunuchs and said, "Give what you have with you to this poor fellow."

And he gave my brother a purse in which he found five hundred dinars; and when it touched his hand he was very nearly dying from the excess of his joy, and he called down blessings on her.

Then he went home a substantial man; and as he sat there thinking things over, somebody rapped at the door. So he got up and opened it and saw an old woman he had never seen before.

"My son," said she, "you should know that prayer time is near and I have not yet made my ritual washing; so kindly let me use your lodging for the purpose."

My brother answered, "To hear is to comply"; and going in, told her to follow him. So she came in and he brought her an ewer to wash with, and sat down ready to fly with joy on account of the dinars he had tied up in his belt for a purse.

When the old woman had finished her washing she came over to where he was sitting and prayed a prayer of two prostrations; after which she blessed my brother with a godly benediction. And he, thanking her, put his hand to the dinars and gave her two, saying to himself, "These are my free offering."

When she saw the gold she cried, "Praise be to Allah! Why do you look on a woman who loves you as though she were a beggar? Take your money back: I have no need of it. Or if you do not want it, give it back to the woman who gave it to you when your glassware was broken. What is more, if you would like to be with her, I can arrange the matter, for she is my mistress."

"Mother," asked my brother, "by what means can I get to her?"

And she answered, "My son, she has an inclination for you; but she is a wealthy man's wife. So take all your money with you and follow me, and I will guide you to what you want; and when you are in her company, spare neither persuasion nor fair words, but bring the whole lot to bear on her; and so you shall enjoy her beauty and her wealth to your heart's content."

My brother took all his gold and got up and followed the old woman, hardly able to believe his luck.

She did not stop going on, and my brother following her, until they came to a tall gate at which she knocked; and a Greek slave girl came out and opened to them. Then the old woman led my brother into a great sitting room spread with wonderfully fine carpets and hung with curtains, where he sat down with his gold in front of him and his turban on his knee.

He had hardly taken his seat before there came in to him a young lady — eye never saw a fairer — dressed in the most sumptuous clothes; at which my brother rose to his feet, and she smiled in his face and welcomed him and signed to him to be seated.

Then she gave orders for the door to be shut; and when it was shut she turned to my brother and took his hand and led him to a private room furnished with all kinds of brocades and cloths of gold. Here he sat down and she sat beside him and played with him a while; after which she got up and said, "Do not stir from your seat until I come back to you" — and disappeared.

And while he was sitting like that, there came in to him a Black slave, big in body and bulk, holding a drawn sword in his hand, who said, "Curse you! Who brought you here, and what do you want here?"

My brother could not give him any reply, being tongue-tied with terror; so the man seized him and stripped his clothes off and beat him with the flat of his sword blade until he fell to the ground in a faint from the excess of the belabouring.

The slave supposed that was the end of him; and my brother heard him call out, "Where is the salt girl?"

At which in came a maid holding a large tray of salt, and the slave went on rubbing it into my brother's wounds; but he did not stir, for fear the slave might find out he was not dead and kill him outright.

Then the salt girl went away, and the slave cried, "Where is the keeper of the cellar?"

At which in came the old woman, and dragged my brother by his feet to a cellar and threw him down on a heap of dead bodies.

He lay in that place two full days; but Allah made the salt the means of preserving his life, by staunching the blood and stopping its flow.

Presently, feeling able to move, Al-Nashshar got up and opened the trapdoor in fear and trembling and crept out into the open; and Allah protected him, so that he went on in the darkness and hid himself in the entrance hall until dawn, when he saw the accursed old woman go out in search of other quarry.

He followed in her wake without her knowing it, and made for his own lodging, where he dressed his wounds and doctored himself until he was whole again.

Meanwhile he used to watch the old woman, tracking her at all times and seasons, and saw her accost one man after another and carry them to the house. However, he did not say a word; but as soon as he was hale and hearty again he took a piece of stuff and made it into a bag, which he filled with broken glass and tied round his middle.

He also disguised himself as a Persian so that nobody should know him, and hid a sword under his foreign-cut clothes.

Then he went out; and presently, falling in with the old woman, said to her, speaking Arabic with a Persian accent, "Venerable lady, I am a stranger, only arrived here today, and I know nobody. Have you a pair of scales where I might weigh eleven hundred dinars? I will give you something out of them for your pains."

"I have a son who is a money-changer, and he keeps all kinds of scales," she answered; "so come with me to him before he goes out, and he will weigh your gold."

My brother answered, "Lead the way."

She led him to the house, and the young lady herself came out and opened it; at which the old woman smiled in her face and said, "I am bringing you fat meat today."

Then the girl took my brother by the hand and led him to the same room as before, where she sat with him a while and then got up and went out, saying, "Do not stir from your seat until I come back to you."

Presently in came the accursed slave with the drawn sword, and cried to my brother, "Get up, and damnation to you."

So he got up; and as the slave walked ahead of him he drew the sword out from under his clothes and struck him with it, and sent his head flying off his body.

Then he dragged the corpse by the feet to the cellar and called out, "Where is the salt girl?"

Up came the girl carrying the tray of salt; and seeing my brother with a sword in his hand, turned to run; but he followed her and struck off her head.

Then he called out, "Where is the keeper of the cellar?" And in came the old woman, to whom he said, "Do you know me again, you ill-omened hag?"

"No, my lord," she replied.

And he said, "I am the owner of the five hundred gold pieces, whose house you came into to make your washing and say your prayers, and whom you snared here and betrayed."

"Fear Allah and spare me," she cried; but he paid no attention to her, and struck her with the sword until he had cut her into four.

Then he went to look for the young lady; and when she saw him her reason left her and she cried out piteously, "Mercy! Mercy!"

So he spared her, and asked, "What made you keep company with this slave?"

And she answered, "I was slave to a certain merchant, and the old woman used to visit me until I took a liking to her. One day she said to me, 'We have a marriage feast at our house the like of which was never seen, and I want you to enjoy the sight of it.' 'To hear is to obey,' I answered; and getting up, dressed myself in my finest clothes and ornaments and took with me a purse with a hundred gold pieces in it.

"Then she brought me here; and I had hardly got into the house before the Black man seized me — and I have stayed in this state three whole years, through the treachery of that accursed old woman."

Then my brother asked her, "Is there anything of his in the house?"

To which she answered, "A great store of wealth; and if you are able to carry it away, do so, and Allah give you good of it."

My brother went with her, and she opened various chests for him with money bags in them, at which he was astounded; then she said to him, "Go now and leave me here, and fetch men to move the money."

He went out and hired ten men; but when he came back he found the door wide open, the girl gone, and nothing left except some small matter of coin and the household stuff. By this he knew that the girl had outwitted him; so he opened the storerooms and seized everything in them, together with the rest of the money, and left nothing in the house.

He passed the night rejoicing; but when morning dawned he found some twenty troopers at the door, who laid hands on him saying, "The Governor wants you."

My brother begged them hard to let him go back to his house, and even offered them a large sum of money; but they refused, and binding him fast with cords, carried him off.

On the way they met a friend of my brother's, who clung to his skirt and begged his protection and asked him to stand by him and help to get him out of their hands. The man stopped and asked them what the matter was, and they answered, "The Governor has ordered us to bring this fellow before him, and, look you, that is what we are doing."

My brother's friend urged them to release him and offered them five hundred dinars to let him go, saying, "When you get back to the Governor, tell him you could not find him."

But they would not listen to what he said, and took my brother and dragged him along on his face, and set him in front of the Governor, who asked, "Where did you get these goods and this money?"

And he answered, "I ask for mercy!"

So the Governor gave him the pledge of mercy; and he told him everything that had happened to him from first to last with the old woman, and how the girl had run off; ending with, "Whatever I have taken, take what you like of it, so long as you leave me enough to live on."

But the Governor took all the goods and all the money for himself; and fearing that the affair might come to the Sultan's ears, he summoned my brother and said, "Leave this city, or I will hang you."

"Hearing and obedience," said my brother, and set out for another town.

On the road thieves fell on him and stripped him and beat him and docked his ears; but I heard news of his misfortunes and went out after him, taking him clothes, and brought him secretly into the city, where I assigned him an allowance for meat and drink.

And presently the Caliph gave ear to
