The Barber's Tale of His Sixth Brother

My sixth brother, Commander of the Faithful — Shakashik, or Many Clamours, the one shorn of both his lips — was once rich and became poor; so one day he went out to beg something to keep body and soul together.

As he was on the road he suddenly caught sight of a large and handsome mansion, with a wide, lofty building standing separate at the entrance, where a number of eunuchs sat giving orders and forbidding.

My brother asked one of the men idling there, and he replied, "The palace belongs to a member of the house of Barmecide."

So he went up to the doorkeepers and asked them for alms.

"Go in," said they, "by the great gate, and you will get what you are after from our master the Wazir."

Accordingly he went in; and passing through the outer entrance, walked on a while and presently came to a hall of the utmost beauty and elegance, paved with marble, hung with curtains, and with a flower garden in the middle of it whose like he had never seen.

My brother stood a while bewildered, not knowing which way to turn his steps; then, seeing somebody at the far end of the sitting room, he walked up to it and found a man of handsome presence and a comely beard.

When this personage saw my brother he stood up to him and welcomed him and asked how things stood with him; to which he replied that he was in want and needed charity.

Hearing this, the great man showed great concern and, putting his hand to his fine robe, tore it, exclaiming, "What! Am I in a city, and you standing here hungry? I have not the patience to bear such a disgrace!"

Then he promised him all manner of good cheer and said, "There is no help for it, you must stay with me and eat of my salt."

"My lord," answered my brother, "I can wait no longer; for indeed I am dying of hunger."

So he cried, "Ho, boy! Bring the basin and the ewer!" And turning to my brother, said, "My guest, come forward and wash your hands."

My brother got up to do it — but he saw neither ewer nor basin; and yet his host went on washing his hands with invisible soap in imperceptible water, and cried, "Bring the table!"

But again my brother saw nothing.

Then said the host, "Honour me by eating some of this meat, and do not be shy."

And he kept moving his hand to and fro as though he were eating, and saying to my brother, "I am surprised to see you eating so sparingly. Do not stint yourself, for I am sure you are famished."

So my brother began to make as though he were eating, while his host kept saying, "Fall to — and notice especially how excellent this bread is, and how white!"

But still my brother saw nothing. Then he said to himself, "This man is fond of making fun of people"; and replied, "My lord, in all my days I never knew anything more winsome than the whiteness of it or sweeter than its taste."

The Barmecide said, "This bread was baked by a maid of mine whom I bought for five hundred dinars."

Then he called out, "Ho, boy, bring in the meat pudding for our first dish, and let there be plenty of fat in it." And turning to my brother, said, "My guest — in Allah's name, did you ever see anything better than this meat pudding? Now by my life, eat, and do not be embarrassed."

Presently he cried out again, "Ho, boy, serve up the marinated stew with the fattened sand grouse in it." And he said to my brother, "Up and eat, my guest, for truly you are hungry and you need food."

So my brother began wagging his jaws and making as if he were champing and chewing, while the host went on calling for one dish after another and yet producing nothing but orders to eat.

Presently he cried, "Ho, boy, bring us the chickens stuffed with pistachio nuts." And he said to my brother, "By your life, my guest, I have fattened these chickens on pistachios; eat, for you have never eaten their like."

"My lord," replied my brother, "they are indeed first rate."

Then the host began motioning with his hand as though he were putting a mouthful into my brother's mouth; and he did not stop enumerating the various dishes and expatiating on them to the hungry man, whose hunger grew more violent still, so that his soul lusted after a bit of bread, even a barley scone.

Said the Barmecide, "Did you ever taste anything more delicious than the seasoning of these dishes?"

And said my brother, "Never, my lord."

"Eat heartily and do not be ashamed," said the host.

And the guest said, "I have eaten my fill of meat."

So the host cried, "Take it away and bring in the sweets." And turning to my brother, said, "Eat some of this almond conserve, for it is first rate; and some of these honey fritters. Take this one — by my life, the syrup is running out of it."

"May I never be bereaved of you, my lord," replied the hungry man; and he began asking him about the abundance of musk in the fritters.

"That is my custom," he answered. "They put a dinar's weight of musk in every honey fritter for me, and half that quantity of ambergris."

All this time my brother kept wagging his head and his jaws, until the master cried, "Enough of that. Bring us the dessert!"

Then he said to him, "Eat some of these almonds and walnuts and raisins; and of this and that" — naming various kinds of dried fruit — "and do not be embarrassed."

But my brother replied, "My lord, indeed I am full: I can eat no more."

"My guest," the host repeated, "if you have a mind to these good things, eat. Allah! Allah! Do not stay hungry."

But my brother answered, "My lord, a man who has eaten of all these dishes — how can he be hungry?"

Then he thought it over and said to himself, "I will do something that will make him regret these tricks of his."

Presently the host called out, "Bring me the wine"; and moving his hands in the air as though they had set it in front of them, he gave my brother a cup and said, "Take this cup, and if it pleases you, let me know."

"My lord," he replied, "it is remarkably good in the nose; but I am used to drinking wine some twenty years old."

"Knock at this door, then," said the host, "for you cannot drink of anything better."

"By your kindness," said my brother, motioning with his hand as though he were drinking.

"Health and joy to you," exclaimed the master of the house; and he pretended to fill a cup and drink it off, and then handed another to my brother, who drank it down and made as though he were drunk.

Presently he caught the host off guard; and raising his arm until the white of his armpit showed, dealt him such a cuff on the back of the neck that the palace echoed with it. And then he came down on him with a second cuff.

The host cried aloud, "What is this, you scum of the earth?"

"My lord," replied my brother, "you have shown great kindness to your slave, and let him into your house and given him your food to eat; and then you made him drink your old wine until he became drunk and rowdy. But you are too noble not to bear with his ignorance and pardon his offence."

When the Barmecide heard my brother's words he laughed his loudest and said, "For a long time I have been in the habit of making mock of men and playing the madcap among my friends; but I have never yet come across a single one who had the patience and the wit to fall in with all my humours except you. So I forgive you; and you shall be my drinking companion in good earnest, and never leave me."

Then he ordered the servants to lay the table in earnest, and they set on every dish he had spoken of in sport; and he and my brother ate until they were satisfied. After which they moved to the drinking room, where they found girls like moons who sang every kind of song and played on every kind of instrument.

There they stayed drinking until the wine got the better of them; and the host treated my brother like a familiar friend, so that he became like a brother to him, and gave him a robe of honour and loved him with a great love.

Next morning the two fell to feasting and carousing again, and they did not stop living like this for a term of twenty years — at the end of which the Barmecide died, and the Sultan took possession of all his wealth and squeezed my brother of his savings, until he was left a pauper without a penny to handle.

So he left the city and fled away, going wherever his face led him; but when he was halfway between two towns the desert Arabs fell on him and bound him and carried him to their camp, where the man who had taken him set about torturing him, saying, "Buy your life from me with your money, or else I will kill you."

My brother began to weep and replied, "By Allah, I have nothing, neither gold nor silver; but I am your prisoner, so do what you like with me."

Then the Bedouin drew a knife, broad-bladed and ground so sharp that if it were plunged into a camel's throat it would sever it clean across from one side to the other, and cut off my brother's lips, and grew more insistent still in demanding money.

Now this Bedouin had a beautiful wife, who in her husband's absence used to make advances to my brother and offer herself to him; but he held off from her.

One day she began tempting him as usual, and he played with her and made her sit on his lap — when in came the Bedouin, who, seeing this, cried out, "Curse you, you accursed villain, would you debauch my wife for me?"

Then he took out a knife and cut off my brother's manhood; after which he tied him on the back of a camel and carried him to a mountain and left him there.

He was found at last by people who recognised him and gave him food and drink, and let me know how he was; at which I went out to him and brought him back to Baghdad, where I made him an allowance enough to live on.

This, then, Commander of the Faithful, is the history of my six brothers; and I was afraid to go away without telling you all of it and leaving you in the error of judging me to be like them. And now you know that I have six brothers on my hands, and that being more upright than they are, I support the whole family.

When the Caliph heard my story and everything I told him about my brothers, he laughed and said, "You speak the truth, Silent Man! You are indeed sparing of speech, and there is nothing of forwardness in you; but now go out of this city and settle in some other."

And he banished me by decree.

I left Baghdad and travelled in foreign parts until I heard of his death and of another man's accession to the Caliphate. Then I went back to Baghdad, where I found all my brothers dead, and came upon this young man, to whom I rendered the kindliest service — for without me he would certainly have been killed.

Indeed he slanders me and accuses me of a fault which is not in my nature; and what he reports about impudence and meddling and forwardness is idle and false. For truly it was on his account that I left Baghdad and travelled through a great many countries until I came to this city and met him here in your company.

And was not all this, worthy company, the mark of the generosity of my nature?
