The End of the Tailor's Tale

Then said the tailor to the King of China:

When we had heard the barber's tale, and seen the excess of his talkativeness and the way he had wronged this young man, we laid hands on him and shut him up; after which we sat down in peace, and ate and drank and enjoyed the good things of the wedding feast until the call to afternoon prayer, when I left the party and went home.

My wife received me with sour looks and said, "You go off enjoying yourself among your friends and leave me sitting sorrowing here alone. So now, unless you take me out and give me some amusement for the rest of the day, I shall cut the rope between us, and that will be the cause of my parting from you."

So I took her out and we amused ourselves until supper time, when we came home and fell in with this hunchback, who was brimful of drink and trolling out these rhymes:

	"Clear is the wine and the cup is fine;
	like to like the two combine.
	It is wine and not a cup!
	It is a cup and not wine!"

So I invited him to have supper with us, and went out to buy fried fish; after which we sat down to eat; and presently my wife took a piece of bread and a chunk of fish and stuffed them into his mouth, and he choked; and though I slapped him long and hard between the shoulders, he died.

Then I carried him off and contrived to leave him at the house of this doctor, the Jew; and the doctor contrived to drop him into the house of the steward; and the steward contrived to set him up in the way of the Christian broker.

This, then, is my adventure, which happened to me only yesterday. Is it not more wonderful than the story of the hunchback?

When the King of China heard the tailor's tale he shook his head for pleasure; and showing great surprise, said, "What passed between the young man and that busybody of a barber is truly more pleasant and more wonderful than the story of my lying rogue of a hunchback."

Then he told one of his chamberlains to go with the tailor and bring the barber out of jail, saying, "I want to hear the talk of this Silent Man, and it shall be the cause of your deliverance, every one of you; then we will bury the hunchback, since he has been dead since yesterday, and set up a tomb over him":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Thirty-fourth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the King of China ordered, "Bring me the barber, who shall be the cause of your deliverance; then we will bury this hunchback, since he has been dead since yesterday, and set up a tomb over him."

So the chamberlain and the tailor went to the jail and released the barber, and presently came back with him to the King.

The Sultan of China looked at him and considered him carefully — and he was an ancient man, past his ninetieth year; dark of face, white of beard, and hoary of eyebrow; lop-eared and with a nose like a trunk, and a vacant, silly, conceited expression on his face.

The King laughed at this figure of fun and said to him, "Silent Man, I want you to tell me something of your history."

Said the barber, "O King of the age, allow me first to ask you: what is the story of this Christian and this Jew and this Muslim and this hunchback — the corpse — that I see among you? And pray, what may be the object of this gathering?"

Said the King of China, "And why do you ask?"

"I ask," he replied, "so that the King's majesty may know that I am no forward fellow or busybody or impertinent meddler, and that I am innocent of their slanderous charges of too much talk; for I am the man whose name is the Silent Man, and my nickname is particularly happy, as the poet says:

	When men design a nickname or a pet name,
	know that nature will often fall in with the name."

Then the King said, "Explain to the barber the case of this hunchback and what happened to him at supper time; and repeat to him the stories told by the Christian, the Jew, the steward and the tailor. A twice-told tale is of no use to me."

They did as he ordered; and the barber shook his head and said, "By Allah, this is a marvel of marvels! Now uncover the body of that hunchback for me."

They undid the winding sheet, and he sat down and took the hunchback's head in his lap and looked at his face, and laughed and guffawed until he fell over on his back, and said, "There is a wonder in every death; but the death of this hunchback is worth writing down and recording in letters of liquid gold!"

The bystanders were astounded at his words, and the King marvelled and said to him, "What is the matter with you, Silent Man? Explain your words to us."

"O King of the age," said the barber, "I swear by your beneficence that there is still life in this hunchback."

At which he pulled a barber's kit out of his belt, and took from it a pot of ointment and anointed the hunchback's neck with it, and the arteries of it. Then he took a pair of iron tweezers and, putting them into the hunchback's throat, drew out the chunk of fish with its bone; and when it came into sight, it was soaked in blood.

At which the hunchback gave a hearty sneeze and jumped up as though nothing had happened, and passing his hand over his face, said, "I testify that there is no god but God, and I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of God."

At this sight everybody there wondered; the King of China laughed until he fainted, and so did the rest of them.

Then said the Sultan, "By Allah, this is truly the most marvellous thing I ever saw! Muslims! Soldiers, all of you! Did you ever in your lives see a man die and be brought back to life? Truly, if Allah had not granted him this barber, he would have been a dead man."

Said they, "By Allah, it is a marvel of marvels."

Then the King of China ordered this tale to be recorded; so they recorded it and placed it in the royal record rooms. After which he bestowed costly robes of honour on the Jew, the Christian and the steward, and told them to go on their way with every mark of esteem.

Then he gave the tailor a sumptuous robe and appointed him his own tailor, with suitable pay and allowances; and made peace between him and the hunchback, to whom he also presented a splendid and expensive suit with a suitable stipend.

He dealt as generously with the barber, giving him a gift and a robe of honour; what is more, he settled a handsome salary on him and created him Barber-Surgeon of State and made him one of his drinking companions.

So they did not stop living the most pleasurable and delightful of lives, until there came to them the Destroyer of all delights and the Sunderer of all societies, the Depopulator of palaces and the Garnerer for graves.

And yet, O most fortunate King (Shahrazad went on), this tale is by no means more wonderful than the tale of Sindbad the Seaman and Sindbad the Landsman.

Said her sister Dunyazad, "And what may that be?"

At which she began to tell the following tale of
