The First Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman

My father was a merchant, one of the notables of my native place, a moneyed man and ample of means, who died while I was still a child, leaving me a great deal of wealth in money and lands and farmhouses.

When I grew up I laid hands on the whole of it and ate of the best and drank freely and wore rich clothes and lived lavishly, keeping company with young men of my own age and reckoning that this way of living would go on for ever and never know any change.

I went on like that a long time; but at last I woke out of my heedlessness, and coming back to my senses, found that my wealth had become no wealth and my condition an ill condition, and that everything I had once held had gone out of my hand.

And recovering my reason, I was struck with dismay and confusion, and remembered a saying of our lord Solomon son of David, on whom be peace, which I had heard from my father in the old days: "Three things are better than three others: the day of death is better than the day of birth, a live dog is better than a dead lion, and the grave is better than want."

Then I got together the remains of my estates and property and sold everything, even my clothes, for three thousand dirhams, with which I resolved to travel to foreign parts, remembering the poet's saying:

	By means of hard work a man shall climb the height;
	whoever aspires to fame must not sleep at night.
	Whoever looks for pearls in the deep must dive,
	winning wealth and welfare by his own main strength;
	and whoever looks for Fame without toil and struggle
	is looking for the impossible and wasting his life.

So, taking heart, I bought myself goods and merchandise and everything needed for a voyage; and impatient to be at sea, I embarked with a company of merchants on board a ship bound for Basra.

There we embarked again and sailed many days and nights, and we passed from island to island and sea to sea and shore to shore, buying and selling and bartering everywhere the ship touched; and we kept on our course until we came to an island like a garden out of the gardens of Paradise.

Here the captain cast anchor, and making fast to the shore, put out the landing planks. So everybody aboard landed and made furnaces and lit fires in them and busied themselves in various ways, some cooking and some washing, while others walked about the island for their amusement; and the crew fell to eating and drinking and playing and sporting.

I was one of the walkers. But while we were occupied like this, the master, who was standing on the gunwale, called out to us at the top of his voice:

"Ho there, passengers! Run for your lives and hurry back to the ship, and leave your gear and save yourselves from destruction, Allah preserve you! For this island you are standing on is no true island, but a great fish lying still in the middle of the sea, on which the sand has settled and trees have sprung up in the old days, so that it has become like an island. But when you lit fires on it, it felt the heat and moved; and in a moment it will sink with you into the sea and you will all be drowned. So leave your gear and look to your safety before you die!":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the ship's master cried out to the passengers, "Leave your gear and look to your safety, before you die!" — all who heard him left their gear and their goods, clothes washed and unwashed, fire pots and brass cooking pots, and fled back to the ship for their lives; and some reached it and others, myself among them, did not.

For suddenly the island shook and sank into the depths of the sea with everything that was on it, and the dashing sea surged over it with clashing waves.

I sank with the rest, down and down into the deep; but Almighty Allah preserved me from drowning and threw in my way a great wooden tub, one of those the ship's company had used for washing. I gripped it for the sweetness of life; and getting astride it like a man riding, paddled with my feet like oars while the waves tossed me right and left as though in sport.

Meanwhile the captain made sail and went off with the men who had got aboard, without a thought for the drowning and the drowned; and I did not stop following the vessel with my eyes until she was out of sight, and I made certain of death.

Darkness closed in on me while I was in this plight, and the winds and the waves carried me on all that night and the next day, until the tub brought up with me under the lee of a high island with trees hanging out over the water.

I caught hold of a branch and by its help clambered up onto the land, after coming close to death; but when I reached the shore I found my legs cramped and numb, and my feet showed the traces of fish nibbling at their soles — though I had felt nothing, for the excess of my anguish and exhaustion.

I threw myself down on the ground of the island like a dead man, and drowned in desolation, fainted away; and I did not come back to my senses until next morning, when the sun rose and revived me.

But I found my feet swollen, so I made shift to move by shuffling on my backside and crawling on my knees; for on that island there was a store of fruit and springs of sweet water. I ate the fruit, which strengthened me; and so I stayed days and nights, until my life seemed to come back to me and my spirits began to revive and I was better able to move about.

So, after due consideration, I set about exploring the island and amusing myself with gazing at everything Almighty Allah had created there; and I rested under the trees, and cut myself a staff from one of them to lean on.

One day, as I walked along the shore, I caught sight of something in the distance and took it for a wild animal or one of the monstrous creatures of the sea; but as I came nearer, looking hard at it all the while, I saw it was a noble mare, tethered on the beach.

Presently I went up to her; but she cried out against me with a great cry, so that I trembled with fear and turned to go away — when a man came out from under the earth and followed me, shouting, "Who are you and where do you come from, and what brought you here?"

"My lord," I answered, "I am truly a waif and a stranger, and I was left to drown with several others by the ship we were voyaging in; but Allah graciously sent me a wooden tub, so I saved myself on it, and it floated with me until the waves cast me up on this island."

When he heard this he took my hand and said, "Come with me"; and he carried me into a great underground chamber, as spacious as a hall. He made me sit down at the upper end of it; and then he brought me something to eat, and being famished, I ate until I was satisfied and refreshed.

And when he had put me at my ease he questioned me about myself, and I told him everything that had happened to me from first to last. And as he was marvelling at my adventure, I said, "By Allah, my lord, excuse me; I have told you the truth of my case and the accident that came to me; and now I should like you to tell me who you are, and why you live here under the earth, and why you have tethered that mare on the edge of the sea."

He answered, "Know that I am one of several men stationed in different parts of this island. We are the grooms of King Mihrjan, and all his horses are under our hands.

"Every month, about the time of the new moon, we bring our best mares here that have never been covered, and picket them on the seashore and hide ourselves in this place under the ground, so that nobody can see us.

"Presently the stallions of the sea scent the mares and come up out of the water; and seeing nobody, mount the mares and have their will of them. When they have covered them they try to drag them away, but cannot, because of the leg-ropes; so they cry out at them and butt at them and kick them. Hearing which, we know that the stallions have dismounted; so we run out and shout at them, at which they take fright and go back into the sea.

"Then the mares conceive by them and bear colts and fillies worth a mint of money, whose like is not to be found on the face of the earth. This is the season for the sea stallions to come out; and, Allah willing, I shall take you to King Mihrjan":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fortieth Night,

she went on: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the groom said to Sindbad the Seaman, "I shall take you to King Mihrjan and show you our country. And know that if you had not happened on us you would have perished miserably and nobody would ever have known of you; but I shall be the means of saving your life and of your getting back to your own land."

I called down blessings on him and thanked him for his kindness and courtesy; and while we were still talking, up came the stallion out of the sea and, giving a great cry, sprang on the mare and covered her.

When he had had his will of her he dismounted and would have carried her away with him, but could not because of the tether. She kicked and cried out at him, at which the groom took a sword and a shield and ran out of the underground room, striking the shield with the blade and calling to his companions, who came up shouting and brandishing spears; and the stallion took fright at them and plunged into the sea like a buffalo and disappeared under the waves.

After this we sat a while, until the rest of the grooms came up, each leading a mare; and seeing me with their fellow groom, they asked about my situation and I repeated my story to them. At which they came up to me and spread the table and ate, and invited me to eat; so I ate with them.

After which they took horse and, mounting me on one of the mares, set out with me and travelled on without stopping until we came to the capital city of King Mihrjan; and going in to him, they told him my story.

Then he sent for me; and when they had set me before him and greetings had been exchanged, he gave me a cordial welcome, and wishing me a long life, told me to tell him my tale.

So I related to him everything I had seen and everything that had happened to me from first to last; at which he marvelled and said, "By Allah, my son, you have truly been preserved by a miracle! If the term of your life were not a long one, you would never have escaped these straits. But praise be to Allah for your safety!"

Then he spoke cheerfully to me and treated me with kindness and consideration; what is more, he made me his agent for the port and registrar of all the ships that came into the harbour.

I attended him regularly to receive his commands, and he favoured me and did me every kind of kindness and invested me with costly and splendid robes. Indeed I stood high in his favour, as an intercessor for the people and a go-between for them and him when they wanted anything of him.

I stayed like that a great while; and whenever I passed through the city to the port I used to question the merchants and travellers and sailors about the city of Baghdad, in the hope of hearing of some chance of getting back to my own country; but I could find nobody who knew it or who knew anybody who went there.

At this I was distressed, for I was weary of being a stranger so long; and my disappointment went on for a time — until one day, going in to King Mihrjan, I found him with a company of Indians. I greeted them and they returned my greeting, and welcomed me politely and asked me about my country:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-first Night,

she went on: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman said:

When they asked me about my country I asked them about theirs, and they told me that they were of various castes: some called the Shakiriyah, who are the noblest of their castes and neither oppress nor offer violence to anybody; and others Brahmans, a people who abstain from wine but live in delight and comfort and merriment and own camels and horses and cattle.

What is more, they told me that the people of India are divided into seventy-two castes, and I marvelled at this beyond all marvelling.

Among the other things I saw in King Mihrjan's dominions was an island called Kasil, where all night long you can hear the beating of drums and tabors; but we were told by the neighbouring islanders and by travellers that the inhabitants are people of diligence and judgement.

In that sea I also saw a fish two hundred cubits long, which the fishermen are afraid of; so they knock pieces of wood together and put it to flight. I saw another fish too, with a head like an owl's — besides many other wonders and rarities which it would be tedious to recount.

I occupied myself in visiting the islands like this until one day, as I stood in the port with a staff in my hand as usual, a great ship with many merchants aboard came sailing for the harbour.

When it reached the small inner port where the ships anchor below the city, the master furled his sails, and making fast to the shore, put out the landing planks; at which the crew fell to breaking bulk and landing cargo, while I stood by taking written note of it all.

They were a long while bringing the goods ashore, so I asked the master, "Is there anything left in your ship?"

And he answered, "My lord, there are several bales of merchandise in the hold whose owner was drowned from among us at one of the islands on our course; so his goods have remained in our charge as a trust, and we mean to sell them and note the price, so as to convey it to his people in the city of Baghdad, the House of Peace."

"What was the merchant's name?" said I.

And he said, "Sindbad the Seaman."

At which I looked hard at him and, recognising him, cried out to him with a great cry, saying:

"Captain, I am that same Sindbad the Seaman who travelled with the other merchants; and when the fish heaved and you called out to us, some saved themselves and others sank, and I was one of them. But Almighty Allah threw in my way a great wooden tub, one of those the crew had used for washing; and the winds and the waves carried me to this island, where by Allah's grace I fell in with King Mihrjan's grooms, and they brought me here to the King their master.

"When I told him my story he treated me with favour and made me his harbour master; and I have prospered in his service and found acceptance with him. These bales, therefore, are mine — the goods that God has given me":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-second Night,

she went on: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when Sindbad the Seaman said to the captain, "These bales are mine, the goods that Allah has given me," the other exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Truly there is neither conscience nor good faith left among men!"

Said I, "Captain, what do you mean by these words, seeing that I have told you my case?"

And he answered, "Because you heard me say that I had goods with me whose owner was drowned, you think to take them without any right; but this is forbidden you by law, for we saw him drown before our eyes, together with many other passengers, and not one of them was saved. So how can you pretend to be the owner of the goods?"

"Captain," said I, "listen to my story and pay attention to my words, and my truthfulness will be plain to you; for lying and falsehood are the marks of hypocrites."

Then I recounted to him everything that had happened to me since I sailed from Baghdad with him, up to the time we came to the fish-island where we were nearly drowned; and I reminded him of certain matters that had passed between us — at which both he and the merchants were satisfied of the truth of my story and recognised me and wished me joy of my deliverance, saying, "By Allah, we did not think you had escaped drowning! But the Lord has granted you a new life."

Then they handed my bales over to me, and I found my name written on them, and nothing was missing from them.

So I opened them and, making up a present for King Mihrjan of the finest and costliest of the contents, had the sailors carry it up to the palace; where I went in to the King and laid my present at his feet, telling him what had happened, and particularly about the ship and my goods.

At which he marvelled beyond all marvelling, and the truth of everything I had told him was made plain to him. His affection for me redoubled after that, and he showed me great honour and bestowed a great present on me in return for mine.

Then I sold my bales and the other things I owned, making a great profit on them, and bought myself other goods and gear of the growth and fashion of that island city.

When the merchants were about to start on their homeward voyage I put everything I had aboard the ship; and going in to the King, thanked him for all his favours and his friendship and begged his leave to go back to my own country and my own friends. He said goodbye to me and bestowed on me a great store of the country's stuffs and produce; and I took my leave of him and embarked.

Then we set sail and travelled on nights and days by the permission of Almighty Allah; and Fortune served us and Fate favoured us, so that we arrived safely at the city of Basra, where I landed, rejoicing at my safe return to my native soil.

After a short stay I set out for Baghdad, the House of Peace, with a store of goods and commodities of great price. Reaching the city in due time, I went straight to my own quarter and into my own house, where all my friends and relations came to greet me.

Then I bought myself eunuchs and concubines, servants and Black slaves, until I had a large household; and I bought houses and lands and gardens, until I was richer and better off than before; and I went back to enjoying the society of my friends and companions more assiduously than ever, forgetting everything I had suffered of exhaustion and hardship and exile and every peril of travel. And I gave myself up to every kind of joy and comfort and delight, eating the daintiest food and drinking the most delicious wines; and my wealth allowed this state of things to go on.

This, then, is the story of my first voyage; and tomorrow, Allah willing, I shall tell you the tale of the second of my seven voyages.

(Says the teller of the tale:) Then Sindbad the Seaman made Sindbad the Landsman have supper with him, and gave orders to give him a hundred gold pieces, saying, "You have cheered us with your company today."

The porter thanked him and, taking the gift, went his way, turning over what he had heard and marvelling mightily at the things that happen to mankind.

He passed the night in his own place, and with the early morning went back to the house of Sindbad the Seaman, who received him with honour and seated him at his side. As soon as the rest of the company had assembled, he set food and drink in front of them; and when they had eaten and drunk well and were merry and in a cheerful frame of mind, he took up his discourse and recounted to them, in these words, the narrative of
