The Second Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman

Know, my brother, that I was living a most comfortable and enjoyable life, in all comfort and delight, as I told you yesterday:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-third Night,

she went on: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when Sindbad the Seaman's guests were all gathered together he spoke to them like this:

I was living a most enjoyable life, until one day my mind became possessed with the thought of travelling about the world of men and seeing their cities and their islands; and a longing took hold of me to trade and make money by commerce.

On this resolve I took a great store of cash and, buying goods and gear fit for travelling, tied them up in bales. Then I went down to the riverbank, where I found a noble ship, brand new and about to sail, fitted with sails of fine cloth and well manned and provisioned; so I took passage in her with a number of other merchants, and after loading our goods we weighed anchor the same day.

Our voyage was a very fine one, and we sailed from place to place and from island to island; and whenever we anchored we met a crowd of merchants and notables and customers, and set about buying and selling and bartering.

At last Destiny brought us to an island, fair and green, in trees abundant, with yellow-ripe fruit luxuriant and flowers fragrant and birds warbling a soft descant, and streams crystalline and radiant — but no sign of a man showed to anyone looking, not so much as a blower of a fire.

The captain made fast with us at this island, and the merchants and the sailors landed and walked about, enjoying the shade of the trees and the song of the birds, which chanted the praises of the One, the Victorious, and marvelling at the works of the Omnipotent King.

I landed with the rest; and sitting down by a spring of sweet water that welled up among the trees, took out some provisions I had with me and ate what Almighty Allah had allotted me. And the breeze was so sweet and the flowers so fragrant that presently I grew drowsy, and lying down in that place, was soon drowned in sleep.

When I woke I found myself alone, for the ship had sailed and left me behind, and not one of the merchants or the sailors had given me a thought.

I searched the island right and left, but found neither man nor jinn; at which I was troubled beyond measure and my gall was ready to burst for the stress of my chagrin and anguish and worry, because I was left entirely alone, without any worldly goods or food or drink, weary and broken-hearted.

So I gave myself up for lost and said, "The crock does not always escape the shock. I was saved the first time by finding somebody who brought me from a desert island to an inhabited place; but now there is no hope for me."

Then I fell to weeping and wailing and gave myself up to a fit of rage, blaming myself for having ventured again on the perils and hardships of a voyage when I was at my ease in my own house in my own country, taking my pleasure with good food and good drink and good clothes and wanting for nothing, neither money nor goods.

And I repented of having left Baghdad — the more so after all the troubles and dangers I had gone through on my first voyage, in which I had so narrowly escaped destruction — and exclaimed, "Truly we are Allah's and to Him we are returning!"

I was indeed like a man mad and jinn-struck; and presently I got up and walked about the island, right and left and every way, unable for trouble of mind to sit still or stay in any one place.

Then I climbed a tall tree and looked out in every direction, but saw nothing except sky and sea and trees and birds and islands and sand.

However, after a while my eager glances fell on some great white thing, a long way off in the interior of the island; so I came down from the tree and made for what I had seen — and it was a huge white dome, rising high into the air and of vast compass.

I walked all round it, but found no door to it, nor could I muster the strength or the nimbleness to climb it, because it was so exceedingly smooth and slippery. So I marked the spot where I stood and went round the dome to measure its circumference, which I found to be fifty good paces.

And as I stood there, casting about for a way to get inside — the day being near its close and the sun near the horizon — the sun was suddenly hidden from me and the air went dull and dark.

I thought a cloud had come over the sun; but it was the season of summer, so I marvelled at it, and lifting my head, looked steadily at the sky — and saw that the cloud was nothing else than an enormous bird, of gigantic girth and inordinately wide of wing, which, as it flew through the air, veiled the sun and hid it from the island.

At this sight my wonder redoubled, and I remembered a story:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

My wonder redoubled, and I remembered a story I had heard in the old days from pilgrims and travellers: how on a certain island there lives a huge bird called the roc, which feeds its young on elephants. And I was certain that the dome which had caught my eye was nothing else than a roc's egg.

As I looked and marvelled at the wonderful works of the Almighty, the bird alighted on the dome and brooded over it, its wings covering it and its legs stretched out behind it on the ground; and in that posture it fell asleep — glory be to Him who never sleeps!

When I saw this I got up and, unwinding my turban from my head, doubled it and twisted it into a rope, with which I girded my middle and tied my waist fast to the legs of the roc, saying to myself, "Perhaps this bird will carry me to a land of cities and inhabitants, and that will be better than staying on this desert island."

I passed the night watching and afraid to sleep, in case the bird flew away with me unawares; and as soon as the dawn broke and the morning shone, the roc rose off its egg and, spreading its wings with a great cry, flew up into the air, dragging me with it. Nor did it stop soaring and towering until I thought it had reached the limit of the firmament; after which it came down towards the earth little by little, until it landed on the top of a high hill.

As soon as I found myself on hard ground I made haste to untie myself, quaking with fear of the bird — though it took no notice of me and did not even feel me; and loosing my turban from its feet, I made off at my best speed.

Presently I saw it catch up something from the ground in its huge claws and rise with it high into the air; and looking narrowly at it, I saw it was a serpent, big of bulk and gigantic of girth, with which it flew clean out of sight.

I marvelled at this; and going forward, found myself on a peak overlooking a valley, exceedingly great and wide and deep, bounded by vast mountains that towered up into the air: nobody could make out their summits, for the excess of their height, nor was anybody able to climb up to them.

When I saw this I blamed myself for what I had done, and said, "Would to Heaven I had stayed on the island! It was better than this wild desert; for there I had at least fruit to eat and water to drink, and here there are neither trees nor fruit nor streams. But there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Truly, as often as I get clear of one peril I fall into a worse danger and a more grievous."

However, I took courage; and walking along the valley, found that its soil was diamond — the stone they use for boring minerals and precious stones and porcelain and onyx, since it is a dense stone and a hard one, on which neither iron nor steel has any effect, and we cannot cut anything from it or break it except by means of lead.

What is more, the valley swarmed with snakes and vipers, each as big as a palm tree, that would have made one gulp of an elephant; and they came out by night and hid during the day, in case the rocs and the eagles pounced on them and tore them to pieces, as was their habit — why, I do not know.

And I repented of what I had done, and said, "By Allah, I have hurried to bring destruction on myself."

The day began to wane as I went along, and I looked about for a place to pass the night, being afraid of the serpents; and I took no thought of food or drink in my concern for my life.

Presently I caught sight of a cave nearby with a narrow doorway; so I went in, and seeing a great stone close to the mouth, rolled it up and stopped the entrance, saying to myself, "I am safe here for the night; and as soon as it is day I will go out and see what destiny will do."

Then I looked inside the cave and saw at the far end a great serpent brooding on her eggs — at which my flesh quaked and my hair stood on end; but I raised my eyes to Heaven and, committing my case to fate and lot, stayed there all that night without sleeping until daybreak, when I rolled the stone back from the mouth of the cave and went out, staggering like a drunken man and giddy with watching and fear and hunger.

As I walked along the valley in this sore state, there fell down in front of me a slaughtered beast — but I could see nobody; at which I marvelled greatly, and presently remembered a story I had heard in the old days from traders and pilgrims and travellers.

How the mountains where the diamonds are, are full of perils and terrors, and nobody can travel through them; but the merchants who deal in diamonds have a device by which they get them. That is to say, they take a sheep and slaughter it and skin it and cut it in pieces, and throw the pieces down from the mountain tops into the floor of the valley, where the meat, being fresh and sticky with blood, has some of the gems cling to it.

There they leave it until midday, when the eagles and the vultures swoop down on it and carry it in their claws to the mountain tops; at which the merchants come and shout at them and scare them off the meat. Then they come and take the diamonds they find sticking to it and go their way with them, and leave the meat to the birds and the beasts; and nobody can come at the diamonds except by this device:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on with his account of what happened to him in the Valley of Diamonds, and told them that the merchants cannot come at the diamonds except by the device already described.

So when I saw the slaughtered beast fall (he went on) and remembered the story, I went up to it and filled my pockets and my belt-shawl and my turban and the folds of my clothes with the choicest diamonds; and while I was busy at it, down fell another great piece of meat in front of me.

Then, with my turban unrolled, and lying on my back, I set the piece of meat on my chest, so that I was hidden by it and it was held up off the ground.

I had hardly gripped it when an eagle swooped down on the flesh and, seizing it in his talons, flew up with it high into the air, and me clinging to it; nor did he stop flying until he landed on the top of one of the mountains, where he dropped the carcass and fell to tearing at it.

But there arose behind him a great noise of shouting and clattering of wood, at which the bird took fright and flew away.

Then I loosed the meat off myself, my clothes daubed with blood from it, and stood up beside it; at which up came the merchant who had shouted at the eagle, and seeing me standing there, did not speak to me, but was frightened of me and shook with fear.

However, he went up to the carcass and, turning it over, found no diamonds sticking to it; at which he gave a great cry and exclaimed, "Alas, my disappointment! There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, with whom we take refuge from Satan the stoned!"

And he bemoaned himself and beat one hand on the other, saying, "Alas, the pity of it! How has this come about?"

Then I went up to him, and he said to me, "Who are you, and what has brought you here?"

And I said, "Do not be afraid; I am a man, and a good man, and a merchant. My story is a wonderful one and my adventures marvellous, and the manner of my coming here is prodigious. So be of good cheer; you shall get from me what will make you glad, for I have a great plenty of diamonds with me and I will give you enough of them to satisfy you — and each one is better than anything you could get otherwise. So fear nothing."

The man was delighted at this and thanked me and blessed me; then we talked together until the other merchants, hearing me in conversation with their fellow, came up and greeted me, for each of them had thrown down his own piece of meat.

And as I went off with them I told them my whole story, how I had suffered hardships at sea and the manner of my reaching the valley. But I gave the owner of the meat a number of the stones I had by me; so they all wished me joy of my escape, saying, "By Allah, a new life has been decreed for you; for nobody ever reached that valley and came away alive before you. But praise be to Allah for your safety!"

We passed the night together in a safe and pleasant place, and I was beyond measure glad at my deliverance from the Valley of Serpents and my arrival in an inhabited land.

Next day we set out and journeyed over the mighty range of mountains, seeing many serpents in the valley, until we came to a fine great island where there was a grove of huge camphor trees, under each one of which a hundred men might take shelter.

When the people want to get camphor, they bore into the upper part of the trunk with a long iron; at which the liquid camphor, which is the sap of the tree, flows out and they catch it in vessels, where it hardens like gum. But after this the tree dies and becomes firewood.

What is more, on this island there is a kind of wild beast called the rhinoceros, which grazes as our steers and buffaloes do; but it is a huge brute, bigger in the body than a camel, and like the camel it feeds on the leaves and twigs of trees.

It is a remarkable animal with a great thick horn, ten cubits long, in the middle of its head, in which, when it is split in two, there is the likeness of a man.

Voyagers and pilgrims and travellers declare that this beast, called the karkadan, will carry off a great elephant on its horn and graze about the island and the seacoast with it and take no notice of it, until the elephant dies and its fat, melting in the sun, runs down into the rhinoceros's eyes and blinds him, so that he lies down on the shore. Then comes the roc and carries off both the rhinoceros and what is on its horn, to feed its young with.

Besides this I saw on this island many kinds of oxen and buffaloes whose like is not found in our country.

Here I sold some of the diamonds I had by me for gold dinars and silver dirhams, and bartered others for the produce of the country; and loading them on beasts of burden, travelled on with the merchants from valley to valley and town to town, buying and selling and seeing foreign countries and the works and the creatures of Allah, until we came to the city of Basra, where we stayed a few days, after which I went on with my journey to Baghdad:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when Sindbad the Seaman came back from his travels to Baghdad, the House of Peace, he arrived home with a great store of diamonds and money and goods.

(He went on:) I met up with my friends and my relations, and gave alms and largesse and bestowed curious gifts and made presents to all my friends and companions.

Then I took to eating well and drinking well and wearing fine clothes and making merry with my fellows, and forgot all my sufferings in the pleasures of coming back to the comfort and delight of life, with a light heart and a broadened chest.

And everybody who heard of my return came and questioned me about my adventures and about foreign countries; and I told them everything that had happened to me and all I had suffered, at which they marvelled and wished me joy of my safe return.

This, then, is the end of the story of my second voyage; and tomorrow, Allah willing, I shall tell you what happened to me on my third voyage.

The company marvelled at his story and had supper with him; after which he ordered a hundred gold dinars to be given to the porter, who took the sum with many thanks and blessings — which he did not stint even when he got home — and went his way, wondering at what he had heard.

Next morning, as soon as the day came in its brightness and shone, he got up and prayed the dawn prayer and went to the house of Sindbad the Seaman, as he had told him to; and he went in and gave him good morning.

The merchant welcomed him and made him sit with him until the rest of the company arrived; and when they had eaten and drunk well and were merry with joy and jollity, their host began by saying, "Listen, my brothers, to what I am about to tell you; for it is even more wonderful than what you have heard already. But Allah alone knows what things His Omniscience has concealed from man. And listen to
