The Third Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman

As I told you yesterday, I came back from my second voyage overjoyed at my safety and with a great increase of wealth, Allah having repaid me everything I had wasted and lost; and I stayed a while in the city of Baghdad enjoying the utmost ease and prosperity and comfort and happiness — until the flesh took hold of me once more with a longing for travel and diversion and adventure, and I yearned after trade and profit and gain; for the human heart is naturally inclined to what is bad for it.

So, making up my mind, I laid in a great plenty of goods suitable for a sea voyage, and going to Basra, went down to the shore and found a fine ship there ready to sail, with a full crew and a large company of merchants, men of worth and substance, of faith and piety and consideration.

I embarked with them, and we set sail on the blessing of Almighty Allah and on His aid and His favour to bring our voyage to a safe and prosperous end; and already we were congratulating one another on our good fortune and our fine voyage.

We travelled on from sea to sea and island to island and city to city, in all delight and contentment, buying and selling wherever we touched and taking our comfort and our pleasure — until one day, as we sailed across the dashing sea, swollen with clashing billows, the master, who was standing on the gunwale examining the ocean in every direction, cried out with a great cry, and beat his face and plucked out his beard and tore his clothes, and ordered the sails furled and the anchors cast.

So we said to him, "Captain, what is the matter?"

"Know, my brothers — Allah preserve you — that the wind has got the better of us and driven us off our course into the middle of the ocean; and destiny, for our ill luck, has brought us to the Mountain of the Zughb, a hairy people like apes, among whom no man ever fell and came out alive. And my heart tells me that we are all dead men."

The master had hardly finished speaking when the apes were on us. They surrounded the ship on all sides, swarming like locusts and crowding the shore.

They were the most frightful of wild creatures, covered with black hair like felt, foul of face and small of stature, being only four spans high, yellow-eyed and black-faced; nobody knows their language or what they are, and they shun the company of men.

We were afraid to kill them or strike them or drive them off, because of their inconceivable numbers, in case, if we hurt one, the rest fell on us and killed us — for numbers prevail over courage. So we let them do as they liked, although we were afraid they would plunder our goods and our gear.

They swarmed up the cables and gnawed them through, and did the same with all the ropes of the ship, so that she fell off from the wind and stranded on their mountainous coast.

Then they laid hands on all the merchants and the crew, and landing us on the island, made off with the ship and its cargo and went their way, we knew not where.

So we were left on the island, eating its fruit and its pot-herbs and drinking from its streams — until one day we caught sight of something in the middle of it that looked like an inhabited house.

So we made for it as fast as our feet would carry us; and it was a castle, strong and tall, surrounded by a high wall and having a two-leaved gate of ebony wood, both leaves of which stood open.

We went in and found inside a wide bare space like a great square, round which stood a number of tall doors thrown open; and at the far end a long stone bench and braziers, with cooking gear hanging on them and a great plenty of bones about them. But we saw nobody, and marvelled at it beyond all wondering.

Then we sat down in the courtyard a little while, and presently fell asleep, and slept from the forenoon until sundown — when the earth trembled under our feet and the air rumbled with a terrible sound.

And there came down on us, from the top of the castle, a huge creature in the likeness of a man, black in colour, tall and big of bulk as though he were a great date palm, with eyes like coals of fire and eye-teeth like a boar's tusks and a vast wide mouth like the mouth of a well.

What is more, he had long loose lips like a camel's, hanging down on his chest, and ears like two boats falling over his shoulder blades; and the nails of his hands were like a lion's claws.

When we saw this frightful giant we were ready to faint, and every moment our fear and terror increased; and we became like dead men for the excess of our horror and fright:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

When we saw this frightful giant we were struck with the utmost terror and horror. And after trampling about on the ground he sat a while on the bench; then he got up and came over to us and seized me by the arm, choosing me out from among my comrades the merchants.

He took me up in his hand and, turning me over, felt me as a butcher feels a sheep he is about to slaughter — and I was no more than a little mouthful in his hands. But finding me lean and fleshless from the stress of toil and trouble and weariness, he let me go and took up another, whom he turned over and felt in the same way and let go. Nor did he stop feeling and turning over the rest of us, one after another, until he came to the master of the ship.

Now he was a sturdy, stout, broad-shouldered fellow, fat and in full vigour; so he pleased the giant, who seized him as a butcher seizes a beast and, throwing him down, set his foot on his neck and broke it; after which he fetched a long spit and, thrusting it up through him, brought it out at the crown of his head.

Then, lighting a fierce fire, he set the spit over it with the captain on it, and turned it over the coals until the flesh was roasted; when he took the spit off the fire and set it down in front of him like a kebab skewer.

Then he tore the body limb from limb as a man joints a chicken, and rending the flesh with his nails, fell to eating it and gnawing the bones, until there was nothing left but some of them, which he threw down beside the wall.

This done, he sat a while; then he lay down on the stone bench and fell asleep, snorting and snoring like the gurgling of a lamb or a cow with its throat cut; nor did he wake until morning, when he got up and went out and went his way.

As soon as we were certain he was gone we began talking to one another, weeping and bemoaning ourselves for the danger we were in, and saying, "Would to Heaven we had been drowned in the sea, or that the apes had eaten us! That would be better than being roasted over the coals. By Allah, this is a vile, foul death! But whatever the Lord wills must come to pass, and there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Him, the Glorious, the Great. We shall certainly perish miserably and nobody will ever know of us, for there is no escape for us from this place."

Then we got up and roamed about the island, hoping we might find somewhere to hide or some means of flight; for indeed death was a light matter to us, provided we were not roasted over the fire and eaten. However, we could find no hiding place, and the evening overtook us; so out of the excess of our terror we went back to the castle and sat down a while.

Presently the earth trembled under our feet, and the black ogre came up to us and, turning us over, felt one after another until he found a man to his liking, whom he took and served as he had served the captain, killing and roasting and eating him; after which he lay down on the bench and slept all night, snorting and snoring like a beast with its throat cut, until daybreak, when he got up and went out as before.

Then we drew together and talked, and said to one another, "By Allah, we had better throw ourselves into the sea and be drowned than die roasted; for this is an abominable death."

Said one of us, "Hear what I say! Let us cast about to kill him and be at peace from the grief of him, and rid the Muslims of his barbarity and his tyranny."

Then said I, "Hear me, my brothers. If there is nothing for it but to kill him, let us carry some of this firewood and these planks down to the seashore and make ourselves a boat, in which — if we manage to kill him — we can either embark and let the water carry us wherever Allah wills, or else stay here until some ship passes and take passage in her.

"And if we fail to kill him, we will get into the boat and put out to sea; and if we are drowned, we shall at least have escaped being roasted over a kitchen fire with our throats cut. And if we escape, we escape; and if we are drowned, we die martyrs."

"By Allah," they all said, "this advice is sound." And we agreed on it and set about carrying it out.

So we hauled the pieces of wood that lay about the bench down to the beach and, making a boat, moored it to the shore; after which we stowed some provisions in it and went back to the castle.

As soon as evening fell the earth trembled under our feet and in came the ogre on us, snarling like a dog about to bite. He came up to us and, feeling us and turning us over one by one, took one of us and did with him as he had done before and ate him; after which he lay down on the bench and snored and snorted like thunder.

As soon as we were sure he was asleep we got up and, taking two of the iron spits that stood there, heated them in the fiercest part of the fire until they were red hot like burning coals; when we gripped them fast and, going up to the giant as he lay snoring on the bench, thrust them into his eyes and pressed on them, all of us together with our united strength, so that his eyeballs burst and he was stone blind.

At which he cried out with a great cry that made our hearts tremble; and springing up off the bench, fell to groping after us, blindfolded.

We fled from him right and left and he could not see us, for his sight was altogether gone; but we were in terrible fear of him and made certain we were dead men, despairing of any escape.

Then he found the door, feeling for it with his hands, and went out roaring aloud; and the earth shook under us with the noise of his roaring, and we quaked with fear.

As he left the castle we followed him and made for the place where we had moored our boat, saying to one another, "If this accursed creature stays away until sundown and does not come back to the castle, we shall know he is dead; and if he comes back, we will get into the boat and paddle until we escape, committing our affair to Allah."

But even as we spoke, up came the ogre with two others, like ghouls, fouler and more frightful than he was, with eyes like red-hot coals. Seeing which, we hurried into the boat and, casting off the moorings, paddled away and pushed out to sea.

As soon as the ogres caught sight of us they cried out at us and, running down to the seashore, fell to pelting us with rocks, some of which fell among us and others into the sea. We paddled with all our might until we were beyond their reach; but most of us were killed by the rock-throwing, and the winds and the waves played with us and carried us into the middle of the dashing sea, swollen with clashing billows.

We had no idea where we were going, and my companions died one after another, until there were only three of us left, myself and two others:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

Most of us were killed by the rock-throwing, and only three of us were left aboard the boat; for as often as one died we threw him into the sea.

We were badly exhausted with the stress of hunger, but we took courage and heartened one another and worked for dear life and paddled with main strength, until the winds cast us up on an island, and we were like dead men for exhaustion and fear and famine.

We landed on the island and walked about it a while, and found it abounded in trees and streams and birds; and we ate its fruit and rejoiced at our escape from the black ogre and our deliverance from the perils of the sea. And so we went on until nightfall, when we lay down and fell asleep from sheer exhaustion.

But we had hardly closed our eyes before we were roused by a hissing sound like the sighing of the wind; and waking, saw a serpent like a dragon — a rarely seen sight — of monstrous make and with a belly of enormous bulk, lying in a circle around us.

Presently it reared its head and, seizing one of my companions, swallowed him down to his shoulders; then it gulped down the rest of him, and we heard his ribs crack in its belly. Presently it went its way; and we were left in bitter amazement and grief for our comrade and in mortal fear for ourselves, saying:

"By Allah, this is a marvellous thing! Every kind of death that threatens us is more terrible than the last. We were rejoicing at our escape from the black ogre and our deliverance from the perils of the sea; and now we have fallen into something worse. There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! By the Almighty, we have escaped from the ogre and from drowning — but how are we to escape from this abominable, viperish monster?"

Then we walked about the island, eating its fruit and drinking from its streams until dusk, when we climbed up into a high tree and went to sleep there, myself on the topmost bough.

As soon as it was dark night up came the serpent, looking right and left; and making for the tree we were in, climbed up to my comrade and swallowed him down to his shoulders. Then it coiled about the trunk with him — while I, who could not take my eyes off the sight, heard his bones crack in its belly — and it swallowed him whole, after which it slid down out of the tree.

When the day broke and the light showed me that the serpent was gone, I came down like a dead man for the stress of my fear and anguish, and thought of throwing myself into the sea and being at rest from the woes of the world; but I could not bring myself to it, for truly life is dear.

So I took five pieces of wood, broad and long, and bound one crosswise to the soles of my feet, and others in the same way on my right and left sides and over my chest; and the broadest and largest of them I bound across my head, and made them all fast with ropes.

Then I lay down on the ground on my back, so that I was completely fenced in by the pieces of wood, which enclosed me like a bier.

So as soon as it was dark, up came the serpent as usual and made towards me, but could not get at me to swallow me because of the wood that fenced me in. So it wriggled round me on every side while I looked on like a dead man for terror; and every now and then it would glide away and come back — but as often as it tried to get at me it was hindered by the pieces of wood I had tied round myself on every side.

It did not stop besetting me like this from sundown until dawn; but when the light of day shone on the beast, it made off in the utmost fury and the extremity of disappointment.

Then I put out my hand and untied myself, very nearly down among the dead men for fear and suffering; and went down to the shore of the island — where a ship far off in the middle of the waves suddenly struck my sight.

So I tore off a great branch of a tree and made signs with it to the crew, shouting all the while; which when the ship's company saw, they said to one another, "We must stand in and see what this is; perhaps it is a man."

So they made for the island and presently heard my cries, at which they took me aboard and questioned me about my case. I told them all my adventures from first to last, at which they marvelled mightily, and covered my nakedness with some of their clothes.

What is more, they set some food in front of me, and I ate my fill and drank cold sweet water and was greatly refreshed; and Almighty Allah brought me back to life after I had been virtually dead. So I praised the Most High and thanked Him for His favours and His exceeding mercies; and my heart revived in me after utter despair, until it seemed to me that everything I had suffered was only a dream I had dreamed.

We sailed on with a fair wind the Almighty sent us until we came to an island called Al-Salahitah, which abounds in sandalwood, where the captain cast anchor:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

And when we had cast anchor, the merchants and the sailors landed with their goods to sell and to buy. Then the captain turned to me and said:

"Listen — you are a stranger and a pauper, and you tell us you have gone through frightful hardships; and so I have a mind to do you some good that may help you towards your own country, so that you will always bless me and pray for me."

"So be it," I answered. "You shall have my prayers."

Said he, "Know then that there was a man with us, a traveller, whom we lost, and we do not know whether he is alive or dead, for we have had no news of him. So I mean to commit his bales of goods to your charge, so that you may sell them on this island. We will give you a part of the proceeds as a payment for your pains and your service, and the rest we will keep until we get back to Baghdad, where we will ask after his family and hand it over to them, together with any goods left unsold. Tell me, then — will you take on the charge and land them and sell them as the other merchants do?"

I replied, "Hearing and obedience to you, my lord; and great is your kindness to me" — and thanked him; at which he told the sailors and the porters to carry the bales in question ashore and hand them over to my charge.

The ship's clerk asked him, "Master, what bales are these, and what merchant's name shall I write on them?"

And he answered, "Write on them the name of Sindbad the Seaman, the man who was with us in the ship and whom we lost at the roc's island, and of whom we have had no news; for we mean this stranger to sell them, and we will give him a part of the price for his pains and keep the rest until we get back to Baghdad, where, if we find the owner, we will hand it over to him, and if not, to his family."

And the clerk said, "Your words are apt and your advice is right."

Now when I heard the captain give orders for the bales to be inscribed with my name, I said to myself, "By Allah, I am Sindbad the Seaman!"

So I armed myself with courage and patience and waited until all the merchants had landed and were gathered together, talking and haggling about buying and selling; and then I went up to the captain and asked him, "My lord, do you know what manner of man this Sindbad was, whose goods you have committed to me for sale?"

And he answered, "I know nothing about him except that he was a man from the city of Baghdad, called Sindbad the Seaman, who was drowned with a number of others when we lay at anchor at such and such an island; and I have heard nothing of him since."

At this I cried out with a great cry and said:

"Captain — whom Allah keep! — know that I am that same Sindbad the Seaman, and that I was not drowned. When you cast anchor at the island I landed with the rest of the merchants and the crew; and I sat down in a pleasant place by myself and ate some of the food I had with me and enjoyed myself, until I grew drowsy and was drowned in sleep; and when I woke I found no ship and nobody near me.

"These goods are my goods and these bales are my bales; and all the merchants who fetch jewels from the Valley of Diamonds saw me there and will bear me witness that I am the very same Sindbad the Seaman. For I told them everything that had happened to me, and told them how you forgot me and left me sleeping on the island, and what happened to me happened."

When the passengers and the crew heard my words they gathered round me, and some of them believed me and others did not. But presently one of the merchants, hearing me mention the Valley of Diamonds, came up and said to them:

"Hear what I say, good people! When I told you the most wonderful thing in all my travels, and told you that at the time we threw down our slaughtered animals into the Valley of Serpents — I throwing one with the rest, as was my custom — there came up a man hanging onto mine, you did not believe me and gave me the lie."

"Yes," said they, "you did tell us some such tale, but we had no reason to believe you."

He went on, "Now this is that very man; and the proof of it is that he gave me diamonds of great value and high price, whose like is not to be found, repaying me more than would ever have come up sticking to my quarter of meat. And I kept company with him as far as the city of Basra, where he took leave of us and went on to his native place, while we went back to our own country.

"This is he; and he told us his name, Sindbad the Seaman, and how the ship left him on the desert island. And you should know that Allah has sent him here so that the truth of my story might be made plain to you. What is more, these are his goods; for when he first fell in with us he told us about them, and the truth of what he said is obvious."

Hearing the merchant's speech, the captain came up to me and considered me closely a while, after which he said, "What was the mark on your bales?"

"Such and such," I answered; and I reminded him of something that had passed between him and me when I shipped with him from Basra.

At which he was convinced that I really was Sindbad the Seaman, and took me round the neck and wished me joy of my safety, saying, "By Allah, my lord, your case is truly wondrous and your tale marvellous; but praised be Allah, who has brought you and me together again, and who has restored your goods and your gear to you!":—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

"Praise be to Allah," said the captain, "who has restored your goods and your gear to you."

Then I disposed of my merchandise as skilfully as I could, and made a large profit on it; at which I rejoiced exceedingly and congratulated myself on my safety and on the recovery of my goods.

We did not stop buying and selling at the various islands until we came to the land of India, where we bought cloves and ginger and all kinds of spices; and from there we went on to the land of Sind, where we also bought and sold.

In those Indian seas I saw wonders without number or count — among others a fish like a cow, which brings forth its young and suckles them as human beings do, and out of whose skin shields are made. There were fish like donkeys and camels too, and tortoises twenty cubits across. And I saw a bird as well that comes out of a seashell and lays its eggs and hatches its chicks on the surface of the water, and never comes up out of the sea onto the land.

Then we set sail again with a fair wind and the blessing of Almighty Allah; and after a prosperous voyage arrived safe and sound at Basra.

Here I stayed a few days and presently went back to Baghdad, where I went straight to my own quarter and my own house, and greeted my family and my household and my friends.

I had gained on this voyage more than could be counted or reckoned; so I gave alms and largesse and clothed the widow and the orphan by way of thanksgiving for my happy return, and fell to feasting and making merry with my companions and my intimates; and forgot, in eating well and drinking well and dressing well, everything that had happened to me and all the perils and hardships I had suffered.

These, then, are the most remarkable things I saw on my third voyage; and tomorrow, if it be the will of Allah, you shall come to me and I will relate the adventures of my fourth voyage, which is still more wonderful than those you have heard already.

(Says the teller of the tale:) Then Sindbad the Seaman ordered a hundred golden dinars to be given to Sindbad the Landsman as usual, and called for food. So they spread the tables and the company ate the evening meal and went their ways, marvelling at the tale they had heard.

The porter, after taking his gold, passed the night in his own house, also wondering at what his namesake the Seaman had told him; and as soon as day broke and the morning showed with its brightness and shone, he got up and prayed the dawn prayer and went to Sindbad the Seaman, who returned his greeting and received him with an open heart and a cheerful face, and made him sit with him until the rest of the company arrived; when he had food set on, and they ate and drank and made merry.

Then Sindbad the Seaman spoke to them and related to them the narrative of
