The Fourth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
(Part 2 of 2)

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

When they had left me in the cavern with my dead wife and closed the mouth of the pit and gone their ways, I looked about me and found myself in a vast cave full of dead bodies, which gave off a foul and loathsome smell; and the air was heavy with the groans of the dying.

At this I fell to blaming myself for what I had done, saying:

"By Allah, I deserve everything that has happened to me and everything that is going to happen! What curse was on me, to take a wife in this city? There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! As often as I say I have escaped from one calamity, I fall into a worse. By Allah, this is an abominable death to die! Would to Heaven I had died a decent death and been washed and shrouded like a man and a Muslim. I wish I had been drowned at sea or had perished in the mountains — it would be better than dying this miserable death."

And so I went on blaming my own folly and my greed for gain, in that black hole where I could not tell night from day; and I did not stop cursing the Foul Fiend and blessing the Almighty Friend.

Then I threw myself down on the bones of the dead and lay there imploring Allah's help; and in the violence of my despair I called on death, which did not come to me — until the fire of hunger burned my stomach and thirst set my throat aflame, when I sat up and, feeling for the bread, ate a morsel of it and swallowed a mouthful of water on top of it.

After this, the worst night I ever knew, I got up and explored the cavern, and found that it ran a long way, with hollows in its sides; and its floor was strewn with dead bodies and rotten bones that had lain there since ancient times. So I made myself a place in one of the hollows of the cave, far from the corpses lately thrown down, and slept there.

I stayed like that a long while, until my provisions were close to running out; and even so I ate only once every day or every second day, and did not drink more than an occasional mouthful, for fear my food should fail me before my death; and I said to myself, "Eat little and drink little; perhaps the Lord will grant you deliverance."

One day, as I sat there pondering my case and wondering what I should do when my bread and water were finished, the stone that covered the opening was suddenly rolled away and the light streamed down on me.

Said I, "I wonder what the matter is; perhaps they have brought another corpse."

Then I saw people standing about the mouth of the pit, who presently let down a dead man and a living woman, weeping and bemoaning herself, and with her a fuller supply of bread and water than usual. I saw her, and she was a beautiful woman; but she did not see me. And they closed up the opening and went away.

Then I took the leg-bone of a dead man and, going up to the woman, struck her on the crown of the head; and she gave one cry and fell down in a faint. I struck her a second and a third time, until she was dead; when I laid hands on her bread and water, and found on her a great quantity of ornaments and rich clothes, necklaces, jewels and gold trinkets — for it was their custom to bury women in all their finery.

I carried the provisions to my sleeping place in the side of the cavern and ate and drank of them sparingly, no more than was enough to keep the life in me, in case the food should run out quickly and I should die of hunger and thirst. And yet I never entirely lost hope in Almighty Allah.

I stayed there a great while, killing everybody they let down alive into the cavern and taking their provisions of food and drink — until one day, as I slept, I was woken by something scratching and burrowing among the bodies in a corner of the cave; and I said, "What can this be?" — being afraid of wolves or hyenas.

So I sprang up and, seizing the leg-bone I have mentioned, made for the noise. As soon as the thing was aware of me it fled from me into the depths of the cavern; and it was a wild animal.

However, I followed it to the far end, until I saw a long way off a point of light no bigger than a star, now appearing and now disappearing. So I made for it; and as I came nearer it grew larger and brighter, until I was certain that it was a crevice in the rock leading out into the open country.

And I said to myself, "There must be some reason for this opening: either it is the mouth of a second pit, like the one they let me down by, or else it is a natural fissure in the rock."

So I thought a while; and coming closer to the light, found that it came from a break in the far side of the mountain, which the wild animals had enlarged by burrowing, so that they could get in and devour the dead and come and go freely.

When I saw this my spirits revived and hope came back to me and I made certain of life, after having died a death. So I went on as though in a dream; and managing to scramble through the gap, found myself on the slope of a high mountain overlooking the salt sea and cutting off all access to it from the island, so that nobody could reach that part of the beach from the city.

I praised my Lord and thanked Him, rejoicing greatly and heartening myself with the prospect of deliverance; then I went back through the crack into the cavern and brought out all the food and water I had saved up, and put on some of the dead people's clothes over my own.

After which I gathered together all the collars and necklaces of pearls and jewels, and the trinkets of gold and silver set with precious stones, and the other ornaments and valuables I could find on the corpses; and making them into bundles with the grave clothes and the garments of the dead, carried them out to the back of the mountain facing the seashore, where I settled myself, meaning to wait there until it should please Almighty Allah to send me relief by some passing ship.

I visited the cavern every day; and as often as I found people buried alive there I killed them all without distinction, men and women alike, and took their food and their valuables and carried them to my place on the seashore.

So I stayed a long while:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

And after carrying all my food and my valuables from the cavern to the coast, I stayed a long while by the sea, pondering my case — until one day I caught sight of a ship passing in the middle of the clashing sea, swollen with dashing billows.

So I took a piece of a white shroud I had with me and, tying it to a staff, ran along the seashore making signals with it and calling out to the people in the ship, until they saw me and, hearing my shouts, sent a boat to fetch me off.

When it drew near the crew called out to me, saying, "Who are you, and how did you come to be on this mountain, where we have never seen anybody in all our born days?"

I answered, "I am a gentleman and a merchant who was shipwrecked and saved himself on one of the ship's planks with some of his goods; and by the blessing of the Almighty and the decrees of Destiny, and by my own strength and skill, after a great deal of toil and trouble I have landed with my gear in this place, where I have been waiting for some passing ship to take me off."

So they took me into their boat, together with the bundles I had made of the jewels and the valuables from the cavern, tied up in clothes and shrouds, and rowed back with me to the ship; where the captain said to me:

"How did you come, man, to that place on that mountain, behind which lies a great city? All my life I have sailed these seas and passed to and fro close by these heights, and yet I never saw any living thing here except wild animals and birds."

I repeated to him the story I had told the sailors, but told him nothing of what had happened to me in the city and the cavern, in case there should be any of the islanders aboard the ship.

Then I took out some of the best pearls I had with me and offered them to the captain, saying, "My lord, you have been the means of saving me off that mountain. I have no ready money; but take this from me in return for your kindness and your good offices."

But he refused to accept it from me, saying, "When we find a shipwrecked man on the seashore or on an island, we take him up and give him food and drink; and if he is naked we clothe him; and we take nothing from him. On the contrary, when we reach a safe port we set him ashore with a present of our own money and treat him kindly and charitably, for the love of Allah the Most High."

So I prayed that his life might be long in the land, and rejoiced at my escape, trusting to be delivered from my troubles and to forget my past misfortunes; for every time I remembered being let down into that cave with my dead wife I shuddered with horror.

Then we went on with our voyage and sailed from island to island and sea to sea, until we came to the Island of the Bell, which contains a city two days' journey across; from where, after a six-day run, we reached the Island of Kala, close to the land of India.

This place is governed by a powerful and mighty King, and it produces excellent camphor and an abundance of Indian rattan; there is a lead mine here too.

At last, by the decree of Allah, we arrived safely at the town of Basra, where I stayed a few days and then went on to the city of Baghdad; and finding my own quarter, went into my house with lively pleasure.

There I met up with my family and my friends, who rejoiced at my happy return and wished me joy of my safety. I laid up in my storehouses all the goods I had brought with me, and gave alms and largesse to holy beggars and the poor, and clothed the widow and the orphan.

Then I gave myself up to pleasure and enjoyment, going back to my old merry way of living.

Such, then, are the most marvellous adventures of my fourth voyage; but tomorrow, if you will kindly come to me, I will tell you what happened to me on my fifth voyage, which was rarer still and more marvellous than the ones before it. And you, my brother Sindbad the Landsman, shall have supper with me as usual.

(Says the teller of the tale:) When Sindbad the Seaman had finished his story he called for supper; so they spread the table and the guests ate the evening meal; after which he gave the porter a hundred dinars as usual, and he and the rest of the company went their ways, glad at heart and marvelling at the tales they had heard — for every story was more extraordinary than the one before it.

Sindbad the Porter passed the night in his own house in all joy and cheer and wonderment; and as soon as morning came with its brightness and shone, he prayed the dawn prayer and went to the house of Sindbad the Seaman, who welcomed him and told him to sit with him until the rest of the company arrived; when they ate and drank and made merry, and the talk went round among them.

Presently their host began the narrative of the fifth voyage:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the host began, in these words, the narrative of
