The Fifth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman

Know, my brothers, that when I had been a while ashore after my fourth voyage — and when, in my comfort and my pleasures and my merrymaking, and in my rejoicing over my large gains and profits, I had forgotten everything I had endured of perils and sufferings — the flesh took hold of me again with the longing to travel and see foreign countries and islands.

Accordingly I bought costly merchandise suited to my purpose, and making it up into bales, went to Basra; where I walked about the river quay until I found a fine tall ship, newly built, with unused gear and fitted out ready for sea.

She pleased me; so I bought her, and putting my goods aboard, hired a master and a crew and set some of my slaves and servants over them as inspectors. A number of merchants also brought their goods aboard and paid me freight and passage money; and then, after reciting the opening chapter of the Koran, we set sail over Allah's pool in all joy and cheer, promising ourselves a prosperous voyage and a good profit.

We sailed from city to city and from island to island and from sea to sea, viewing the cities and countries we passed, and selling and buying in a good many of them — until one day we came to a great uninhabited island, deserted and desolate, on which was a white dome of the biggest bulk, half buried in the sand.

The merchants landed to examine this dome, leaving me in the ship; and when they came near it — it was a huge roc's egg. They fell to beating it with stones, not knowing what it was, and presently broke it open; at which a great deal of water ran out of it and the young roc appeared inside. So they pulled it out of the shell and cut its throat and took a great store of meat off it.

Now I was in the ship and did not know what they were doing; but presently one of the passengers came up to me and said, "My lord, come and look at the egg we took for a dome."

So I looked, and seeing the merchants beating it with stones, called out to them, "Stop! Stop! Do not meddle with that egg, or the roc will come out and break our ship and destroy us."

But they paid no attention to me and did not leave off striking the egg — when the day grew dark and dun and the sun was hidden from us, as though some great cloud had passed over the sky.

So we raised our eyes, and saw that what we had taken for a cloud was the roc, poised between us and the sun; and it was his wings that darkened the day.

When he came and saw his egg broken he cried a loud cry, at which his mate came flying up; and the two of them began circling round the ship, crying out at us with voices louder than thunder.

I called to the captain and the crew, "Put out to sea and look for safety in flight, before we are all destroyed!"

So the merchants came aboard and we cast off and made haste away from the island to reach the open sea. When the rocs saw this they flew off, and we crowded all sail on the ship, thinking to get clear of their country; but presently the two of them reappeared and flew after us and stood over us, each carrying in its claws a huge boulder it had brought from the mountains.

As soon as the male roc came up with us he let fall the rock he held in his talons; but the master put the ship about, so that the rock missed her by a very little and plunged into the waves with such violence that the ship pitched high and then sank into the trough of the sea, and the bottom of the ocean appeared to us.

Then the female roc let fall her rock, which was bigger than her mate's; and as Destiny had decreed, it fell on the poop of the ship and crushed it, the rudder flying into twenty pieces; at which the vessel foundered and everything and everybody aboard was thrown into the sea.

As for me, I struggled for sweet life until Almighty Allah threw in my way one of the ship's planks, which I clung to; and getting astride it, fell to paddling with my feet.

Now the ship had gone down close to an island in the middle of the sea, and the winds and the waves carried me on until, by permission of the Most High, they cast me up on the shore of that island, at my last gasp from toil and distress and half dead with hunger and thirst.

So I landed more like a corpse than a living man, and throwing myself down on the beach, lay there a while until I began to revive and recover my spirits; when I walked about the island and found it like one of the enclosed gardens of Paradise.

Its trees, in abundance dressed, bore ripe yellow fruit for their freight; its streams ran clear and bright; its flowers were fair to smell and to sight, and its birds warbled with delight the praises of Him to whom belong permanence and all might.

So I ate my fill of the fruit and slaked my thirst with the water of the streams until I could take no more; and I gave thanks to the Most High and glorified Him:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

So when I had escaped drowning and reached the island, which gave me fruit to eat and water to drink, I gave thanks to the Most High and glorified Him; after which I sat until nightfall, hearing no voice and seeing no inhabitant.

Then I lay down, very nearly dead with labour and trouble and terror, and slept without a break until morning; when I got up and walked about under the trees, until I came to the channel of a draw-well fed by a spring of running water; and by this well sat an old man of venerable appearance, girt about with a waistcloth made of the fibre of palm fronds.

I said to myself, "Perhaps this old man is one of the people who were wrecked in the ship and has made his way to this island."

So I came up to him and greeted him, and he returned my greeting by signs but did not speak; and I said to him, "Uncle, what makes you sit here?"

He shook his head and moaned and signed to me with his hands, as much as to say, "Take me on your shoulders and carry me across to the other side of the well channel."

And I said in my mind, "I will deal kindly with him and do what he wants; perhaps I shall earn a reward in Heaven for it, since he may be a paralytic."

So I took him on my back and carried him to the place he pointed at, and said, "Get down at your leisure."

But he would not get off my back, and wound his legs about my neck. I looked at them, and seeing that they were like a buffalo's hide for blackness and roughness, I was frightened and would have thrown him off; but he clung to me and gripped my neck with his legs until I was very nearly choked, and the world went black in my sight and I fell senseless to the ground like a dead man.

But he still kept his seat; and raising his legs, drummed with his heels and beat my back and shoulders harder than palm rods, until he forced me to get up for the excess of the pain.

Then he signed to me with his hand to carry him this way and that among the trees that bore the best fruit; and if ever I refused to do what he wanted, or loitered, or took my time, he beat me with his feet more grievously than if I had been beaten with whips.

He did not stop signalling with his hand wherever he had a mind to go; so I carried him about the island like a captive slave, and he fouled my shoulders and my back, and never dismounted night or day; and when he wanted to sleep he wound his legs about my neck and leaned back and slept a while, then got up and beat me — at which I sprang up in a hurry, unable to gainsay him because of the pain he inflicted on me.

And indeed I blamed myself and bitterly regretted having taken pity on him; and I went on in this condition, suffering an exhaustion beyond describing, until I said to myself, "I did him a good turn and he has paid me back with harm. By Allah, never again will I do any man a service as long as I live!"

And again and again I begged the Most High that I might die, for the stress of my weariness and my misery. And so I went on a long while — until one day I came with him to a place where there were plenty of gourds, many of them dry.

So I took a great dry gourd and, cutting the head open, scooped out the inside and cleaned it; after which I gathered grapes from a vine that grew close by and squeezed them into the gourd until it was full of the juice.

Then I stopped up the mouth and set it in the sun, where I left it some days, until it became strong wine; and every day I used to drink some of it, to comfort and sustain me under my labours with that perverse and obstinate fiend. And as often as I drank myself drunk I forgot my troubles and took new heart.

One day he saw me drinking and signed to me with his hand, as much as to say, "What is that?"

Said I, "It is an excellent cordial, which cheers the heart and revives the spirits."

Then, being heated with the wine, I ran and danced with him among the trees, clapping my hands and singing and making merry; and I staggered under him on purpose.

When he saw this he signed to me to give him the gourd so that he could drink; and I was afraid of him and gave it to him. So he took it and, draining it to the dregs, threw it on the ground; at which he grew frolicsome and began to clap his hands and jig to and fro on my shoulders, and he made water over me so copiously that all my clothes were drenched.

But presently the fumes of the wine rose to his head and he became helplessly drunk, and the muscles of his sides and his limbs relaxed and he swayed to and fro on my back.

When I saw that he had lost his senses with drunkenness I put my hand to his legs and, loosing them from my neck, stooped down almost to the ground and threw him off at full length:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

So I threw the devil off my shoulders, hardly able to believe in my deliverance from him and afraid he might shake off his drunkenness and do me a mischief.

Then I took up a great stone from among the trees and, coming up to him, struck him on the head with it with all my might and crushed in his skull as he lay dead drunk. At which his flesh and his fat and his blood being all in a pulp, he died and went to what he deserved, the Fire — no mercy of Allah be on him.

I then went back, with an easy heart, to my old station on the seashore, and stayed on that island many days, eating its fruit and drinking its water and keeping a lookout for passing ships — until one day, as I sat on the beach recalling everything that had happened to me and saying, "I wonder whether Allah will keep me alive and restore me to my home and my family and my friends" — a ship came making for the island through the dashing sea and the clashing waves.

Presently it cast anchor and the passengers landed; so I made for them, and when they saw me they all hurried up to me and, gathering round me, questioned me about my case and how I came to be there.

I told them everything that had happened to me, at which they marvelled beyond all marvelling and said, "The one who rode on your shoulder is called the Shaykh al-Bahr, the Old Man of the Sea; and nobody has ever felt his legs on his neck and come off alive except you; and those who die under him he eats. So praise be to Allah for your safety!"

Then they set some food in front of me, of which I ate my fill; and gave me some clothes, with which I clothed myself afresh and covered my nakedness; after which they took me up into the ship.

And we sailed days and nights, until fate brought us to a place called the City of Apes, built with lofty houses, all of which looked out on the sea, and having a single gate studded and strengthened with iron nails.

Now every night, as soon as it is dusk, the people who live in this city come out through the gates and, putting out to sea in boats and ships, pass the night on the water for fear the apes should come down on them from the mountains.

Hearing this I was badly troubled, remembering what I had suffered before from the ape-kind.

Presently I landed to amuse myself in the city; but meanwhile the ship set sail without me, and I regretted having gone ashore; and calling to mind my companions and what had happened to me with the apes, first and last, I sat down and fell to weeping and lamenting.

Presently one of the townspeople came up to me and said, "My lord, it seems to me you are a stranger to these parts?"

"Yes," I answered, "I am indeed a stranger, and a poor one, who came here in a ship that cast anchor here; and I landed to see the town, but when I would have gone aboard again, I found they had sailed without me."

Said he, "Come and embark with us; for if you spend the night in the city the apes will destroy you."

"Hearing and obedience," I replied; and getting up, embarked at once with him in one of the boats; at which they pushed off from the shore, and anchoring a mile or so from land, passed the night there.

At daybreak they rowed back to the city and landed and went each about his business. They did this every night; for if anybody stayed in the town by night the apes came down on him and killed him. As soon as it was day the apes left the place and ate the fruit in the gardens, then went back to the mountains and slept there until nightfall, when they came down on the city again.

Now this place was in the farthest part of the Land of the Blacks; and one of the strangest things that happened to me during my stay in the city was this.

One of the company I passed the night with in the boat asked me, "My lord, you are plainly a stranger in these parts; have you any trade you can work at?"

And I answered, "By Allah, brother, I have no trade and I know no handicraft; for I was a merchant and a man of money and substance, and had a ship of my own loaded with a great store of goods and merchandise. But it foundered at sea and everybody was drowned except me, who saved myself on a piece of plank that Allah granted me of His favour."

At this he brought me a cotton bag and, giving it to me, said, "Take this bag and fill it with pebbles from the beach, and go out with a company of the townspeople, to whom I will give instructions about you. Do as they do, and perhaps you will earn something that may help you towards the voyage home to your own country."

Then he carried me to the beach, where I filled my bag with pebbles large and small; and presently we saw a company of people come out of the town, each carrying a bag like mine filled with pebbles.

To these he committed me, commending me to their care and saying, "This man is a stranger; take him with you and teach him how to gather, so that he may earn his daily bread, and you will earn your reward and recompense in Heaven."

"On our head and eyes be it," they answered; and bidding me welcome, went on with me until we came to a spacious valley, full of tall trees with trunks so smooth that nobody could climb them.

Now sleeping under these trees were a great many apes, which when they saw us got up and fled from us and swarmed up among the branches; at which my companions began pelting them with what they had in their bags, and the apes fell to plucking the fruit off the trees and throwing it at the people.

I looked at the fruit they were throwing at us and found it to be coconuts; so I picked out a great tree full of apes, and going up to it, began pelting them with stones; and they pelted me back with nuts, which I collected as the rest did — so that even before I had finished my bagful of pebbles I had got a great plenty of nuts.

And as soon as my companions had likewise got as many nuts as they could carry, we went back to the city, where we arrived at the tail end of the day.

Then I went in to the kindly man who had put me in company with the nut-gatherers, and gave him everything I had got, thanking him for his kindness; but he would not accept them, saying, "Sell them and make a profit on the price."

And presently he added, giving me the key of a storeroom in his house, "Store your nuts in this safe place, and go out every morning and gather them as you have done today; and pick out the worst of them for sale and for your own keep, and lay up the rest here — so that perhaps you may collect enough to serve you for your journey home."

"Allah reward you!" I answered; and I did as he advised me, going out every day with the coconut gatherers, who recommended me to one another and showed me the best-stocked trees.

I did this for some time, until I had laid up a great store of excellent nuts, besides a large sum of money from the price of those I had sold. So I became comfortably off, and bought everything I saw and had a mind to, and passed my time pleasantly, greatly enjoying my stay in the city — until one day, as I stood on the beach, a great ship steering through the heart of the sea presently cast anchor by the shore and landed a company of merchants, who set about selling and buying and bartering their goods for coconuts and other commodities.

Then I went to my friend and told him the ship had come and that I had a mind to go back to my own country; and he said, "It is for you to decide."

So I thanked him for his kindnesses and took my leave of him; then, going to the captain of the ship, I agreed with him for my passage and put my coconuts and everything else I had aboard.

We weighed anchor:—

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

So I left the City of the Apes and put my coconuts and everything else I had aboard. We weighed anchor the same day and sailed from island to island and sea to sea; and wherever we stopped I sold and traded with my coconuts, and the Lord repaid me more than I had before and lost.

Among other places we came to an island abounding in cloves and cinnamon and pepper; and the country people told me that beside every bunch of pepper there grows a great leaf which shades it from the sun and casts the water off it in the wet season, but that when the rain stops the leaf turns over and droops down at the side of the bunch.

Here I took in a great store of pepper and cloves and cinnamon in exchange for coconuts; and from there we passed to the Island of Al-Usirat, where the Comorin aloes-wood comes from, and then to another island five days' journey in length, where the Chinese aloes-wood grows, which is better than the Comorin. But the people of this island are fouler in their conduct and their religion than those of the other, for they love fornication and wine-bibbing, and know neither prayer nor the call to prayer.

From there we came to the pearl fisheries, and I gave the divers some of my coconuts and said to them, "Dive for my luck and my lot!"

They did so, and brought up from the deep water a great store of large and priceless pearls; and they said to me, "By Allah, my master, your luck is a lucky one!"

Then we sailed on with the blessing of Allah, whose name be exalted; and did not stop sailing until we arrived safely at Basra.

There I stayed a little and then went on to Baghdad, where I came into my own quarter and found my house and met up with my family and greeted my friends, who wished me joy of my safe return; and I laid up all my goods and valuables in my storehouses.

Then I distributed alms and largesse and clothed the widow and the orphan and made presents to my relations and my comrades; for the Lord had repaid me fourfold what I had lost. After which I went back to my old merry way of living, and forgot everything I had suffered, in the great profit and gain I had made.

Such, then, is the history of my fifth voyage and its wonders; and now to supper. And tomorrow come again, and I will tell you what happened to me on my sixth voyage; for it was more wonderful still than this.

(Says the teller of the tale:) Then he called for food; and the servants spread the table; and when they had eaten the evening meal, he ordered a hundred golden dinars to be given to Sindbad the porter; and the Landsman went home and lay down to sleep, marvelling greatly at everything he had heard.

Next morning, as soon as it was light, he prayed the dawn prayer; and after blessing Mohammed, the Cream of all creatures, went to the house of Sindbad the Seaman and wished him a good day.

The merchant told him to sit down and talked with him until the rest of the company arrived. Then the servants spread the table; and when they had eaten and drunk well and were mirthful and merry, Sindbad the Seaman began, in these words, the narrative of
