The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman

Know, my friends, that after I came home from my sixth voyage, which brought me abundant profit, I took up my old life again in every possible joy and enjoyment and mirth and merrymaking, day and night; and I stayed a while in this comfort and satisfaction, until my soul began once more to long to sail the seas and see foreign countries and keep company with merchants and hear new things.

So, having made up my mind, I packed up in bales a quantity of costly stuffs suitable for sea trade, and carried them from Baghdad to Basra, where I found a ship ready for sea with a company of substantial merchants aboard her. I took passage with them, and we became friends, and we set out on our venture in health and safety, sailing with a fair wind until we came to a city called Madinat al-Sin, the City of China.

But after we had left it, as we went along in all cheerfulness and confidence, talking of trade and travel, there sprang up a violent head wind and a storm of rain fell on us and soaked us and our goods through. So we covered the bales with our cloaks and our clothes and coarse cloth and canvas, so that the rain should not spoil them, and gave ourselves up to prayer and supplication to Almighty Allah, humbling ourselves before Him to be delivered from the danger we were in.

But the captain got up and tightened his belt and tucked up his skirts and, after taking refuge with Allah from Satan the stoned, climbed to the masthead, from where he looked out to the right and to the left; and then, gazing down at the passengers and the crew, he fell to beating his face and tearing out his beard.

So we cried out to him, "Captain, what is the matter?"

And he answered, "Ask the Most High to deliver you out of the strait we have fallen into, and mourn for yourselves and take leave of one another; for you must know that the wind has got the mastery of us and has driven us into the uttermost of all the seas of the world."

Then he came down from the masthead and, opening his sea chest, pulled out a bag of blue cotton, from which he took a powder like ashes. This he put in a saucer wetted with a little water, and after waiting a short time he smelt it and tasted it; and then he took a small book out of the chest and read in it a while, and said, weeping:

"Know, passengers, that in this book there is a marvellous matter set down, which shows that whoever comes to this place will surely die, with no hope of escape; for this ocean is called the Sea of the Region of the King, and in it is the tomb of our lord Solomon son of David (on both be peace!); and in it are serpents of enormous size and dreadful appearance. And whatever ship comes into these waters, there rises to her a great fish out of the sea and swallows her up with everything and everybody on board her."

When we heard these words from the captain we were greatly astonished; but he had hardly finished speaking when the ship was lifted clean out of the water and dropped back again, and we set about praying the prayer for the dying and committing our souls to Allah.

Presently we heard a terrible great cry like a loud peal of thunder, at which we were struck with terror and became like dead men, giving ourselves up for lost. And then there came up to us a huge fish, as big as a tall mountain, at the sight of which we went wild with fright and, weeping bitterly, made ready to die, marvelling at its vast size and its grim shape — when a second fish appeared, and we had never seen anything more monstrous than that. So we mourned for our lives and said farewell to one another; and then suddenly up came a third fish, bigger than the first two; at which we lost the power of thought and reason altogether and were stupefied with the excess of our fear and horror.

Then the three fish began circling round the ship, and the third and biggest opened his mouth to swallow it; and we looked into his mouth, and it was wider than the gate of a city, and his throat was like a long valley. So we called upon the Almighty and cried out for help to His Apostle (on whom be blessing and peace!) — when all at once a violent squall of wind rose and struck the ship, which lifted out of the water and came down on a great reef, the haunt of sea monsters, where she broke up and fell apart into planks, and everything and everybody aboard was plunged into the sea.

As for me, I tore off all my clothes except my gown and swam a little way, until I came upon one of the ship's planks, which I clung to and then got astride like a horse, while the winds and the waters played with me and the waves lifted me up and threw me down; and I was in a most pitiable state for fear and misery and hunger and thirst.

Then I reproached myself for what I had done, and my soul was sick after a life of ease and comfort; and I said to myself, "Sindbad, Sindbad the Seaman, you never repent, and yet you are always suffering hardships and disasters; and still you will not give up sea travel — or if you do say, 'I give it up,' you lie when you say it. Bear patiently, then, what you suffer, for you deserve every bit of what happens to you!"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on:

But when I had got astride the plank, I said to myself, "You deserve everything that happens to you. All this is decreed for me by Allah (whose name be exalted!) to turn me away from my greed for gain, which is the source of everything I endure — for I have wealth and to spare."

Then I came to my senses and said, "Truly, this time I repent to the Most High, with a sincere repentance, of my hunger for profit and adventure; and never again will I so much as name travel with my tongue or in my thoughts." And I went on humbling myself before Almighty Allah and weeping and lamenting over myself, remembering my former condition of comfort and satisfaction and mirth and merriment and joy.

So I remained two days, at the end of which I came to a great island with plenty of trees and streams on it. There I landed and ate of the fruit of the island and drank of its waters, until I was refreshed and my life came back to me and my strength and spirits were restored; and I recited:

	When your affairs show a knotted and tangled skein,
	Fate comes down out of Heaven and straightens every ply.
	Hold your soul in patience till your lot comes clear:
	He who ties the knot can also untie.

Then I walked about until I found, on the far side, a great river of sweet water running with a strong current; and this brought to my mind the boat-raft I had made before, and I said to myself, "I must make another; perhaps I can get myself out of this strait. If I escape, I have what I want, and I vow to Almighty Allah to swear off travelling; and if I die, I shall be at peace and shall rest from all my toil and trouble."

So I got up and gathered a great quantity of pieces of wood from the trees, which were all of the finest sandalwood, the like of which is not to be found — though at the time I did not know it; and I managed to twist creepers and tree twigs into a kind of rope, with which I bound the logs together and so contrived a raft.

Then, saying, "If I am saved, it is by God's grace," I got aboard it and committed myself to the current; and it carried me on for the first day and the second and the third after I left the island, while I lay on the raft, eating nothing and drinking, when I was thirsty, the water of the river, until I was as weak and giddy as a chicken with the stress of exhaustion and starvation and fear.

At the end of this time I came to a high mountain with the river running underneath it; and when I saw it I feared for my life, remembering how narrow a passage I had suffered through on my last journey; and I would gladly have stopped the raft and got ashore on the mountainside. But the current was too strong for me and drew the raft into the underground passage like an archway; at which I gave myself up for lost and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"

However, after a little the raft slid out into the open air, and I saw before me a wide valley into which the river fell with a noise like rolling thunder and a swiftness like the rushing of the wind. I held on to the raft for fear of falling off it, while the waves tossed me right and left; and the craft went on down with the current, and I could neither stop it nor turn it towards the bank, until it came to a halt with me at a great and handsome city, splendidly built and full of people.

And when the townspeople saw me on the raft, coming down with the current, they threw me ropes, which I had not the strength to hold; then they tossed a net over the craft and drew it ashore with me on it, whereupon I fell on the ground in the middle of them like a dead man, from sheer fear and hunger and lack of sleep.

After a while there came up to me out of the crowd an old man of dignified appearance, well on in years, who welcomed me and threw over me a quantity of handsome clothes, with which I covered myself. Then he took me to the baths and brought me refreshing sherbets and delicious perfumes; and when I came out, he carried me to his house, where his people made much of me and, seating me in a pleasant place, set rich food in front of me, of which I ate my fill and gave thanks to God the Most High for my deliverance.

Then his pages fetched me hot water and I washed my hands, and his handmaids brought me silk napkins with which I dried them and wiped my mouth. The old gentleman also set aside a room for me in a part of his house, and instructed his pages and his slave girls to wait on me and do whatever I wanted and supply whatever I needed. They were diligent in my service, and I stayed with him in the guest chamber three days, taking my ease with good food and good drink and good scents, until life came back to me and my terrors quieted down and my heart grew calm and my mind was at rest.

On the fourth day my host came in to me and said, "You cheer us with your company, my son, and praise be to Allah for your safety! Tell me: will you come down with me now to the shore and the bazaar and sell your goods and take the price of them? You might buy something to trade with. I have told my servants to bring your stock in trade up out of the sea, and they have piled it on the beach."

I was silent for a while, and said to myself, "What does he mean by this, and what goods do I have?"

Then he said, "My son, do not be troubled or anxious, but come with me to the market; and if anyone offers a price for your goods that satisfies you, take it; and if you are not satisfied, I will store them for you in my warehouse until a better occasion for selling comes round."

So I thought over my situation and said to myself, "Do as he says, and see what these goods are." And I said to him, "Uncle, I hear and I obey; I cannot go against you in anything, for Allah's blessing is upon everything you do."

So he led me to the market street, where I found that he had taken to pieces the raft that had carried me, which was made of sandalwood, and I heard the broker calling it up for sale.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman took up his tale in these words:

I found that the old gentleman had taken my raft to pieces where it lay on the beach, and that the broker was crying the sandalwood for sale. Then the merchants came and opened the bidding for the wood, and bid against one another until the price reached a thousand dinars, when they stopped bidding.

And my host said to me, "Listen, my son: this is the going rate for your goods in hard times like these. Will you sell them for this, or shall I store them for you in my warehouses until prices go up?"

"My lord," I answered, "the business is in your hands: do as you think best."

Then he asked, "Will you sell the wood to me, my son, for a hundred gold pieces over and above what the merchants have bid for it?"

And I answered, "Yes, I have sold it to you, and the money is received."

So he ordered his servants to carry the wood off to his warehouses and, taking me back to his house, sat me down and counted out the purchase money to me; after which he put it away in bags and, setting them in a private place, locked them up with an iron padlock and gave me the key.

Some days after this the old gentleman said to me, "My son, I have something to put to you, and I hope you will do as I ask."

I said, "What is it?"

He said, "I am a very old man and I have no son; but I have a daughter who is young in years and lovely to look at, and endowed with great wealth and beauty. Now I have a mind to marry her to you, so that you may live with her here in this country of ours; and I will make you master of everything I have in hand, for I am an old man and you shall stand in my place."

I was silent for shame and gave him no answer, so he went on: "Do as I wish in this, my son, for I want nothing but your good; and if you will only do as I say, you shall have her at once and be as a son to me, and everything that is in my hands or that comes to me shall be yours. And if you have a mind to trade and travel to your own country, nobody shall stop you, and your property will be entirely at your own disposal; so do as you please."

"By Allah, uncle," I answered, "you have become like a father to me; and I am a stranger here and have gone through a great many hardships, and with the stress of everything I have suffered I have no judgment or understanding left. It is for you, then, to decide what I should do."

At this he sent his servants for the judge and the witnesses, and married me to his daughter, making us a noble wedding feast and a great celebration. When I went in to her I found her perfect in beauty and loveliness and grace and proportion, dressed in rich clothes and covered with a profusion of ornaments and necklaces and other trinkets of gold and silver and precious stones, worth a mint of money, a price nobody could pay. She pleased me and we loved each other; and I lived with her in comfort and delight of life, until her father was taken to the mercy of Almighty Allah.

So we washed him and shrouded him and buried him, and I took possession of the whole of his property, and all his servants and slaves became mine. Moreover, the merchants installed me in his office, for he had been their headman and their chief, and none of them bought anything except with his knowledge and by his leave; and now his rank passed to me.

When I came to know the townspeople better, I found that at the beginning of each month they were transformed: their faces changed and they became like birds, and they put out wings on which they flew up into the upper regions of the sky, and nobody was left in the city but the women and the children.

And I said in my mind, "When the first of the month comes, I will ask one of them to carry me with them, wherever it is they go."

So when the time came and their colour changed and their shapes altered, I went to one of the townspeople and said to him, "Allah be upon you! Carry me with you, so that I may enjoy myself with the rest and come back with you."

"That cannot be done," he answered; but I would not stop pressing him, and I kept at him until he agreed.

Then I went out in his company, without telling any of my family or my servants or my friends; and he took me on his back and flew up with me so high in the air that I heard the angels glorifying God in the dome of heaven, at which I marvelled and cried out, "Praised be Allah! Extolled be the perfection of Allah!"

I had hardly finished pronouncing the tasbih — praised be Allah! — when there came a fire out of heaven that all but consumed the whole company; whereupon they fled from it and came down cursing me, and, throwing me down on a high mountain, went away in great anger and left me there alone.

Finding myself in this plight, I repented of what I had done and reproached myself for having taken on something I was not equal to, saying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! No sooner am I delivered out of one affliction than I fall into a worse one."

And I stayed there in this state, not knowing where I ought to go, when two young men came up, as beautiful as two moons, each of them using a rod of red gold for a staff. So I went over to them and greeted them; and when they had returned my greeting I said, "Allah be upon you both! Who are you, and what are you?"

They said, "We are servants of Allah the Most High, living on this mountain"; and, giving me a rod of red gold that they had with them, they went on their way and left me.

I walked along the mountain ridge, steadying my steps with the staff and thinking about the two young men, when a serpent came out from under the mountain with a man in her jaws, whom she had swallowed as far as below his navel, and he was calling out and saying, "Whoever delivers me, Allah will deliver him from every adversity!"

So I went up to the serpent and struck her on the head with the golden staff, at which she threw the man out of her mouth.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Sindbad the Seaman went on in these words:

When I struck the serpent on the head with my golden staff she threw the man out of her mouth. Then I struck her a second time and she turned and fled; whereupon he came up to me and said, "Since it was at your hands that I was delivered from that serpent, I will never leave you, and you shall have me for your comrade on this mountain."

"And welcome," I answered. So we went on together along the mountain until we fell in with a company of people; and I looked and saw among them the very man who had carried me and thrown me down there. I went up to him and spoke him fair, apologising to him and saying, "Comrade, this is not how a friend should treat a friend."

He said, "It was you who nearly destroyed us all with your tasbih and your glorifying God on my back."

I said, "Forgive me, for I knew nothing about this business; but if you will take me with you, I swear not to say a word."

So he relented and agreed to carry me with him, but he made it an express condition that as long as I was on his back I should say no tasbih and do no glorifying of God at all.

Then I gave the golden wand to the man I had delivered from the serpent and said goodbye to him, and my friend took me on his back and flew with me as before, until he brought me to the city and set me down in my own house.

My wife came to meet me and greeted me and congratulated me on my safety, and then said, "Take care not to go out with those people again, and do not keep company with them, for they are brothers of the devils, and they do not know how to speak the name of Almighty Allah, nor do they worship Him."

"And how did your father get on with them?" I asked.

And she answered, "My father was not one of them and did not do as they do. And now that he is dead, I think you would do better to sell everything we have and buy merchandise with the price of it and travel to your own country and your own people, and I will go with you; for I have no wish to stay on in this city, now that my father and my mother are both dead."

So I sold off the old gentleman's property piece by piece, and looked out for somebody who might be travelling from there to Basra, so that I could join him. And while I was doing this I heard of a company of the townspeople who had a mind to make the voyage but could not find a ship; so they bought timber and built themselves a great ship, in which I took passage with them and paid the whole of the hire.

Then we embarked, my wife and I, with all our movable goods, leaving our houses and our lands and the rest of it, and set sail; and we went on sailing from island to island and from sea to sea, with a fair and favouring wind, until we arrived at Basra safe and sound.

I made no stay there, but chartered another vessel and, transferring my goods to her, set out at once for Baghdad, where I arrived safely; and going into my own quarter and to my own house, I met up with my family and my friends and my familiars, who stored my goods away in my warehouses.

Now my people, reckoning up how long I had been away on this seventh voyage, had made it twenty-seven years, and had given up all hope of me; so when they heard of my return they came to welcome me and congratulate me on my safety, and I told them everything that had happened to me, at which they marvelled exceedingly.

Then I swore off travel and vowed to Allah the Most High that I would venture no more by land or by sea, for this seventh and last voyage had given me a surfeit of travel and adventure; and I thanked the Lord (be He praised and glorified!) and blessed Him for having restored me to my kith and kin and my country and my home.

"Consider, then, Sindbad the Landsman," Sindbad the Seaman went on, "what sufferings I have gone through and what dangers and hardships I endured before I came to my present state."

"Allah be upon you, my lord!" answered Sindbad the Landsman. "Forgive me the wrong I did you."

And they never left off friendship and fellowship, living in all cheerfulness and pleasure and comfort of life, until there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies, the Leveller of palaces and the Filler of graveyards — that is to say, the Cup of Death. And glory be to the Living One who does not die!
