The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman: The Calcutta Version

[Editor's note: The seventh voyage is the one place where the manuscripts part company outright. What follows is not a variant reading of the tale just told but a different story altogether, told in the Calcutta edition of the Nights in place of the flying men and the sandalwood raft. Burton printed both. So does this edition.]

Know, my brothers and friends and companions all, that when I gave up voyaging and trading I said to myself, "What has happened to me is enough"; and I spent my time in comfort and pleasure.

Then one day, as I sat at home, there came a knock at the door, and when the doorkeeper opened it a page came in and said, "The Caliph summons you."

I went with him to His Majesty and kissed the ground and greeted him; and he welcomed me and treated me with honour and said, "Sindbad, I have a piece of business for you: will you do it?"

So I kissed his hand and asked, "My lord, what business has the master for the slave?"

And he answered, "It is my wish that you should travel to the King of Sarandib and carry him our letter and our gift, since he has sent a present and a letter to us."

I trembled at these words and replied, "By Allah the Omnipotent, my lord, I have come to loathe travelling; when I so much as hear the words 'voyage' or 'journey' my limbs shake with the memory of the hardships and horrors I have been through. I have no desire for this whatever — the more so as I have bound myself by an oath never to leave Baghdad."

Then I told the Caliph everything I had gone through from first to last, and he marvelled exceedingly and said, "By the Almighty, Sindbad, in all the ages of the world such misfortunes as happened to you were never known to happen to any man, and you do quite right never even to speak of travel. But for our sake you will go this one time and carry our present and our letter to the King of Sarandib; and, God willing, you shall be back quickly, and in this way we shall be under no obligation to him."

I answered that I heard and obeyed, since I could not oppose his command; so he gave me the gifts and the letter, with money for my expenses, and I kissed his hands and left his presence.

Then I went down from Baghdad to the Gulf and embarked with some other merchants, and our ship sailed before a fair wind many days and nights until, by Allah's help, we reached the island of Sarandib. As soon as we had made fast we landed, and I took the present and the letter and went in with them to the King and kissed the ground before him.

When he saw me he said, "Welcome, Sindbad! By Allah the Omnipotent, we have been longing to see you; and glory be to God, who has shown us your face again!"

Then he took me by the hand and made me sit beside him, delighted, and welcomed me with familiar kindness and treated me as a friend. After this he began to talk with me and addressed me courteously and asked, "What was the reason for your coming to us, Sindbad?"

So, after kissing his hand and thanking him, I answered, "My lord, I have brought you a present from my master, the Caliph Harun al-Rashid"; and I offered him the present and the letter, which he read and was overjoyed at.

The present was: a mare worth ten thousand dinars, with a golden saddle set with jewels; a book; a sumptuous suit of clothes; a hundred different kinds of white Cairo cloths and silks of Suez, Kufa and Alexandria; Greek carpets; and a hundred maunds weight of linen and raw silk. Moreover there was a wonderful rarity — a marvellous cup of crystal, in the middle of which was the figure of a lion facing a kneeling man who grasped a bow with the arrow drawn back to the head — together with the food tray of Solomon son of David (on whom be peace!).

The letter ran as follows:

	Peace from King al-Rashid, whom Allah has aided (and has granted to him and to his forefathers noble rank and wide-spread glory), be upon the fortunate Sultan. And after: your letter came to our hands and we rejoiced at it; and we have sent you the book entitled Delight of the Intelligent and, for Friends, the Rare Present, together with various curiosities suitable for Kings; so be so good as to accept them. And peace be with you.

Then the King heaped wealth on me and treated me with every honour; so I prayed for him and thanked him for his generosity.

Some days later I asked his leave to depart, but could not get it except by a great deal of pressing; whereupon I said goodbye to him and set out from his city with merchants and other companions, bound for home with no desire at all for travel or for trade.

We went on voyaging and coasting along a good many islands; but when we were half-way we were surrounded by a number of canoes full of men like devils, armed with bows and arrows, swords and daggers, and dressed in mail coats and other armour. They fell on us and wounded and killed everybody who resisted them; and then, having captured the ship and everything in her, they carried us off to an island, where they sold us for the meanest price.

Now I was bought by a wealthy man, who took me to his house and gave me food and drink and clothing and treated me in the friendliest way; so I took heart, and rested a little.

One day he asked me, "Do you know any art or trade?"

And I answered, "My lord, I am a merchant, and I know nothing but buying and selling."

"Do you know," he asked, "how to use a bow and arrow?"

"Yes," I said, "I know that much."

At this he brought me a bow and arrows and mounted me behind him on an elephant; then he set out when the night was nearly over and, passing through a forest of huge trees, came to a tall and sturdy one, up which he made me climb. Then he gave me the bow and the arrows, saying, "Sit here now; and when the elephants come trooping past in the early morning, shoot at them. You may well hit one; and if he falls, come and tell me." And with that he left me.

I hid myself in the tree, in great terror, and trembled there until the sun rose; and when the elephants appeared and wandered about among the trees I shot my arrows at them, and kept on until I had shot one of them down. In the evening I reported my success to my master, who was delighted with me and treated me with great honour; and next morning he took the dead elephant away.

I went on like this, shooting an elephant every morning which my master would carry off, until one day, as I sat hidden up in the tree, there came on suddenly and without warning a countless host of elephants, whose screaming and trumpeting were such that I thought the earth was shaking under them. They all surrounded my tree, which was some fifty cubits round, and one enormous monster came up to it and wound his trunk about the trunk of it and hauled it up by the roots and dashed it to the ground.

I fell down in a faint among the beasts, and then the monster elephant wound his trunk about me and, setting me on his back, went off with me, the others going along with us. He carried me, still unconscious, until he reached the place he was making for, when he rolled me off his back and presently went his way, and the others followed him.

So I rested a little; and when my terror had died down I looked about me, and found myself among the bones of elephants — from which I concluded that this was their burial place, and that the monster elephant had brought me here on account of the tusks.

So I got up and walked a whole day and night until I came to my master's house. He saw how my colour was changed with fright and hunger, and he rejoiced at my return and said, "By Allah, you have made my heart sore! I went to look when you were missing and found the tree torn up, and I thought the elephants had killed you. Tell me how it went with you."

I told him everything that had happened to me, at which he wondered greatly and was very glad; and at last he asked, "Do you know the place?"

"Yes, master," I answered.

So we mounted an elephant and went until we came to the spot; and when my master saw the heaps of tusks he rejoiced greatly, and, carrying away as many as he wanted, went home with me.

After this he treated me with even greater favour and said, "My son, you have shown us the way to great riches, and may Allah reward you for it! You are free, for the Almighty's sake and before His face! The elephants used to destroy a great many of us, because we hunted them for their ivory; but Allah has preserved you from them, and you have made our fortunes with the heaps you have led us to."

"Master," I answered, "may God free your neck from the fire! And do you, master, graciously give me leave to go back to my own country."

"Yes," he said, "you shall have that permission. But we hold a fair once a year, when merchants come to us from all quarters to buy up this ivory. The time is drawing near; and when they have finished their business I will send you in their charge and give you what you need to reach your home."

So I blessed him and thanked him and stayed with him, treated with respect and honour, for some days; and then the merchants came as he had said, and bought and sold and bartered. And when they had made ready to go back, my master came to me and said, "Get up and prepare yourself to travel with the traders on their way to your country."

They had bought a great many tusks, which they had tied up together in loads and were putting aboard, when my master sent me off with them, paying for my passage and settling all my debts; and besides that he made me a large present in goods.

We set out and voyaged from island to island until we had crossed the sea and landed on the shores of the Persian Gulf, where the merchants brought out their stores and sold them. I sold what I had at a high profit too, and bought some of the prettiest things in the place for presents, and beautiful curiosities, and everything else I wanted. I also bought myself a mount; and we set off and crossed the deserts from country to country until I reached Baghdad.

Here I went in to the Caliph and, after greeting him and kissing his hands, told him everything that had happened to me; whereupon he rejoiced at my safety and thanked Almighty Allah, and ordered my story to be written down in letters of gold.

Then I went into my house and met my family and my brothers; and that is the end of the history of what happened to me in the course of my seven voyages. Praise be to Allah, the One, the Creator, the Maker of all things in Heaven and Earth!

Now when Shahrazad had finished her story of the two Sindbads, Dunyazad exclaimed, "Sister, how pleasant your tale is, and how tasteful! How sweet and how welcome!"

She answered, "And what is this compared with what I could tell you tomorrow night?"

The King said, "What might that be?"

And she said: It is a tale touching
