The City of Brass
(Part 1 of 4)

It is told that long ago, in years and ages long gone by, there was at Damascus in Syria a Caliph called Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, the fifth of the house of Umayya.

As this Commander of the Faithful sat one day in his palace, talking with his sultans and kings and the great men of his empire, the conversation turned upon the legends of past peoples and the traditions of our lord Solomon, son of David (on the two of them be peace!), and upon what Almighty Allah had given him of lordship and dominion over men and jinn and birds and beasts and reptiles and the wind and all other created things.

And the Caliph said, "Truly we hear from those who went before us that the Lord (extolled and exalted be He!) granted to nobody the like of what He granted to our lord Solomon, and that he attained to what no other man ever attained — in that he used to imprison jinn and marids and satans in jars of copper, and stop them with lead, and seal them with his ring."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Caliph Abd al-Malik bin Marwan sat talking with the great men of his court about our lord Solomon, and they remarked upon what Allah had given him of lordship and dominion, the Commander of the Faithful said, "Indeed he attained to what no other man ever attained, in that he used to imprison jinn and marids and satans in jars of copper, and stop them with lead, and seal them with his ring."

Then Talib bin Sahl spoke up — a man who hunted for treasure, and had books that revealed to him hoards and wealth hidden under the earth — and said:

"Commander of the Faithful — may Allah make your dominion endure and exalt your dignity in this world and the next! — my father told me, on the authority of my grandfather, that he once took ship with a company bound for the island of Sicily, and sailed until a contrary wind rose against them and drove them off their course and brought them, after a month, to a great mountain in one of the lands of Allah the Most High; though what land it was they did not know.

"My grandfather said: This was in the darkness of the night; and as soon as it was day there came out to us from the caves of the mountain a people black-skinned and naked, who understood not one word that was said to them; nor was there one of them who knew Arabic except their King, who was of their own kind.

"When he saw the ship he came down to it with a company of his followers and greeted us and made us welcome, and asked us about our condition and our faith. We told him everything about ourselves, and he said, Be of good cheer, for no harm shall come to you. And when we in our turn asked them about their faith, we found that each of them held one of the many creeds that were current before the preaching of Islam and the mission of Mohammed, whom may Allah bless and keep. So my shipmates said, We do not know what you are talking about.

"Then the King said, No son of Adam has ever come to our land before you; but do not be afraid, and be assured of your safety and of your return to your own country. Then he entertained us three days, feeding us on the flesh of birds and wild beasts and fishes, for they had no other meat; and on the fourth day he took us down to the beach so that we might amuse ourselves watching the fishermen.

"There we saw a man casting his net for fish; and presently he pulled it up, and in it was a jar of copper, stopped with lead and sealed with the seal ring of Solomon son of David, on whom be peace! He brought the vessel ashore and broke it open, and there came out of it a smoke which rose twisting and blue to the top of the sky, and we heard a horrible voice saying, I repent! I repent! Pardon, Prophet of Allah! Never again will I go back to what I did before.

"Then the smoke became a terrible giant, frightful in shape, whose head was level with the mountaintops; and he vanished from our sight, while our hearts were nearly torn out of us for terror. But the black people thought nothing of it.

"So we went back to the King and asked him about the matter; and he said, Know that this was one of the jinn whom Solomon son of David, being angry with them, shut up in these vessels and threw into the sea, after stopping their mouths with molten lead. Our fishermen often bring up such bottles in their nets; and when they are broken open, out come jinn who, supposing that Solomon is still alive and can pardon them, make their submission to him and say, I repent, Prophet of Allah!"

The Caliph marvelled at Talib's story and said, "Glory be to God! Truly, a mighty dominion was given to Solomon."

Now al-Nabighah al-Zubyani was present, and he said, "Talib has spoken the truth, as the words of the All-wise, the Everlasting One, prove:

	And Solomon, when Allah said to him,
	Rise, be my Caliph, rule with righteous sway;
	Honour the man who honours and obeys you,
	And whoever rebels, imprison him for aye —

so he used to put them in copper bottles and throw them into the sea."

The poet's words pleased the Caliph, and he said, "By Allah, I long to look on some of these vessels of Solomon's, which must be a warning to anyone willing to be warned."

"Commander of the Faithful," replied Talib, "it is in your power to do so without stirring from home. Send to your brother Abd al-Aziz bin Marwan, so that he may write to Musa bin Nusayr, governor of the Maghrib, telling him to ride from there to the mountains I have spoken of and fetch you as many of these jars as you have a mind for; for those mountains adjoin the frontiers of his province."

The Caliph approved his advice and said, "You have spoken the truth, Talib; and I wish you to be my messenger to Musa bin Nusayr in this matter. You shall have the White Flag, and whatever you like of money and honours and the rest; and I will look after your family while you are away."

"With love and gladness, Commander of the Faithful!" answered Talib.

"Go, with the blessing of Allah and His help," said the Caliph; and he ordered a letter written to his brother Abd al-Aziz, his viceroy in Egypt, and another to Musa bin Nusayr, his viceroy in North-West Africa, telling him to go himself in search of the bottles of Solomon, leaving his son to govern in his place. Moreover he charged him to engage guides, and to spare neither men nor money, and not to be slack in the business, since he would accept no excuse.

Then he sealed the two letters and handed them to Talib bin Sahl, telling him to have the royal ensigns carried before him and to make all possible speed; and he gave him treasure and horsemen and footmen to help him on his way, and provided for the needs of his household while he was gone.

So Talib set out, and arrived in due course at Cairo.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Talib bin Sahl set out with his escort and crossed the desert country between Syria and Egypt, where the Governor came out to meet him and treated him and his company with high honour while they stayed with him. Then he gave them a guide to bring them up to the Sa'id, which is Upper Egypt, where the Emir Musa had his residence.

And when the son of Nusayr heard that Talib was coming, he went out to meet him and was delighted with him. Talib gave him the Caliph's letter, and he took it reverently and laid it on his head and cried, "I hear and I obey the Commander of the Faithful!"

Then he thought it best to call his chief officers together; and when they were all present he told them what was in the Caliph's letter and asked their advice about how he should act.

"Emir," they answered, "if you are looking for somebody to guide you to the place, send for the Shaykh Abd al-Samad, son of Abd al-Kuddus, al-Samudi; for he is a man of wide learning, who has travelled far and knows from experience all the seas and deserts and lands and countries of the world, and the peoples and the wonders in them. Send for him, and he will surely guide you to what you want."

So Musa sent for him; and he proved to be a very ancient man, far gone in years and broken down with the passage of time. The Emir greeted him and said, "Shaykh Abd al-Samad, our lord the Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, has given me such and such an order. I have little knowledge of the country where the thing he wants is to be found; but I am told that you know it well, and the roads to it. Will you come with me, then, and help me to accomplish the Caliph's need? If it please Allah the Most High, your trouble and your travelling shall not go for nothing."

The Shaykh replied, "I hear and obey the command of the Commander of the Faithful. But know, Emir, that the road there is long and difficult, and there are few ways to it."

"How far is it?" asked Musa.

And the Shaykh answered, "It is a journey of two years and some months going, and as long coming back; and the way is full of hardships and terrors and things wonderful and strange. Now you are a champion of the Faith, and our country lies close to the enemy's; and it may be that the Christians will come out against us while you are gone. So you ought to leave somebody to govern in your place."

"That is well said," answered the Emir; and he appointed his son Harun governor for the time of his absence, requiring the troops to swear allegiance to him and ordering them to obey him in everything he commanded. And they heard his words and promised obedience. Now this Harun was a man of great prowess, a renowned warrior and a formidable knight.

And the Shaykh Abd al-Samad let Harun believe that the place they were making for was only four months' journey away along the seashore, with camping places all the way, one adjoining the next, and grass and springs; adding, "Allah will certainly make the matter easy for us, through your blessing, deputy of the Commander of the Faithful!"

The Emir Musa said, "Do you know whether any of the kings have trodden this land before us?"

And the Shaykh said, "Yes; it belonged in the old days to Darius the Greek, King of Alexandria." But he said to Musa privately, "Emir, take with you a thousand camels loaded with food, and a great store of porous earthenware water jars."

The Emir asked, "And what are we to do with those?"

And the Shaykh answered, "On our way lies the desert of Kayrawan, which is a vast waste four days' journey across and has no water in it; nor does the sound of a voice ever sound there, nor is a living soul ever to be seen. Moreover the simoom blows there, and the other hot winds they call al-Juwayb, which dry up the waterskins; but if the water is in earthenware, no harm can come to it."

"Right," said Musa; and he sent to Alexandria and had a great quantity of the jars brought from there.

Then he took with him his vizier and two thousand cavalry, in mail from head to foot, and set out, with no other guide but Abd al-Samad, who went before them riding on his hackney.

The party pressed on, now passing through inhabited lands, now through ruins, now crossing frightful wastes and thirsty deserts, and now mountains that towered up into the air; and they did not leave off travelling for a whole year, until one morning, at daybreak, after they had journeyed all night, the Shaykh found himself in a country he did not know, and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"

The Emir said, "What is the matter, Shaykh?"

And he answered, "By the Lord of the Kaaba, we have wandered off our road!"

"How did that happen?" asked Musa.

And Abd al-Samad replied, "The stars were covered with cloud, and I could not steer by them."

"Where on God's earth are we now?" asked the Emir.

And the Shaykh answered, "I do not know; for I never set eyes on this land until this moment."

Musa said, "Guide us back to the place where we went astray."

But the other said, "I know it no longer."

Then Musa said, "Let us push on; perhaps Allah will guide us to it, or set us right by His power."

So they went on until the hour of the noon prayer, when they came out on a fine open plain, wide and level and smooth as the sea in a calm; and presently there appeared to them on the horizon something great and high and black, in the middle of which was what looked like smoke rising to the edge of the sky.

They made for this, and did not stop until they came near it — and behold, it was a lofty castle, firm-founded and huge and grim, like a towering mountain, built all of black stone, with frowning battlements and a door of gleaming Chinese steel that dazzled the eyes and dazed the wits. Round about it were a thousand steps; and the thing that had looked like smoke from far off was a central dome of lead, a hundred cubits high.

When the Emir saw this he marvelled greatly, and marvelled that the place should be empty of inhabitants; and the Shaykh, when he had satisfied himself about it, said, "There is no god but God, and Mohammed is the Apostle of God!"

Musa said, "I hear you praising the Lord and calling Him holy, and it seems to me you are glad."

"Emir," answered Abd al-Samad, "be glad; for Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) has delivered us out of the frightful wastes and the thirsty deserts."

"How do you know that?" said Musa.

And the other said, "I know it because my father told me, on the authority of my grandfather, that he said: We were once travelling in this country and strayed from the road, and came to this palace, and from it to the City of Brass; and between that city and the place you are seeking is two full months' travel. But you must take to the seashore and not leave it, for there are watering places and wells and camping grounds along it, established by King Alexander the Two-Horned, who, when he went to the conquest of Mauretania, found thirsty deserts and wastes and wilds on the way, and dug water pits in them and built cisterns."

Musa said, "May Allah gladden you for your good news!"

And the Shaykh said, "Come, let us go and look at that palace and its marvels, for it is a lesson to anybody willing to be taught."

So the Emir went up to the palace with the Shaykh and his officers; and coming to the gate, they found it open. Now this gate was built with lofty columns and porticoes whose walls and ceilings were inlaid with gold and silver and precious stones; and there were flights of steps leading up to it, among them two wide staircases of coloured marble the like of which was never seen; and over the doorway was a tablet with letters of gold graven on it in the old Ionian character.

"Emir," asked the Shaykh, "shall I read?"

And Musa answered, "Read, and God bless you; for everything that happens to us on this journey depends upon your blessing."

So the Shaykh, who was a very learned man and versed in all tongues and scripts, went up to the tablet and read what was written on it, and it was verse like this:

	The signs that here portray their mighty works
	warn us that all must tread the selfsame way.
	You who stand in this place to hear the news
	of a people whose power has passed for ever away:
	enter this palace gate, and ask what became
	of greatness fallen into dust and clay.
	Death has destroyed them and scattered their might,
	and in the dust they lost their rich display —
	as if they had only set their burdens down
	to rest a while, and then had ridden away.

When the Emir Musa heard these lines he wept until he lost his senses, and said, "There is no god but God, the Living, the Eternal, who does not cease!"

Then he entered the palace and was astounded at its beauty and the excellence of its building. He amused himself a while looking at the pictures and figures in it, until he came to another door, over which verses were written too; and he said to the Shaykh, "Come, read me these."

So he went forward and read as follows:

	Under these domes how many a company
	halted of old, and went on without stay.
	See what a power Time shows over other men,
	Time with his changes, that could such lords waylay.
	They shared out among them everything they had gathered,
	then left their joys behind and went the way of decay.
	What joys they had! What food they ate! And now
	in the dust they are eaten, and the worm has his prey.

At this the Emir Musa wept bitterly, and the world turned yellow before his eyes, and he said, "Truly, we were created for a mighty matter!"

Then they went on exploring the palace and found it deserted and empty of any living thing, its courtyards desolate and its dwellings laid waste. In the middle of it stood a lofty pavilion with a dome rising high into the air, and around it were four hundred tombs built of yellow marble.

The Emir went up to these, and among them was a great tomb, wide and long, with a tablet of white marble standing at the head of it, on which these lines were graven:

	How often have I fought, and how many have I killed!
	How much have I seen of blessing and of bane!
	How much have I eaten, and how much have I drunk!
	How often have I listened to a singing girl's strain!
	How much have I commanded, how much have I forbidden!
	How many a castle, and how many a castellain
	have I besieged and searched, and the cloistered maids
	deep in its walls were taken as my captives then!
	But it was in ignorance that I sinned, to win rewards
	that, once won, proved nothing and brought me no gain.
	So reckon your reckoning, man, and be wise,
	before you drain the cup of death and doom;
	for it is only a little while before they strew
	the dust on your head, and your life goes down to the tomb.

The Emir and his companions wept; then, going up to the pavilion, they saw that it had eight doors of sandalwood, studded with nails of gold and stars of silver and inlaid with every kind of precious stone. On the first door these verses were written:

	What I left, I did not leave out of nobility of soul,
	but by the sentence and decree appointed to every man.
	While I lived happy, with a haughty and lofty temper,
	defending my hoard like a lion in the fight,
	I took no rest, and greed forbade me to give away
	one grain of mustard seed to save my soul from the fire —
	until I was struck one day, as by an arrow, by the decree
	of the Maker, the Fashioner, the Lord of Might and Right.
	When my death was appointed, I could not keep my life
	by all my stratagems, my cunning and my sleight;
	the troops I had gathered availed me nothing, and none
	of my friends and my neighbours had power to mend my plight.
	All my life long I was weaned by journeying towards death,
	in hardship or in comfort, in joy or in despite.
	So when the money bags are bloated, and you add
	dinar to dinar, all of it may leave you in a night;
	and the driver of a camel and the digger of a grave
	are what your heirs shall fetch before the morning is bright.
	And on the Day of Judgment you shall stand alone before your Lord,
	overloaded with your sins and your crimes and your fright.
	Do not let the world seduce you with its luring, but look
	at the measure it has dealt out to your family and your neighbours.

When Musa heard these verses he wept so hard that he fainted away; then, coming to himself, he went into the pavilion and saw in it a long tomb, awesome to look at, on which was a tablet of Chinese steel; and the Shaykh Abd al-Samad drew near it and read this inscription:

	In the name of the Everlasting Allah, the Never-beginning, the Never-ending; in the name of Allah, who does not beget and is not begotten, and to whom there is no like; in the name of Allah, the Lord of Majesty and Might; in the name of the Living One who is never appointed to death!

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Shaykh Abd al-Samad, having read what is set down above, found this written also:

	You who come to this place, take warning from what you see of the accidents of Time and the turns of Fortune, and do not be deceived by the world and its pomps and vanities and fallacies and falsehoods and empty lures; for it is flattering and deceitful and treacherous, and the things in it are only a loan to us, which it will borrow back from every borrower.
	It is like the dreams of a dreamer and the visions of a sleeper, or like the mirage in the desert, which the thirsty man takes for water; and Satan makes it seem fair to men, right up to their death. These are the ways of the world; so do not put your trust in it, nor lean towards it, for it betrays the man who leans on it and commits his affairs to it. Do not fall into its snares, nor take hold of its skirts, but take warning from my example.
	I owned four thousand bay horses and a proud palace, and I had a thousand daughters of kings to wife, high-bosomed girls like so many moons. I was blessed with a thousand sons like fierce lions, and I lived a thousand years, glad in heart and mind, and I amassed treasures beyond the means of all the kings of all the regions of the earth, supposing that my delight would go on for ever.
	But there fell on me unawares the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies, the Desolator of dwellings and the Spoiler of inhabited places, the Murderer of great and small, of babies and children and mothers; who has no pity on the poor man for his poverty, and no fear of the King for all his commanding and forbidding.
	Truly, we lived safe and secure in this palace until there came down on us the judgment of the Lord of the Three Worlds, the Lord of the Heavens and the Lord of the Earths, and the vengeance of the Manifest Truth overtook us; when two of us died every day, until a great company of us had perished.
	When I saw that destruction had come into our houses and settled down with us, and had drowned us in the sea of deaths, I called for a writer and told him to compose these verses and lessons and warnings, which I had graven, with rule and compass, on these doors and tablets and tombs.
	Now I had an army of a thousand thousand bridles, men of warlike bearing with strong keen forearms, armed with spears and shining mail coats and swords that gleamed; so I ordered them to put on their long hauberks and gird on their biting blades and mount their high-mettled horses and level their dreadful lances. And when the doom of the Lord of heaven and earth fell on us, I said to them: Ho, all you soldiers and troopers, can you turn aside what has fallen on me from the Omnipotent King?
	But the soldiers and the troopers could do nothing, and they said: How shall we do battle with Him whom no chamberlain bars access to — the Lord of the door that has no doorkeeper?
	Then I said to them: Bring me my treasures. Now I had in my treasuries a thousand cisterns, and in each of them a thousand hundredweight of red gold and as much white silver, besides pearls and jewels of every kind and other precious things beyond the reach of the kings of the earth. So they did as I said; and when they had laid all the treasure before me, I said to them: Can you ransom me with all this treasure? Can you buy me one single day of life with it?
	But they could not. So they resigned themselves to Fate and Fortune as they had been ordained, and I submitted to the judgment of Allah, bearing patiently the affliction He decreed for me, until He took my soul and made me dwell in my grave.
	And if you ask my name: I am Kush, son of Shaddad, son of Ad the Greater.

And on the tablets these lines were engraved:
