The City of Brass
(Part 2 of 4)

	If you would know my name, whose day is done
	with the shifts of time and the chances under the sun:
	know that I am the son of Shaddad, who ruled mankind
	and held dominion over all the earth as one.
	Every stubborn people was made abject to me,
	from Syria to Cairo and the lands of Adnan;
	I reigned in glory and conquered many kings,
	and every people went in fear of my mischief.
	Yes, I saw tribes and armies in my hand,
	and the whole world dreaded me, both friend and foe.
	When I took horse, I looked upon my numbered troops:
	a million bridles on neighing steeds in a row.
	And I had wealth that nobody could tell or count,
	all of it hoarded against the day of woe.
	Gladly would I have bought my life with all my wealth,
	and shunned my death for the space of a breath or so;
	but God would have nothing except what His purpose willed,
	and so I was cut off from my brothers and left alone.
	And Death, who sunders men, exchanged my lot
	for a pauper's hut, out of a mansion's grandeur;
	and there I found all my actions gone and past,
	for which I stand pledged, and by my own sin undone.
	So fear, O man, who walk along the edge of a brink,
	the turns of Fortune and the chances of Change.

The Emir Musa was wounded to the heart and sick of his own life for what he saw of the places where these people had been cut down; and as they went about the highways and byways of the palace, looking at its sitting rooms and its pleasure grounds, they came upon a table of yellow onyx supported on four feet of juniper wood, with these words graven on it:

	At this table have eaten a thousand kings blind in the right eye, and a thousand blind in the left, and yet another thousand sound in both eyes — all of whom have left the world and taken up their lodging in the tombs and the catacombs.

The Emir wrote all this down, and left the palace, carrying away nothing with him but the table.

Then he went on with his troops for three days under the guidance of the Shaykh Abd al-Samad, until they came to a high hill on which stood a horseman of brass. In his hand he held a lance with a broad head, bright as blinding lightning, on which was graven:

	You who come to me: if you do not know the way to the City of Brass, rub the hand of this rider, and he will turn round and presently stop. Then take the direction he faces, and go without fear, for it will bring you, without hardship, to the city.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventieth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Emir Musa rubbed the horseman's hand, he spun round like dazzling lightning and stopped facing in a different direction from the one they had been travelling in. So they took the road he pointed to — which was the right way — and, finding it a beaten track, went on through their days and nights until they had covered a wide stretch of country.

Then they came upon a pillar of black stone like the chimney of a furnace, in which there was somebody sunk up to his armpits. He had two great wings and four arms — two of them like the arms of the sons of Adam, and the other two like a lion's paws with claws of iron — and he was black and tall and frightful to look at, with hair like horses' tails and eyes like blazing coals set upright in his face. Moreover he had in the middle of his forehead a third eye, like a lynx's, out of which flew sparks of fire; and he was crying out and saying, "Glory to my Lord, who has adjudged me this grievous torment and this sore punishment until the Day of Doom!"

When the party saw him they lost their reason with fright and turned to run; so the Emir Musa asked the Shaykh Abd al-Samad, "What is this?"

And he answered, "I do not know."

Musa said, "Go closer and question him about his condition; perhaps he will tell you his case."

"Allah keep you, Emir! Indeed, I am afraid of him," replied the Shaykh.

But the Emir answered, "Do not be afraid; he is prevented from reaching you, or anybody else, by the thing he is in."

So Abd al-Samad went up to the pillar and said to the one who was inside it, "Creature, what is your name, and what are you, and how did you come to be here like this?"

"I am an ifrit of the jinn," he replied, "and my name is Dahish, son of al-A'amash; and I am confined here by the Almighty, imprisoned here by Providence and punished by the judgment of Allah, until it pleases Him, to whom belong Might and Majesty, to release me."

Then Musa said, "Ask him why he is shut up in this column."

So the Shaykh asked him about it, and the ifrit replied:

Truly, my tale is a wonder and my case a marvel, and it is this. One of the sons of Iblis had an idol of red carnelian, of which I was the guardian; and there served that idol a King of the Kings of the sea, a prince of great power and famous for his prowess, who ruled over a thousand thousand warriors of the jann, who struck with swords before him and answered his summons in time of need. All of these were under my command and obeyed my orders, and every one of them was a rebel against Solomon son of David, on whom be peace! And I used to get inside the belly of the idol, and give them their orders from there.

Now this King's daughter loved the idol and was constant in bowing down to it and diligent in its service; and she was the loveliest woman of her day, perfect in beauty and grace, in elegance and charm. She was described to Solomon, and he sent to her father, saying, "Give me your daughter in marriage, and break your idol of carnelian, and bear witness, saying: There is no god but God, and Solomon is the Prophet of Allah! If you do this, what is due to us shall be due to you, and your debt shall be our debt. But if you refuse, prepare to answer the summons of the Lord and put on your grave clothes, for I will come against you with an army nothing can resist, which shall fill the waste places of the earth and make you like yesterday, which is past and will never come back."

When this message reached the King he grew insolent and rebellious, full of pride and defiance, and he cried out to his viziers, "What do you say to this? You know that Solomon son of David has sent demanding that I give him my daughter in marriage, and break my idol of carnelian, and enter his faith!"

And they answered, "Mighty King, how shall Solomon do such a thing to you? Even if he could come at you in the middle of this vast ocean, he could not prevail against you; for the marids of the jann will fight on your side, and you will ask help of your idol whom you serve, and he will help you and give you victory over him. So you would do well to consult your Lord about this matter" — meaning the idol — "and hear what he says. If he says, Fight him, then fight him; and if not, not."

So the King went in to his idol without pause or delay and offered up sacrifices and slaughtered victims; after which he fell down before it, prostrate and weeping, and repeated these verses:

	O my Lord, well I know your powerful hand:
	Solomon would break you and see you banned.
	O my Lord, I stand here to beg your aid;
	command, and I bow to your high command.

Then I — the ifrit went on, addressing the Shaykh and those around him — out of my ignorance and my want of wit, and my recklessness about Solomon's commandment and my lack of any knowledge of his power, got inside the belly of the idol and answered as follows:

	As for me, of him I feel no fright,
	for my learning and my wisdom are infinite.
	If he wants war, I will show him a fight,
	and out of his body I will tear his sprite!

When the King heard my boastful answer he hardened his heart and resolved to make war on the Prophet and offer him battle; so he beat the messenger with a severe beating and returned a foul answer to Solomon, threatening him and saying, "Truly, your soul has suggested a vain thing to you. Do you threaten me with lying words? Gird yourself for battle; for if you do not come to me, I shall certainly come to you."

So the messenger went back to Solomon and told him everything that had passed and everything that had happened to him. And when the Prophet heard it, he raged like Doomsday and set himself to the fight, and raised armies of men and jann and birds and reptiles. He commanded his vizier al-Dimiryat, King of the Jann, to gather together the marids of the jinn from every quarter, and he collected six hundred thousand thousand devils for him. Moreover, by his order, his vizier Asaf bin Barkhiya raised him an army of men to the number of a thousand thousand and more. All these he furnished with arms and armour; and mounting, with his host, upon his carpet, he took flight through the air, while the beasts went along under him and the birds flew overhead, until he came down on the island of the rebel King and encircled it about, filling the earth with his hosts.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the ifrit went on:

So when Solomon the prophet (on whom be peace!) had come down with his host on the island, he sent to our King, saying, "Behold, I am come. Defend your life against what has fallen on you, or else make your submission to me and confess that I am the Apostle of Allah, and give me your daughter in lawful marriage, and break your idol and worship the one God, who alone is worthy of worship; and bear witness, you and yours, and say: There is no god but God, and Solomon is the Apostle of Allah! If you do this you shall have pardon and peace; and if not, it will do you no good to fortify yourself on this island, for Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) has commanded the wind to obey me, and I will order it to carry me to you on my carpet and make you a warning and an example to deter others."

But the King answered his messenger, saying, "It cannot be in any way as he demands of me; so tell him I am coming out to him."

With this answer the messenger went back to Solomon, who thereupon gathered together all the jinn under his hand, to the number of a thousand thousand, and added to them others besides — marids and satans from the islands of the sea and the tops of the mountains — and, drawing them up on parade, opened his armouries and distributed arms and armour to them.

Then the Prophet drew up his host in order of battle, dividing the beasts into two bodies, one on the right wing of the men and the other on the left, and ordering them to tear the enemies' horses apart. Furthermore, he ordered the birds that were on the island to hover over their heads, and, when the assault was made, to swoop down and tear out the enemy's eyes with their beaks and beat their faces with their wings; and they answered, "We hear and we obey Allah and you, Prophet of Allah!"

Then Solomon seated himself on a throne of alabaster studded with precious stones and plated with red gold; and, commanding the wind to lift him into the air, set his vizier Asaf bin Barkhiya and the kings of mankind on his right, and his vizier al-Dimiryat and the kings of the jinn on his left, and arrayed the beasts and the vipers and the serpents in the van.

Then they all fell on us together, and we gave them battle for two days over a vast plain; but on the third day disaster came upon us and the judgment of Allah the Most High was carried out on us. Now the first to charge them were my troops and I; and I said to my companions, "Stay where you are, while I go out to them and challenge al-Dimiryat to single combat."

And behold, he came out to the duel like a vast mountain, with his fires flaming and his smoke going up in a spire, and shot a falling star of fire at me; but I swerved aside from it and it missed me. Then I cast a flame of fire at him in my turn, and struck him; but his shaft overcame my fire, and he gave such a terrible cry at me that it seemed to me the skies had fallen flat on top of me, and the mountains trembled at his voice.

Then he ordered his hosts to charge; and they rushed on us and we rushed on them, each side crying out against the other; and the battle reared its crest, rising in volumes with the smoke going up in columns and hearts nearly splitting. The birds and the flying jinn fought in the air, and the beasts and the men and the foot-going jann in the dust; and I fought with al-Dimiryat until I was worn out, and he no less.

At last I grew weak and turned to flee from him, whereupon my companions and my tribesmen took to flight as well, and my hosts were routed; and Solomon cried out, saying, "Take that furious tyrant, the accursed, the infamous!"

Then man fell on man and jinni on jinni, and the armies of the Prophet charged down on us, with the wild beasts and the lions on their right hand and on their left, tearing our horses apart and rending our men; while the birds hovered overhead in the air, pecking out our eyes with their claws and beaks and beating our faces with their wings, and the serpents struck us with their fangs, until most of our people lay flat on the face of the earth like the trunks of date palms. So defeat came upon our King, and we became a spoil for Solomon.

As for me, I fled before al-Dimiryat, but he followed me for three months' journey, until I fell down from weariness and he overtook me and pounced on me and made me his prisoner.

I said, "By the virtue of Him who has exalted you and abased me, spare me and bring me into the presence of Solomon, on whom be peace!"

So he carried me before Solomon, who received me in the foulest fashion and ordered this pillar to be brought and hollowed out. Then he put me inside it and chained me and sealed me with his seal ring; and al-Dimiryat carried me to this place where you see me. Moreover, he charged a great angel to guard me; and this pillar is my prison until the Day of Judgment.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the jinni imprisoned in the pillar had told them his tale from first to last, the party marvelled at his story and at the frightfulness of his appearance, and the Emir Musa said, "There is no god but God! Truly Solomon was gifted with a mighty dominion."

Then the Shaykh Abd al-Samad said to the jinni, "You there! I should like to ask you about something; tell us about it."

"Ask what you like," answered the ifrit Dahish.

And the Shaykh said, "Are there anywhere hereabouts any of the ifrits imprisoned in jars of copper from the time of Solomon, on whom be peace?"

"Yes," replied the jinni. "There are such in the sea of al-Karkar, on the shores of which lives a people descended from Noah, on whom be peace; for their country was not reached by the Flood, and they are cut off there from the other sons of Adam."

Abd al-Samad said, "And which is the way to the City of Brass and the place where the jars of Solomon are, and what distance is there between us and it?"

The ifrit said, "It is near at hand"; and he directed them on the way there.

So they left him and went forward, until there appeared to them far off a great blackness with two fires in it facing one another; and the Emir Musa asked the Shaykh, "What is that vast blackness and its twin fires?"

And the guide answered, "Rejoice, Emir, for this is the City of Brass, as it is described in the Book of Hidden Treasures which I have with me. Its walls are of black stone, and it has two towers of Andalusian brass, which look to anybody in the distance like two fires; and that is why it is called the City of Brass."

Then they went on without stopping until they drew near the city — and behold, it was like a piece of a mountain, or a mass of iron cast in a mould, impenetrable for the height of its walls and bulwarks; while nothing could be more beautiful than its buildings and the ordering of them.

So they dismounted and looked for a way in, but saw none, and could not find a trace of any opening in the walls — for although there were twenty-five gates to the city, not one of them was visible from outside.

Then the Emir said, "Shaykh, I can see no sign of any gate to this city."

And he said, "Emir, so it is described in my Book of Hidden Treasures. It has twenty-five gates, but not one of them can be opened except from inside the city."

Musa asked, "And how shall we manage to get into the city and see its wonders?"

And Talib son of Sahl, his vizier, answered, "Allah keep the Emir! Let us rest here two or three days, and, God willing, we shall find a way to get inside the walls."

Then Musa said to one of his men, "Mount your camel and ride round the city; perhaps you may come upon a gate, or some place a little lower than this in front of us, or, God willing, a breach we can get in by."

So he mounted his beast, taking water and food with him, and rode round the city for two days and two nights without drawing rein to rest; but he found the wall of it like a single block, with no breach and no way in. And on the third day he came in sight of his companions again, dazed and astonished at what he had seen of the size and the height of the place, and said, "Emir, the easiest place to get at is the one where you have halted."

Then Musa took Talib and Abd al-Samad and climbed the highest hill overlooking the city. When they reached the top they saw below them a city — and eyes never saw a greater or a finer — with dwellings and mansions of towering height, and palaces and pavilions and domes gleaming gloriously bright, and lamps and bulwarks of infinite strength; and its streams were flowing and its flowers blowing and its fruits glowing. It was a city with impregnable gates; but empty and still, without a voice and without one living soul to cheer it. The owl hooted in its quarters; the bird went skimming in circles over its squares; and the raven croaked in its great thoroughfares, weeping and lamenting for the people who once lived there.

The Emir stood a while, marvelling and grieving over the desolation of the city, and saying, "Glory to Him whom no ages and no changes and no times can wither — Him who created all things by His Might!"

Presently he happened to look aside and caught sight of seven tablets of white marble a long way off. So he went up to them, and finding inscriptions graven on them, called the Shaykh and told him to read them. So he came forward, and examining the inscriptions, found that they held matter of admonition and warning, and examples and restraint for people of understanding.

On the first tablet was inscribed, in the ancient Greek character:

	Son of Adam, how heedless you are of what lies before you! Truly your years and your months and your days have distracted you from it. Do you not know that the cup of death is filled for your undoing, and that in a little while you shall drain it to the dregs? Look to your doom before you go into your tomb. Where are the Kings who held dominion over the lands and humbled the servants of Allah and built these palaces and had armies under their command? By Allah, the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies and the Devastator of dwelling places came down on them and carried them from the spaciousness of their palaces to the narrowness of their burial places.

And at the foot of the tablet these verses were written:
