The City of Brass
(Part 3 of 4)

	Where are the kings who peopled the earth — where are they?
	They left what they had built and settled, for ever and aye.
	They are entombed, and still pledged for actions past,
	and after their death decay came upon them to stay.
	Where are their troops? They failed to ward and guard.
	Where is the wealth that in their treasuries lay?
	The Lord of the Highest Heaven surprised them with one word,
	and neither wealth nor refuge could their doom delay.

When the Emir heard this he cried out, and the tears ran down his cheeks, and he exclaimed, "By Allah, to abstain from the world is the wisest course and the only cure!" And he called for a pen case and paper and wrote down what was graven on the first tablet.

Then he went up to the second tablet and found these words graven on it:

	Son of Adam, what has seduced you away from the service of the Ancient of Days, and made you forget that one day you must pay the debt of death? Do you not know that this is a place you pass through, in which nobody stays? And yet you give your thought to the world and cling fast to it. Where are the kings who peopled Iraq and possessed the four quarters of the globe? Where are those who lived in Isfahan and the land of Khorasan? The voice of the Summoner of Death called them and they answered him, and the Herald of Destruction hailed them and they replied, Here we are! Truly, what they built and fortified profited them nothing; nor did what they had gathered and laid by serve for their defence.

And at the foot of the tablet these verses were graven:

	Where are the men who built and fortified
	high places whose like no man ever espied?
	In fear of Fate they levied troops and hosts,
	which availed them nothing when the time and the tide
	came round. Where are the Chosroes in their strongest walls?
	As though they had never been in the homes they tried.

The Emir Musa wept and exclaimed, "By Allah, we are indeed created for a grave matter!" Then he copied the inscription and passed on to the third tablet.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Emir Musa passed on to the third tablet, on which was written:

	Son of Adam, the things of this world you love and prize, and the command of your Lord you spurn and despise. All the days of your life go by, and you are content to have it so. Make ready your provision for the journey against the day appointed for you to see, and prepare to answer the Lord of every creature that shall be.

And at the foot were written these verses:

	Where is the man who peopled, in the years gone past,
	the lands of Hind and Sind, and played the tyrant there?
	Who bound Zanj and Abyssinia beneath his yoke,
	and curbed Nubia and laid its power bare?
	Do not look for news of what is in his grave:
	he is too far off to help your seeing there.
	The stroke of death fell on him sharp and sure,
	and neither palace saved him nor the lands he swayed.

At this Musa wept bitterly, and going on to the fourth tablet he read inscribed on it:

	Son of Adam, how long shall your Lord bear with you, while every day you are sunk in the sea of your own folly? Has it been established, then, that some day you shall not die? Son of Adam, do not let the deceits of your days and nights and times and hours delude you with their delights; but remember that death lies ready for you in ambush, eager to spring on your shoulders; and not a day passes but he wakes with you in the morning and lies down with you at night. Beware, then, of his onslaught, and make provision against it. As it was with me, so it is with you: you waste your whole life and squander the joys your days are full of. Listen, then, to my words and put your trust in the Lord of Lords; for in the world there is no stability — it is no more to you than a spider's web.

And at the foot of the tablet these couplets were written:

	Where is the man who plied all this labour,
	who founded and built and reared these walls on high?
	Where are the lords of the castles? Those who dwelt in them
	went out and left them lying in decay.
	They are all entombed, in pledge against the day
	when every sin shall show to every eye.
	None but the Lord Most High has endurance,
	whose Might and Majesty shall never die.

When the Emir read this he fainted away, and presently, coming to himself, marvelled greatly and wrote it down. Then he went up to the fifth tablet, and behold, on it was graven:

	Son of Adam, what is it that distracts you from obedience to your Creator and the Author of your being — Him who raised you when you were little, and fed you when you were grown? You are ungrateful for His bounty, although He watches over you with His favours and lets down the curtain of His protection over you. There must come to you an hour bitterer than aloes and hotter than live coals. Provide against it, then; for who shall sweeten its gall or quench its fires? Think of the peoples and the heroes who went before you, and take warning by them, before you perish.

And at the foot of the tablet these couplets were graven:

	Where are the kings of the earth, who from the place they lived
	sped off to the graveyards with their hoardings in tow?
	Once, on their days of mounting, you would have seen
	hosts that hid the ground they rode on, row on row.
	How many a king they humbled in their day!
	How many a host they led and laid on low!
	But from the Lord of the Highest Heaven there came
	one word in haste, and joy turned grief before the morning's glow.

The Emir marvelled at this and wrote it down; after which he passed on to the sixth tablet, and behold, on it was inscribed:

	Son of Adam, do not think that safety will last for ever and always, seeing that death is sealed to your head at every hour. Where are your fathers, where are your brothers, where are your friends and the people you loved? They have all gone to the dust of the tombs and presented themselves before the Glorious One, the Forgiving, as if they had never eaten or drunk; and they are held in pledge for what they earned. So look to yourself, before your tomb comes upon you.

And at the foot of the tablet were these couplets:

	Where are the kings who ruled the Franks of old?
	Where is the king who peopled the land of Tangier?
	Their works are written down in a book, and He,
	the One, the Father of all, shall hold it as witness there.

At this the Emir Musa marvelled and wrote it down, saying, "There is no god but God! Indeed, how fine these people were!"

Then he went up to the seventh tablet, and behold, on it was written:

	Glory to Him who has fore-ordained death for everything He creates, the Living One, who does not die! Son of Adam, do not let your days and their delights delude you, nor your hours and the pleasures of their time; and know that death is coming to you and sits upon your shoulder. Beware, then, of his assault, and be ready for his onslaught. As it was with me, so it is with you: you are wasting the sweetness of your life and the joy of your hours. Give ear, then, to my counsel and put your trust in the Lord of Lords, and know that in the world there is no stability, but it is like a spider's web to you, and everything in it shall die and cease to be. Where is the man who laid the foundation of Amid and built it, and built Farikin and exalted it? Where are the peoples of the strong places? When they had lived in them, after all their might they went down into the tombs. They have been carried off by death, and we shall be afflicted by doom in the same way. Nobody remains except Allah the Most High, for He is Allah the Forgiving One.

The Emir Musa wept and copied all this; and indeed the world had grown small in his eyes.

Then he came down the hill and rejoined his host, with whom he spent the rest of the day casting about for a way into the city. And he said to his vizier Talib bin Sahl and to the chief officers about him, "How shall we manage to get into this city and see its marvels? Perhaps we shall find in it something to win us the favour of the Commander of the Faithful."

"Allah prolong the Emir's fortune!" replied Talib. "Let us make a ladder and climb the wall with it; then perhaps we may get at the gate from the inside."

The Emir said, "That is exactly what occurred to me too, and it is admirable advice!"

Then he called for carpenters and blacksmiths and told them to shape wood and build a ladder plated and banded with iron. So they made a strong ladder, and a great many men worked at it for a whole month.

Then the whole company took hold of it and set it up against the wall, and it reached the top as exactly as if it had been built for it beforehand. The Emir marvelled and said, "The blessing of Allah be upon you! It looks as though you had taken the measure of the wall, so excellent is your work."

Then he said to his men, "Which of you will go up the ladder and walk along the wall and look for a way of getting down into the city, so as to see how things stand and let us know how we may open the gate?"

At which one of them said, "I will go up, Emir, and go down and open it for you."

And Musa answered, "Go, and the blessing of Allah go with you!"

So the man climbed the ladder; but when he came to the top of the wall he stood up and gazed steadily down into the city, and then clapped his hands and cried out at the top of his voice, "By Allah, you are fair!" — and threw himself down into the place.

And Musa cried, "By Allah, he is a dead man!"

But another came up to him and said, "Emir, this man was mad, and no doubt his madness got the better of him and destroyed him. I will go up and open the gate for you, if it be the will of Allah the Most High."

"Go up," replied Musa, "and Allah be with you! But take care not to lose your head, as your comrade did."

Then the man climbed the ladder; but no sooner had he reached the top of the wall than he laughed aloud, saying, "Well done! Well done!" and, clapping his hands, threw himself down into the city and died on the spot.

When the Emir saw this he said, "If that is what a reasonable man does, what will a madman do? If all our men behave like this we shall have none left, and we shall fail in our errand and in the errand of the Commander of the Faithful. Get ready to march: we have no business with this city."

But a third man of the company said, "Perhaps somebody else may be steadier than they were." So a third climbed the wall, and a fourth and a fifth, and every one of them cried out and threw himself down, exactly as the first had done; nor did they leave off doing so until a dozen had perished in the same way.

Then the Shaykh Abd al-Samad came forward and took heart and said, "This business is for nobody but me; for a man with experience is not like a man without it."

The Emir said, "Indeed you shall not do it, and I will not have you go up. If you die, we shall all be cut off to the last man, since you are our guide."

But he answered, "It may be that what we are looking for will be accomplished at my hands, by the grace of God Most High."

So the whole company agreed to let him climb the ladder; and he got up and took heart and said, "In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate!" and went up the ladder, calling on the name of the Lord and reciting the Verses of Safety.

When he reached the top of the wall he clapped his hands and gazed steadily down into the city; at which the people below all cried out to him with one voice, saying, "Shaykh Abd al-Samad, for the Lord's sake, do not throw yourself down!" and they added, "Truly, we belong to Allah and to Him we are returning! If the Shaykh falls, we are all dead men."

Then he laughed beyond all measure, and sat for a long hour reciting the names of Almighty Allah and repeating the Verses of Safety; and then he got up and cried out at the top of his voice, saying, "Emir, have no fear; no harm shall come to you, for Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!) has turned aside from me the wiles and the malice of Satan, by the blessing of the words, In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate!"

Musa asked, "What did you see, Shaykh?"

And Abd al-Samad answered, "I saw ten girls like the houris of Heaven, calling to me with their hands."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Shaykh Abd al-Samad answered:

"I saw ten girls like the houris of Heaven, calling and signalling, Come to us! And it seemed to me there was a lake of water below me. So I thought I would throw myself down — when I caught sight of my twelve companions lying dead; so I held myself back and recited something of Allah's Book, whereupon He dispelled the girls' witching wiles and malicious guiles, and they disappeared. And no doubt this was an enchantment devised by the people of the city, to drive off anybody who should try to look into the place or enter it. And it has succeeded in killing our companions."

Then he walked on along the wall until he came to the two towers of brass, and saw in them two gates of gold, without padlocks or any visible means of opening. Here he paused as long as Allah pleased, and looked about him a while, until he caught sight, in the middle of one of the gates, of a horseman of brass with his hand stretched out as if pointing, and something written on his palm. So he went up to it and read these words:

	You who come to this place: if you would enter, turn the pin in my navel twelve times, and the gate will open.

So he examined the horseman, and finding in his navel a pin of gold, firmly set and fast fixed, he turned it twelve times; whereupon the horseman revolved like blinding lightning and the gate swung open with a noise like thunder.

He went in and found himself in a long passage, which brought him down some steps into a guardroom furnished with fine wooden benches, on which sat men who were dead, with handsome shields hanging over their heads, and keen blades, and bent bows, and arrows ready notched.

From there he came to the main gate of the city; and finding it secured with iron bars and elaborately worked locks and bolts and chains and other fastenings of wood and metal, he said to himself, "Very likely the keys are with those dead men."

So he went back to the guardroom, and seeing among the dead an old man sitting on a high wooden bench who seemed to be the chief of them, he said in his mind, "Who knows but the keys are with this Shaykh? No doubt he was the warden of the city and these others were under his hand."

So he went up to him and lifted his gown — and behold, the keys were hanging at his belt; at which he rejoiced exceedingly and was ready to fly for gladness.

Then he took them and went to the gateway and undid the padlocks and drew back the bolts and the bars, whereupon the great leaves flew open with a crash like a peal of thunder, so huge and so terrible were they. At this he cried out, "Allahu akbar — God is most great!" And the people outside answered him with the same words, rejoicing and thanking him for what he had done.

The Emir Musa was delighted too at the Shaykh's safety and at the opening of the city gate, and the troops all pressed forward to go in; but Musa cried out to them, "Good people, if we all go in at once we shall not be safe from some mishap that may befall us. Let half go in and the other half wait outside."

So he pushed forward with half his men, carrying their weapons of war; and finding their comrades lying dead, they buried them. And they saw the doorkeepers and the eunuchs and the chamberlains and the officers reclining on couches of silk, and every one of them a corpse.

Then they went on until they came to the chief market place, full of lofty buildings, not one of which overtopped the others; and they found all its shops open, with the scales hung out and the brass vessels set in order and the caravanserais full of goods of every kind. And they saw the merchants sitting on the shop boards, dead, with shrivelled skin and rotted bones — a warning to those who can take warning; and here they saw four separate markets, all of them full of wealth.

Then they left the great bazaar and went on until they came to the silk market, where they found silks and brocades embroidered with red gold and figured with white silver on every kind of colour, and the owners lying dead on mats of scented goatskin, looking as if they were about to speak.

After that they crossed the market street of pearls and rubies and other jewels, and came to the street of the money-changers, whom they saw sitting dead on carpets of raw silk and dyed stuffs, in shops full of gold and silver.

From there they passed on to the perfumers' bazaar, where they found the shops filled with drugs of all kinds, and bladders of musk and ambergris and nadd-perfume and camphor and other scents, in vessels of ivory and ebony and khalanj-wood and Andalusian copper, which is equal in value to gold; and various kinds of rattan and Indian cane. But the shopkeepers all lay dead, and there was nothing whatever of food with them.

And close by this drug market they came upon a palace, imposingly built and magnificently decorated; so they went in and found in it banners displayed and drawn sword blades and strung bows and shields hanging by chains of gold and silver, and helmets gilded with red gold. In the vestibules stood benches of ivory plated with glittering gold and covered with silken stuffs, on which lay men whose skin had dried on their bones; a fool would have thought they were asleep, but for want of food they had perished and tasted the cup of death.

Now when the Emir Musa saw this he stood still, glorifying Allah the Most High and calling Him holy, and contemplating the beauty of the palace and the massiveness of its masonry and the fine perfection of its ordering; for it was built in the finest and most solid fashion, and most of its decoration was of green lapis lazuli. And on the inner door, which stood open, these couplets were written in characters of gold and ultramarine:

	Consider, man, what these places have shown you,
	and be on your guard before you travel the same road;
	and make ready good provision that may serve your turn some day,
	for every dweller in the house must go with those who have gone.
	Consider how this people adorned their palaces,
	and in the dust have been held in pledge for the seed of the acts they sowed.
	They built, but their building did not avail them, and their hoards
	neither saved their lives nor put off the day of Destiny.
	How often they hoped for things that were not decreed,
	and passed on to their tombs before Hope had shown its bounty!
	And from a high and awful state, all of a sudden, they were sent
	to the narrowness of the grave — and oh, how base is their abode!
	Then a Crier came to them after burial and cried:
	What good were the thrones to you, or the crowns, or the gold you were given?
	Where now are the faces that were hidden by curtain and by veil,
	whose charms were told in proverbs — those beauties in the fashion?
	The tombs reply aloud to the questioners, and cry:
	The canker and decay of Death corrode those rosy cheeks.
	Long they ate and drank, but their rejoicing had a term;
	and the eater in his turn was eaten, and the worm ate him.
