The City of Brass
(Part 4 of 4)

When the Emir read this he wept until he was nearly fainting.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Emir wept until he was nearly fainting, and gave orders for the verses to be written down; after which he passed on into the inner palace and came to a vast hall, at each of whose four corners stood a pavilion, lofty and spacious, washed with gold and silver and painted in various colours.

In the heart of the hall was a great jetting fountain of alabaster, surmounted by a canopy of brocade; and in each pavilion was a sitting place, and each place had its richly worked fountain and its tank paved with marble, and streams running in channels along the floor and meeting in a great and splendid cistern of many-coloured marbles.

The Emir said to the Shaykh Abd al-Samad, "Come, let us visit that pavilion!"

So they went into the first and found it full of gold and silver and pearls and jacinths and other precious stones and metals, besides chests filled with brocades, red and yellow and white.

Then they went to the second pavilion, and, opening a closet there, found it full of arms and armour — gilded helmets and Davidean hauberks and Indian swords and Arabian spears and Khwarazmian maces and other gear of fight and fray.

From there they passed to the third pavilion, where they saw closets padlocked and covered with curtains worked with every kind of embroidery. They opened one of these and found it full of weapons elaborately ornamented with openwork and with gold and silver damascening and jewels.

Then they went into the fourth pavilion, and opening one of the closets there, saw in it a great store of eating and drinking vessels of gold and silver, with platters of crystal and goblets set with fine pearls and cups of carnelian and the like. So they all fell to taking whatever suited their taste, and each of the soldiers carried off what he could.

When they left the pavilions they saw, in the middle of the palace, a door of teak inlaid with ivory and ebony and plated with glittering gold, over which hung a silk curtain bordered with every kind of embroidery; and on this door were locks of white silver that opened by a trick, without a key. The Shaykh Abd al-Samad went boldly up to it and by the help of his knowledge and skill opened the locks, whereupon the door let them into a corridor paved with marble and hung with veil-like tapestries embroidered with figures of every kind of beast and bird, whose bodies were of red gold and white silver and their eyes of pearls and rubies, amazing everybody who looked at them.

Going on, they came to a hall built all of polished marble inlaid with jewels, which looked to anybody standing there as if the floor were running water, so that whoever walked on it slipped. The Emir told the Shaykh to strew something over it, so that they could walk across; and when this was done they managed to get forward, until they came to a great domed pavilion of stone gilded with red gold and crowned with a cupola of alabaster, around which were set lattice windows, carved and jewelled with rods of emerald beyond the means of any king.

Under this dome was a canopy of brocade, resting on pillars of red gold and worked with figures of birds whose feet were of emerald, and beneath each bird was a network of fresh-coloured pearls. The canopy was spread over a jetting fountain of ivory and carnelian, plated with glittering gold; and beside it stood a couch set with pearls and rubies and other jewels, and beside the couch a pillar of gold. On the capital of the column stood a bird made of red rubies, holding in his bill a pearl that shone like a star.

And on the couch lay a girl like the shining sun, and eyes never saw a fairer. She wore a close-fitting robe of fine pearls, with a crown of red gold on her head, banded with gems; and on her forehead were two great jewels whose light was like the light of the sun. On her breast she wore a jewelled amulet, filled with musk and ambergris and worth the empire of the Caesars; and round her neck hung a collar of rubies and great pearls, hollowed and filled with sweet-smelling musk. And it seemed as though she looked at them, to the right and to the left.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the girl seemed to be gazing at the party to the right and to the left. The Emir Musa marvelled at her extraordinary beauty and was astonished at the blackness of her hair and the redness of her cheeks, which made anybody looking at her think she was alive and not dead; and he said to her, "Peace be with you, girl!"

But Talib ibn Sahl said to him, "Allah preserve you, Emir! This girl is dead and there is no life in her; so how should she return your greeting?" And he added, "Indeed, she is only a corpse embalmed with extraordinary art. Her eyes were taken out after her death and quicksilver set under them, after which they were put back in their sockets. That is why they glisten; and when the air moves her lashes she seems to blink, and it looks to anybody watching as though she were looking at him, dead though she is."

At this the Emir marvelled beyond measure and said, "Glory be to God, who subjects His creatures to the dominion of Death!"

Now the couch the girl lay on had steps, and on them stood two statues of Andalusian copper representing slaves, one white and the other black. The first held a mace of steel and the second a sword of watered steel that dazzled the eye; and between them, on one of the steps of the couch, lay a golden tablet, on which these words were written in characters of white silver:

	In the name of God, the Compassionating, the Compassionate! Praise be to Allah, the Creator of mankind; and He is the Lord of Lords, the Causer of Causes! In the name of Allah, the Never-beginning, the Everlasting, the Ordainer of Fate and Fortune!
	Son of Adam, what has fooled you into this long hoping? What has made you forget the mischance of the Day of Death? Do you not know that Death is calling for you and hurrying to seize your soul? Be ready, then, for the road, and provide yourself for your departure from the world; for you shall certainly leave it without delay.
	Where is Adam, the first of mankind? Where is Noah with his descendants? Where are the Kings of India and the plain of Iraq, and those who reigned over the widest regions of the earth? Where do the Amalekites live now, and the giants and the tyrants of old? Truly, the dwelling places are empty of them, and they have departed from their kindred and their homes. Where are the Kings of the Arabs and of the Persians? They are dead, every one, and gone, and have become rotten bones. Where are the lords who stood so high? They are all done and dead. Where are Korah and Haman? Where is Shaddad son of Ad? Where are Canaan and the Lord of the Stakes? By Allah, the Reaper of lives has reaped them and emptied the lands of them. Did they provide against the Day of Resurrection, or make ready to answer the Lord of men?
	You there — if you do not know me, I will tell you my name. I am Tadmurah, daughter of the Kings of the Amalekites, of those who held dominion over the lands in fairness and brought low the necks of mankind. I possessed what no king ever possessed, and I was righteous in my rule and did justice among my subjects; yes, I gave gifts and largesse, and freed slaves both men and women. So I lived many years in all the ease and delight of life, until Death knocked at my door and calamities beyond counting fell on me and on my people. And it happened in this way.
	There came upon us seven successive years of drought, in which not a drop of rain fell on us from the skies and not a green thing sprouted for us on the face of the earth. So we ate what food we had by us, and then we fell upon the cattle and ate them, until nothing was left. Then I had my treasures brought out and measured by the measure, and sent out trusted men to buy food. They went round all the lands looking for it and left no city unsearched, but they did not find it to be bought, and came back to us with the treasure after a long absence, and let us know that they had not been able to barter fine pearls for poor wheat, bushel for bushel, weight for weight.
	So when we despaired of help, we displayed all our riches and things of price and, shutting the gates of the city and its strong places, resigned ourselves to the judgment of our Lord and committed our case to our King. And then we all died, as you see us, and left everything we had built and everything we had hoarded. This, then, is our story; and after the substance nothing remains but the trace.

Then they looked at the foot of the tablet and read these couplets:

	Child of Adam, do not let hope mock you and jeer at you:
	from everything your hands have treasured you shall be removed.
	I see you coveting the world and the fleeting charms of the world,
	and the races that are past and gone did the same as you, I see.
	They got wealth lawful and unlawful; but all their hoarded store,
	when their term was accomplished, delayed nothing of Destiny's decree.
	They led armies and mighty men and won themselves gold in plenty;
	then left their wealth and their palaces, compelled by Fate to flee
	to the narrowness of the graveyard and the humble bed of dust,
	from which, held in pledge for every word and deed, they never win free.
	They are like a company of travellers who had unloaded in the night
	at a house that lacked food and was not overfond of company,
	whose owner says, Good people, there is no lodging here for you;
	so those who had just unpacked packed up and went off hurriedly,
	disliking the march, and neither the journey nor the halt
	had anything of pleasant chance or anything of a good greeting.
	So make ready good provision, stored up for tomorrow's journey:
	nothing but a righteous and honest life shall avail you with the Lord.

And the Emir Musa wept as he read on:

	By Allah, the fear of the Lord is the best of all property, the pillar of certainty and the only sure support. Truly, Death is the manifest truth and the sure command, and in it, O you, is the goal and the plain place of return. Take warning, then, by those who went off into the dust and hurried along the road to the appointed end. Do you not see that grey hairs are summoning you to the tomb, and that the whiteness of your locks is lamenting your doom? So be awake and ready for your departure and for the settling of your account.
	Son of Adam, what has hardened your heart in this hateful way? What has seduced you from the service of your Lord? Where are the peoples of the old time? They are a warning to whoever will be warned. Where are the Kings of China and the lords of majestic bearing? Where is Shaddad son of Ad and everything he built and established? Where is Nimrod, who revolted against Allah and defied Him? Where is Pharaoh, who rebelled against God and denied Him? Death followed hard on the trail of all of them and laid them low, sparing neither great nor small, male nor female; and the Reaper of Mankind cut them off — yes, by Him who makes the night come round upon the day!
	Know, you who come to this place, that the woman you see here was not deluded by the world and its frail delights, for it is faithless and treacherous, a house of ruin, empty and false; and it is good for a creature to remember his sins. So she feared her Lord and made her dealings fair and provided herself with provisions against the appointed day of marching.
	Whoever comes to our city, and Allah grants him the means to enter it, let him take of the treasure all he can; but let him not touch anything that is on my body, for it is the covering of my shame and the outfit for the last journey. So let him fear Allah and strip none of it away, or else he will destroy his own self. This I have set out for him as a warning from me and a solemn trust to keep. And with that, peace be with you; and I pray Allah to keep you from sickness and calamity.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Emir Musa read this he wept exceedingly until he fainted away; and presently, coming to himself, he wrote down everything he had seen and took to heart everything he had witnessed.

Then he said to his men, "Fetch the camels and load them with these treasures and vases and jewels."

"Emir," asked Talib, "are we to leave our girl here with all that is on her — things that have no equal, whose like is not to be found, and more perfect than anything else you are taking? You could not find a finer offering to win the favour of the Commander of the Faithful."

But Musa answered, "Man, did you not hear what the lady says on this tablet? All the more since she gives it in trust to us, and we are no traitors."

"And are we," retorted the vizier Talib, "because of these words, to leave all these riches and jewels behind, seeing that she is dead? What should she do with things that are the adornment of the world and the ornament of the worldly, when a single garment of cotton would be enough to cover her? We have more right to them than she has."

And so saying he mounted the steps of the couch between the pillars; but when he came within reach of the two slaves, the mace-bearer struck him on the back and the other struck him with the sword he held in his hand and cut off his head, and he dropped down dead.

The Emir said, "Allah have no mercy on your resting place! Indeed, there was enough in these treasures; and greed for gain certainly degrades a man."

Then he ordered the troops to be let in; so they came in and loaded the camels with those treasures and precious ores; after which they went out, and the Emir ordered them to shut the gate as it had been before.

They travelled along the seashore a whole month, until they came in sight of a high mountain overlooking the sea and full of caves, in which lived a tribe of black people, dressed in hides with hooded cloaks of hide as well, and speaking a language nobody knew. When they saw the troops they started like shying horses and fled into the caves, while their women and children stood at the cave mouths looking at the strangers.

"Shaykh Abd al-Samad," asked the Emir, "who are these people?"

And he answered, "They are the people we are looking for, on behalf of the Commander of the Faithful."

So they dismounted and set down their loads and pitched their tents; and almost before they had finished, down came the King of these people from the mountain and drew near the camp. Now he understood Arabic; so when he came to the Emir he greeted him with the salaam, and Musa returned his greeting and treated him with honour.

Then the King said to the Emir, "Are you men, or jinn?"

"We are men, certainly," said Musa; "but no doubt you are jinn, to judge by your living apart on this mountain, which is cut off from mankind, and by your enormous size."

"Not at all," answered the King. "We too are children of Adam, of the lineage of Ham, son of Noah (on whom be peace!); and this sea is called al-Karkar."

Musa asked, "King, what is your religion, and what do you worship?"

And he answered, "We worship the God of the heavens, and our religion is the religion of Mohammed, whom Allah bless and preserve!"

"And how did you come by the knowledge of that," asked the Emir, "seeing that no prophet was ever inspired to visit this country?"

"Know, Emir," replied the King, "that a long while ago there appeared to us out of the sea a man from whom came a light that lit up the horizons, and he cried out in a voice that was heard by men far and near, saying: Children of Ham, reverence Him who sees and is not seen, and say: There is no god but God, and Mohammed is the messenger of God! And he added: I am Abu al-Abbas al-Khizr.

"Before that we used to worship one another, but he called us to the service of the Lord of all creatures; and he taught us to repeat these words: There is no god but God alone, who has no partner; His is the kingdom and His is the praise. He gives life and death, and He is Almighty over all things. Nor do we draw near to Allah (be He exalted and extolled!) except with these words, for we know no others. But every eve before Friday we see a light on the face of the earth, and we hear a voice saying: Holy and glorious, Lord of the Angels and the Spirit! What He wills, is; and what He does not will, is not. Every blessing is of His grace, and there is neither Majesty nor is there Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!

"But you," said the King, "who and what are you, and what brings you to this land?"

Musa said, "We are officers of the Sovereign of Islam, the Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, who has heard tell of the lord Solomon, son of David (on whom be peace!) and of the supreme dominion the Most High gave him: how he held sway over jinn and beast and bird, and how, when he was angry with one of the marids, he used to shut him in a jar of copper and stop its mouth on him with lead, on which he stamped his seal ring, and throw it into the sea of al-Karkar. Now we have heard that this sea is near your land; so the Commander of the Faithful has sent us here to bring him some of these jars, that he may look at them and take pleasure in the sight of them. Such is our case, then, and what we want of you, King; and we hope you will help us to accomplish the errand the Commander of the Faithful has laid on us."

"With love and gladness," replied the King; and taking them to the guest house, he treated them with the utmost honour and provided them with everything they needed, feeding them on fish.

They stayed like this three days, and then he ordered his divers to fetch some of the vessels of Solomon up out of the sea. So they dived and brought up twelve jars, at which the Emir and the Shaykh and all the company rejoiced that the Caliph's need had been met.

Then Musa gave the King many great gifts; and he in his turn made him a present of one of the wonders of the deep — fishes in human form — saying, "Your food these three days has been the flesh of these fish."

The Emir said, "We must certainly carry some of these to the Caliph, for the sight of them will please him more than the jars of Solomon."

Then they took their leave of the King and, setting out on their homeward journey, travelled until they came to Damascus, where Musa went in to the Commander of the Faithful and told him everything he had seen and heard of verses and legends and examples, and how Talib bin Sahl had died.

And the Caliph said, "I wish I had been with you, so that I might have seen what you saw!"

Then he took the copper vessels and opened them one after another, whereupon the devils came out of them, saying, "We repent, Prophet of Allah! Never again will we go back to the like of this — never!" And the Caliph marvelled at it.

As for the daughters of the deep that the King had presented to them, they made them cisterns of planks full of water and laid them in there; but they died of the great heat.

Then the Caliph sent for the spoils of the City of Brass and divided them among the Faithful.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Caliph marvelled greatly at the jars and their contents; and then he sent for the spoils and divided them among the Faithful, saying, "Never did Allah give to anybody the like of what He bestowed upon Solomon son of David!"

Thereupon the Emir Musa asked his leave to appoint his son governor of the province in his place, so that he might take himself off to the Holy City of Jerusalem and worship Allah there. So the Commander of the Faithful invested his son Harun with the government, and Musa went off to the Glorious and Holy City, where he died.

This, then, is all that has come down to us of the story of the City of Brass; and God is All-knowing.

Now, said Shahrazad, I have another tale to tell, about
