Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 2 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan magician, after leaving the baths with Aladdin, took him and walked with him to the merchants' bazaar; and, having entertained him by showing him the market and its buying and selling, said to him, "My son, it becomes you to get to know people, and merchants especially, so that you may learn the merchant's trade from them, seeing that it is your calling now."

Then he led him out and showed him the city and its great mosques, along with all the pleasant sights in it; and last of all he took him into a cook's shop. Here dinner was served to them on plates of silver, and they dined well and ate and drank their fill, after which they went on their way.

Presently the Moroccan pointed out to Aladdin the pleasure grounds and the noble buildings, and went in with him to the Sultan's palace and entertained him by showing him all the apartments, which were exceedingly fine and grand; and finally he led him to the merchants' caravanserai where he was lodging himself. Then he invited several of the traders who were staying there; and they came and sat down to supper, when he informed them that the youth was his nephew, Aladdin by name.

And after they had eaten and drunk and night had fallen, he got up and took the lad with him and led him back to his mother; who, the moment she saw her boy looking like one of the merchants, was out of her wits and grew almost sad from sheer gladness.

Then she fell to thanking her supposed relative, the Moroccan, for all his kindnesses, and said to him, "Brother-in-law, I could never say enough if I thanked you for the rest of your days and praised you for the good deeds you have done to this child of mine."

At which the Moroccan said, "Wife of my brother, do not think this mere kindness on my part; the lad is my own son, and it is my duty to stand in the place of my brother, his father. So be quite satisfied."

And she said, "I pray Allah, by the honour of the saints, the ancients and the moderns, that He preserve you and let you continue, brother-in-law, and prolong your life for my sake; so that you shall be a wing spread over this orphan boy, and he shall always be obedient to your orders and do nothing except what you tell him."

The Moroccan replied, "Wife of my brother, Aladdin is a young man of sense now, and the son of good people, and I hope to Allah that he will follow in his father's footsteps and be a comfort to your eyes. But I am sorry that tomorrow, being Friday, I shall not be able to open his shop, since it is the day of assembly, when all the merchants go out to the gardens and pleasure grounds after congregational prayer. On Saturday, though, God willing, we will do our business. Meanwhile I will come to you early tomorrow and take Aladdin for a pleasant walk to the gardens and pleasure grounds outside the city, which he may perhaps not have seen before. There he shall see the merchants and the notables who go out to amuse themselves, so that he may get to know them and they him."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan went away and slept that night in his lodgings; and early next morning he came to the tailor's house and rapped at the door.

Now Aladdin — what with the joy of the new clothes he had put on, and the previous day's enjoyment in the baths and in eating and drinking and looking at the people, and what with expecting his uncle to come at dawn and carry him off on an outing to the gardens — had not slept a wink that night nor closed his eyelids, and could hardly believe it when the day broke. But hearing the knock at the door he went out at once in a great hurry, like a spark of fire, and opened it and saw his uncle the magician, who embraced him and kissed him.

Then, taking his hand, the Moroccan said to him as they set off together, "Son of my brother, today I will show you a sight you never saw in all your life"; and he began to make the lad laugh and to cheer him with pleasant talk.

So they went out of the city gate, and the Moroccan took to walking about the gardens with Aladdin, pointing out for his pleasure the exceedingly fine pleasure grounds and the marvellous tall pavilions. And whenever they stopped to stare at a garden or a mansion or a palace, the Moroccan would say to his companion, "Does this please you, son of my brother?"

Aladdin was nearly flying with delight at seeing sights he had never seen in all his born days; and they went on strolling about and enjoying themselves until they grew tired, when they came into a very grand garden nearby, a place that delighted the heart and lit up the sight, for its swift-running rills flowed among the flowers and the water jetted from the jaws of lions moulded in yellow brass like gold.

So they sat down opposite a little lake and rested a while; and Aladdin enjoyed himself exceedingly and fell to joking with his uncle and making merry with him, as though the magician really were his father's brother.

Presently the Moroccan got up and, loosening his belt, drew out from under it a bag full of food, dried fruit and so on, saying to Aladdin, "Nephew, perhaps you have grown hungry; so come and eat what you need."

So the lad fell on the food and the Moroccan ate with him, and they were gladdened and cheered by the rest and the good cheer.

Then the magician said, "Get up, son of my brother, if you are rested, and let us stroll on a little and reach the end of our walk."

So Aladdin got up, and the Moroccan walked with him from garden to garden until they had left them all behind and reached the foot of a high, bare hill; when the lad — who had never in all his days been outside the city gate, and had never in his life walked such a walk as this — said to the Moroccan, "Uncle, where are we going? We have left the gardens behind us one and all and got into barren hill country; and if the way is still long, I have no strength left for walking. Indeed I am ready to drop with tiredness. There are no gardens ahead of us, so let us turn back and go home to town."

The magician said, "No, my son, this is the right road, and the gardens are not ended; for we are going to look at one that has no equal among the gardens of kings, and everything you have seen is nothing beside it. So screw up your courage to walk; you are a man now, praise be to Allah!"

Then the Moroccan fell to soothing Aladdin with soft words and telling him wonderful tales, lies as well as truth, until they reached the spot the African magician had in mind — the spot he had travelled from the Land of the Setting Sun to the regions of China for.

And when they got there the Moroccan said to Aladdin, "Son of my brother, sit down and take your rest, for this is the place we have been looking for; and, God willing, I will soon entertain you by showing you marvels the like of which nobody in the world ever saw, and no one has ever had the pleasure of gazing on what you are about to see."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan wizard said to Aladdin, "No created being has ever enjoyed the sights you are about to see. But when you are rested, get up and look for some wood chips and kindling sticks, small ones and dry, so that we may light a fire; and then I will show you, son of my brother, matters beyond the range of matter."

Now when the lad heard these words he longed to see what his uncle was going to do; and, forgetting how tired he was, he got straight up and fell to gathering small wood chips and dry sticks, and went on until the Moroccan called to him, "That is enough, son of my brother!"

Presently the magician brought out from his breast pocket a casket, which he opened, and took out of it as much incense as he needed; and then he fumigated and conjured and pronounced spells, muttering words nobody could understand. And immediately the ground split apart, after a thick gloom and a quaking of the earth and bellowings of thunder.

At this Aladdin was startled, and so terrified that he tried to run away. But when the African magician saw what he meant to do, he flew into a terrible rage; for without the lad his work would profit him nothing, since the hidden hoard he was trying to open could not be opened except by means of Aladdin.

So, noticing this attempt to run off, the magician got up and raised his hand and struck Aladdin such a blow on the head that his back teeth were nearly knocked out, and he fell to the ground in a faint. But after a time he came round by the magician's magic, and cried out, weeping all the while, "Uncle, what have I done to deserve a blow like that from you?"

At this the Moroccan fell to soothing him, and said, "My son, my intention is to make a man of you; so do not go against me, for I am your uncle and like a father to you. Obey me, then, in everything I tell you, and very soon you will forget all this labour and toil, when you look at the marvels I am about to show you."

And soon after the ground had split apart in front of the Moroccan, it showed a marble slab with a copper ring set in it. The Moroccan struck a geomantic table and turned to Aladdin and said, "If you do everything I tell you, you shall certainly become richer than any of the kings. And this, my son, is the reason I struck you: because there lies a hoard here that is stored in your name, and yet you meant to leave it and make off. But now collect your thoughts, and see how I have opened the earth by my spells and my conjurations."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan magician said to Aladdin:

"My son, now collect your thoughts! Under that stone with the ring set in it lies the treasure I told you about. So put your hand on the ring and lift the slab; for nobody among all the people except yourself has the power to open it, and no mortal born but you may set foot inside this enchanted treasury, which has been kept for you. But you must learn from me everything I am going to charge you with, and not go against a single syllable of my words. All this, my child, is for your own good; the hoard is of immense value, such as the kings of the world never gathered — and remember that it is for you and for me."

So poor Aladdin forgot his weariness and the blow and his tears; and he was struck dumb and dazzled by the Moroccan's words, and rejoiced that he was fated to become rich in such measure that not even the Sultans would be richer than he was. So he cried, "Uncle, tell me to do whatever you please, for I will be obedient to your bidding."

The Moroccan replied, "Nephew, you are to me like my own child and even dearer, being my brother's son, and since I have no other kith or kin except yourself; and you, my child, are my heir and my successor."

So saying, he went up to Aladdin and kissed him and said, "Who is it I intend all this labour of mine for? Truly, every bit of it is for your sake, my son, so that I may leave you a rich man and one of the very greatest. So do not go against me in anything I say to you. And now go up to that ring and lift it up as I told you."

Aladdin answered, "Uncle, this ring is too heavy for me: I cannot lift it single-handed, so come forward yourself and lend me your strength and your help in lifting it, for indeed I am young in years."

The Moroccan replied, "Son of my brother, we shall find it impossible to do anything at all if I help you, and all our efforts will be wasted. But put your hand on the ring and pull it up, and you shall raise the slab at once — and indeed I told you that nobody can touch it except yourself. But while you are hauling at it, do not stop saying your own name and the names of your father and your mother, and it will come up to you immediately and you will not feel the weight of it."

At this the lad summoned up his strength and girded the loins of resolution and did as the Moroccan had told him, and heaved up the slab with perfect ease when he pronounced his own name and the names of his parents, exactly as the magician had bidden him. And as soon as the stone was up, he threw it aside.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that after Aladdin had raised the slab from over the entrance to the hoard, there appeared before him an underground vault, with a flight of some twelve stairs leading down into it; and the Moroccan said:

"Aladdin, collect your thoughts, and do whatever I tell you down to the smallest detail, and do not fail in any part of it.

"Go down into that vault with all care until you reach the bottom, and there you will find a space divided into four halls; and in each of these you will see four jars of gold, and others of pure gold and silver. Take care, though, not to take anything from them or touch them, and do not even let your gown or its skirts so much as brush the jars or the walls. Leave them alone and go forward until you reach the fourth hall, without pausing for a single moment on the way; and if you do anything contrary to this, you will be transformed on the spot and become a black stone.

"When you reach the fourth hall you will find a door in it, which you must open; and, pronouncing the names you spoke over the slab, go through it into a garden planted everywhere with fruit-bearing trees. You must cross this by a path you will see in front of you, about fifty cubits long, beyond which you will come upon an open hall with a ladder in it of some thirty rungs. And you will also see, hanging from its ceiling —"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan magician went on teaching Aladdin how he was to go down into the hoard, and continued:

"When you reach the hall you will find there a Lamp hanging from the ceiling. So climb the ladder and take that Lamp and put it in your breast pocket, after pouring out what is in it; and have no fear of harm to your clothes from it, because what is in it is not ordinary oil. And on your way back you are allowed to pick from the trees whatever you please, for it is all yours so long as the Lamp is in your hand."

Now when the Moroccan had finished his instructions to Aladdin, he drew off a seal ring and put it on the lad's forefinger, saying, "My son, this ring will free you from all hurt and all fear that may threaten you — but only on condition that you keep in mind everything I have told you. So get up straight away and go down the stairs, strengthening your purpose and girding the loins of resolution; and moreover have no fear, for you are a man now and no longer a child. And in a very short time, my son, you shall win yourself immense riches and become the wealthiest man in the world."

So Aladdin got up and went down into the vault, where he found the four halls, each with its four jars of gold; and these he passed by, as the Moroccan had told him, with the utmost care and caution. From there he went on into the garden and walked along the length of it until he came into the hall, where he climbed the ladder and took the Lamp, which he put out, pouring away the oil that was in it, and placed it in his breast pocket.

Then, coming down the ladder, he went back into the garden, where he fell to gazing at the trees, on which birds sat glorifying their great Creator with loud voices. Now he had not noticed them as he went in; but all these trees bore costly gems for fruit, and each had its own kind of growth and jewels of its own particular sort. And these were of every colour — green and white, yellow, red and other brilliant hues — and the radiance flashing from these gems put the rays of the mid-morning sun in the shade. Furthermore, the size of each stone was so far beyond describing that no king among the kings of the world owned a single gem equal to the larger sort, nor could boast of even one half the size of the smaller kind.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
