Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 3 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin walked among the trees and gazed at them and at other things that surprised the sight and bewildered the wits; and as he studied them, he saw that instead of ordinary fruit their produce was of very fine jewels and precious stones — emeralds and diamonds, rubies, spinels and balas rubies, pearls and other such gems, astounding to the mind's eye of any man.

And since the lad had never in all his born days seen anything like these, nor reached the years of discretion that would have taught him what such valuables were worth — he being still only a little lad — he supposed that all these jewels were made of glass or crystal.

So he collected them until he had filled his breast pockets, and began to satisfy himself as to whether they were or were not ordinary fruits, such as grapes and figs and other things one could eat. But finding them to be of a glassy substance, and being ignorant of precious stones and their prices, he gathered into his breast pockets every kind of growth the trees had to offer; and, having failed in his purpose of finding them to be food, he said in his mind, "I will collect a lot of these glass fruits to play with at home."

So he fell to picking them in quantities and cramming them into his pockets and his breast pockets until they were stuffed full; after which he picked more, which he put in his waist shawl, and then, girding himself with it, he carried off all he could manage, meaning to put them about the house as ornaments — and, as has been said, never imagining that they were anything but glass.

Then he hurried his pace, for fear of his uncle the Moroccan, until he had passed through the four halls and finally, on his way back, reached the vault, where he did not cast a glance at the jars of gold, although he was able and permitted to take some of what was in them on his way out.

But when he came to the vault stairs and climbed the steps until there was nothing left but the last one, he found this one higher than all the others, and he was unable, alone and unassisted and loaded down as he was, to get up it. So he said to the Moroccan, "Uncle, give me your hand and help me to climb."

But the Moroccan answered, "My son, give me the Lamp and lighten your load; it may well be that that is what is weighing you down."

The lad answered, "Uncle, it is not the Lamp weighing me down at all; but do give me a hand, and as soon as I reach the ground I will give it to you."

At this the Moroccan magician, whose only object was the Lamp and nothing else, began to insist on Aladdin giving it to him at once. But the lad, having put it at the bottom of his breast pocket, and his other pouches being full of gems and bulging outwards, could not get his fingers to it to hand it over. So the wizard, after a great deal of useless insistence on being given what his nephew was unable to give, fell to raging with a furious rage and demanding the Lamp, while Aladdin could not get at it.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin could not get at the Lamp to hand it to his uncle the Moroccan, that false villain; so the magician grew foolish with fury at being unable to get what he wanted. And yet the lad had promised truthfully that he would give it up as soon as he could reach the ground, with no lying thought and no ill intent.

But when the Moroccan saw that he would not hand it over, he grew exceedingly angry and gave up all hope of winning it; so he conjured and pronounced spells and threw incense into the middle of the fire, and immediately the slab made a lid of itself and by the power of magic closed the entrance; the earth buried the stone as it had been before, and Aladdin, unable to get out, was left underground.

Now the sorcerer was a stranger and, as we have said, no uncle of Aladdin's at all; he had misrepresented himself and put forward a lying claim, so that he might get hold of the Lamp by means of the lad for whom the hoard had been stored up. So the accursed man heaped the earth over him and left him to die of hunger.

For this Moroccan was an African of Africa proper, born in the interior of the Land of the Setting Sun; and from his earliest years he had been addicted to witchcraft and had studied and practised every kind of occult science, for which unholy learning the city of Africa is notorious. And he never left off reading and hearing lectures until he had become a past master of all such knowledge.

And out of the abounding skill in spells and conjurations that he had acquired by forty years of reading and being taught, one day he discovered by devilish inspiration that there lay in a far city of the cities of China, named al-Kalas, an immense hoard, the like of which none of the kings of this world had ever gathered; and, moreover, that the most marvellous article in this enchanted treasure was a wonderful Lamp, of which whoever had possession could not possibly be surpassed by any man on earth, either in high rank or in wealth and riches; nor could the mightiest monarch in the universe attain to the all-sufficiency of this Lamp with all its magical power.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Moroccan had assured himself by his science and had seen that this hoard could only be opened by the presence of a lad named Aladdin, of a poor family and living in that very city, and had learned how easy the taking of it would be and free of hardships, he immediately and without pause or delay equipped himself for the voyage to China, as we have already told; and he did what he did with Aladdin, fancying that he would become Lord of the Lamp.

But his attempt and his hopes were baffled and his work was entirely wasted; whereupon, determining to put the lad to death, he heaped the earth over him by sorcery, so that the unfortunate boy might perish, reflecting that a live man has nobody to murder him. And secondly, he did it with the intention that, since Aladdin could not come out from underground, he would also be powerless to bring the Lamp out of the vault.

So presently he went his way and retired to his own country, Africa, a sadder man, and disappointed of all his expectations.

Such was the case with the wizard. But as for Aladdin, when the earth was heaped over him he began shouting to the Moroccan, whom he still believed to be his uncle, begging him to lend a hand so that he might get out of the vault and come back up to the surface of the earth; but however loudly he cried, nobody was found to answer.

At that moment he understood the trick the Moroccan had played on him, and that the man was no uncle but a liar and a wizard. Then the unhappy boy despaired of life, and learned to his sorrow that there was no way out for him; so he fell to weeping bitterly at the calamity that had come upon him.

And after a while he stood up and went down the stairs to see whether Almighty Allah had lightened his load of grief by leaving a way out. So he turned to the right and to the left, but he saw nothing except darkness, and four walls shut upon him; for the magician had by his magic locked all the doors and had even shut up the garden the lad had walked through, in case it should offer him some means of getting out onto the surface of the earth, so that he should be sure to die.

Then Aladdin's weeping grew more bitter and his wailing louder, when he found all the doors fast shut; for he had thought to console himself for a while in the garden. But when he found that everything was locked, he fell to shedding tears and lamenting like a man who has lost his every hope, and went back to sit on the stairs of the flight he had come down into the vault by.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin sat down on the stair of the vault, weeping and wailing and wanting all hope.

But it is a light matter for Allah (be He exalted and extolled!), when He intends anything, to say "Be", and it comes to be; for He creates joy in the middle of annoyance. And so it was with Aladdin.

While the Moroccan magician was sending him down into the vault, he had put a seal ring on his finger by way of a gift, and had said, "Truly, this ring shall save you out of every strait, if you fall into calamity and the ill turns of time; and it shall take away from you all hurt and harm, and help you with a strong arm wherever you may be set down."

Now this was by the destiny of God the Great, that it might be the means of Aladdin's escape. For while he sat wailing and weeping over his situation, and had thrown away all hope of life, and utter misery had overwhelmed him, he rubbed his hands together in the excess of his sorrow, as unhappy people do; and then, raising them in supplication to Allah, he cried:

"I testify that there is no God but You alone, the Most Great, the Omnipotent, the All-Conquering, the Quickener of the dead, the Creator of man's need and the Granter of it, the Resolver of his difficulties and his distress and the Bringer of joy and not of annoyance. You are my sufficiency, and You are the Truest of Trustees. And I bear witness that Mohammed is Your servant and Your Apostle; and I beg You, my God, by his favour with You, to free me from this foul plight I am in."

And while he was imploring the Lord and chafing his hands in the soreness of his sorrow for what had happened to him, his fingers happened to rub the Ring — when, lo and behold, its familiar rose up before him and cried, "Here I am! Your slave stands between your hands. Ask whatever you want, for I am the servant of him who has the Ring on his hand, the seal ring of my lord and master."

At this the lad looked at him and saw standing in front of him a marid like one of the ifrits of our lord Solomon's jinn. He trembled at the terrible sight; but, hearing the Slave of the Ring say, "Ask whatever you want; truly I am your servant, seeing that my lord's ring is on your finger," he got his spirits back and remembered the Moroccan's words when he gave him the Ring.

So he rejoiced greatly and grew brave, and cried, "You there, Slave of the Lord of the Ring, I want you to set me on the face of the earth."

And he had hardly finished speaking when the ground split apart and he found himself at the door of the hoard, outside it and in full view of the world.

Now for three whole days he had been sitting in the darkness of the treasury underground, and when the light of day and the shining of the sun struck his face he found he could not keep his eyes open; so he began to open the lids a little and shut them a little, until his eyeballs got their strength back and grew used to the light and were purged of the foul murk.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell me one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin, having come out of the treasury, opened his eyes after a short time and saw himself on the surface of the earth, which delighted him exceedingly. And yet he was astonished to find himself outside the hoard door he had gone in by when it was opened by the Moroccan magician — especially as the opening had been lidded over and the ground smoothed out, with no sign at all of any entrance.

At this his surprise grew until he half thought he was in some other place, and his mind was not convinced that the spot was the same until he saw the place where they had kindled the fire of wood chips and dried sticks, and where the African wizard had conjured over the incense. Then he turned to right and left and caught sight of the gardens far off, and his eyes recognised the road he had come by.

So he gave thanks to Almighty Allah, who had restored him to the face of the earth and freed him from death after he had given up all hope of life. Then he got up and walked along the way to the town, which he now knew well, until he came into the streets and went on to his own home.

Then he went in to his mother; and at the sight of her, with the overwhelming stress of joy at his escape, and the memory of his past fright and the hardships he had endured and the pangs of hunger, he fell to the ground in front of her in a dead faint.

Now his mother had been utterly wretched since the time he left her, and he found her moaning and crying about him; and on seeing him come into the house she rejoiced exceedingly, but was at once overwhelmed with grief when he sank to the ground in a swoon before her eyes.

Still, she did not neglect the matter or treat it lightly, but hurried at once to sprinkle water on his face, and afterwards asked the neighbours for some scents, which she made him breathe in.

And when he had come round a little, he begged her to bring him something to eat, saying, "Mother, it is three days now since I ate anything at all."

At this she got up and brought him what she had by her; and then, setting it in front of him, said, "Come along, my son; eat and be cheered; and when you have rested you shall tell me what has happened to you and upset you so, my child. Just now I will not question you, for you are truly worn out."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell me one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin ate and drank and was cheered; and after he had rested and got his spirits back, he cried:

"Ah, mother, I have a bitter grievance against you for leaving me to that accursed creature who tried to bring about my destruction and meant to take my life. Know that I saw Death with my own eyes at the hand of this damned wretch, whom you assured me was my uncle; and if Almighty Allah had not rescued me from him, both you and I, mother, would have been cheated by the excess of this accursed man's promises to do me good, and by the great show of affection he made to us.

"Understand, mother, that this fellow is a sorcerer, a Moor, an accursed man, a liar, a traitor and a hypocrite; nor do I believe that the devils under the earth are as damnable as he is. Allah abase him in his every book!

"Listen, then, mother, to what this abominable man did; and everything I tell you will be true and certain. See how the damned villain broke every promise he made, assuring me that he would soon bring me nothing but good; and consider the fondness he showed me and the things he did for me — and all of it only to get what he wanted, for his design was to destroy me. And praise be to the Lord for my deliverance! Listen and learn, mother, how this accursed man treated me."

Then Aladdin told his mother everything that had happened to him, weeping all the while for the stress of his gladness — how the Moroccan had led him to a hill in which the hoard was hidden, and how he had conjured and fumigated. And he added:

"After that, mother, a mighty fear took hold of me when the hill split and the earth gaped in front of me by his wizardry; and I trembled with terror at the rolling of the thunder in my ears and the murk that fell on us when he fumigated and muttered spells. Seeing these horrors, in my fright I meant to run away; but when he understood what I intended he abused me and struck me such a blow that it made me faint.

"However, seeing that the treasury could only be opened by means of me, mother, he could not go down into it himself, it being in my name and not in his; and since he is an ill-omened magician, he understood that I was necessary to him, and that was his need of me."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell me one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin acquainted his mother with everything that had happened to him at the hands of the Moroccan magician, and said:

"After he had struck me, he thought it best to soothe me so that he could send me down into the enchanted treasury; and first he drew a Ring off his own finger and put it on mine. So I went down and found four halls, all full of gold and silver, which counted for nothing, and the accursed man had charged me not to touch any of it. Then I went into a very fine flower garden, decked out everywhere with tall trees whose leaves and fruit bewildered the wits — for all of them, mother, were of many-coloured glass — and at last I reached the hall where this Lamp was hanging. So I took it straight away and put it out and poured out what was in it."

And so saying, Aladdin drew the Lamp out of his breast pocket and showed it to his mother, along with the gems and jewels he had brought from the garden; and there were two large bagfuls of precious stones, not one of which was to be found among the kings of the world. But the lad knew nothing about their worth, supposing them to be glass or crystal.

And presently he went on: "After this, mother, I reached the hoard door carrying the Lamp, and shouted to the accursed sorcerer, who called himself my uncle, to give me a hand and haul me up, since I could not get up the last step by myself for the great weight of my load. But he would not, and only said, 'First hand me the Lamp!' However, as I had put it at the bottom of my breast pocket, and the other pouches bulged out beyond it, I could not get at it, and said, 'Uncle, I cannot reach you the Lamp, but I will give it to you when I am outside the treasury.'

"His only need was the Lamp, and he meant, mother, to snatch it from me and after that kill me — as indeed he did his best to do, by heaping the earth over my head. That, then, is what happened to me at the hands of this foul sorcerer."

At this Aladdin fell to abusing the magician in hot anger and with a burning heart, crying, "Away with him! I take refuge from this damned creature, the ill-omened, the wrongdoer, the perjurer, the man lost to all humanity, the arch-traitor, the hypocrite, the annihilator of pity and mercy!"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
