Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 4 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when Aladdin's mother heard his words and what had happened to him at the hands of the Moroccan magician, she said, "Yes indeed, my son, he is a miscreant and a hypocrite who murders people by his magic; but it was the grace of Almighty Allah, my child, that saved you from the tricks and the treachery of this accursed sorcerer, whom I took to be truly your uncle."

Then, as the lad had not slept a wink for three days and found himself nodding, he went to get his natural rest, and his mother did the same; nor did he wake until about noon on the second day.

As soon as he had shaken off his sleep he called for something to eat, being very hungry indeed; but his mother said, "My son, I have no food for you, since yesterday you ate everything there was in the house. But wait patiently a while: I have spun a little yarn which I will carry to the market street and sell, and buy you some food with whatever it fetches."

"Mother," said he, "keep your yarn and do not sell it; but fetch me the Lamp I brought here, so that I may go and sell it and buy provisions with the price of it; for I think it will bring in more money than the spinning."

So Aladdin's mother got up and fetched the Lamp for her son; but while she was doing it she saw that it was exceedingly dirty, and so she said, "My son, here is the Lamp, but it is very filthy: once we have washed it and polished it, it will sell better."

Then, taking a handful of sand, she began to rub it — and she had hardly begun when there appeared to her one of the jann, whose face was frightful and whose bulk was horribly big, and he was gigantic as one of the giants. And straight away he cried to her, "Say what you want of me! Here I am, your slave, and the slave of whoever holds the Lamp — and not I alone, but all the Slaves of the Wonderful Lamp you have there in your hand."

She quaked, and terror was heavy on her when she looked at that frightful figure; and her tongue was tied so that she could make no reply at all, never having been used to seeing anything of the sort.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin's mother was too terrified to make any answer to the marid; indeed she fell to the ground, overcome with fright.

Now her son was standing a little way off, and he had already seen the jinni of the Ring which he had rubbed inside the treasury; so when he heard the slave speaking to his mother he hurried forward and, snatching the Lamp out of her hand, said, "Slave of the Lamp, I am hungry, and it is my wish that you fetch me something to eat — and let it be something tasty, beyond our means."

The jinni disappeared for the twinkling of an eye and came back with a very fine tray and a costly one, for it was all of virgin silver; and on it stood twelve golden dishes of all kinds of meats and delicate dainties, with bread whiter than snow; also two silver cups and two flagons of wine, clear-strained and long-stored. And after setting all these in front of Aladdin, he vanished out of sight.

At this the lad went and sprinkled rose water on his mother's face and made her breathe in pure sharp perfumes, and said to her when she came round, "Get up, mother, and let us eat some of this food, with which Almighty Allah has eased our poverty."

But when she saw that very fine silver tray she fell to marvelling at the business, and said, "My son, who is this generous, this open-handed person who has taken away our hunger pains and our poverty? We are truly under an obligation to him; and it seems to me it is the Sultan who, hearing of our mean condition and our misery, has sent us this tray of food."

He said, "Mother, this is no time for questions: get up, and let us eat, for we are both starving."

So they sat down to the tray and fell to eating; and Aladdin's mother tasted meats whose like she had never touched in all her life. So they devoured them with sharpened appetites and with all the capacity that comes of extreme hunger; and, besides, the food was such as marks the tables of kings. But neither of them knew whether the tray was valuable or not, for never in their born days had they set eyes on anything like it.

As soon as they had finished the meal — leaving enough food, all the same, for supper and for the next day too — they got up and washed their hands and sat down to talk; and the mother turned to her son and said, "Tell me, my child, what happened to you with the slave, the jinni? For now, praise be to the Lord, we have eaten our fill of the good things He has favoured us with, and you have no excuse for saying to me, 'I am hungry.'"

So Aladdin told her everything that had passed between him and the slave while she had lain on the ground in a faint from sheer terror; and at this she was seized with great astonishment, and said, "That is true; for the jinn do present themselves before the sons of Adam. But I, my son, never saw them in all my life; and it seems to me that this is the same one who saved you when you were inside the enchanted hoard."

"This is not he, mother: this one who appeared to you is the Slave of the Lamp!"

"And who may that be, my son?"

"This is a slave of another kind and shape from him. That one was the familiar of the Ring; and this fellow of his that you saw was the slave of the Lamp you were holding in your hand."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin said, "Truly, mother, the jinni who appeared to you was the slave of the Lamp."

And when his mother heard these words she cried, "There! There! So this accursed creature who showed himself to me and came near to killing me with fright is attached to the Lamp!"

"Yes," he replied.

And she answered, "Now I beg you, my son, by the milk I suckled you with, to throw this Lamp and this Ring away from you; because they can bring us nothing but the most extreme terror, and I in particular can never bear to set eyes on them a second time. Besides, all dealings with them are unlawful, for the Prophet (whom Allah save and keep!) warned us against them with threats."

He replied, "Your commands, mother, are upon my head and my eyes; but as for this thing you have said, it is impossible for me to part either with the Lamp or with the Ring. You have seen yourself what good the slave did us when we were starving. And understand, mother, that the Moroccan, the liar, the magician, when he sent me down into the hoard, wanted neither the silver nor the gold that filled the four halls, but charged me to bring him the Lamp and nothing else — because in truth he had learned what its priceless value was. And if he had not been certain of it, he would never have endured all that toil and trouble, nor travelled from his own country to ours in search of it; nor would he have shut me up in the treasury when he despaired of the Lamp I would not hand over to him.

"So it becomes us, mother, to keep this Lamp and take every care of it, and not to disclose its secrets to anybody; for this is our means of living now, and this is what shall make us rich. And as for the Ring, I will never take it off my finger, seeing that but for this you would never have seen me alive again — no, I should have died inside the hoard underground. How then could I possibly take it off my finger? And who knows what may happen to me as time goes by, what slips or calamities or injurious mishaps this Ring may deliver me from? However, out of regard for your feelings I will put the Lamp away, and never let it be seen by you again."

Now when his mother heard his words and thought them over she knew they were true, and said to him, "Do whatever you like, my son; for my part I never wish to see them again, nor ever to set eyes on that frightful spectacle I saw before."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin and his mother went on eating the food the jinni had brought them for two full days, until it was finished. But when he found that no food was left for them, he got up and took one of the dishes the slave had brought on the tray. Now they were all of the finest gold, but the lad knew nothing about that.

So he carried it to the bazaar, and there, seeing a dealer, a Jewish man, he offered it to him for sale. When the dealer caught sight of it he took the lad aside where nobody could see him, and looked the dish over and studied it until he was certain that it was of refined gold. But he did not know whether Aladdin was aware of its value or was a raw boy in such matters, so he asked him, "How much for this dish, sir?"

And the other answered, "You know what it is worth."

The dealer debated with himself how much he should offer, since Aladdin had given him a tradesman's answer; and he thought of the lowest possible valuation, while at the same time he was afraid that the lad might know its worth and expect a considerable sum. So he said in his mind, "Very likely the fellow is an ignoramus in these matters and does not know the price of the dish."

Whereupon he pulled a dinar out of his pocket; and Aladdin, seeing the gold piece lying in his palm, took it hastily and went his way — by which the dealer was assured that his customer knew nothing whatever about such things, and repented with entire repentance that he had given him a gold dinar instead of a copper coin, a bright-polished groat.

Aladdin, however, made no delay, but went straight to the baker's, where he bought bread and got change for the coin; and then, going to his mother, he gave her the loaves and the small change that was left, and said, "Mother, off you go and buy everything we need."

So she got up and walked to the bazaar and laid in the necessary stock; after which they ate and were cheered.

And whenever the price of the dish was spent, Aladdin would take another and carry it to the same dealer, who bought every one of them at a pitiful price; and he would have paid even less, only that, having given a dinar for the first, he was afraid to offer a smaller sum in case the lad should go and sell to some rival in the trade and so lose him his profits.

Now when all the golden dishes had been sold there remained only the silver tray they had stood on; and, as it was large and heavy, Aladdin brought the dealer to his house and produced the article, and the buyer, seeing the size of it, gave him ten dinars; and these being accepted, he went his way.

Aladdin and his mother lived on the coins until they were spent; and then he brought out the Lamp and rubbed it, and immediately there appeared the slave who had shown himself before.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the jinni, the slave of the Lamp, on appearing to Aladdin said, "Ask, my lord, whatever you want; for I am your slave and the servant of whoever has the Lamp."

And the lad said, "I want you to bring me a tray of food like the one you brought me before, for I am starving."

So in the glance of an eye the slave produced a similar tray carrying twelve dishes of the most sumptuous kind, furnished with everything required; and on it stood clean bread and several glass bottles of strained wine.

Now Aladdin's mother had gone out when she knew he was about to rub the Lamp, so that she should not have to look at the jinni again; but after a while she came back, and when she caught sight of the tray covered with silver dishes and smelt the savour of the rich meats spreading through the house, she marvelled and rejoiced.

At this he said, "Look, mother! You told me to throw the Lamp away — see now what its virtues are."

And she said, "My son, Allah increase his welfare; but I would rather not look at him."

Then the lad sat down with his mother to the tray, and they ate and drank until they were satisfied; after which they put away what was left for the next day.

As soon as the food was eaten, Aladdin got up and stowed one of the dishes away under his clothes and went out to find the dealer, meaning to sell it to him. But by the decree of Fate he passed the shop of an old jeweller, an honest man and a pious one who feared Allah.

When the old man saw the lad he asked him, "My son, what is it you want? For I have seen you pass this way many times and do business with that dealer, and I have watched you hand over various articles to him; and now I fancy you have something for sale and are looking for him as a buyer. But you do not know, my child, that this man holds it lawful to take the goods of anybody who comes to him, and always defrauds them; and you have fallen into his hands. If, then, my son, you have anything you want to sell, show it to me and have no fear, for I will give you the full price of it, by the truth of Almighty Allah."

At this Aladdin brought out the dish; and when the old goldsmith saw it he took it and weighed it in his scales and asked the lad, "Was it the fellow of this that you sold to him?"

"Yes, its fellow and its brother," he answered.

And the old man said, "What price did he pay you?"

And the lad said, "One dinar."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the old goldsmith heard from Aladdin that the dealer used to give him only one dinar as the price of a dish, he cried, "Ah! I take refuge from a man who cheats the servants of Almighty Allah!"

Then, looking at the lad, he exclaimed, "My son, that tricky fellow has swindled you and laughed at you; for this dish is pure silver and virgin, and I have weighed it and found it worth seventy dinars. And if you care to take its value, take it."

At this the old man counted out seventy gold pieces to him, which he accepted; and presently he thanked him for his kindness in exposing the dealer's rascality.

And after this, whenever the price of a dish was spent he would bring another; and in this way he and his mother were soon in better circumstances. Yet they went on living in their old style, as middle-class people, without spending too much on food or squandering money.

But Aladdin had now thrown off the ungraciousness of his boyhood: he shunned the company of scapegraces and began to keep company with good men and true, going every day to the merchants' market street and there associating with the great and the small of them, asking about matters of merchandise and learning the price of investments and so on. He also frequented the bazaars of the goldsmiths and the jewellers, where he would sit and amuse himself by inspecting their precious stones and by noting how jewels were bought and sold there.

And so presently he became aware that the fruits of those trees, which he had filled his pockets with when he went into the enchanted treasury, were neither glass nor crystal but gems, rich and rare; and he understood that he had come by immense wealth, such as kings can never possess. He then considered all the precious stones there were in the jewellers' quarter, and found that their biggest was not worth his smallest.

In this way he went on, going to the bazaar every day and making himself familiar with the people and winning their good will, and asking about selling and buying, giving and taking, the dear and the cheap — until one day, when, after getting up at dawn and putting on his clothes, he went out as usual to the jewellers' bazaar; and as he was passing along it he heard the crier crying as follows:

"By command of our magnificent master, the King of the Time and the Lord of the Age and the Tide: let all the people lock up their shops and their stores and go inside their houses, for the Lady Badr al-Budur, the Sultan's daughter, intends to visit the baths; and whoever disobeys the order shall be punished with the death penalty, and his blood be on his own neck!"

But when Aladdin heard the proclamation he longed to look upon the King's daughter, and said in his mind, "Indeed, all the people talk of her beauty and loveliness, and the end of my desires is to see her."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
