Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 5 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Fortieth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin fell to contriving some way of getting a look at the Princess Badr al-Budur, and at last judged it best to take up his station behind the door of the baths, where he could see her face as she went in.

So without pause or delay he went off to the baths before she was expected, and stood at the back of the entrance, in a place where none of the people happened to be looking.

Now when the Sultan's daughter had gone the rounds of the city and its main streets, and had enjoyed herself sightseeing, she came at last to the baths; and as she was going in she raised her veil, and her face rose before the sight like a pearl of price or a shining sun; and she was one of whom the poet sang:

	Magic kohl enchants the bright glances of her;
	we pluck roses in posies from the rosy cheeks of her.
	The gloom of the hair of her is the gloomiest hue of night,
	and her bright brow lights up all the murk of the night of her.

(Says the reciter:) when the Princess raised the veil from her face and Aladdin saw her looks, he said, "In very truth her fashioning magnifies her Almighty Fashioner; and glory be to Him who created her and adorned her with this beauty and loveliness."

His strength was struck down from the moment he saw her, and his thoughts were scattered; his gaze was dazzled and the love of her took hold of the whole of his heart; and when he went home to his mother he was like a man in a trance.

His mother spoke to him, but he neither answered nor denied; and when she set the morning meal before him he was still the same. So she said, "My son, what can have happened to you? Tell me, is anything wrong with you? Let me know what harm has come to you; for, quite unlike your custom, you do not speak when I speak to you."

At this Aladdin — who used to think that all women were like his mother, and who, although he had heard of the charms of Badr al-Budur, the Sultan's daughter, had no idea what "beauty" and "loveliness" might mean — turned to his mother and exclaimed, "Let me be!"

However, she went on begging him to come and eat; so he did as she asked, but hardly touched the food; after which he lay at full length on his bed all night long, deep in thought, until the morning came. And he was in the same condition the next day, when his mother was perplexed at the state of her son and unable to find out what had happened to him.

So, thinking that perhaps he was ill, she came close to him and asked, "My son, if you feel any pain or anything of that kind, let me know, so that I may go out and fetch you the doctor; and today there is in this city of ours a physician from the Land of the Arabs, whom the Sultan has sent to summon, and rumour has it he is exceedingly skilful. So if you are ill, let me go and bring him to you."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-first Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin, hearing his mother offer to send for the physician, said, "Mother, I am well in body and in no way ill. But I always thought that all women were like you, until yesterday, when I saw the Lady Badr al-Budur, the Sultan's daughter, as she was going to the baths."

Then he told her everything that had happened to him, and added, "Perhaps you too heard the crier crying, 'Let no man open a shop or stand in the street, so that the Lady Badr al-Budur may go to the baths without an eye seeing her.' But I have looked upon her just as she is, for she raised her veil at the door; and when I saw her face and beheld that noble work of the Creator, a violent fit of ecstasy fell on me, mother, for love of her; and a firm resolve to win her has opened its way into every limb of me, and there is no rest possible for me unless I win her. So I intend to ask the Sultan her father for her hand in lawful marriage."

When Aladdin's mother heard her son's words she thought little of his wits, and cried, "My child, the name of Allah be upon you! It seems to me you have lost your senses. Be rightly guided, my son, and do not be like the men the jinn have maddened!"

He replied, "No, mother, I am not out of my mind, nor am I one of the madmen; and what you say will not alter one jot of what is in my thoughts, for rest is impossible to me until I have won the darling of my heart's core, the beautiful Lady Badr al-Budur. And now I am resolved to ask her of her father the Sultan."

She answered, "My son, by my life upon you, do not talk like this, in case anybody overhears you and says you are insane; so throw such nonsense away from you! Who would undertake a business like this, or make such a request of the King? Indeed, supposing this talk of yours were serious, I do not know how you would manage to beg such a favour of the Sultan, or through whom you would want to put it forward."

He retorted, "Through whom should I ask it, mother, when you are here? And who is there who loves me and is more faithful to me than you are? So my plan is that you yourself shall put forward this petition of mine."

She said, "My son, Allah keep me far from it! What — have I lost my wits like you? Throw the thought away, and a long way from your heart. Remember whose son you are, my child — the orphan boy of a tailor, the poorest and meanest of all the tailors working in this city; and I, your mother, come of poor and needy people too. How then do you dare ask for the Sultan's daughter in marriage, when her father would not condescend to marry her to the sons of kings and sovereigns unless they were his peers in honour and grandeur and majesty — and if they were even one degree lower, he would refuse her to them?"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-second Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin waited patiently until his mother had said her say, and then said, "Mother, everything you have called to mind is known to me; and moreover I know perfectly well that I am the child of poor parents. Nevertheless these words of yours do not turn me from my purpose at all, not at all. And I still hope of you, if I am your son and you truly love me, that you will grant me this favour; otherwise you will destroy me, for present Death is hovering over my head unless I win my will of my heart's darling; and I, mother, am your child whatever happens."

Hearing these words, his mother wept out of her sorrow for him and said, "My child! Yes, indeed I am your mother, and I have no son and no lifeblood of my liver except yourself, and the end of my wishes is to get you a wife and take joy in you. But suppose I looked for a bride among our own likes and equals: her people would at once ask whether you had any land or garden, any merchandise or trade, by which you could support her; and what answer could I make?

"Then, if I cannot possibly answer poor people like ourselves, how shall I be bold enough, my son, to ask for the daughter of the Sultan of China, who has no equal either behind him or before him? So weigh this matter in your mind. And who is to ask her in marriage for the son of a tailor? I know very well that saying anything of the sort will only increase our misfortunes; for it may be the cause of our falling into mortal danger from the Sultan — perhaps even death, for you and for me.

"And as far as I am concerned, how am I to venture on such a rash and perilous deed, my son? In what way am I to ask the Sultan for his daughter to be your wife; and, indeed, how am I ever to get near him at all? And if I do succeed in that, what am I to answer if they ask me about your means? Very likely the King will take me for a madwoman. And, last of all, suppose I do get an audience with the Sultan — what offering is there that I can lay before the King's majesty?"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-third Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin's mother went on to her son: "It is true, my child, that the Sultan is mild and merciful, and never turns away anybody who comes to him asking for justice or pity or protection, nor anybody who begs him for a present; for he is generous and lavishes his favours on far and near. But he deals out his gifts to those who deserve them — to men who have done some daring deed in battle before his eyes, or have rendered some great service to his state as civilians.

"But you! Tell me what feat you have performed in his presence or before the public, that you should deserve such a favour from him? And, secondly, this boon you are ambitious for is not for one of our condition, nor is it possible that the King should grant you the goal of your aspiration. For whoever goes to the Sultan and begs a favour of him ought to take in hand something that suits the royal majesty, as indeed I warned you before. How, then, are you to risk yourself standing before the Sultan and asking for his daughter in marriage, when you have nothing with you to offer him that befits his exalted station?"

To this Aladdin replied, "Mother, you speak to the point and have reminded me rightly, and it is proper that I should turn over in my mind everything you have reminded me of. But, mother, the love of Princess Badr al-Budur has entered into the core of my heart, and I cannot rest unless I win her. However, you have also called back to my mind something I had forgotten, and it is this that emboldens me to ask the King for his daughter. Although you declare, mother, that I have no gift I can lay before the Sultan, as the way of the world is, yet in very truth I have an offering and a present whose equal, mother, I do not believe any of the kings possesses — no, nor anything like it."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin said to his mother:

"Because in fact what I took for glass or crystal was nothing but precious stones; and I hold that all the kings of the world have never possessed anything like one of the smallest of them. For by going about among the jewellers I have learned that they are the costliest gems, and these are what I brought back in my pockets from the hoard; so, if you please, set your mind at rest.

"We have in the house a bowl of Chinese porcelain; so get up and fetch it, and I will fill it with these jewels, which you shall carry as a gift to the King; and you shall stand in his presence and ask him for what I want. I am certain that by this means the business will become easy for you. And if you are unwilling, mother, to make the effort to win what I wish for as regards the Lady Badr al-Budur, know that I shall certainly die.

"And do not imagine that this gift is anything but the costliest of stones; and be assured, mother, that in my many visits to the jewellers' bazaar I have watched the merchants selling, for sums beyond a man's judgment, jewels whose beauty is not worth a quarter of a carat of what we have. Seeing which, I was certain that ours are beyond all price. So get up, mother, as I asked you, and bring me that porcelain bowl, so that I may arrange some of these gems in it and we can see what they look like."

So she brought him the Chinese bowl, saying to herself, "I shall know what to do when I find out whether my child's words about these jewels are true or not"; and she set it in front of her son, who pulled the stones out of his pockets and arranged them in the bowl, and went on arranging gems of all sorts in it until he had filled it.

And when it was brimful she could not fix her eyes steadily on it; on the contrary, she winked and blinked at the dazzle of the stones and their radiance and the excess of their lightning-like flash; and her wits were bewildered by it. Only, she was not convinced that their value was really as enormous as she had been told. And yet she reflected that possibly her son had spoken rightly when he declared that their like was not to be found with kings.

Then Aladdin turned to her and said, "You have seen, mother, that this present intended for the Sultan is magnificent, and I am certain it will get you high honour with him, and that he will receive you with all respect. And now, mother, you have no excuse; so compose your thoughts and get up; take this bowl and away with it to the palace."

His mother answered, "My son, it is true that the present is exceedingly high-priced and the costliest of the costly, and also that, as you say, nobody owns its like. But who would have the boldness to go and ask the Sultan for his daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur? I certainly dare not say to him, 'I want your daughter!' when he asks me, 'What is it you want?' — for you must understand, my son, that my tongue will be tied.

"And granting that Allah helps me and I embolden myself to say to him, 'My wish is to become a connection of yours by the marriage of your daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur, to my son Aladdin' — they will certainly decide on the spot that I am demented, and will throw me out in disgrace and despised. I will not tell you that I shall thereby fall into danger of death, for it will not only be me but you as well.

"However, my son, out of regard for your inclination, I must embolden myself and go there. And yet, my child, if the King receives me and honours me on account of the gift, and asks me what it is you want —"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin's mother said to her son, "— and in answer I ask him for what you want in the matter of your marriage with his daughter, how am I to answer him if he asks me, as men do, What estates have you, and what income? And perhaps, my son, he will ask me that before he asks me about you."

Aladdin replied, "It is not possible that the Sultan should make such a demand at the moment when he is looking at the jewels and their magnificence; nor is it right to think about things like these which may never happen. Now just get up and set this present of precious stones before him and ask him for his daughter for me, and do not sit there making so much of the difficulty in your imagination.

"You have learned by now, mother, that this Lamp of ours has become a steady income to us, and that whatever I want of it is supplied to me; and my hope is that by means of it I shall learn how to answer the Sultan, if he asks me about what you say."

Then Aladdin and his mother went on talking the subject over all that night; and when morning came the good woman got up and heartened her heart, especially as her son had explained to her a little of the powers of the Lamp and its virtues — namely, that it would supply everything they asked of it.

Aladdin, however, seeing his mother take courage when he explained to her the workings of the Lamp, was afraid she might chatter to people about it; so he said to her, "Mother, take care how you speak to anybody about the properties of the Lamp and the profit of it, for this is our one great blessing. Guard your thoughts, in case you say too much about it in front of others, whoever they may be; or we may lose it, and lose the good fortune we have and the benefits we look for, since they come from it."

His mother replied, "Have no fear of that, my son"; and she got up and took the bowl full of jewels, which she wrapped in a fine kerchief, and went out early so as to reach the Divan before it got crowded.

When she came into the palace the reception was not yet fully attended, and she saw the viziers and various lords of the land going into the presence chamber; and after a short time, when the Divan was made complete by the ministers and high officials and chieftains and emirs and grandees, the Sultan appeared, and the viziers made their obeisance and so did the nobles and the notables.

The King seated himself on the throne of his kingship, and everybody present at the reception stood before him with folded arms, waiting for his command to sit; and when they got it, each took his place according to his rank. Then the petitioners came before the Sultan, who gave judgment in his usual way, until the Divan came to an end; when the King got up and withdrew into the palace and all the rest went their ways.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin's mother, having come earliest of all, found means of getting in without anybody speaking to her or offering to lead her to the presence; and she went on standing there until the Divan ended, when the Sultan got up and withdrew into the palace and all the rest went about their business.

And when she saw the throne empty and the King going into his harem, she went off too, and returned home. But as soon as her son caught sight of her, bowl in hand, he thought that perhaps something unfortunate had happened to her; but he would not ask anything until she had set the bowl down, when she told him what had occurred, and ended by adding:

"Praise be to the Lord, my child, that I found courage enough and secured myself a standing place at the reception today. And although I was too frightened to speak to the King, yet, God willing, I will address him tomorrow. Even today there were many who, like me, could not get an audience with the Sultan. But be of good cheer, my son; tomorrow I really must speak to him for your sake. And what has not happened may yet happen."

When Aladdin heard his mother's words he was overjoyed; and although, in the excess of his love and longing for the Lady Badr al-Budur, he expected the business to be settled from one hour to the next, yet he possessed his soul in patience.

They slept well that night; and early next morning Aladdin's mother got up and went with her bowl to the King's court, which she found shut. So she asked the people, and they told her that the Sultan did not hold a reception every day, but only three times a week; so she decided to go home again.

And after this, whenever she saw the court open she would stand before the King until the reception ended; and when it was shut she would go to make sure of it; and this went on for a whole month.

The Sultan noticed her presence at every reception; but on the last day, when she took up her station as usual before the Council, she let it close and lacked the boldness to come forward and speak a single syllable.

Now as the King, having risen, was making for his harem in the company of the Grand Vizier, he turned to him and said, "Vizier, for the last six or seven reception days I have seen that old woman present herself at every audience, and I have also noticed that she always carries something under her cloak. Tell me, Vizier, do you know anything about her and what she intends?"

"My lord the Sultan," said the other, "women are truly weak of wit, and very likely this good woman comes here to complain to you against her husband or somebody of her family."

But this answer was far from satisfying the Sultan; on the contrary, he ordered the Vizier to set her before him if she should come again; and the minister immediately put his hand on his head and exclaimed, "To hear is to obey, my lord the Sultan!"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
