Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 6 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin's mother made a practice of going to the Divan every day and passing into the room and standing opposite the King; and although she was sorrowful and thoroughly worn out, still, for her son's sake, she did her best to make light of all her difficulties.

Now one day, when she was doing as she usually did, the Sultan cast his eyes on her as she stood before him and said to his Grand Vizier, "This is the very woman I spoke to you about yesterday; so bring her before me at once, that I may see what her suit is and grant her what she needs."

So the minister introduced her immediately; and when she was in the presence she saluted the King by kissing her fingertips and raising them to her forehead, and, praying for the Sultan's glory and long continuance and the permanence of his prosperity, kissed the ground before him.

At this he said, "Woman, for several days I have seen you attending the reception without a word said; so tell me if you have some request that I may grant."

She kissed the ground a second time, and after blessing him answered, "Yes indeed, as your head lives, O King of the Age, I have a want; but before anything else, be pleased to grant me a promise of safety, so that I may put my suit to the ears of our lord the Sultan; for your Highness may perhaps find it a strange one."

The King, wanting to know what she needed, and being a man of unusual mildness and clemency, gave his word for her safety and ordered everybody about him to be dismissed at once, so that nobody was left but the Grand Vizier. Then he turned to his petitioner and said, "Tell me your suit: you have the safeguard of Almighty Allah."

"O King of the Age," she replied, "I ask your pardon too."

And he said, "Allah pardon you, even as I do."

Then she said, "Our lord the Sultan, I have a son called Aladdin; and one day, having heard the crier ordering all men to shut up their shops and keep off the streets, because the Lady Badr al-Budur, the Sultan's daughter, was going to the baths, he felt an uncontrollable longing to look at her, and hid himself in a place where he could see her very well; and that place was behind the door of the baths.

"When she came in he saw her and studied her as much as he wished — and only too well; for from the time he looked at her, O King of the Age, until this hour, life has not been pleasant to him. And he has required of me that I ask your Highness for her as his wife; nor could I drive this fancy out of his head, because love of her has mastered his vitals, and to such a degree that he said to me, 'Understand, mother, that if I do not get my wish I shall certainly die.'

"And so I hope that your Highness will be pleased to be mild and merciful and pardon this boldness on my part and my child's, and refrain from punishing us for it."

When the Sultan heard her tale he looked at her kindly, and, laughing aloud, asked her, "What is that you are carrying, and what is in that kerchief?"

And she, seeing the Sultan laugh instead of growing angry at her words, opened the wrapper at once and set the bowl of jewels before him — at which the audience hall was lit up as though by chandeliers and candelabra; and he was dazed and amazed at the radiance of the rare gems, and fell to marvelling at their size and beauty and excellence.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the King saw the gems he was seized with surprise and cried, "Never at all until this day have I seen anything like these jewels for size and beauty and excellence; nor do I believe there is a single one like them to be found in my treasury."

Then he turned to his minister and asked, "What do you say, Vizier? Tell me, have you ever in your time seen such very fine jewels as these?"

The other answered, "Never have I seen the like, our lord the Sultan; nor do I think there is in the treasuries of my lord the Sultan the fellow of the least of them."

The King went on, "Now indeed, whoever has presented me with such jewels deserves to become the bridegroom of my daughter Badr al-Budur; because, as far as I can see, nobody is more deserving of her than he is."

When the Vizier heard the Sultan's words he was tongue-tied with worry and grieved bitterly, for the King had promised to give the Princess in marriage to his son. So after a little while he said, "O King of the Age, your Highness was pleased to promise me that the Lady Badr al-Budur should be my son's wife; so it is only right that your exalted Highness should grant us a delay of three months, during which time, God willing, my son may obtain and present an offering costlier still than this."

So the King, although he knew that such a thing could not be done, either by the Vizier or by the greatest of his grandees, yet out of his grace and kindness granted him the delay he asked for.

Then he turned to the old woman, Aladdin's mother, and said, "Go to your son and tell him I have pledged my word that my daughter shall be in his name; only, I must make the necessary preparations of wedding furniture for her use, and so it is only proper that he should be patient for the next three months."

Getting this answer, Aladdin's mother thanked the Sultan and blessed him; and then, going out in the greatest haste, like one flying for joy, she went home. And when her son saw her come in with a smiling face he was gladdened at the sign of good news, especially as she had come back without delay, as she did on the days when the court was shut, and had not brought the bowl back with her.

Presently he asked her, "God willing, you bring me good news, mother? Perhaps the jewels and their value have done their work, and perhaps you have been kindly received by the King, and he has shown you favour and listened to your request?"

So she told him the whole tale — how the Sultan had treated her well and had marvelled at the extraordinary size of the gems and their surpassing water, as had the Vizier too — and added, "And he promised that his daughter should be yours. Only, my child, the Vizier spoke of a secret agreement made with him by the Sultan before he pledged himself to me; and, after speaking privately, the King put me off to the end of three months. So I have grown fearful that the Vizier may be ill-disposed towards you, and may perhaps try to change the Sultan's mind."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when Aladdin heard his mother's words, and how the Sultan had promised him his daughter — putting the wedding off, however, until after the third month — his mind was gladdened and he rejoiced exceedingly, and said, "Since the King has given his word for three months' time — well, it is a long while! — at any rate my gladness is very great."

Then he thanked his mother, showing her how her good work had gone beyond all her toil and trouble; and said to her, "By Allah, mother, until now I was as it were in my grave, and you have drawn me out of it; and I praise Almighty Allah, because at this moment I am certain that no man in the world is happier than I am, or more fortunate."

Then he possessed himself in patience until two of the three months had gone by.

Now one day his mother went out about sundown to the bazaar to buy some oil, and she found all the market shops fast shut and the whole city decorated, and people putting wax tapers and flowers in their windows; and she saw the soldiers and the household troops and the officers riding in procession, and torches and lamps flaming and flaring; and she wondered at the marvellous sight and the glamour of the scene.

So she went into an oil seller's shop that was still open and bought what she needed from him, and said, "By your life, uncle, tell me what the news in town is today, that people have made all these decorations, and every house and market street is adorned, and the troops are all standing on guard?"

The oil seller asked her, "Woman, I suppose you are a stranger and not one of this city?"

And she answered, "No, I am your fellow townswoman."

He retorted, "You a townswoman, and yet you do not know that this very night the son of the Grand Vizier is going in to the Lady Badr al-Budur, the Sultan's daughter! He is at the baths now, and all this force of soldiery is on guard and standing under arms to wait for him to come out, when they will carry him in bridal procession to the palace, where the Princess is expecting him."

As Aladdin's mother heard these words she grieved, and was distracted in her mind and perplexed how to tell her son of this sorrowful event, knowing well that the poor youth was looking, hour by hour, to the end of the three months.

But she went straight home to him, and when she had come in she said, "My son, I have some news for you, but the sorrow it will cause you will be hard for me."

He cried, "Let me know what your news is."

And she replied, "Truly the Sultan has broken his promise to you in the matter of the Lady Badr al-Budur, and this very night the Grand Vizier's son is going in to her. And for some time, my son, I have suspected that the minister would change the King's mind, just as I told you how he had spoken privately to him in front of me."

Aladdin asked, "How did you learn that the Vizier's son is to pay his first visit to the Princess tonight?"

So she told him the whole tale — how, when she went to buy oil, she had found the city decorated and the eunuch officials and lords of the land with the troops under arms waiting for the bridegroom to come from the baths, and that the first visit was appointed for that very night.

Hearing this, Aladdin was seized with a fever of jealousy brought on by his grief; but after a short while he remembered the Lamp, and, recovering his spirits, said, "By your life, mother, believe me that the Vizier's son will not enjoy her as you think. But let us leave this subject now; get up and serve the supper, and after we have eaten let me go to my own room, and all will be well and happy."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that after Aladdin had eaten his supper he went to his room and, locking the door, brought out the Lamp and rubbed it; whereupon its familiar appeared to him at once and said, "Ask whatever you want, for I am your slave and the slave of him who holds the Lamp in his hand — I and all the Slaves of the Lamp."

He replied, "Listen to me. I begged the Sultan for his daughter in marriage, and he promised her to me after three months; but he has not kept his word — no, he has given her to the Vizier's son, and this very night the bridegroom will go in to her. Therefore I order you, if you are a trustworthy servant of the Lamp, when you see bride and bridegroom bedded together tonight, to take them up at once and carry them here, bed and all; and this is what I want of you."

The marid replied, "Hearing and obeying; and if you have any other service besides this, ask me for everything you want."

Aladdin said, "At present I require nothing except what I have told you to do."

Whereupon the slave disappeared, and Aladdin went back to spend the rest of the evening with his mother.

But at the hour when he knew the servant would be coming, he got up and went to his room; and after a little while, behold, the marid came, bringing him the newly wedded couple on their bridal bed.

Aladdin was overjoyed to see them; then he cried to the slave, "Carry that gallows bird away and lay him out at full length in the privy."

His order was carried out at once; but before leaving him the slave blew such a cold blast upon the bridegroom that it shrivelled him, and the plight of the Vizier's son was pitiful.

Then the servant, coming back to Aladdin, said to him, "If you need anything else, tell me of it."

And Aladdin said, "Come back in the morning, so that you may put them back where they belong."

To which the marid said, "I hear and obey," and vanished.

Presently Aladdin got up, hardly able to believe that the affair had gone so well for him; but when he looked at the Lady Badr al-Budur lying under his own roof, although he had long burned with love of her, still he kept his respect for her, and said, "Princess of fair ones, do not think that I brought you here to lessen your honour. Heaven forbid! No, it was only to prevent the wrong man having you, since your father the Sultan promised you to me. So rest here in peace."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Lady Badr al-Budur, the Sultan's daughter, saw herself in that mean and dark lodging, and heard Aladdin's words, she was seized with fear and trembling and became utterly distraught, and could make no reply at all.

Presently the youth got up and, stripping off his outer clothes, laid a sword between them and lay down on the bed beside the Princess; and he did nothing villainous, for it was enough for him to have prevented the consummation of her marriage with the Vizier's son.

The Lady Badr al-Budur, on the other hand, passed the worst night of all nights, nor had she seen a worse in all her born days; and it was the same with the minister's son, who lay in the privy and dared not stir for the fear of the jinni that overwhelmed him.

As soon as it was morning the slave appeared before Aladdin, without the Lamp having been rubbed, and said to him, "My lord, if you require anything, command me, and I will do it upon my head and my eyes."

He said, "Go, take up the bride and bridegroom and carry them to their own apartment."

So the servant did as he was told in the glance of an eye, and bore the pair away and put them in the palace where they had been before, without anybody seeing them; but they both nearly died of fright when they found themselves being carried from place to place.

And the marid had barely time to set them down and go on his way before the Sultan came on a visit of congratulation to his daughter; and when the Vizier's son heard the doors thrown open he sprang out of bed at once and put his clothes on, for he knew that nobody but the King could come in at that hour. And yet it was exceedingly hard for him to leave his bed, in which he had wanted to warm himself a little after the cold night in the water closet he had just come from.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Sultan went in to his daughter Badr al-Budur and, kissing her between the eyes, bade her good morning and asked her about her bridegroom, and whether she was pleased and satisfied with him.

But she made no reply whatever, and looked at him with an angry eye; and although he repeated his words again and again, she held her peace and did not speak a single syllable to him.

So the King left her and, going to the Queen, told her what had passed between him and his daughter; and the mother, not wanting to leave the Sultan angry with their child, said to him, "O King of the Age, this is the way with most newly married couples, at least during their first days of marriage, for they are bashful and rather shy. So be pleased to excuse her, and after a little while she will become herself again and talk to people as she did before; whereas now, O King of the Age, it is her shyness that keeps her silent. However, I should like to go and see her."

At this the Queen got up and put on her clothes; then, going to her daughter, she wished her good morning and kissed her between the eyes. But still the Princess would make no answer at all; whereupon the Queen said to herself, "No doubt something strange has happened to trouble her like this."

So she asked her, "My daughter, what has brought you to this state? Let me know what has happened to you, that when I come and bid you good morning you have not a word to say to me?"

At this the Lady Badr al-Budur raised her head and said, "Forgive me, mother; it was my duty to meet you with all respect and honour, seeing that you have honoured me with this visit. But I beg you to hear the cause of my condition, and to see how the night I have just spent has been the worst of nights to me.

"Hardly had we lain down, mother, when somebody — whose shape I do not know — lifted up our bed and carried it to a dark place, foul and mean."

Then the Princess related to the Queen mother everything that had happened to her that night: how they had taken her bridegroom away and left her alone and lonely; and how after a while another young man came and lay down beside her in the bridegroom's place, after putting his sword between her and himself.

"And in the morning," she went on, "the one who carried us off came back and took us straight back to our own place. But the moment he got here he left us; and suddenly my father the Sultan came in at the very hour and moment of our arrival, and I had neither heart nor tongue to speak to him with, for the stress of the terror and trembling that had come over me. Perhaps such a want of duty may have seemed hard to him; so I hope, mother, that you will tell him the cause of my condition, and that he will pardon me for not answering him, and will not blame me but rather accept my excuses."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
