Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 8 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when Aladdin heard these words he laughed and said, "Mother, you declare that we have no answer, and you think the case exceedingly difficult; but compose your thoughts and get up and bring me something to eat; and after we have dined, if the Compassionate is willing, you shall see my reply.

"The Sultan too thinks, as you do, that he has demanded a prodigious dowry in order to turn me away from his daughter — whereas the fact is that he has asked me for a great deal less than I expected. But go out at once and buy the provisions, and leave me to get you an answer."

So she went out to fetch what she needed from the bazaar, and Aladdin went to his room and, taking the Lamp, rubbed it; whereupon its slave appeared to him at once and said, "Ask, my lord, whatever you want."

He replied, "I have asked the Sultan for his daughter in marriage, and he has required of me forty bowls of the purest gold, each weighing ten pounds and all to be filled with gems such as we find in the gardens of the hoard; and furthermore, that they be carried on the heads of as many white handmaids, each attended by her black eunuch slave, forty of them in full number. So I want you to bring all these into my presence."

"Hearing and obeying, my lord," said the slave; and, disappearing for the space of an hour or so, he presently came back bringing the platters and the jewels, the handmaids and the eunuchs; and, setting them before him, the marid said, "This is what you demanded of me: tell me now if you want any other matter or service besides this."

Aladdin answered, "I need nothing else; but if I do, I will summon you and let you know."

The slave now disappeared; and after a little while Aladdin's mother came home, and on entering the house saw the black slaves and the handmaids. At this she marvelled and exclaimed, "All this comes from the Lamp — which may Allah preserve to my son!"

But before she could take off her cloak Aladdin said to her, "Mother, this is your moment, before the Sultan goes into his private palace: carry him what he asked for, and go with it at once, so that he may know that I can supply everything he wants and more; and also that he has been misled by his Grand Vizier, and that the two of them vainly imagined they would baffle me."

Then he got up at once and opened the house door, and the handmaids and black slaves paced out two by two, each girl with her eunuch beside her, until they crowded the whole quarter, with Aladdin's mother going in front of them.

And when the people of that district caught sight of such a very fine sight and marvellous spectacle, they all stood and gazed, and studied the forms and figures of the handmaids and marvelled at their beauty and loveliness; for every one of them wore robes worked with gold and studded with jewels, no dress being worth less than a thousand dinars. They stared just as hard at the bowls; and although these were covered with pieces of brocade, themselves embroidered with gold and set with precious stones, yet the brilliance that shot out from them dulled the shine of the sun.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the people, and especially the people of the quarter, stood marvelling at this extraordinary scene.

Then Aladdin's mother walked forward, and all the handmaids and eunuchs paced behind her in the best of order and arrangement, and the citizens gathered to gaze at the beauty of the girls and glorify God the Most Great, until the train reached the palace and went into it in the company of the tailor's widow.

Now when the officers and chamberlains and army officers saw them, they were all seized with surprise, particularly at the sight of the handmaids, any one of whom would have ravished the reason of a hermit. And although the royal chamberlains and officials were men of family, the sons of grandees and emirs, still they could not help wondering at the costly dresses of the girls and the platters carried on their heads; nor could they look at them with their eyes open, because of the exceeding brilliance and radiance.

Then the officials went in and reported to the King, who immediately ordered them admitted to the presence chamber; and Aladdin's mother went in with them.

When they stood before the Sultan they all saluted him with every sign of respect and honour and prayed for his glory and prosperity; then they set the bowls down from their heads at his feet and, having taken off the brocade covers, stood with their arms folded behind them.

The Sultan marvelled exceedingly and was distracted by the beauty of the handmaids and their loveliness, which was beyond praise; and his wits were bewildered when he looked at the golden bowls brimful of gems that captured a man's sight; and he was so perplexed at the marvel of it that he became like a dumb man, unable to utter a syllable for the excess of his wonder. And his senses were stupefied still more when he considered that within an hour or so all these treasures had been collected.

Presently he ordered the slave girls to carry their loads inside, as the Princess's dowry; and when they had done as he bade them, Aladdin's mother came forward and said to the Sultan, "My lord, this is not much with which to honour the Lady Badr al-Budur, for she deserves all these things multiplied many times over."

At this the sovereign turned to the minister and asked, "What do you say, Vizier? Is not a man who could produce such wealth in so short a time — is he not, I say, worthy to become the Sultan's son-in-law and take the King's daughter to wife?"

Then the minister — although he marvelled at these riches even more than the Sultan did — whose envy was killing him and growing greater by the hour, seeing his liege lord satisfied with the money and the dowry, and yet being unable to fight against fact, answered, "It is not worthy of her."

And with that he fell to devising a scheme against the King, so that he might keep the Lady Badr al-Budur from Aladdin; and accordingly he went on, "My liege, all the treasures of the universe are not worth a nail-paring of your daughter: indeed your Highness has valued these things far too highly in comparison with her."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the King heard the words of his Grand Vizier he knew that the speech was prompted by excess of envy; so, turning to the mother of Aladdin, he said, "Woman, go to your son and tell him that I have accepted the dowry from him and stand by my bargain, and that my daughter shall be his bride and he my son-in-law. Furthermore, tell him to come and present himself at once, so that I may become acquainted with him: he shall see nothing from me but honour and consideration, and this night shall be the beginning of the marriage festivities. Only, as I said to you, let him come to me and not delay."

At this Aladdin's mother went home with the speed of a storm wind, so as to hurry as fast as she could to congratulate her son; and she flew with joy at the thought that her boy was about to become son-in-law to the Sultan.

After she had gone, the King dismissed the Divan and, going into the Princess's palace, ordered the bowls and the handmaids to be brought before him and before her, so that she might inspect them too.

But when the Lady Badr al-Budur looked at the jewels she was overcome and cried, "It seems to me that in all the treasuries of the world there is not one jewel to rival these!"

Then she looked at the handmaids and marvelled at their beauty and loveliness, and knew that all this came from her new bridegroom, who had sent them to serve her. So she was gladdened, although she had been grieved and saddened on account of her former husband, the Vizier's son; and she rejoiced exceedingly as she gazed at the girls and their charms. Nor was her father the Sultan less pleased and heartened when he saw his daughter relieved of all her mourning and melancholy; and his own vanished at the sight of her enjoyment.

Then he asked her, "My daughter, do these things divert you? Indeed I think this suitor of yours is more suitable for you than the Vizier's son; and very soon, God willing, my daughter, you shall have fuller joy of him."

So it was with the King. But as for Aladdin, as soon as he saw his mother coming into the house with her face laughing from the stress of her joy, he rejoiced at the sign of good news and cried, "To Allah alone be praise! Everything I desired is accomplished."

His mother answered, "Be glad at my good news, my son, and hearten your heart and cool your eyes at the winning of your wish. The Sultan has accepted your offering — I mean the money and the dowry of the Lady Badr al-Budur, who is now your betrothed bride; and this very night, my child, is your marriage and your first visit to her. For the King, so as to assure me of his word, has proclaimed to the world that you are his son-in-law, and has promised this night for the going in. But he also said to me, 'Let your son come here at once, so that I may become acquainted with him and receive him with all honour and respect.' And now here I am, my son, at the end of my labours; and whatever happens, the rest is upon your shoulders."

At this Aladdin got up and kissed his mother's hand and thanked her and praised her kindly service; then he left her and, going into his room, took the Lamp and rubbed it — when, lo and behold, its slave appeared and cried, "Here I am! Ask whatever you want."

The young man replied, "It is my desire that you take me to a bath whose like is not in the world; and then fetch me a suit of clothes so costly and so kingly that no royalty ever owned its fellow."

The marid replied, "I hear and I obey"; and carried him off to baths such as were never seen by the kings of Persia, for the building was all of alabaster and carnelian and it contained marvellous paintings that captured the sight; and the great hall was studded with precious stones. There was not a soul in it; but when Aladdin went in, one of the jann in human shape washed him and bathed him exactly as he wished.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin, after being washed and bathed, left the baths and went into the great hall, where he found that his old clothes had been taken away and replaced by a suit of the most precious and princely kind. Then he was served with sherbets and coffee scented with ambergris; and after drinking he got up, and a party of black slaves came forward and dressed him in the costliest of clothing, and then perfumed him and fumigated him.

It is known that Aladdin was the son of a tailor, a poor man; yet now nobody would have thought him anything of the kind — no, everybody would have said, "This is the greatest of the offspring of kings: praise be to Him who changes and who is not changed!"

Presently the jinni came and lifted him up and carried him to his home, and asked, "My lord, tell me, do you need anything?"

He answered, "Yes. It is my wish that you bring me forty-eight mamelukes, of whom two dozen shall go before me and the rest follow me, the whole number with their war chargers and their clothing and accoutrements; and everything upon them and their horses must be of nothing but the highest worth and the costliest kind, such as is not to be found in the treasuries of kings.

"Then fetch me a stallion fit for the riding of the kings of Persia, and let his furniture, every bit of it, be of gold crusted with the finest gems. Fetch me also forty-eight thousand dinars, so that each white slave may carry a thousand gold pieces. It is my intention now to go to the Sultan, so do not delay; for without all the requisites I have told you of I cannot visit him.

"Moreover, set before me a dozen slave girls, unique in beauty and dressed in the most magnificent clothes, to go with my mother to the royal palace; and let every handmaid be robed in clothing that befits a queen's wearing."

The slave replied, "To hear is to obey"; and, disappearing for the twinkling of an eye, brought everything he had been told to bring, and led by the hand a stallion that had no rival among the Arabs of Arabia, whose saddlecloth was of splendid brocade worked with gold.

At this, without pause or delay, Aladdin sent for his mother and gave her the clothes she was to wear, and put in her charge the twelve slave girls who were to form her suite to the palace. Then he sent one of the mamelukes whom the jinni had brought to see whether the Sultan had left the palace or not. The white slave went off lighter than the lightning, and coming back just as fast, said, "My lord, the Sultan is waiting for you!"

At this Aladdin got up and took horse, his mamelukes riding in front of him and behind him; and they were such that everybody had to cry out, "Praise to the Lord who created them and clothed them with such beauty and loveliness!" And they scattered gold among the crowd in front of their master, who surpassed them all in comeliness and good looks — and there is no need to ask about the sons of kings; praise be to the Bountiful, the Eternal!

All this came of the virtues of the Wonderful Lamp, which gifted whoever possessed it with the fairest face and the finest figure, with wealth and with wisdom.

The people admired Aladdin's liberality and exceeding generosity, and everybody was distracted by his charm and elegance, his gravity and his good manners; they glorified the Creator for this noble creation, and blessed him one and all; and, although they knew him for the son of such-and-such a tailor, still not a man envied him — no, everybody agreed that he deserved his great good fortune.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the people were bewildered at Aladdin and his liberality and generosity; and everybody, high and low, blessed him and prayed for him as he rode towards the palace with the mamelukes before and behind him, scattering gold over the heads of the crowd.

Now the Sultan had assembled the lords of the land and, telling them of the promise he had passed to Aladdin about the marriage of his daughter, had ordered them to await his arrival and then go out, one and all, to meet him and greet him. So the emirs and viziers, the chamberlains, the officials and the army officers took their stations, waiting for him at the palace gate.

Aladdin would gladly have dismounted at the outer entrance; but one of the nobles whom the King had appointed to the duty came up to him and said, "My lord, it is the royal command that you ride in and not dismount until you reach the door of the Divan."

Then they all went before him in a body and escorted him to the appointed place, where they crowded round him, some to hold his stirrup and some supporting him on either side, while others took him by the hands and helped him dismount; after which all the emirs and nobles went ahead of him into the Divan and led him right up to the royal throne.

At this the Sultan came down at once from his seat of state and, forbidding him to kiss the carpet, embraced and kissed him and seated him at his own right hand, beside him.

Aladdin did whatever is proper in the case of kings, by way of salutation and offering of blessings, and said, "Our lord the Sultan, truly the generosity of your Highness required that you should be pleased to grant me the hand of your daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur, although I am undeserving of the greatness of such a gift, being only the humblest of your slaves. I pray Allah grant you prosperity and long continuance; but in very truth, O King, my tongue is helpless to thank you for the fullness of the favour, beyond all measure, that you have bestowed on me. And I hope of your Highness that you will give me a piece of ground suitable for a pavilion that shall befit your daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur."

The Sultan was struck with admiration when he saw Aladdin in his princely suit and looked at him and considered his beauty and loveliness, and noticed the mamelukes standing to serve him in their comeliness and good looks; and his wonder grew still more when Aladdin's mother came up to him in costly and sumptuous clothes, dressed as though she were a queen, and when he gazed at the twelve handmaids standing before her with folded arms, doing her service with all respect and reverence.

He noticed too Aladdin's eloquence and his delicacy of speech, and he was astounded at it, he and all his court who were present at the reception.

At this a fire was kindled in the Grand Vizier's heart out of envy of Aladdin, until he was ready to die of it; and it was worse when the Sultan, after hearing the youth's succession of prayers and seeing his high dignity of bearing — respectful with it — and his eloquence and elegance of language, clasped him to his bosom and kissed him and cried, "Alas, my son, that I have not enjoyed your conversation before this day!"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Sultan saw Aladdin in this fashion, he rejoiced in him with very great joy and immediately ordered the music and the bands to strike up; then he got up and, taking the youth, led him into the palace where supper had been prepared, and the eunuchs at once laid the tables.

So the sovereign sat down and seated his son-in-law at his right side, and the viziers and high officials and lords of the land took their places, each according to his rank; whereupon the bands played and a very fine wedding feast was spread out in the palace.

The King now applied himself to making friends with Aladdin and talked with the youth, who answered him with all courtesy and eloquence, as though he had been brought up in the palaces of kings or had lived among them all his life. And the longer the talk went on between them, the more the Sultan's pleasure and delight increased, hearing his son-in-law's readiness of reply and his sweet flow of language.

But after they had eaten and drunk and the trays had been taken away, the King ordered the judges and witnesses summoned; and they presently attended and knitted the knot and wrote out the contract between Aladdin and the Lady Badr al-Budur.

And presently the bridegroom got up and would have gone out, when his father-in-law held him back and asked, "Where are you off to, my child? The bridal feasts have begun and the marriage is made and the tie is tied and the deed is written."

He replied, "My lord the King, it is my wish to build for the Lady Badr al-Budur a pavilion befitting her station and high degree, nor can I visit her before I have done so. But, God willing, the building shall be finished in the shortest possible time, by the utmost efforts of your slave and by the kindly regard of your Highness. And although I do — yes indeed! — long to enjoy the society of the Lady Badr al-Budur, still it is my duty to serve her first, and it becomes me to set about the work at once."

"Look around you, my son," replied the Sultan, "for whatever ground you think suitable to your design, and take everything into your own hands; but I think the best for you will be that broad plain facing my palace, and, if it pleases you, build your pavilion on it."

"And this," answered Aladdin, "is the sum of my wishes, that I may be near your Highness."

So saying, he said farewell to the King and took horse, with his mamelukes riding before him and behind him, and all the world blessed him and cried, "By Allah, he deserves it!" until he reached his home.

Then he got down from his stallion and, going to his room, rubbed the Lamp; and behold, the slave stood before him and said, "Ask, my lord, whatever you want."

And Aladdin answered, "I require of you a grave and important service, which you must do for me; and it is that you build me, with all urgency, a pavilion facing the palace of the Sultan; and it must be a marvel, for it shall be provided with every requisite, such as royal furniture and so forth."

The slave replied, "To hear is to obey."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
