Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 9 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the slave vanished, and before the next dawn broke came back to Aladdin and said, "My lord, the pavilion is finished to the utmost of your fancy; and if you would like to inspect it, get up at once and come with me."

So he rose, and the slave carried him in the glance of an eye to the pavilion; which, when Aladdin looked at it, struck him with surprise at such building, all its stones being of jasper and alabaster and porphyry and mosaic work.

Then the slave led him into the treasury, which was full of gold and silver and costly gems of every kind, past counting or computing, pricing or estimating. From there to another place, where Aladdin saw everything needed for the tables — plates and dishes, spoons and ladles, basins and covers, cups and goblets, the whole of precious metal. From there to the kitchen, where they found the cooks provided with everything they needed and with cooking pans, likewise of gold and silver. From there to a storehouse piled with chests packed full of royal clothing, stuffs that captured the reason, such as gold-worked brocades from India and China and cloths embroidered with gold. From there to many apartments furnished beyond describing. From there to the stables, containing horses whose like was not to be met with among the kings of the universe; and lastly they went to the harness rooms, all hung with saddlecloths and costly saddles and other gear, studded everywhere with pearls and precious stones.

And all this was the work of a single night.

Aladdin was wonder-struck and astounded by that magnificent display of wealth, which not even the mightiest monarch on earth could have produced; and more so to see his pavilion fully provided with eunuchs and handmaids whose beauty would have seduced a saint.

Yet the chief marvel of the pavilion was an upper belvedere with twenty-four windows, all made of emeralds and rubies and other gems; and one window was left unfinished, at Aladdin's own requirement, so that the Sultan might prove himself unable to complete it.

When the youth had inspected the whole building he was exceedingly pleased and gladdened; then, turning to the slave, he said, "I require one thing more of you, which is still wanting and which I forgot to tell you of."

"Ask what you want, my lord," said the servant.

And the other said, "I ask of you a carpet of the finest brocade, all worked with gold, which, when it is unrolled and stretched out, shall reach from here to the Sultan's palace, so that the Lady Badr al-Budur, when she comes here, may walk upon it and not tread on the common earth."

The slave went away for a short while and said on his return, "My lord, truly what you asked for is here."

Then he took him and showed him a carpet that bewildered the wits, and it stretched from palace to pavilion; and after this the servant carried Aladdin off and set him down in his own home.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the slave, after showing Aladdin the carpet, carried him home.

Now the day was brightening, so the Sultan rose from his sleep and, throwing open the casement, looked out and saw, opposite his palace, a palatial pavilion ready built. At this he fell to rubbing his eyes and opening them their widest and studying the scene; and he was soon certain that the new building was very fine and grand enough to bewilder the wits. And with just as much amazement he saw the carpet spread out between palace and pavilion; and, like their lord, the royal doorkeepers and the whole household were dazed and amazed at the spectacle.

Meanwhile the Vizier came in, and as he entered he caught sight of the newly built pavilion and the carpet, at which he wondered too; and when he went in to the Sultan the two of them fell to talking about this marvellous matter, with great surprise at a sight that distracted the gazer and attracted the heart. They said at last, "In very truth, we think that none of the royalties could build the fellow of this pavilion."

And the King, turning to the minister, asked him, "Do you see now that Aladdin is worthy to be the husband of the Princess my daughter? Have you looked at and considered this right royal building, this magnificence of wealth, which the thought of man cannot contain?"

But the Vizier, in his envy of Aladdin, replied, "O King of the Age, truly this foundation and this building and this wealth cannot be except by means of magic; nor can any man in the world, be he the richest in goods or the greatest in power, manage to found and finish such a building as this in a single night."

The Sultan retorted, "I am surprised to see how you go on harping continually on your evil opinion of Aladdin; but I hold that it is caused by your envy and jealousy. You were present when I gave him the ground at his own request for a place where he might build a pavilion to lodge my daughter, and I myself favoured him with a site for it, and that too before your very face. But however that may be — shall a man who could send me such a store of such stones for the Princess's dowry, of which kings have never obtained even a few, shall he, I say, be unable to build a building like this?"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Vizier heard the Sultan's words he knew that his lord loved Aladdin exceedingly; so his envy and malice increased; only, as he could do nothing against the youth, he sat silent and powerless to make any reply.

But Aladdin, seeing that it was broad day and that the appointed time had come for him to go to the palace — where his wedding was being celebrated, and where the emirs and viziers and grandees were gathered about the Sultan to be present at the ceremony — got up and rubbed the Lamp; and when its slave appeared and said, "My lord, ask whatever you want, for I stand before you and at your service," he said, "I mean to go to the palace at once, this day being my wedding festival, and I want you to supply me with ten thousand dinars."

The slave vanished for the twinkling of an eye and came back bringing the money; whereupon Aladdin took horse with his mamelukes before and behind him and rode on his way, scattering gold pieces among the people as he went, until they were all fondly disposed towards him and his dignity was enhanced.

But when he drew near the palace, and the emirs and officers and army officers who were standing to await him noticed his approach, they hurried straight to the King and gave him the news; whereupon the Sultan rose and went to meet his son-in-law, and after embracing and kissing him led him, still holding his hand, into his own apartment, where he sat down and seated him at his right side.

The city was all decorated, and music rang through the palace and the singers sang, until the King ordered the midday meal brought, when the eunuchs and mamelukes hurried to spread the tables and trays, which were such as are served to kings.

Then the Sultan and Aladdin and the lords of the land and the grandees of the realm took their seats and ate and drank until they were satisfied. And it was a very fine wedding, in city and palace alike, and the high nobles all rejoiced in it and the common people of the kingdom were just as gladdened, while the governors of provinces and rulers of districts flocked in from far regions to see Aladdin's marriage and its processions and festivities.

The Sultan too marvelled in his mind to look at Aladdin's mother and to remember how she used to visit him in her poverty-stricken state, while her son could command all this wealth and magnificence.

And when the spectators who crowded the royal palace to enjoy the wedding feasts looked at Aladdin's pavilion and the beauties of the building, they were seized with immense surprise that so vast a building as this could have been raised up in a single night; and they blessed the youth and cried, "Allah gladden him! By Allah, he deserves all this! Allah bless his days!"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when dinner was over, Aladdin rose and, taking his leave of the Sultan, took horse with his mamelukes and rode to his own pavilion to prepare to receive his bride, the Lady Badr al-Budur, in it.

And as he passed, all the people shouted their good wishes with one voice, and their words were, "Allah gladden you! Allah increase your glory! Allah grant you length of life!" while immense crowds gathered to swell the marriage procession; and they escorted him to his new home, he showering gold on them the whole time.

When he reached his pavilion he dismounted and walked in and sat down on the divan, while his mamelukes stood before him with folded arms; and after a short delay they brought him sherbets; and when these had been drunk, he ordered his white slaves and handmaids and eunuchs and everybody in the pavilion to make ready to receive the Lady Badr al-Budur.

Moreover, as soon as mid-afternoon came and the air had cooled and the great heat of the sun had lessened, the Sultan ordered his army officers and emirs and viziers to go down to the plain of the maydan, where he rode too. And Aladdin also took horse with his mamelukes, mounting a stallion whose like was not among the horses of the Arabs of Arabia; and he showed his horsemanship on the parade ground and so played at the javelin game that nobody could withstand him — while his bride sat watching him from the latticed balcony of her bower and, seeing in him such beauty and such horsemanship, fell headlong in love with him and was ready to fly for joy.

And after they had ridden their horses in rings on the maydan, and each had displayed what he could of horsemanship, and Aladdin had proved himself the best man of them all, they rode in a body to the Sultan's palace, and the youth went back to his own pavilion.

But when evening came, the viziers and nobles took the bridegroom and, falling into order, escorted him to the royal baths, where he was bathed and perfumed. As soon as he came out he put on a dress more magnificent than the last and took horse, with the emirs and the officers riding before him and forming a grand procession, in which four of the viziers carried naked swords about him. All the citizens and the strangers and the troops marched before him in ordered throng, carrying wax candles and kettledrums and pipes and other instruments of mirth and merriment, until they escorted him to his pavilion.

Here he dismounted and walked in and took his seat, and seated the viziers and emirs who had escorted him; and the mamelukes brought sherbets and sugared drinks, which they also passed to the people who had followed in his train. It was a world of people, past all telling; and with it all Aladdin ordered his mamelukes to stand outside the pavilion doors and shower gold on the crowd.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Sultan came back from the plain of the maydan to his palace, he ordered the household, men and women alike, to form a cavalcade at once for his daughter, with all ceremony, and carry her to her bridegroom's pavilion.

So the nobles and officers who had followed and escorted the bridegroom mounted at once, and the handmaids and eunuchs went out with wax candles and made a very fine procession for the Lady Badr al-Budur; and they paced on in front of her until they came into Aladdin's pavilion, with Aladdin's mother walking beside the bride. In front of the Princess went the wives of the viziers and emirs, grandees and notables; and in attendance on her were the forty-eight slave girls presented to her before by her bridegroom, each holding in her hand a huge candle scented with camphor and ambergris and set in a candlestick of gem-studded gold.

And reaching Aladdin's pavilion they led her to her bower in the upper storey and changed her robes and enthroned her; then, as soon as the displaying was over, they took her to Aladdin's apartments, and presently he paid her the first visit.

Now his mother was with the bride; and when the bridegroom came up and took off her veil, the old lady fell to studying the beauty of the Princess and her loveliness; and she looked around at the pavilion, which was all lit up by gold and gems, besides the many candelabra of precious metals encrusted with emeralds and jacinths. So she said in her mind, "Once upon a time I thought the Sultan's palace was very fine; but this pavilion is a thing apart. Nor do I believe that any of the greatest kings of Persia ever attained anything like it in his day; and I am certain that all the world together could not build a match for it."

And no less did the Lady Badr al-Budur fall to gazing at the pavilion and marvelling at its magnificence.

Then the tables were spread, and they all ate and drank and were gladdened; after which eighty girls came before them, each holding an instrument of mirth and merriment in her hand; and then they moved their fingertips deftly and touched the strings, striking them into song, most musical and most melancholy, until they tore the hearts of the hearers.

At this the Princess marvelled more than ever, and said to herself, "In all my life I never heard songs like these" — until she left off eating, the better to listen.

And at last Aladdin poured out wine for her and passed it to her with his own hand; so great joy and jubilation went round among them, and it was a notable night, such a one as Alexander, Lord of the Two Horns, never spent in his time.

When they had finished eating and drinking and the tables had been taken away from before them, Aladdin got up and went in to his bride.

As soon as morning came he left his bed, and the treasurer brought him a costly suit and a very fine one, of the most sumptuous robes worn by kings. Then, after drinking coffee flavoured with ambergris, he ordered the horses saddled and, mounting with his mamelukes before and behind him, rode to the Sultan's palace; and as he came into its courtyard the eunuchs went in and reported his coming to their lord.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Sultan heard of Aladdin's approach he got up at once to receive him, and embraced and kissed him as though he were his own son; then, seating him at his right, he blessed and prayed for him, as did the viziers and emirs, the lords of the land and the grandees of the realm.

Presently the King ordered the morning meal brought, which the attendants served up; and they all broke their fast together; and when they had eaten and drunk their fill and the tables had been taken away by the eunuchs, Aladdin turned to the Sultan and said, "My lord, would your Highness be pleased to honour me today at dinner in the house of the Lady Badr al-Budur, your beloved daughter, and to come accompanied by all your ministers and the grandees of the realm?"

The King replied — and he was delighted with his son-in-law — "You are surpassing in liberality, my son!"

Then he gave orders to all those invited and rode out with them, Aladdin riding beside him, until they reached the pavilion; and as he went in and considered its construction, its architecture and its stonework, all jasper and carnelian, his sight was dazed and his wits amazed at such grandeur and magnificence of wealth.

Then, turning to the minister, he said, "What do you say? Tell me, have you ever in all your time seen anything like this among the mightiest of earth's monarchs, for the abundance of gold and gems we are looking at now?"

The Grand Vizier replied, "My lord the King, this is a feat that cannot be accomplished by the might of any monarch among the sons of Adam; nor could all the peoples of the whole world put together build a palace like this; no, not even builders could be found to make anything resembling it, except — as I said to your Highness — by force of sorcery."

These words made the King certain that his minister spoke from nothing but envy and jealousy of Aladdin, and wanted to establish in the royal mind that all this splendour was not made by man but by means of magic and with the aid of the black art. So he said to him, "That is enough from you, Vizier: you have no other word to say, and I know very well what cause drives you to say what you say."

Then Aladdin went ahead of the Sultan until he had led him to the upper belvedere, where he saw its skylights, windows and latticed casements and shutters wholly made of emeralds and rubies and other costly gems; at which his mind was perplexed and his wits bewildered and his thoughts distracted.

Presently he took to strolling round the belvedere and enjoying these sights that captured the eye, until he happened to cast a glance at the window that Aladdin had deliberately left unworked and unfinished like the rest; and when he noticed that it was incomplete he cried, "Woe and alas for you, window, for your imperfection!"

And, turning to his minister, he asked, "Do you know the reason for leaving this window and its frame incomplete?"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
