Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 10 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventieth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Vizier said to the Sultan, "My lord, I imagine that the want of finish in this window comes of your Highness having pushed on Aladdin's marriage, so that he had no leisure to complete it."

Now at that time Aladdin had gone in to his bride, the Lady Badr al-Budur, to tell her that her father was there; and when he came back the King asked him, "My son, what is the reason that the window of this belvedere was not made perfect?"

"O King of the Age, seeing how sudden my wedding was," he answered, "I could not find craftsmen to finish it."

The Sultan said, "I have a mind to complete it myself."

And Aladdin said, "Allah perpetuate your glory, O King; so shall your memory endure in your daughter's pavilion."

The Sultan immediately ordered jewellers and goldsmiths summoned, and gave orders that they should be supplied from the treasury with everything they needed of gold and gems and precious ores; and when they were gathered together he commanded them to complete the work still wanting in the belvedere window.

Meanwhile the Princess came out to meet her father the Sultan, who noticed her smiling face as she drew near; so he embraced her and kissed her, and then led her into the pavilion, and they all went in together.

Now this was the hour of the midday meal, and one table had been spread for the sovereign, his daughter and his son-in-law, and a second for the viziers, the lords of the land, the grandees of the realm, the chief officers of the army, the chamberlains and the officials.

The King took his seat between the Princess and her husband; and when he put out his hand to the food and tasted it, he was struck with surprise at the flavour of the dishes and their savoury and sumptuous cooking. Moreover, there stood before him the eighty girls, each and every one of them saying to the full moon, "Get up, and let me sit in your place!" All held instruments of mirth and merriment, and they tuned them and deftly moved their fingertips and struck the strings into song, most musical and most melodious, which expanded the heart of any mourner.

At this the Sultan was gladdened and the time was good to him; and in his high enjoyment he exclaimed, "In very truth this thing is beyond the compass of King or Caesar."

Then they fell to eating and drinking, and the cup went round until they had drunk enough, when sweetmeats and fruits of all sorts and other such things were served, the dessert being laid out in a different room, to which they moved and enjoyed these pleasures to their satisfaction.

Presently the Sultan got up to see whether the work of his jewellers and goldsmiths matched that of the pavilion; so he went upstairs to them and inspected their work and how they had done it; but he noticed a very great difference, and his men were far from being able to make anything like the rest of Aladdin's pavilion.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that after the King had inspected the work of his jewellers and goldsmiths, they told him how all the gems stored in the Lesser Treasury had been brought to them and used, and that the whole lot had proved insufficient; whereupon he ordered the Greater Treasury opened and gave the workmen everything they wanted of him. Moreover he allowed them, if that was not enough, to take the jewels Aladdin had given him.

They carried off the whole lot and pushed on with their labours, but they found the gems failing them, even though they had not yet finished half of what was wanting to the belvedere window. At this the King ordered them to seize all the precious stones owned by the viziers and grandees of the realm; but although they did as he bade them, the supply still fell short of what they needed.

Next morning Aladdin got up to look at the jewellers' work, and noticed that they had not finished half of what was wanting to the belvedere window; so he ordered them at once to undo everything they had done and give the jewels back to their owners.

So they pulled out the precious stones and sent the Sultan's to the Sultan and the viziers' to the viziers. Then the jewellers went to the King and told him what Aladdin had ordered; so he asked them, "What did he say to you, and what was his reason, and why was he not content to have the window finished, and why did he undo the work you had done?"

They answered, "Our lord, we have no idea at all; he simply told us to take out everything we had done."

At this the Sultan called for his horse at once and, mounting, took the road to the pavilion; while Aladdin, having dismissed the goldsmiths and jewellers, had gone into his private room and rubbed the Lamp.

At this its servant appeared to him at once and said, "Ask whatever you want: your slave is between your hands."

And Aladdin said, "It is my wish that you finish the window that was left unfinished."

The marid replied, "On my head be it, and on my eyes!" — and then vanished, and after a little while came back saying, "My lord, truly what you commanded me to do is done."

So Aladdin went upstairs to the belvedere and found the whole window in a wholly finished state; and while he was still studying it, behold, a eunuch came in to him and said, "My lord, the Sultan has ridden out to visit you and is coming through the pavilion gate."

So Aladdin went straight down and received his father-in-law.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Sultan, on catching sight of his son-in-law, cried to him, "Why, my child, have you done this, and not let the jewellers complete the belvedere window, leaving an unfinished place in the pavilion?"

Aladdin replied, "O King of the Age, I left it imperfect only for a design of my own; nor was I incapable of perfecting it, nor could I intend that your Highness should honour me by visiting a pavilion in which there was anything deficient. And so that you may know I am not unable to make it perfect, let your Highness be pleased to walk upstairs with me and see whether anything remains to be done to it or not."

So the Sultan went up with him and, entering the belvedere, fell to looking right and left; but he saw no fault at all in any of the windows — no, he noticed that they were all perfect. So he marvelled at the sight and embraced Aladdin and kissed him, saying, "My son, what is this extraordinary feat? You can do in a single night what the jewellers could not do in months. By Allah, I believe you have neither brother nor rival in this world."

Aladdin said, "Allah prolong your life and preserve you for ever! Your slave does not deserve such praise."

And the King said, "By Allah, my child, you deserve all praise for a feat that all the craftsmen of the world were incapable of."

Then the Sultan came down and went into the apartments of his daughter the Lady Badr al-Budur to take a rest beside her, and he saw that she was exceedingly joyful at the glory and grandeur she lived in; and then, after resting a while, he went back to his palace.

Now Aladdin used to go through the city streets every day with his mamelukes riding in front of him and behind him, showering gold right and left upon the people; and all the world, stranger and neighbour, far and near, was filled with love of him for the excess of his liberality and generosity.

Moreover he increased the pensions of the poor religious and the paupers, and he would distribute alms to them with his own hand; by which good deed he won a high reputation throughout the realm; and most of the lords of the land and the emirs would eat at his table, and men swore by nothing except his precious life.

Nor did he leave off going out to the chase and to the parade ground, and riding horses and playing at the javelin game in the Sultan's presence; and whenever the Lady Badr al-Budur watched him disporting himself on horseback, she loved him all the more, and thought to herself that Allah had done her abundant good by causing what happened with the Vizier's son to happen, and by preserving her virginity intact for her true bridegroom, Aladdin.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin won for himself a fairer fame and a rarer reputation day by day, while affection for him increased in the hearts of all the people and he grew greater in the eyes of men.

Moreover it happened in those days that certain enemies took horse and attacked the Sultan, who armed and equipped an army to drive them off and made Aladdin its commander. So he marched out with his men and did not stop marching until he drew near the enemy, whose forces were exceedingly many; and presently, when the action began, he bared his sword and charged home upon them.

Then battle and slaughter broke out and violent was the uproar; but at last Aladdin broke the hostile host and put them all to flight, killing the best part of them and plundering their money and cattle, their property and possessions; and he despoiled them of spoils that could not be counted or computed.

Then he came back victorious after a noble victory, and entered the capital, which had decorated herself in his honour out of her delight in him; and the Sultan went out to meet him and, congratulating him, embraced him and kissed him; and throughout the kingdom high festival was held with great joy and gladness.

Presently the sovereign and his son-in-law went to the pavilion, where they were met by the Princess Badr al-Budur, who rejoiced in her husband and, after kissing him between the eyes, led him to her apartments. After a time the Sultan came too, and they sat down while the slave girls brought them sherbets and confections, which they ate and drank.

Then the Sultan commanded that the whole kingdom be decorated for the triumph of his son-in-law and his victory over the invader; and the subjects and the soldiery and all the people knew only Allah in heaven and Aladdin on earth; for their love, won by his liberality, was increased by his noble horsemanship and his successful fighting for the country and putting the enemy to flight.

Such, then, was the high fortune of Aladdin. But as for the Moroccan magician, after going back to his own country he spent all this time bewailing what he had endured of toil and travail to win the Lamp, and above all that his trouble had gone for nothing and that the morsel, when it was almost at his lips, had flown out of his grasp.

He pondered all this and mourned and reviled Aladdin out of the excess of his rage against him; and at times he would exclaim, "I am well satisfied with this bastard's death underground, and I only hope that at some time or other I may get hold of the Lamp, seeing how it is still safe."

Now one day he struck a table of sand and dotted down the figures and carefully considered what they came to; then he transferred them to paper so that he might study them and make sure of Aladdin's destruction and of the safety of the Lamp preserved beneath the earth. Presently he firmly established the sequence of the figures, mothers as well as daughters, but still he did not see the Lamp.

At this rage overrode him, and he made another trial to be sure of Aladdin's death; but he did not see him in the enchanted treasure. At this his anger grew still more, and it grew greater when he ascertained that the youth had come up out of the ground and was now on the surface of the earth alive and alert — and furthermore, that he had become the owner of the Lamp, for which he himself had endured such toil and travail and troubles as a man cannot bear except for so great an object.

So he said to himself, "I have suffered pains and penalties that nobody else could have endured, for the sake of the Lamp, only for somebody other than me to carry it off; and this accursed boy has taken it without any difficulty. And who knows whether he knows the virtues of the Lamp, than whose owner nobody in the world should be wealthier?"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan magician, having considered and ascertained that Aladdin had escaped from the vault and had got the prize of the Lamp, said to himself, "There is nothing for it but that I work for his destruction."

He then struck another geomantic table and, examining the figures, saw that the lad had won himself immeasurable riches and had married the daughter of his King; so, out of envy and jealousy, he was fired with the flame of wrath; and, getting up without let or delay, he equipped himself and set out for China, where he arrived in due season.

Now when he had reached the King's capital, where Aladdin was, he put up at one of the caravanserais; and when he had rested from the weariness of the journey he put on his clothes and went down to wander about the streets, where he never passed a group without hearing them chattering about the pavilion and its grandeur and praising Aladdin's beauty, his good looks, his liberality and generosity, his fine manners and his good morals.

Presently he went into an establishment where men were drinking a certain warm beverage; and, going up to one of those who were loud in their praises, he said to him, "Fine young man, who may this be that you all describe and commend?"

"Evidently you are a foreigner," answered the other, "and you have come from a far country. But even granting that, how does it happen that you have not heard of the Emir Aladdin, whose renown, I fancy, has filled the universe, and whose pavilion, known by report to far and near, is one of the Wonders of the World? How, then, has nothing of this ever come to your ears, nor the name of Aladdin — whose glory and enjoyment may our Lord increase! — nor his fame?"

The Moroccan replied, "The sum of my wishes is to look upon this pavilion; and if you would do me a favour, please guide me to it, for I am a foreigner."

The man answered, "To hear is to obey"; and, going ahead of him, pointed out Aladdin's pavilion; whereupon the Moroccan fell to studying it and understood at once that it was the work of the Lamp.

So he cried, "Ah! Ah! I must dig a pit for this accursed boy, this son of a tailor, who could not once earn himself so much as an evening meal; and if the Fates help me, I will certainly destroy his life and send his mother back to spinning at her wheel, as she used to do before."

So saying, he went back to his caravanserai in a sorry state of grief and melancholy and regret, bred by his envy and hatred of Aladdin.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Moroccan magician got back to his caravanserai he took his astrological gear and his geomantic table to discover where the Lamp might be; and he found that it was in the pavilion and not on Aladdin's person. So he rejoiced at this exceedingly and exclaimed, "Now indeed it will be an easy task to take the life of this accursed boy, and I see my way to getting the Lamp."

Then he went to a coppersmith and said to him, "Make me a set of lamps, and take the full price of them from me and more; only I would have you hurry to finish them."

The smith replied, "Hearing and obeying," and fell to work to keep his word; and when they were ready the Moroccan paid him what price he asked; then, taking them, he carried them to the inn and set them in a basket.

Presently he began wandering about the highways and market streets of the capital, crying aloud, "New lamps for old! Ho! Who will give old lamps for new lamps?"

But when people heard him crying in this fashion they laughed at him and said, "No doubt this man is jinn-mad, going about offering new for old"; and a whole world followed him, and the children of the quarter chased him from place to place laughing at him, and he neither forbade them nor cared how they treated him.

And he did not stop strolling about the streets until he came under Aladdin's pavilion, where he shouted at the top of his voice, and the boys screamed after him, "A madman! A madman!"

Now Destiny had decreed that the Lady Badr al-Budur should be sitting in her belvedere, from which she heard somebody crying like a crier and the children bawling at him; only she did not understand what was going on. So she gave orders to one of her slave girls, saying, "Go and see who it is that is crying, and what his cry is."

The girl went out and looked, and saw a man crying, "New lamps for old! Ho! Who will give old lamps for new lamps?" — and the little ones chasing him and laughing at him; and the Princess laughed as loudly when this strange business was told to her.

Now Aladdin had carelessly left the Lamp in his pavilion without hiding it and locking it up in his strongbox; and one of the slave girls who had seen it said, "My lady, I think I noticed an old lamp in my lord Aladdin's apartment; so let us give it in exchange for a new lamp to this man, and see whether his cry is truth or a lie."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
