Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 11 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that at this the Princess said to the slave girl, "Bring me the old lamp you say you saw in your lord's apartment."

Now the Lady Badr al-Budur knew nothing about the Lamp and its peculiar properties, which had raised Aladdin her husband to such high rank and grandeur; and her only end and aim was to find out by experiment what was in the mind of a man who would give new in exchange for old.

So the handmaid went out and up to Aladdin's apartment and came back with the Lamp to her lady, who, like all the rest of them, knew nothing of the Moroccan's cunning tricks and his crafty device.

Then the Princess ordered one of the eunuch officers to go down and barter the old lamp for a new one. So he obeyed her order and, after taking a new lamp from the man, came back and laid it before his lady; who, looking at it and seeing that it was brand new, fell to laughing at the Moroccan's wits.

But the Moroccan, when he had the thing in his hand and recognised it for the Lamp of the enchanted treasury, put it at once into his breast pocket and left all the other lamps to the people who were bartering with him.

Then he went off running until he was clear of the city, when he walked at leisure over the level ground; and he waited patiently until night fell on him in open country where there was nobody but himself.

There he brought out the Lamp, when suddenly the marid appeared to him and said, "Here I am! Your slave stands between your hands: ask of me whatever you want."

"It is my desire," the Moroccan replied, "that you lift up Aladdin's pavilion from where it is now, with the people in it and everything it contains — not forgetting me — and set it down in my own land, Africa. You know my town, and I want the building placed in the gardens close by it."

The marid slave replied, "Hearing and obedience: shut your eyes and open your eyes, and you will find yourself together with the pavilion in your own country."

This was done; and in the twinkling of an eye the Moroccan and the pavilion and everything in it were carried away to the land of Africa.

Such, then, was the work of the Moroccan magician. But now let us go back to the Sultan and his son-in-law.

It was the custom of the King, because of his attachment to his daughter and his affection for her, every morning when he had shaken off sleep to open the latticed casement and look out from it, so that he might catch sight of where she lived. So that day he got up and did as he always did.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Sultan came up to the latticed casement of his palace and looked out towards Aladdin's pavilion, he saw nothing at all: no, the site was smooth as a well-trodden highway and just as it had been before, and he could find neither building nor outbuildings.

So astonishment covered him like a garment, and his wits were bewildered, and he began rubbing his eyes in case they were dimmed or darkened, and gazing intently; but at last he was certain that no trace of the pavilion remained and no sign that it had ever been, nor did he know the why or the wherefore of its disappearance.

So his surprise increased and he struck hand upon hand, and the tears trickled down his cheeks over his beard, because he did not know what had become of his daughter. Then he sent out officials at once and summoned the Grand Vizier, who attended immediately; and, seeing him in this pitiable state, said, "Pardon, O King of the Age; may Allah keep every ill from you! Why are you in such sorrow?"

The sovereign exclaimed, "I suppose you do not know what has happened to me?"

And the minister said, "Not at all, our lord: by Allah, I know nothing whatever about it."

"Then," resumed the Sultan, "it is plain you have not looked in the direction of Aladdin's pavilion today."

"True, my lord," said the Vizier; "it must still be locked and fast shut."

And the King said, "Since you have no inkling of anything, get up and look out of the window and see Aladdin's pavilion, that you say is locked and fast shut."

The minister obeyed him, but he could see nothing at all, neither pavilion nor anything else; so, with mind and thoughts sorely perplexed, he came back to his liege lord, who asked him, "Have you learned the reason of my distress now, and noticed that palace of yours, locked and fast shut?"

The Vizier answered, "O King of the Age, some time ago I represented to your Highness that this pavilion and all these matters were magic."

At this the Sultan, fired with anger, cried, "Where is Aladdin?"

And the minister replied, "He has gone hunting."

Whereupon the King commanded, without pause or delay, that certain of his officers and army officers should go and bring his son-in-law to him chained and with his elbows pinioned.

So they went out until they found Aladdin, when they said to him, "Our lord Aladdin, excuse us and do not be angry with us; for the King has commanded that we carry you before him pinioned and fettered, and we hope for pardon from you, because we are under royal orders which we cannot go against."

Aladdin, hearing these words, was seized with surprise; and, not knowing the reason for it, remained tongue-tied for a time; after which he turned to them and asked, "Good people, do you know nothing at all about the motive for the royal command? I know very well that my soul is innocent, and that I have never sinned against king or against kingdom."

"Our lord," they answered, "we have no idea whatever."

So Aladdin got down from his horse and said to them, "Do whatever the Sultan told you to do, for the King's command is upon the head and the eyes."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the officers, having bound Aladdin and pinioned his elbows behind his back, dragged him along in chains and carried him into the city.

But when the people saw him pinioned and in irons, they understood that the Sultan meant to strike off his head; and, since they loved him exceedingly, they all gathered together and seized their weapons; and then, swarming out of their houses, followed the soldiers to see what was going on.

And when the troops arrived with Aladdin at the palace they went in and informed the Sultan, whereupon he immediately commanded the executioner to cut off his son-in-law's head.

Now as soon as the subjects knew of this order they barricaded the gates and shut the doors of the palace and sent a message to the King, saying, "At this very moment we will level your house over the heads of everybody in it and over your own, if the least hurt or harm comes to Aladdin."

So the Vizier went in and reported to the Sultan, "O King of the Age, your command is about to seal the roll of our lives; and it would be better if you pardoned your son-in-law, in case some sore mischance comes upon us; for the people love him far more than they love us."

Now the executioner had already spread out the carpet of blood and, having seated Aladdin on it, had bandaged his eyes; moreover he had walked round him several times, waiting for his lord's last orders, when the King looked out of the window and saw his subjects — who had suddenly attacked him — swarming up the walls and meaning to tear them down.

So he immediately ordered the executioner to stay his hand from Aladdin, and commanded the crier to go out to the crowd and cry aloud that he had pardoned his son-in-law and taken him back into favour.

But when Aladdin found himself free and saw the Sultan seated on his throne, he went up to him and said, "My lord, since your Highness has favoured me all my life, be pleased of your grace to let me know now how and in what I have sinned against you."

"Traitor," cried the King, "until this moment I knew of no sin of yours"; then, turning to the Vizier, he said, "Take him and make him look out of the window, and afterwards let him tell us where his pavilion is."

And when the royal order was obeyed, Aladdin saw the place as level as a well-trodden road, exactly as it had been before the foundation of the building was laid, without the faintest trace of any building at all.

At this he was astonished and perplexed, not knowing what had happened; but when he came back into the presence the King asked him, "What is it you have seen? Where is your pavilion, and where is my daughter, the core of my heart, my only child, than whom I have no other?"

Aladdin answered, "O King of the Age, I know nothing of it, nor anything of what has happened."

And the Sultan retorted, "You must understand, Aladdin, that I have pardoned you only so that you may go out and look into this affair and enquire after my daughter for me. And never show yourself in my presence unless she is with you; and if you do not bring her, by the life of my head I will cut off your head."

The other replied, "To hear is to obey: only grant me a delay and respite of forty days; after which, if I do not produce her, strike off my head and do with me whatever you wish."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Sultan said to Aladdin, "Truly I have granted your request, a delay of forty days; but do not imagine you can fly out of my hand, for I would bring you back even if you were above the clouds instead of only on the surface of the earth."

Aladdin replied, "My lord the Sultan, as I said to your Highness, if I fail to bring her within the appointed term I will present myself to have my head struck off."

Now when the people and all the subjects saw Aladdin at liberty they rejoiced exceedingly and were delighted at his release; but the shame of his treatment, and his embarrassment before his friends, and the envious exultation of his enemies had bowed down Aladdin's head; so he went off wandering through the streets of the city, perplexed about his situation and not knowing what had happened to him.

He lingered about the capital for two days in the saddest state, not knowing what to do to find his wife and his pavilion; and during this time various people privately brought him food and drink.

When the two days were over he left the city to wander about the waste and open lands outside the walls, with no notion where he ought to go; and he walked on aimlessly until the path brought him beside a river, where, under the stress of the sorrow that overwhelmed him, he gave himself up to despair and thought of throwing himself into the water.

Being, however, a good Muslim who professed the unity of the Godhead, he feared Allah in his soul; and, standing on the bank, he prepared to perform the ritual ablution. But as he was scooping up the water in his right hand and rubbing his fingers, it so happened that he also rubbed the Ring.

At this its marid appeared and said to him, "Here I am! Your slave stands between your hands: ask of me whatever you want."

Seeing the marid, Aladdin rejoiced exceedingly and cried, "Slave, I want you to bring my pavilion before me, and my wife the Lady Badr al-Budur in it, together with everything it contains."

"My lord," replied the marid, "it is very hard on me that you ask a service I cannot manage: this matter depends on the Slave of the Lamp, and I dare not even attempt it."

Aladdin answered, "Since the matter is beyond your competence, I do not require it of you; but at least take me up and set me down beside my pavilion, in whatever land that may be."

The slave exclaimed, "Hearing and obeying, my lord"; and, lifting him high in the air, in the space of a glance set him down beside his pavilion in the land of Africa, at a spot facing his wife's apartment.

Now this was at nightfall; yet one look was enough for him to recognise his home; whereby his cares and worries were cleared away, and he recovered his trust in Allah, after having cut off all hope of ever seeing his wife again.

Then he fell to pondering the secret and mysterious favours of the Lord (glorified be His omnipotence!), and how, after despair had mastered him, the Ring had come to gladden him; and how, when all his hopes were cut off, Allah had been pleased to bless him with the services of its slave.

So he rejoiced and his melancholy left him; and then, since he had gone four days without sleep for the excess of his cares and sorrows and the stress of his thoughts, he went up close to his pavilion and slept under a tree beside the building, which, as we said, had been set down among the gardens outside the city of Africa.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Eightieth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin lay that night under a tree beside his pavilion in complete restfulness; but a man who carries his head next door to the headsman cannot sleep at night except when slumber gets the better of him.

He slumbered until Morning showed her face; and when he was woken by the warbling of the small birds he got up and went down to the bank of the river that ran past there into the city; and here he washed his hands and face again and afterwards finished his ablution. Then he prayed the dawn prayer; and when he had ended his devotions he came back and sat down under the windows of the Princess's bower.

Now the Lady Badr al-Budur, out of her extreme sorrow at being parted from her husband and her father the Sultan, and at the great misfortune that had come upon her from the accursed Moroccan magician, had got into the habit of rising in the darkness before dawn and sitting in tears, since she could not sleep at nights and had sworn off food and drink.

Her favourite slave girl used to come into her chamber at the hour of the prayer salutation in order to dress her; and this time, by the decree of Destiny, when she threw open the window to let her lady comfort and console herself by looking at the trees and the streams, and peered out of the lattice herself, she caught sight of her master sitting below, and told the Princess, saying, "My lady! My lady! Here is my lord Aladdin sitting at the foot of the wall!"

So her mistress got up hurriedly and, gazing from the casement, saw him; and her husband, raising his head, saw her; so she greeted him and he greeted her, both of them ready to fly for joy.

Presently she said, "Up and come in to me by the private side door, for the accursed man is not here now"; and she gave orders to the slave girl, who went down and opened it for him.

Then Aladdin came through it and was met by his wife, and they embraced and exchanged kisses with all delight until they wept for sheer joy.

After this they sat down, and Aladdin said to her, "My lady, before anything else it is my wish to ask you a question. I used to keep an old copper lamp in a certain part of my pavilion; what became of it?"

When the Princess heard these words she sighed and cried, "My darling, it was that very Lamp that made us fall into this calamity!"

Aladdin asked her, "How did the affair happen?"

And she answered by recounting to him everything that had passed, first and last, and especially how they had given an old lamp in exchange for a new one, adding, "And the next day we had hardly seen one another at dawn before we found ourselves in this country; and the man who deceived us and took the lamp by way of barter told me that he had done the deed by the might of his magic and by means of the Lamp; that he is a Moor from Africa; and that we are now in his native country."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Lady Badr al-Budur had finished speaking, Aladdin went on, "Tell me what this accursed man intends with regard to you; also what he says to you, and what he wants of you."

She replied, "He comes to visit me once every day and no more. He would woo me to his love, and he begs me to take him for my husband instead of you, and to forget you and console myself for the loss of you. And he tells me that the Sultan my father has cut off my husband's head, adding that you, the son of poor parents, were made rich by him. And he coaxes me with talk; but he never gets anything from me except weeping and wailing, nor has he heard one sugar-sweet word from me."

Aladdin said, "Tell me where he has put the Lamp, if you know anything about it."

And she said, "He carries it about on his body always, nor is it possible for him to leave it for a single hour; and moreover, once, when he was telling me what I have just told you, he brought it out of his breast pocket and let me look at it."

When Aladdin heard these words he rejoiced exceedingly and said, "My lady, listen to me. It is my plan to go away from you at once, and to come back only after changing these clothes of mine; so do not be surprised when you see me altered, but tell one of your women to stand by the private side door all the time, and to open it the moment she sees me coming. And now I will contrive a scheme for killing this damned fool."

With that he got up and, going out of the pavilion door, walked on until he met a farm labourer on the way, to whom he said, "Man, take my clothes and give me your garments."

But the peasant refused; so Aladdin stripped him of his clothes by force and put them on, leaving the man his own rich gear by way of a gift.

Then he followed the highway leading to the neighbouring city, and, entering it, went to the perfumers' bazaar, where he bought from one of them some rarely potent bhang, the kind that works in a minute, paying two dinars for two drams of it; and he came back in disguise by the same road until he reached the pavilion.

Here the slave girl opened the private side door to him, and he went in to the Lady Badr al-Budur.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
