Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 12 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when Aladdin came in disguised to his wife he said:

"Listen to me. I want you to dress and adorn yourself in your best and cast off every outward show and appearance of care; and when the accursed Moroccan visits you, receive him with a 'Welcome and fair welcome,' and meet him with a smiling face, and invite him to come and have supper with you. Moreover, let him see that you have forgotten Aladdin your beloved, and your father too, and that you have learned to love him with a great love, showing him every kind of joy and pleasure.

"Then ask him for wine, which must be red, and pledge him to his secret wishes in a meaningful draught; and when you have given him two or three cupfuls and made him careless, then drop these drops into his cup and fill it up with wine. He will no sooner drink it than he will fall on his back senseless as a dead man."

Hearing these words, the Princess exclaimed, "It is exceedingly hard for me to do such a thing; and yet I must do it, so that we may escape the defilement of this accursed man who tortured me by parting me from you and from my father. So the killing of this accursed man is lawful and right."

Then Aladdin ate and drank with his wife enough to keep off his hunger, and then, getting up without pause or delay, went out of the pavilion.

So the Lady Badr al-Budur summoned her tirewoman, who robed her and arrayed her in her finest clothes and adorned her and perfumed her; and while she was like this, behold, the accursed Moroccan came in.

He was greatly delighted to see her in such a state, and more delighted still when she faced him, quite against her custom, with a laughing face; and his love-longing increased, and his desire to have her.

Then she took him and, seating him beside her, said, "My darling, do come to me tonight, if you are willing, and let us have supper together. My sorrow has been enough for me; for if I were to sit mourning for a thousand years or even two thousand, Aladdin would never come back to me from the tomb. And I rely on what you said yesterday, namely that my father the Sultan killed him in his stress of sorrow at being parted from me.

"And do not be surprised that I am changed today from what I was yesterday; the reason for it is that I have decided to take you for my friend and companion in Aladdin's place and succession, for now I have no other man but you. So I hope for your company tonight, that we may have supper together and drink a little wine with one another; and especially I should like you to let me taste the wine of your native soil, the land of Africa, because it may well be better than any of the wine of China that we drink. I have some wine by me, but it is the growth of my own country, and I very much want to taste what yours produces."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that when the Moroccan saw the love lavished on him by the Lady Badr al-Budur, and noticed how changed she was from the sorrowful, melancholy woman she used to be, he thought she had cut off all hope of Aladdin; and he was overjoyed and said to her, "I hear and obey, my lady, whatever you wish and everything you command. I have at home a jar of our country's wine, which I have carefully kept and stored deep in the earth for eight years; and I will go now and fill our need from it and come back to you in all haste."

But the Princess, so as to wheedle him more and more, replied, "My darling, do not go and leave me alone; send one of the eunuchs to fill some for us, and stay sitting here beside me, so that I may find my consolation in you."

He answered, "My lady, nobody knows where the jar is buried but myself, and I will not be long away from you."

So saying, the Moroccan went out, and after a short time brought back as much wine as they wanted; whereupon the Princess said to him, "You have taken pains and trouble to serve me, and I have suffered for your sake, my beloved."

He said, "Not at all, eyes of mine; I hold myself honoured by serving you."

Then the Lady Badr al-Budur sat down with him at table, and the two fell to eating; and presently the Princess said she would like to drink, when the handmaid filled her a cup at once and then crowned another for the Moroccan. So she drank to his long life and his secret wishes, and he drank to her life too.

Then the Princess, who was unmatched in eloquence and delicacy of speech, fell to making a drinking companion of him, and beguiled him by addressing him in the sweetest terms, full of hidden meaning. This was done only so that he might become more madly in love with her; but the Moroccan thought it came of a real inclination for him, and did not know it was a snare set to kill him.

So his longing for her increased, and he was dying of love for her when he saw her speaking to him with such tenderness of words and thoughts, and his head began to swim and all the world seemed as nothing in his eyes.

But when they came to the end of the supper, and the wine had mastered his brains, and the Princess saw this in him, she said, "With us there is a custom throughout our country, but I do not know whether it is the usage of yours or not."

The Moroccan replied, "And what may that be?"

So she said to him, "At the end of supper each lover in turn takes the cup of the beloved and drinks it off"; and at once she crowned one with wine and told the handmaid to carry him her own cup, in which the drink was mixed with the bhang.

Now she had taught the slave girl what to do; and all the handmaids and eunuchs in the pavilion longed for the sorcerer's slaughter and were at one with the Princess in that matter.

So the girl handed him the cup; and when he heard her words and saw her drinking from his cup and passing hers to him, and noticed all this show of love, he fancied himself Alexander, Lord of the Two Horns.

Then she said to him, swaying gracefully from side to side and putting her hand in his hand, "My life, here is your cup with me and my cup with you; and this is how lovers drink from each other's cups."

Then she kissed the brim and drained it to the dregs, and again kissed its lip and offered it to him.

At this he flew for joy, and meaning to do the same, raised her cup to his mouth and drank off the whole contents, without considering whether there was anything harmful in it or not.

And immediately he rolled over on his back in a deathlike condition, and the cup dropped out of his grasp; whereupon the Lady Badr al-Budur and the slave girls ran hurriedly and opened the pavilion door to their lord Aladdin, who came in disguised as a labourer.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin, entering his pavilion, went up to his wife's apartment, where he found her still sitting at table, and facing her lay the Moroccan like a man slaughtered; so he went straight up to her and kissed her and thanked her for it.

Then, rejoicing exceedingly, he turned to her and said, "Take yourself and your handmaids to the inner rooms, and leave me alone for the present so that I may take counsel about my business."

The Princess did not hesitate but went away at once, she and her women; then Aladdin got up and, after locking the door on them, walked up to the Moroccan and put his hand to his breast pocket and drew out the Lamp; after which he unsheathed his sword and killed the villain.

Presently he rubbed the Lamp, and the marid slave appeared and said, "Here I am, my lord; what is it you want?"

"I want you," said Aladdin, "to take up my pavilion out of this country and carry it to the land of China, and there set it down on the site where it stood before, facing the Sultan's palace."

The marid replied, "Hearing and obeying, my lord."

Then Aladdin went and sat down with his wife and, throwing his arms round her neck, kissed her, and she kissed him; and they sat talking together, while the jinni carried the pavilion and everything in it to the appointed place.

Presently Aladdin told the handmaids to spread the table before him, and he and the Lady Badr al-Budur took their seats at it and fell to eating and drinking in all joy and gladness, until they had enough; when, moving to the room of wine and conversation, they sat there and caroused in fair companionship and each kissed the other with all the gladness of love.

It had been long and long since they had enjoyed any pleasure; so they went on like this until the sun of the wine rose in their heads and sleep took hold of them, at which point they went to their bed in all ease and comfort.

Early next morning Aladdin woke and woke his wife, and the slave girls came in and put on her dress and prepared her and adorned her, while her husband arrayed himself in his costliest clothes; and the two of them were ready to fly for joy at their reunion after being parted. Moreover the Princess was especially joyful and glad because that day she expected to see her beloved father.

Such was the case with Aladdin and the Lady Badr al-Budur. But as for the Sultan, after he had driven his son-in-law away he never stopped grieving for the loss of his daughter; and every hour of every day he would sit and weep for her as women weep, because she was his only child and he had nobody else to take to his heart. And as he shook off sleep, morning after morning, he would hurry to the window and throw it open and peer in the direction where Aladdin's pavilion used to stand, and pour out tears until his eyes were dried up and their lids were ulcerated.

Now on that day he got up at dawn and, as he always did, looked out — when, lo and behold, he saw a building in front of him; so he rubbed his eyes and studied it curiously until he became certain that it was his son-in-law's pavilion.

So he called for a horse without let or delay; and as soon as his beast was saddled he mounted and made for the place. And Aladdin, when he saw his father-in-law coming, went down and met him halfway; then, taking his hand, helped him up the stairs to his daughter's apartment.

And the Princess, being just as eager to see her father, came down and greeted him at the foot of the staircase facing the ground-floor hall. At this the King folded her in his arms and kissed her, shedding tears of joy; and she did the same, until at last Aladdin led them up to the upper hall, where they took their seats and the Sultan fell to asking her how she was and what had happened to her.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Lady Badr al-Budur began to inform the Sultan of everything that had happened to her, saying, "My father, I did not come back to life until yesterday, when I saw my husband; and it was he who freed me from the bondage of that Moroccan, that magician, that accursed man, than whom I believe there is nobody viler on the face of the earth. And but for my beloved, I should never have escaped him, nor would you have seen me for the rest of my days.

"But great sadness and sorrow got hold of me, father, not only for losing you but for the loss of a husband under whose kindness I shall live all my life long, seeing that he freed me from that foul sorcerer."

Then the Princess began repeating to her father everything that had happened to her, and telling him how the Moroccan had tricked her in the guise of a lamp seller who offered new for old; how she had given him the Lamp, whose worth she did not know; and how she had bartered it away only to laugh at the lamp man's folly.

"And next morning, father," she went on, "we found ourselves and everything the pavilion contained in the land of Africa — until my husband came to us and contrived a scheme by which we escaped; and if it had not been for Aladdin hurrying to our aid, the accursed man was determined to have me by force."

Then she told him of the drops of bhang given to the African in his wine, and concluded, "Then my husband came back to me; and how I do not know, but we were moved from the land of Africa to this place."

Aladdin in his turn recounted how, finding the wizard dead drunk, he had sent his wife and her women away out of the polluted place into the inner apartments; how he had taken the Lamp out of the sorcerer's breast pocket, where his wife had told him to look; how he had killed the villain; and finally how, making use of the Lamp, he had summoned its slave and ordered him to carry the pavilion back to its proper site — ending his tale with, "And if your Highness has any doubt about my words, come with me and look at the accursed magician."

The King did so; and, having examined the Moroccan, ordered the body to be carried away at once and burnt and its ashes scattered in the air.

Then he took to embracing Aladdin and kissing him, and said, "Pardon me, my son, for I was about to destroy your life through the foul deeds of this damned enchanter, who threw you into such a pit of peril; and I may be excused, my child, for what I did to you, because I found myself bereft of my daughter, my only one, who is dearer to me than my very kingdom. You know how the hearts of parents yearn towards their children, especially when, as with me, they have one and no other to love."

And in this fashion the Sultan went on excusing himself and kissing his son-in-law.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin said to the Sultan, "O King of the Time, you did nothing to me contrary to Holy Law, and I did not sin against you either; but all the trouble came from that Moroccan, the impure, the magician."

Thereupon the Sultan ordered the city decorated, and they obeyed him and held high feast and festivities. He also commanded the crier to cry about the streets, saying, "This day is a mighty great festival, on which public rejoicings must be held throughout the realm for a full month of thirty days, in honour of the return home of the Lady Badr al-Budur and her husband Aladdin."

So it happened with Aladdin and the Moroccan. But for all that, the King's son-in-law had not escaped entirely from the accursed man, although his body had been burnt and its ashes scattered in the air.

For the villain had a brother, more villainous still than himself, and a greater adept in necromancy, geomancy and astrology; and, as the old saying has it, "a bean, and it was split" — so each of them lived in his own quarter of the globe, that he might fill it with his sorcery, his fraud and his treason.

Now one day it happened that the Moroccan's brother wanted to learn how things fared with him; so he brought out his sandboard and dotted it and produced the figures; which, when he had considered them and studied them carefully, gave him to know that the man he was looking for was dead and housed in the tomb.

So he grieved and was certain of his death; but he dotted a second time, seeking to learn the manner of the death and where it had happened; and so he found that the place was the land of China and the manner the foulest kind of slaughter; and furthermore, that the man who had killed him was a young man named Aladdin.

Seeing this, he got up at once and equipped himself for the journey; then he set out and crossed wilds and woods and heights for the space of many months, until he reached China and the capital of the Sultan, where the slayer of his brother was.

He put up at the so-called Strangers' Inn and, hiring himself a cell, rested there a while; then he went out and wandered about the highways so that he might find some path that would help him to win his ill-minded wish, which was to take blood-revenge upon Aladdin for his brother.

Presently he went into a coffee house, a fine building that stood in the marketplace and that gathered a throng of people to play, some at mankalah, others at backgammon, others at chess and whatever else.

There he sat down and listened to the men sitting beside him; and they happened to be talking about an ancient and holy dame named Fatimah, who lived always at her devotions in a hermitage outside the town, and never came into it except two days in each month. They mentioned too that she had performed many saintly miracles.

When the Moroccan necromancer heard this he said to himself, "Now I have found what I was looking for. God willing, by means of this old woman I shall win my wish."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
