Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp
(Part 13 of 13)

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan necromancer went up to the people who were talking about the miracles performed by the devout old woman and said to one of them, "Uncle, I heard you all talking about the wonders of a certain holy woman named Fatimah: who is she, and where might she live?"

"Marvellous!" exclaimed the man. "How can you be in our city and yet never have heard about the miracles of the Lady Fatimah? Evidently, you poor fellow, you are a foreigner, since the fastings of this devout woman and her asceticism in worldly matters and the beauties of her piety have never come to your ears."

The Moroccan answered, "That is true, sir: yes, I am a stranger, and I only came to this city of yours last night. And I hope you will tell me about the saintly miracles of this virtuous woman and where she lives, for I have fallen into a calamity, and it is my wish to visit her and beg for her prayers; so that perhaps Allah, to whom be honour and glory, may through her blessings deliver me from my trouble."

At this the man recounted to him the marvels of Fatimah the devout and her piety and the beauties of her worship; and then, taking him by the hand, went with him outside the city and showed him the way to where she lived, which was a cave on the top of a hill.

The necromancer acknowledged his kindness in many words and, thanking him for his good offices, went back to his cell in the caravanserai.

Now by the decree of Fate, the very next day Fatimah came down into the city; and the Moroccan necromancer happened to leave his lodging in the morning, when he saw the people swarming and crowding; so he went up to find out what was going on, and found the holy woman standing in the middle of the throng, with everybody who suffered from pain or sickness flocking to her, asking a blessing and begging for her prayers; and every one she touched became whole of his illness.

The Moroccan necromancer followed her about until she went back to her cave; then, waiting until the evening had drawn in, he got up and went to a wine seller's shop, where he drank a cup of wine.

After this he went out of the city and, finding the holy woman's cave, went in and saw her lying flat on her back on a strip of matting. So he came forward and mounted upon her belly; then he drew his dagger and shouted at her; and when she woke and opened her eyes she saw a Moorish man with an unsheathed dagger sitting on her middle as though about to kill her.

She was troubled and badly terrified; but he said to her, "Listen! If you cry out or say a word I will kill you this very moment. Get up now and do everything I tell you." Then he swore her an oath that if she obeyed his orders, whatever they might be, he would not put her to death.

So saying, he got up off her, and Fatimah got up too; when he said to her, "Give me your gear and take my clothes"; whereupon she gave him her clothing and her headbands, her face veil and her cloak.

Then he said, "It is also necessary that you rub me with something that will make the colour of my face like yours."

So she went into the inner part of the cave and, bringing out a jar of ointment, spread some of it on her palm and with it smeared his face until its colour matched her own; then she gave him her staff and, showing him how to walk and what to do when he went into the city, hung her rosary round his neck.

Last of all she handed him a mirror and said, "Now look! You are no different from me at all"; and he saw himself the double of Fatimah, as though she had never gone or come.

But having got everything he wanted, he broke his oath and asked for a cord, which she brought him; then he seized her and strangled her in the cave; and presently, when she was dead, dragged the body outside and threw it into a pit nearby.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan, after murdering Fatimah, threw her body into a pit and went back to sleep in her cave; and when the day broke he got up and, going to the town, took his stand under the walls of Aladdin's pavilion.

At this the people flocked about him, all of them certain that he was Fatimah the devout; and he fell to doing whatever she used to do: he laid hands on these in pain, and recited a chapter of the Koran for those, and made prayers for a third.

Presently the thronging of the people and the clamour of the crowd were heard by the Lady Badr al-Budur, who said to her handmaids, "Look and see what is going on and what the cause of this uproar is."

At this the chief of the eunuchs went out to see what the matter might be, and came back presently and said, "My lady, this clamour is caused by the Lady Fatimah; and if you are pleased to command it, I will bring her to you, and so you may gain a blessing through her."

The Princess answered, "Go and bring her; for many a day now I have kept hearing of her miracles and her virtues, and I long to see her and get a blessing by her intervention, for people tell of her manifestations in many cases of difficulty."

The eunuch went out and brought in the Moroccan necromancer, dressed in Fatimah's clothing; and when the wizard stood before the Lady Badr al-Budur he began, at first sight, to bless her with a string of prayers; nor did any one of those present doubt for a moment that he was the holy woman herself.

The Princess got up and greeted him with the salaam; then, seating him beside her, said, "My Lady Fatimah, it is my wish that you should stay with me always, so that I may be blessed through you, and may also learn from you the paths of worship and piety and follow your example, which makes for salvation."

Now all this was a foul deception on the part of the accursed African, and he planned to complete his trickery; so he went on, "My lady, I am a poor woman and a religious, who lives in the desert; and one like me does not deserve to live in the palaces of kings."

But the Princess replied, "Have no worry at all, my Lady Fatimah; I will set aside an apartment of my pavilion for you, so that you may worship in it and nobody shall ever come and trouble you; and you will be able to worship Allah in my house better than in your cave."

The Moroccan answered, "Hearing and obedience, my lady; I will not oppose your order, for the commands of the children of kings may not be gainsaid or refused. Only I hope that my eating and drinking and sitting may be inside my own room, which shall be kept wholly private; nor do I require or wish for delicacies of diet, but do me the favour of sending your handmaid every day with a bit of bread and a sup of water; and when I feel like food, let me eat by myself in my own room."

Now what the accursed man meant by this was to avoid the danger of having to raise his face veil at mealtimes, when his purpose might be defeated by his beard and moustaches showing that he was a man.

The Princess replied, "My Lady Fatimah, be of good heart; nothing shall happen except what you wish. But now get up and let me show you the apartment in the palace that I would prepare for your stay with us."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Lady Badr al-Budur got up and, taking the necromancer who had disguised himself as the holy woman, showed him into the place she had kindly promised him for a home, and said, "My Lady Fatimah, here you shall live with every comfort about you, in all privacy and repose; and the place shall be named after your name."

Whereupon the Moroccan acknowledged her kindness and prayed for her.

Then the Princess showed him the lattices and the jewelled belvedere with its twenty-four windows, and said to him, "What do you think, my Lady Fatimah, of this marvellous pavilion?"

The Moroccan replied, "By Allah, my daughter, it is indeed exceedingly fine and wondrous; nor do I believe its equal is to be found in the whole universe. But alas for the lack of one thing that would enhance its beauty and its decoration!"

The Princess asked, "My Lady Fatimah, what does it lack, and what is this thing that would add to its adornment? Tell me about it, for I always believed it to be wholly perfect."

The Moroccan answered, "My lady, all it wants is that there should be hanging from the middle of the dome the egg of a bird called the roc; and if that were done, the pavilion would have no equal anywhere in the world."

The Princess asked, "What is this bird, and where can we find her egg?"

And the Moroccan answered, "My lady, the roc is indeed a giant bird, which carries off camels and elephants in her claws and flies away with them, such is her size and her strength; and this bird is mostly found on Mount Kaf; and the architect who built this pavilion is able to bring you one of her eggs."

Then they left off such talk, since it was the hour for the midday meal; and when the handmaid had spread the table, the Lady Badr al-Budur sent down to invite the accursed African to eat with her. But he would not accept, and for a good reason would on no account agree; no, he got up and retired to the room the Princess had assigned him, and the slave girls carried his dinner there.

Now when evening came on, Aladdin got back from the chase and met his wife, who greeted him with the salaam; and he clasped her to his bosom and kissed her. Presently, looking at her face, he saw a shade of sadness on it, and he noticed that, contrary to her custom, she did not laugh; so he asked her, "What has happened to you, my darling? Tell me — has anything happened to trouble your thoughts?"

"Nothing whatever," she answered; "but, my beloved, I used to imagine that our pavilion lacked nothing at all; and yet, eyes of mine, Aladdin, if the dome of the upper storey were hung with an egg of the bird called the roc, there would be nothing like it in the universe."

Her husband answered, "And you are saddened over this trifle, when it is the easiest of all matters to me! So cheer yourself; and whatever you want, it is enough that you tell me of it, and I will bring it from the depths of the earth in the quickest time and at the earliest hour."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Aladdin, after refreshing his Princess's spirits by promising her everything she could wish for, went straight to his room and, taking the Lamp, rubbed it; when the marid appeared without let or delay, saying, "Ask whatever you want."

The other said, "I want you to fetch me an egg of the bird roc and hang it from the crown of the dome of this pavilion of mine."

But when the marid heard these words his face grew fierce, and he shouted with a mighty loud and frightful voice, and cried:

"Denier of kindly deeds! Is it not enough for you that I and all the Slaves of the Lamp are for ever at your service, but you must also require me to bring you our Liege Lady for your pleasure, and hang her up at the dome of your pavilion for the enjoyment of you and your wife? Now by Allah, you deserve, you and she, that I should reduce you to ashes this very moment and scatter you on the air. But since the two of you are ignorant of this matter, and do not know its inner meaning from its outer, I will pardon you, for indeed you are only innocents.

"The offence comes from that accursed necromancer, brother to the Moroccan magician, who is living here representing himself to be Fatimah the devout, after taking her dress and her belongings and murdering her in the cave. Indeed he came here seeking to kill you by way of blood-revenge for his brother; and it is he who taught your wife to require this thing of me."

So saying, the marid vanished.

But when Aladdin heard these words his wits fled his head and his joints trembled at the marid's terrible shout; and yet he strengthened his purpose and, getting up at once, went out of his room and into his wife's.

There he pretended to have an aching head, since he knew how famous Fatimah was for the art and mystery of healing all such pains; and when the Lady Badr al-Budur saw him sitting with his hand to his head and complaining of feeling unwell, she asked him the cause, and he answered, "I know of nothing else, except that my head aches exceedingly."

At this she immediately ordered Fatimah summoned, so that the holy woman might lay her hand on his head; and Aladdin asked her, "Who may this Fatimah be?"

So she told him it was Fatimah the devout, to whom she had given a home in the pavilion.

Meanwhile the slave girls had gone out and summoned the Moroccan; and when the accursed man made his appearance, Aladdin got up to him and, acting like a man who knew nothing of his purpose, greeted him as though he were the real Fatimah and, kissing the hem of his sleeve, welcomed him and treated him with honour and said, "My Lady Fatimah, I hope you will bless me with a favour, for I know well how you practise the healing of pains: I have got a mighty ache in my head."

The accursed Moroccan could hardly believe he was hearing such words, this being all he had wanted.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

Dunyazad said, "Sister, if you are not sleepy, do tell us one of your pleasant tales." And Shahrazad replied, "With love and good will."

It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the Moroccan necromancer, dressed as Fatimah the devout, came up to Aladdin to put his hand on his head and heal his ache; so he laid on one hand and, putting the other under his gown, drew out a dagger to kill him with.

But Aladdin was watching him and, waiting patiently until he had wholly unsheathed the weapon, seized him with a powerful grip; and, wrenching the dagger out of his grasp, plunged it deep into his heart.

When the Lady Badr al-Budur saw him do this she shrieked and cried out, "What has this virtuous and holy woman done, that you have loaded your neck with the heavy burden of her blood, wrongfully shed? Have you no fear of Allah, that you kill Fatimah, this saintly woman, whose miracles are famous far and wide?"

"No," replied Aladdin. "I have not killed Fatimah. I have killed only Fatimah's killer, the man who is the brother of the accursed Moroccan magician who carried you off by his black art and transported my pavilion to the land of Africa. And this damnable brother of his came to our city and worked these wiles, murdering Fatimah and taking her clothes, only so that he might avenge his brother's blood on me; and it was he too who taught you to require a roc's egg of me, so that my death might come of the request. But if you doubt what I say, come here and look at the person I have killed."

At this Aladdin drew aside the Moroccan's face veil, and the Lady Badr al-Budur saw the likeness of a man with a full beard that nearly covered his features. She knew the truth at once and said to her husband, "My beloved, twice now I have cast you into risk of death!"

But he answered, "No harm in that, my lady, by the blessing of your loving eyes: I accept with all joy everything you bring me."

The Princess, hearing these words, hurried to fold him in her arms and kissed him, saying, "My darling, all this comes of my love for you, and I knew nothing about it; but truly I do not think lightly of your affection."

So Aladdin kissed her and pressed her to his breast, and the love between them grew greater still.

At that moment the Sultan appeared, and they told him everything that had happened and showed him the body of the Moroccan necromancer; whereupon the King ordered it to be burned and the ashes scattered on the air, exactly as had been done with the wizard's brother.

And Aladdin lived with his wife, the Lady Badr al-Budur, in all pleasure and joy of life, and from then on escaped every danger; and after a while, when the Sultan died, his son-in-law was seated on the throne of the kingdom; and he ruled and dealt justice to the people, so that they all loved him; and he lived with his wife in all comfort and happiness, until there came to him the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies.

Dunyazad said, "Sister, how rare and delightful your tale is!"

And Shahrazad said, "And what is this compared with what I could tell you tomorrow night, if my lord the King is pleased to leave me alive?"

So Shahryar said to himself, "Indeed I will not kill her until she has told me the whole tale."

When it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

Shahrazad began to relate the adventures of
