Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves
(Part 2 of 3)

When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that it chanced one day, when the robbers came to the treasure cave as they usually did, that they marvelled exceedingly to find no sign or trace of Kasim's body, while they noticed that a great deal of the gold had been carried off.

The captain said, "Now we must make enquiry into this matter; or else we shall suffer great loss, and this treasure of ours, which we and our forefathers have amassed over the course of many years, will be wasted and spoiled little by little."

To this they all assented, and with one mind agreed that the man they had killed had known the magic words by which the door was made to open; and moreover, that somebody besides him knew the spell too, and had carried off the body and a great deal of the gold as well; and so they must make diligent search and find out who the man might be.

Then they took counsel and decided that one of them, who should be shrewd and quick-witted, must put on the clothes of some merchant from foreign parts; and then, going to the city, must go about from quarter to quarter and from street to street and learn whether any townsman had lately died, and if so where he had lived, so that with this clue they might be able to find the man they were looking for.

At this one of the robbers said, "Give me leave to go and find out such news in the town and bring you word of it; and if I fail in my purpose, I hold my life forfeit."

So that bandit, after disguising himself in his dress, pushed into the town at night; and early next morning he went to the market square and saw that none of the shops had been opened yet, except only that of Baba Mustafa the tailor, who sat on his working stool with thread and needle in hand.

The thief bade him good day and said, "It is still dark: how can you see to sew?"

The tailor said, "I can tell you are a stranger. In spite of my years my eyesight is so keen that only yesterday I sewed a dead body together while sitting in a room that was quite dark."

At this the bandit said to himself, "I shall get something of what I want out of this tailor"; and to get a further clue he said, "It seems to me you are joking with me, and that you mean a shroud for a corpse was stitched by you and that your business is sewing shrouds."

The tailor answered, "It is no matter to you: ask me no more questions."

Thereupon the robber placed a gold coin in his hand and went on, "I do not wish to uncover anything you are hiding — my breast, like every honest man's, is the grave of secrets; and this only would I learn from you: in what house did you do that job? Can you direct me to it, or take me there yourself?"

The tailor took the gold greedily and cried, "I have not seen the way to that house with my own eyes. A certain slave woman led me to a place I know very well, and there she bandaged my eyes and guided me to some building, and finally took me into a darkened room where the dead body lay dismembered. Then she unbound the kerchief and told me to sew first the corpse and then the shroud; which having done, she blindfolded me again and led me back to the place she had brought me from and left me there. So you see I am not able to tell you where you will find the house."

The robber said, "Even though you do not know the dwelling you speak of, still you can take me to the place where you were blindfolded; then I will tie a kerchief over your eyes and lead you as you were led — and in this way you may perhaps hit upon the spot. If you will do me this favour, look: here is another gold coin for you."

Thereupon the bandit slipped a second gold coin into the tailor's palm, and Baba Mustafa thrust it into his pocket with the first; then, leaving his shop as it was, he walked to the place where Morgiana had tied the kerchief round his eyes, and with him went the robber, who, after binding on the bandage, led him by the hand.

Baba Mustafa, who was clever and keen-witted, presently struck the street he had walked along with the handmaid, and walked on counting step by step; then, stopping suddenly, he said, "This far I came with her"; and the two of them stopped in front of Kasim's house, where his brother Ali Baba now lived.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the robber then made marks with white chalk on the door, so that he might find it easily at some future time; and, taking the bandage off the tailor's eyes, said, "Baba Mustafa, I thank you for this favour; and may Almighty Allah reward you for your goodness. Tell me now, I beg you, who lives in that house?"

He said, "In very truth I do not know, for I have little knowledge of this quarter of the city."

And the bandit, understanding that he could get no further clue from the tailor, sent him back to his shop with abundant thanks, and hurried back to the meeting place in the jungle where the band was waiting for him.

Not long afterwards it happened that Morgiana, going out on some errand, marvelled exceedingly at seeing the chalk marks showing white on the door. She stood a while deep in thought and presently guessed that some enemy had made the signs so that he might recognise the house and play some trick on her lord. So she chalked the doors of all her neighbours in the same way, and kept the matter secret, never confiding it either to her master or to her mistress.

Meanwhile the robber told his comrades the tale of his adventure and how he had found the clue; so the captain, and the whole band with him, went one after another by different ways until they came into the city; and the man who had put the mark on Ali Baba's door went with the chief to point out the place.

He led him straight to the house and, pointing at the sign, exclaimed, "Here lives the man we are looking for!"

But when the captain looked around him he saw that all the houses bore chalk marks in the same fashion; and he wondered and said, "By what means do you know which house, of all these houses that bear the same signs, is the one you spoke of?"

At this the robber guide was confounded beyond all measure of confusion and could make no answer; then with an oath he cried, "I certainly did set a sign on a door; but I do not know where all the marks on the other doors came from, nor can I say for certain which was the one I chalked."

Thereupon the captain went back to the marketplace and said to his men, "We have toiled and laboured in vain, and we have not found the house we came to look for. Let us go back to the forest, our rendezvous; I shall go there too."

Then they all trooped off and gathered together inside the treasure cave; and when the robbers had all met, the captain judged that the man who had spoken falsely and led them through the city to no purpose deserved punishment. So he imprisoned him in the presence of them all; and then he said, "I will show special favour to the one among you who will go to town and bring me intelligence by which we may lay hands on the plunderer of our property."

At this another of the company came forward and said, "I am ready to go and enquire into the case; and it is I who will bring you to your wish."

The captain, after giving him presents and promises, sent him off on his errand; and by the decree of Destiny, which nobody may gainsay, this second robber went first to the house of Baba Mustafa the tailor, exactly as the thief before him had done. In the same way he persuaded the tailor with gifts of gold coin to be led blindfold; and so he too was guided to Ali Baba's door.

Here, noting his predecessor's work, he fixed a mark on the doorpost in red chalk, the better to distinguish it from the others, which still showed white. Then he made his way back in stealth to his company; but Morgiana on her part also spotted the red sign on the door and, with subtle forethought, marked all the others in the same fashion; nor did she tell anybody what she had done.

Meanwhile the bandit rejoined his band and said boastfully, "Captain, I have found the house and put a mark on it by which I shall tell it clearly from all its neighbours."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the captain sent another of his men to the city, and he found the place; but, as before, when the troop went there they saw every single house marked with signs of red chalk. So they came back disappointed, and the captain, growing exceedingly displeased and distracted, clapped this spy into gaol too.

Then the chief said to himself, "Two men have failed in their attempt and have got their rightful reward of punishment; and I imagine none of the rest of my band will try to follow up their search; so I will go and find this fellow's house myself."

So he went along and, helped by the tailor Baba Mustafa, who had gained a good deal of gold in this business, he hit upon the house of Ali Baba; and here he made no outward show or sign, but marked it on the tablet of his heart and impressed the picture of it on the page of his memory.

Then, returning to the jungle, he said to his men, "I have full knowledge of the place and have drawn it clearly in my mind, so that now there will be no difficulty in finding it. Go out straight away and buy and bring here nineteen mules, together with one large leather jar of mustard oil and thirty-seven vessels of the same kind quite empty.

"Not counting me and the two locked up in gaol, you number thirty-seven souls; so I will stow you away, armed and equipped, each inside his jar, and will load two on each mule; and on the nineteenth mule there shall be a man in an empty jar on one side, and on the other the jar full of oil.

"I for my part, in the guise of an oil merchant, will drive the mules into the town, arriving at the house by night, and will ask leave of its master to stay there until morning. After this we shall find our chance during the dark hours to get up and fall on him and kill him."

And the captain went on to say, "When we have made an end of him we shall recover the gold and treasure he robbed us of, and bring it back on the mules."

This plan pleased the robbers, who went out at once and bought mules and huge leather jars, and did as the captain had told them. And after a delay of three days, shortly before nightfall, they got up; and, smearing all the jars over with mustard oil, each hid himself inside an empty vessel.

The chief then disguised himself in a trader's clothes and placed the jars on the nineteen mules — that is, the thirty-seven vessels, in each of which lay a robber armed and equipped, and the one that was full of oil.

This done, he drove the beasts before him, and presently reached Ali Baba's place at nightfall; when it happened that the master of the house was strolling to and fro in front of his home after supper.

The captain greeted him with the salaam and said, "I come from such and such a village with oil; and I have often been here selling oil, but now, to my grief, I have arrived too late, and I am sorely troubled and perplexed about where I shall spend the night. If you have pity on me, I beg you to let me stay here in your courtyard and ease the mules by taking down the jars and giving the beasts a little fodder."

Although Ali Baba had heard the captain's voice when he was perched in the tree, and had seen him go into the cave, still, because of the disguise, he did not know him for the leader of the thieves, and granted his request with a hearty welcome and gave him full leave to stop there for the night.

He then pointed out an empty shed to tether the mules in, and told one of the slave boys to go and fetch grain and water. He also gave orders to the slave girl Morgiana, saying, "A guest has come here and is staying tonight. Busy yourself with all speed about his supper and make the guest bed ready for him."

Presently, when the captain had let down all the jars and had fed and watered his mules, Ali Baba received him with all courtesy and kindness, and, summoning Morgiana, said in his presence, "See that you do not fail in the service of this stranger of ours, nor let him lack for anything. Tomorrow early I want to go to the baths and bathe; so give my slave boy Abdullah a suit of clean white clothes that I may put on after washing; and moreover make ready some broth overnight, that I may drink it after I get home."

She replied, "I will have everything ready as you have told me."

So Ali Baba went off to his rest; and the captain, having had his supper, went to the shed and saw that all the mules had their food and drink for the night.

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that the captain, after seeing to the mules and to the jars, which Ali Baba and his household believed to be full of oil, and finding himself completely private, whispered to his men who were lying in ambush, "Tonight at midnight, when you hear my voice, open the leather jars quickly from top to bottom with your sharp knives and come out without delay."

Then, passing through the kitchen, he reached the room where a bed had been spread for him, Morgiana showing the way with a lamp.

She said, "If you need anything else, I beg you to command your servant, who is always ready to obey what you say."

He answered, "I need nothing else"; and then, putting out the light, he lay down on the bed to sleep a while before the time came to rouse his men and finish off the work.

Meanwhile Morgiana did as her master had told her: she first took out a suit of clean white clothes and handed it over to Abdullah, who had not yet gone to bed; then she put the pot on the hearth to boil the broth, and blew the fire until it burnt briskly.

After a short while she needed to see whether the broth was boiling; but by that time all the lamps had gone out, and she found that the oil was spent and there was nowhere she could get a light.

The slave boy Abdullah noticed that she was troubled and perplexed at this, and said to her, "Why make such a fuss? In that shed there are plenty of jars of oil: go now and take as much of it as you like."

Morgiana thanked him for the suggestion; and Abdullah, who was lying at his ease in the hall, went off to sleep so that he might wake early and attend Ali Baba at the bath.

So the handmaid got up and, with the oil can in her hand, walked to the shed where the leather jars stood ranged in rows. Now as she drew near one of the vessels, the thief who was hidden in it, hearing the tread of footsteps, thought it must be his captain, whose summons he was waiting for; so he whispered, "Is it time for us to come out now?"

Morgiana started back, frightened at the sound of a human voice; but since she was bold and quick-witted she replied, "The time is not yet come" — and said to herself, "These jars are not full of oil, and I perceive some mystery here. Perhaps the oil merchant is hatching some treacherous plot against my lord; so may Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate, protect us from his snares!"

So she answered in a voice made like the captain's, "Not yet; the time has not come." Then she went to the next jar and gave the same reply to the man inside it, and so on to all the vessels, one by one.

Then she said to herself, "Praise be to the Lord! My master took this fellow in, believing him to be an oil merchant; but look — he has let in a band of robbers, who are only waiting for the signal to fall on him and plunder the place and put him to death."

Then she went on to the furthest jar and, finding it brimming with oil, filled her can and, going back to the kitchen, trimmed the lamp and lit the wicks; then, bringing out a large cauldron, she set it on the fire and, filling it with oil out of the jar, heaped wood on the hearth and fanned it into a fierce flame, the more readily to boil what was in it.

When this was done she baled it out in potfuls and poured it, seething hot, into the leather vessels one by one — while the thieves, unable to escape, were scalded to death, and every jar held a corpse.

So did this slave girl by her subtle wit make a clean end of them all, noiselessly and without even the people in the house knowing about it.

Now when she had satisfied herself that every one of the men had been killed, she went back to the kitchen and, shutting the door, sat brewing Ali Baba's broth.

Hardly an hour had passed before the captain woke from his sleep; and, opening his window wide, saw that everything was dark and silent; so he clapped his hands as a signal for his men to come out, but not a sound was heard in return. After a while he clapped again and called aloud, but got no answer; and when he cried out a third time with no reply, he was perplexed and went out to the shed where the jars stood.

He thought to himself, "Perhaps they have all fallen asleep, when the time for action is at hand; so I must wake them without pause or delay."

Then, going up to the nearest jar, he was startled by a smell of oil and seething flesh; and touching it on the outside he felt it reeking hot; then, going to the others one by one, he found them all in the same condition.

At this he knew for certain what fate had befallen his band; and, fearing for his own safety, he climbed onto the wall and, dropping from there into a garden, made his escape in high dudgeon and sore disappointment.

Morgiana waited a while to see the captain come back from the shed, but he did not come; at which she knew that he had scaled the wall and taken to flight, since the street door was double-locked; and, the thieves being all disposed of in this way, Morgiana lay down and slept in perfect ease and peace of mind.

When two hours of darkness were still left, Ali Baba woke and went to the baths, knowing nothing of the night's adventure, for the gallant slave girl had not woken him — nor indeed had she thought such a thing wise, because if she had looked for a chance to report her plan to him she might well have lost her opportunity and spoiled the whole project.

The sun was high over the horizon when Ali Baba walked back from the baths; and he marvelled greatly to see the jars still standing under the shed, and said, "How does it come about that the oil merchant, my guest, has not taken his mules and his jars of oil to market?"

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.

When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

she said: It has reached me, O fortunate King, that Ali Baba presently asked Morgiana what had become of the oil merchant, his guest, whom he had put in her charge; and she answered, "Almighty Allah grant you a hundred and twenty years of safety! I will tell you about this merchant in private."

So Ali Baba went aside with his slave girl, who, taking him outside the house, first locked the courtyard door; then, showing him a jar, said, "Please look into this and see whether there is oil in it or something else."

At this, peering inside it, he saw a man; at which sight he cried out and would gladly have run away in his fright.

Morgiana said, "Do not fear him; this man no longer has the strength to do you harm. He is dead, and stone dead."

Hearing such words of comfort and reassurance, Ali Baba asked, "Morgiana, what evils have we escaped, and by what means has this wretch become the quarry of Fate?"

She answered, "Praise be to Almighty Allah! I will tell you all about the case; but hush, do not speak aloud, in case the neighbours learn the secret and it ends in our ruin. Now look into all the jars, one by one from first to last."

So Ali Baba examined them each in turn and found in each a man fully armed and equipped, all of them scalded to death.

At this, speechless with sheer amazement, he stared at the jars; but presently, recovering himself, he asked, "And where is he, the oil merchant?"

She answered, "I will tell you about him too. The villain was no trader but a treacherous assassin, whose honeyed words would have trapped you to your doom; and now I will tell you what he was and what has happened. But meanwhile you are fresh from the baths, and you should first drink some of this broth for your stomach's sake and your health's."

So Ali Baba went inside and Morgiana served up the dish; after which her master said, "I should very much like to hear this wonderful story: please tell it to me and set my heart at ease."

At this the handmaid fell to relating everything that had happened, in these words:

"Master, when you told me to boil the broth and went off to bed, your servant, obeying your command, took out a suit of clean white clothes and gave it to the boy Abdullah; then kindled the fire and set the broth on. As soon as it was ready I needed to light a lamp so that I could see to skim it; but all the oil was spent, and, learning this, I told the slave boy Abdullah what I needed, and he advised me to draw some from the jars standing under the shed.

"So I took a can and went to the first vessel, when suddenly I heard a voice inside it whisper very cautiously, 'Is it time for us to come out now?' I was amazed at this and judged that the pretended merchant had laid some plot to kill you; so I replied, 'The time is not yet come.' Then I went to the second jar and heard another voice, to which I made the same answer, and so on with all of them.

"By now I was certain that these men were only waiting for some signal from their chief, whom you had taken in as a guest within your walls, supposing him to be a merchant in oil; and that, after you had received him hospitably, the wretch had brought these men to murder you and plunder your goods and spoil your house. But I gave him no opportunity to win his wish.

"The last jar I found full of oil; and, taking some from it, I lit the lamp; then, putting a large cauldron on the fire, I filled it up with oil that I brought from the jar and made a fierce blaze under it; and when the contents were seething hot I took out several cansful, meaning to scald them all to death, and, going to each jar in due order, poured boiling oil into them one by one.

"Having destroyed them utterly in this way, I went back to the kitchen and, putting out the lamps, stood by the window watching what might happen and how that false merchant would act next.

"Not long after I had taken up my station, the robber captain woke and signalled to his thieves several times. Then, getting no reply, he came downstairs and went out to the jars; and, finding that all his men were dead, he fled through the darkness — where, I do not know. So when he had completely disappeared I was sure that, the door being double-locked, he had scaled the wall and dropped into the garden and made his escape. And then, with my heart at rest, I slept."

And Morgiana, after telling her story to her master, presently added, "This is the whole truth that I have told you. For some days indeed I have had an inkling of something of this kind, but I kept it from you, thinking it unwise to risk the chance of its reaching the neighbours' ears; now, however, there is nothing for it but to tell you.

"One day, as I came to the house door, I saw a white chalk mark on it; and the next day a red sign beside the white. I did not know what the marks were made for; nevertheless I put others on the doors of several neighbours, judging that some enemy had done this in order to bring about my master's destruction. So I made the marks on all the other doors in such perfect conformity with those I had found that it would be hard to tell them apart."

And Shahrazad saw the dawn breaking, and fell silent.
