Conclusion

Now during all this time Shahrazad had borne the King three boy children; so when she had made an end of her tales she rose to her feet and, kissing the ground before him, said:

"O King of the time, and unique one of the age and the tide: I am your handmaid, and for these thousand nights and a night I have entertained you with stories of the people who went before us and with cautionary instances of the men of old. May I then make bold to beg a boon of your Highness?"

He replied, "Ask, Shahrazad, and it shall be granted you."

Whereupon she cried out to the nurses and the eunuchs, saying, "Bring me my children."

So they brought them to her in haste, and they were three boy children, one walking, one crawling and one at the breast. She took them and, setting them before the King, kissed the ground again and said:

"O King of the age, these are your children; and I beg you to release me from the doom of death, as a gift to these infants; for if you kill me they will be motherless, and will find no woman to rear them as they ought to be reared."

When the King heard this he wept and, pressing the boys to his bosom, said, "By Allah, Shahrazad, I pardoned you before ever these children came, because I found you chaste, pure, honest and pious. Allah bless you, and your father and your mother, and your root and your branch! I take the Almighty to witness against me that I exempt you from anything that could harm you."

So she kissed his hands and his feet and rejoiced exceedingly, saying, "May the Lord make your life long and increase you in dignity and majesty!" — and presently added:

"You marvelled at what happened to you at the hands of women; and yet greater and more grievous misfortunes than yours befell the kings of Persia before you. Indeed I have set out for you what happened to caliphs and kings and others with their women; but the telling is long and the hearing of it grows tedious, and in what I have told there is warning enough for the man of wits and admonishment enough for the wise."

Then she stopped speaking; and when King Shahryar had heard her words and profited by what she said, he summoned up his powers of reason and cleansed his heart and made his understanding come back to him, and turned to Almighty Allah and said to himself:

"Since more than has befallen me befell the kings of Persia, never, while I live, shall I stop blaming myself for the past. As for this Shahrazad, her like is not to be found in the lands; so praise be to Him who appointed her a means of delivering His creatures from oppression and slaughter!"

Then he rose from where he sat and kissed her head; at which she rejoiced exceedingly, she and her sister Dunyazad.

When the morning came, the King went out and, sitting down on the throne of his kingship, summoned the lords of his land; whereupon the chamberlains and officials and captains of the army came in to him and kissed the ground before him.

He distinguished the vizier, Shahrazad's father, with special favour, and bestowed on him a costly and splendid robe of honour, and treated him with the utmost kindness, and said to him, "Allah protect you, for that you gave me your noble daughter to wife, who has been the means of my repenting of killing other people's daughters. Indeed I have found her pure and pious, chaste and honest; and Allah has granted me three boy children by her; so praised be He for His surpassing favour."

Then he bestowed robes of honour on his viziers and emirs and chief officers, and set out briefly to them what had happened to him with Shahrazad, and how he had turned from his former ways and repented of what he had done, and how he intended to take the vizier's daughter Shahrazad to wife and have the marriage contract drawn up with her.

When those who were present heard this they kissed the ground before him and blessed him and his betrothed Shahrazad, and the vizier thanked her.

Then Shahryar brought his sitting to an end in all well-being, whereupon the people dispersed to their homes, and the news was noised abroad that the King intended to marry the vizier's daughter Shahrazad.

Then he set about making ready the wedding gear, and presently sent for his brother, King Shah Zaman, who came; and King Shahryar went out to meet him with his troops.

Furthermore they decorated the city in the finest fashion and spread scents from censers and burnt aloes-wood and other perfumes in all the markets and thoroughfares, and rubbed themselves with saffron, while the drums beat and the flutes and pipes sounded and mimes and mountebanks played and plied their arts, and the King lavished gifts and largesse on them; and indeed it was a notable day.

When they came to the palace, King Shahryar gave orders to spread the tables with beasts roasted whole and sweetmeats and every kind of food, and told the crier to cry to the people that they should come up to the Divan and eat and drink, and that this should be a means of reconciliation between him and them. So high and low, great and small, came up to him; and they stayed like that, eating and drinking, seven days and seven nights.

Then the King shut himself up with his brother and told him what had happened to him with the vizier's daughter Shahrazad over the past three years, and told him what he had heard from her of proverbs and parables, chronicles and pleasantries, quips and jests, stories and anecdotes, dialogues and histories and elegies and other verses; at which King Shah Zaman marvelled with the uttermost marvel and said:

"I should like to take her younger sister to wife, so that we may be two brothers married to two sisters, and they in the same way sisters to us. For the calamity that befell me was the cause of our discovering what had befallen you; and all this time, these three years past, I have taken no delight in any woman, except that I lie each night with a girl of my kingdom and every morning I put her to death. But now I want to marry your wife's sister Dunyazad."

When King Shahryar heard his brother's words he rejoiced exceedingly and, getting up at once, went in to his wife Shahrazad and told her what his brother intended, namely that he sought her sister Dunyazad in marriage.

Whereupon she answered, "O King of the age, we ask one condition of him, and that is that he take up his home with us; for I cannot bear to be parted from my sister for an hour, since we were brought up together and cannot endure to be separated from one another. If he accepts this bargain, she is his servant."

King Shahryar went back to his brother and told him what Shahrazad had said; and he replied, "Indeed, this is exactly what was in my mind; for I wish never again to be parted from you for a single hour. As for the kingdom, Allah the Most High shall send it whomever He chooses, for I have no desire for kingship any longer."

When King Shahryar heard his brother's words he rejoiced exceedingly and said, "Truly this is what I wished, my brother. So praised be Allah, who has brought about union between us."

Then he sent for the judges and the learned men, the captains and the notables, and they married the two brothers to the two sisters. The contracts were written out, and the two kings bestowed robes of honour of silk and satin on all who were present, while the city was decorated and the rejoicings were renewed.

The King commanded every emir and vizier and chamberlain and officer to decorate his palace, and the people of the city were gladdened by the promise of happiness and contentment. King Shahryar also ordered sheep slaughtered and kitchens set up, and made wedding feasts and fed all comers, high and low; and he gave alms to the poor and needy and extended his bounty to great and small.

Then the eunuchs went out to perfume the baths for the brides; so they scented them with rosewater and willow-flower water and pods of musk, and fumigated them with eaglewood and ambergris.

Then Shahrazad went in, she and her sister Dunyazad, and they cleansed their heads and trimmed their hair. When they came out of the baths they put on clothes and ornaments such as men used to prepare for the kings of Persia; and among Shahrazad's clothes was a dress bordered with red gold and worked with images of birds and beasts.

And the two sisters encircled their necks with necklaces of precious jewels, the like of which Alexander never rejoiced in, for in them were great jewels that amazed the wit and dazzled the eye; and the imagination was bewildered at their charms, for indeed each of them was brighter than the sun and the moon.

Before them they lit brilliant torches of wax in candelabra of gold; but their faces outshone the torches, for they had eyes sharper than unsheathed swords, and the lashes of their eyelids bewitched all hearts. Their cheeks were rosy red and their necks and their figures swayed gracefully, and their eyes played like a gazelle's; and the slave girls came to meet them with instruments of music.

Then the two kings went into the baths, and when they came out they sat down on a couch set with pearls and gems, whereupon the two sisters came up and stood between their hands, like two moons, bending and leaning from side to side in their beauty and loveliness.

Presently they brought Shahrazad forward and displayed her, in the first dress, in a suit of red; whereupon King Shahryar rose to look at her, and the wits of everybody present, men and women alike, were bewitched; for she was just as one of those who described her said of her:

	A sun on a wand in a knoll of sand she showed,
	clad in her crimson-coloured chemisette;
	of the honey-dew of her lips she gave me drink,
	and with her rosy cheeks quenched the fire she set.

Then they dressed Dunyazad in a dress of blue brocade, and she became like the full moon when it shines out. So they displayed her in this, in the first dress, before King Shah Zaman, who rejoiced in her and nearly fainted away with love-longing and desire; yes, he was distracted with passion for her the moment he saw her, because she was as one of those who described her said of her in these lines:

	She comes dressed in a vest of azure,
	ultramarine, as the skies are decked and dight;
	I viewed the unparalleled sight, which showed my eyes
	a summer moon upon a winter night.

Then they went back to Shahrazad and displayed her in the second dress, a suit of surpassing fineness, and veiled her face with her hair like a chin-veil. Moreover they let down her side locks, and she was as one of those who described her said of her in these lines:

	Hail to him whose locks overshadow his cheeks,
	who slew my life by cruel hard despite!
	I said, "Have you veiled the Morning in Night?"
	He said, "No — I veil the Moon in the hue of Night."

Then they displayed Dunyazad in a second and a third and a fourth dress, and she paced forward like the rising sun, and swayed to and fro in the insolence of her beauty; and she was as the poet says of her in these lines:

	The sun of beauty she to all appears,
	and, lovely and coy, she mocks all loveliness;
	and when he meets her face and her smile
	in the morning, the sun of day must dress in clouds.

Then they displayed Shahrazad in the third dress and the fourth and the fifth, and she became like a supple willow branch or a thirsting gazelle, lovely of face and perfect in every attribute of grace, just as one says of her in these lines:

	She comes like the fullest moon on a happy night,
	taper of waist, with a shape of magic might;
	she has an eye whose glances quell mankind,
	and the ruby on her cheeks reflects its light.
	The blackness of her hair enveils her hips —
	beware of curls that bite with a viper's bite!
	Her sides are silken-soft, and all the while the heart
	behind that surface is mere rock, escaping sight.
	From the fringed curtains of her eyes she shoots
	shafts that at the furthest range still strike the white.

Then they went back to Dunyazad and displayed her in the fifth dress and in the sixth, which was green; and she surpassed with her loveliness the fair ones of the four quarters of the world, and outdid, with the brightness of her face, the full moon at its rising; for she was as the poet says of her in these lines:

	A girl she was whom the dresser's art had decked with snare and sleight,
	and robed with rays as though the sun had borrowed her own light.
	She came before us wondrously clad in a chemisette of green,
	as, veiled behind his leafy screen, the pomegranate hides from sight.
	And when he said, "What do you call the fashion of your dress?"
	she answered us in a pleasant way, with a double meaning dight:
	"We call this garment heartbreak; and rightly is it named,
	for many a heart we broke with this, and harried many a sprite."

Then they displayed Shahrazad in the sixth and seventh dresses and clad her in a young man's clothes; whereupon she came forward swaying from side to side and moving coquettishly, and indeed she ravished wits and hearts and bewitched all eyes with her glances. She shook her sides and swayed her haunches, then put her hair up under a sword hilt and went up to King Shahryar, who embraced her as a hospitable host embraces his guest, and threatened her in her ear with the taking of the sword; and she was as the poet says of her in these words:

	Were the darkness of a beard not male,
	and fairer than the feminine,
	the tirewomen would have grudged the bride
	who made herself a beard and whiskers wear.

And they did the same with her sister Dunyazad; and when they had made an end of the display, the King bestowed robes of honour on everybody present and sent the brides to their own apartments.

Then Shahrazad went in to King Shahryar and Dunyazad to King Shah Zaman, and each of them solaced himself with the company of his beloved wife, and the hearts of the people were comforted.

When morning came, the vizier came in to the two kings and kissed the ground before them; and they thanked him and were generous in their bounty to him. Presently they went out and sat down on the couches of kingship, while all the viziers and emirs and grandees and lords of the land presented themselves and kissed the ground. King Shahryar ordered them robes of honour and largesse, and they prayed for the permanence and prosperity of the King and his brother.

Then the two sovereigns appointed their father-in-law the vizier to be viceroy in Samarkand and assigned him five of the chief emirs to go with him, charging them to attend him and do him service. The minister kissed the ground and prayed that they might be granted length of life; then he went in to his daughters, with the eunuchs and ushers walking before him, and greeted them and said goodbye to them. They kissed his hands and gave him joy of his kingship and bestowed immense treasures on him; after which he took his leave of them and set out, and travelled days and nights until he came near Samarkand, where the townspeople met him three days' journey out and rejoiced in him exceedingly.

So he entered the city, and they decorated the houses, and it was a notable day. He sat down on the throne of his kingship, and the viziers did him homage, and the grandees and emirs of Samarkand, and they all prayed that he might be granted justice and victory and long continuance. So he bestowed robes of honour on them and treated them with distinction, and they made him Sultan over them.

As soon as his father-in-law had left for Samarkand, King Shahryar summoned the grandees of his realm and made them a stupendous banquet of every kind of delicious food and exquisite sweetmeat. He also bestowed robes of honour on them and rewarded them, and divided the kingdoms between himself and his brother in their presence; at which the people rejoiced.

Then the two kings lived on, each ruling a day in turn, and they were always in harmony with one another; while in the same way their wives continued in the love of Almighty Allah and in thanksgiving to Him; and the peoples and the provinces were at peace, and the preachers prayed for them from the pulpits, and their fame was noised abroad, and travellers carried news of them to every land.

In due time King Shahryar summoned chroniclers and copyists and told them to write down everything that had happened to him with his wife, first and last; so they wrote it, and named it The Stories of the Thousand Nights and a Night. The book came to thirty volumes, and these the King laid up in his treasury.

And the two brothers lived with their wives in all pleasure and comfort of life and its delights, for indeed Allah the Most High had changed their annoyance into joy; and in this way they went on until there took them the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies, the Desolator of dwelling places and the Garnerer of graveyards; and they were carried away to the mercy of Almighty Allah. Their houses fell into waste and their palaces lay in ruins, and other kings inherited their riches.

Then there reigned after them a wise ruler, who was just and keen-witted and accomplished, and who loved tales and legends, and especially those that chronicle the doings of sovereigns and sultans; and he found in the treasury these marvellous stories and wonderful histories, contained in the thirty volumes.

So he read in them a first book and a second and a third, and so on to the last of them; and each book astounded and delighted him more than the one before it, until he came to the end of them. Then he admired everything he had read in them of description and discourse and rare traits and anecdotes and moral instances and reminiscences, and ordered the people to copy them and spread them over all lands and climes; and so their fame was noised abroad, and the people named them The Marvels and Wonders of the Thousand Nights and a Night.

This is all that has come down to us of the origin of this book, and Allah is All-knowing.

So glory be to Him whom the shifts of Time do not waste away, nor does anything of chance or change affect His sway; whom one case does not divert from another case, and who is alone in the attributes of perfect grace. And prayer and peace be upon the Lord's Pontiff and Chosen One among His creatures, our lord Mohammed, the Prince of mankind, through whom we beg of Him a goodly and a godly end.
