cp	The smaller Diagram with a single red counter on the line between No. 7 and No. 8 in the lower half, and the other compartments unmarked.
cq	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 6, the upper right compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
cr	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 7, the lower left compartment, and a red counter in No. 8, the lower right.
cs	The smaller Diagram with red counters in No. 5 and No. 6, the two upper compartments, and the lower half unmarked.
ct	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 6, the upper right compartment, and a red counter in No. 8, the lower right; the left half is unmarked.
cu	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 5, upper left, a red counter in No. 6, upper right, and a grey counter in No. 8, lower right.
cv	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 5, upper left, a grey counter in No. 7, lower left, and a red counter in No. 8, lower right.
cw	The smaller Diagram with grey counters in No. 5 and No. 6, the upper compartments, and in No. 8, the lower right; No. 7 is unmarked.
cx	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 6, the upper right compartment, and another in No. 7, the lower left.
cy	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 5, the upper left compartment, and a grey counter in No. 8, the lower right.
cz	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 5, upper left, red counters in No. 6 and No. 7, and a grey counter in No. 8, lower right.
da	The larger Diagram, unmarked: upper half x, lower half x', left half y, right half y', with the inner square labelled m.
db	The larger Diagram, unmarked, its halves labelled x and x' above and below, y and y' left and right, and its inner square m.
dc	The smaller Diagram, unmarked, its upper and lower halves labelled x and x' and its left and right halves labelled y and y'.
dd	The larger Diagram with grey counters in No. 9 and No. 15, the outer left compartments, and in No. 11 and No. 12, and a red counter in No. 13.
de	The larger Diagram with a grey counter in No. 11, a red counter in No. 12, and a grey counter in No. 13, all inside the inner square.
df	The larger Diagram with grey counters in No. 11, No. 12 and No. 14 of the inner square, and a red counter in No. 13, its lower left.
dg	The larger Diagram with grey counters in No. 10 and No. 16, the outer right compartments, and in No. 13 and No. 14, the lower half of the inner square.
dh	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter in No. 6.
di	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a grey counter in No. 5 and a red counter in No. 6.
dj	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter in each compartment.
dk	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a grey counter in each compartment.
dl	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter on the line between them.
dm	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a grey counter in No. 6.
dn	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter in No. 6.
do	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter on the line between them and another red counter in No. 6.
dp	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a grey counter in No. 5.
dq	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter in No. 6.
dr	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter in No. 5 and a grey counter in No. 6.
ds	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter in No. 5.
dt	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a grey counter in No. 5.
du	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a red counter in each compartment.
dv	The upper half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 left and No. 6 right, with a grey counter in No. 5 and a red counter in No. 6.
dw	The left half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 above and No. 7 below, with a grey counter in No. 7.
dx	The left half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 above and No. 7 below, with a red counter in No. 5 and a grey counter in No. 7.
dy	The left half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 above and No. 7 below, with a grey counter in each compartment.
dz	The left half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 above and No. 7 below, with a red counter in No. 7.
ea	The left half of the smaller Diagram, No. 5 above and No. 7 below, with a red counter on the line between them.
eb	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 5, the upper left compartment, and a grey counter in No. 7, the lower left.
ec	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 7, the lower left compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
ed	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 8, the lower right compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
ee	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 6, the upper right compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
ef	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 6, the upper right compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
eg	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 7, the lower left compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
eh	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 8, the lower right compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
ei	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 7, the lower left compartment, and a red counter in No. 8, the lower right.
ej	The smaller Diagram with a red counter on the line between No. 6 and No. 8, in the right half, and nothing else marked.
ek	The smaller Diagram with grey counters in No. 7 and No. 8, the two lower compartments, and the upper half unmarked.
el	The smaller Diagram with red counters in No. 5 and No. 7, the two left-hand compartments, and the right half unmarked.
em	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 5, upper left, a grey counter in No. 6, upper right, and a red counter in No. 8, lower right.
en	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 7, the lower left compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
eo	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 6, the upper right compartment, and a red counter in No. 8, the lower right.
ep	The smaller Diagram with a red counter on the line between No. 6 and No. 8, in the right half, and nothing else marked.
eq	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 5, upper left, and grey counters in No. 6, upper right, and No. 7, lower left.
er	The smaller Diagram with grey counters in No. 7 and No. 8, the two lower compartments, and the upper half unmarked.
es	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 5, the upper left compartment, and a red counter in No. 6, the upper right.
et	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 5, the upper left compartment, and the other three compartments unmarked.
eu	The smaller Diagram with red counters in No. 7 and No. 8, the two lower compartments, and the upper half unmarked.
ev	The smaller Diagram with a grey counter in No. 5, upper left, a red counter in No. 6, upper right, and a grey counter in No. 7, lower left.
ew	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 6, upper right, a red counter in No. 7, lower left, and a grey counter in No. 8, lower right.
ex	The smaller Diagram with a red counter in No. 5, the upper left compartment, and another in No. 8, the lower right.
ey	The larger Diagram with grey counters in No. 11 and No. 12, the upper half of the inner square, and nothing else marked.
ez	The larger Diagram with a red counter on the line between No. 9 and No. 15, in the outer part of the left half, and nothing else marked.
fa	The larger Diagram with grey counters in No. 11 and No. 12 of the inner square, and a red counter on the line between No. 13 and No. 14.
fb	The larger Diagram with grey counters in No. 10 and No. 16, the two outer compartments of the right half, and nothing else marked.
fc	The larger Diagram with grey counters in No. 9 and No. 15, the outer left compartments, and in No. 11 and No. 12, and a red counter in No. 13.
fd	The larger Diagram with a grey counter in No. 11, a red counter in No. 12, and a grey counter in No. 13, all inside the inner square.
