Proverbial Expressions

No. 1. Chapter V

	Materiem superabat opus.—Ovid.
	The workmanship surpassed the material.

No. 2. Chapter V

	Facies non omnibus una,
	Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum.
	—Ovid.

	Facies non omnibus una,
	Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum.
	—Ovid.

Their faces were not all alike, nor yet unlike, but such as those of sisters ought to be.

No. 3. Chapter V

	Medio tutissimus ibis.—Ovid.
	You will go most safely in the middle.

No. 4. Chapter V

	Hic situs est Phaëton, currus auriga paterni,
	Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.
	—Ovid.

	Hic situs est Phaëton, currus auriga paterni,
	Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.
	—Ovid.

Here lies Phaëton, the driver of his father’s chariot, which if he failed to manage, yet he fell in a great undertaking.

No. 5. Chapter XVI

	Imponere Pelio Ossam.—Virgil.
	To pile Ossa upon Pelion.

No. 6. Chapter XXVIII

	Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes.—Virgil.
	I fear the Greeks even when they offer gifts.

No. 7. Chapter XXVIII

	Non tali auxilio nec defensoribus istis
	Tempus eget.—Virgil.
	Not such aid nor such defenders does the time require.

No. 8. Chapter XXIX

	Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charybdim.
	He runs on Scylla, wishing to avoid Charybdis.

No. 9. Chapter XXXI

	Monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademptum.—Virgil.

A horrible monster, misshapen, vast, whose only eye has been put out.

No. 10. Chapter XXXI

	Tantæne animis cœlestibus iræ?—Virgil.
	In heavenly minds can such resentments dwell?

No. 11. Chapter XXXI

	Haud ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco.—Virgil.

Not unacquainted with distress, I have learned to succor the unfortunate.

No. 12. Chapter XXXI

	Tros, Tyriusve mihi nullo discrimine agetur.—Virgil.
	Whether Trojan or Tyrian shall make no difference to me.

No. 13. Chapter XXXI

	Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.—Virgil.
	Yield thou not to adversity, but press on the more bravely.

No. 14. Chapter XXXI

	Facilis descensus Averni;
	Noctes atque dies patet atri janua Ditis;
	Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras,
	Hoc opus, hic labor est.—Virgil.

The descent of Avernus is easy; the gate of Pluto stands open night and day; but to retrace one’s steps and return to the upper air—that is the toil, that the difficulty.

No. 15. Chapter XXXI

	Uno avulso non deficit alter.—Virgil.
	When one is torn away another succeeds.

No. 16. Chapter XXXIII

	Quadrupendante putrum sonitu quatit ungula campum.—Virgil.

Then struck the hoofs of the steeds on the ground with a four-footed trampling.

No. 17. Chapter XXXIII

	Sternitur infelix alieno vulnere, cœlumque
	Adspicit et moriens dulces reminiscitur Argos.—Virgil.

He falls, unhappy, by a wound intended for another; looks up to the skies, and dying remembers sweet Argos.

FOOTNOTES
