REASONS FOR SOME PECULIARITIES IN THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE ANGLO-AMERICANS.

     Some remnants of aristocratic institutions within the most
     complete democracy. -- Why? -- We must carefully distinguish
     what is Puritan in origin from what is English in origin.

The reader should not draw overly broad or absolute conclusions from what I have just said. The social conditions, religion, and customs and values of the first emigrants undoubtedly exerted an immense influence on the destiny of their new homeland. But it was not in their power to found a society whose starting point lay solely in themselves; no one can entirely break free from the past. It happened -- sometimes deliberately, sometimes without their knowing it -- that they mixed into the ideas and practices that were their own other practices and other ideas that they had absorbed from their education or from the national traditions of their country.

When you want to know and judge the Anglo-Americans of today, you must therefore carefully distinguish what is Puritan in origin from what is English in origin.

In the United States, you often encounter laws or customs that clash with everything around them. These laws seem to have been drafted in a spirit opposite to the dominant spirit of American legislation; these customs and values seem to contradict the overall social conditions. If the English colonies had been founded in an age of darkness, or if their origins were already lost in the mist of time, the problem would be unsolvable.

I will cite a single example to make my point clear.

American civil and criminal law knows only two instruments of enforcement: imprisonment or bail. The first step in any legal proceeding is to obtain bail from the defendant, or, if he refuses, to have him locked up; only then is the validity of the claim or the seriousness of the charges debated.

It is obvious that such a system works against the poor and favors the rich.

A poor man cannot always find someone to post bail, even in a civil case, and if he is forced to wait for justice in jail, his enforced idleness soon reduces him to destitution.

A rich man, by contrast, always manages to avoid imprisonment in civil matters; and more than that, if he has committed an offense, he easily escapes the punishment that awaits him: after posting bail, he disappears. So you could say that for him, all the penalties the law imposes amount to nothing more than fines. [Note: There are, to be sure, crimes for which bail is not accepted, but they are very few in number.] What could be more aristocratic than a system like that?

In America, however, it is the poor who make the law, and they usually reserve the greatest advantages of society for themselves.

The explanation for this phenomenon must be sought in England: the laws I am talking about are English. [Note: See Blackstone and Delolme, Book 1, Chapter X.] The Americans never changed them, even though they are at odds with the rest of their legislation and with the whole body of their ideas.

The thing a people is least likely to change, after its customs, is its civil legislation. Civil laws are familiar only to lawyers -- that is, to the very people who have a direct interest in keeping them as they are, good or bad, for the simple reason that they know them. The general public barely knows these laws; it sees them in action only in particular cases, grasps their overall tendency only with difficulty, and submits to them without thinking about it.

I have cited one example; I could have pointed out many others.

The picture that American society presents is, if I may put it this way, covered with a democratic coat of paint, beneath which you can see, from time to time, the old colors of aristocracy showing through.
