GENERAL IDEAS ON ADMINISTRATION IN THE UNITED STATES.

     How the states of the Union differ from one another in their
     systems of administration. -- Township life less active and less
     fully developed as you move south. -- The power of the magistrate
     grows, that of the voter shrinks. -- Administration shifts from
     the township to the county. -- States of New York, Ohio, and
     Pennsylvania. -- Administrative principles applicable to the
     whole Union. -- Election of public officials, or permanence of
     their positions. -- Absence of hierarchy. -- Introduction of
     judicial methods into administration.

I said earlier that after examining the constitution of the township and the county in New England in detail, I would cast a general glance over the rest of the Union.

Townships and township life exist in every state, but in none of the states of the confederation do you find a township identical to the New England model.

As you move south, you notice that township life becomes less active. The township has fewer officials, fewer rights, and fewer duties; the population does not exercise as direct an influence over affairs; town meetings are less frequent and deal with fewer subjects. The power of the elected magistrate is therefore comparatively greater and that of the voter smaller; the township spirit is less alert and less potent. [Note: For the details, see The Revised Statutes of the state of New York, part I, chapter XI, entitled "Of the powers, duties and privileges of towns," vol. 1, pp. 336-364. See also the collection entitled Digest of the Laws of Pennsylvania, under the headings Assessors, Collectors, Constables, Overseers of the poor, Supervisor of highway. And the collection entitled Acts of a general nature of the state of Ohio, the law of February 25, 1834, on townships, p. 412. And then the particular provisions concerning the various township officials, such as Township's Clerks, Trustees, Overseers of the poor, Fence-Viewers, Appraisers of property, Township's Treasurer, Constables, Supervisors of highways.]

You begin to notice these differences in the state of New York; they are already very pronounced in Pennsylvania; but they become less striking as you move northwest. Most of the settlers who go to found the northwestern states come from New England, and they carry the administrative habits of the mother country into their adopted homeland. The Ohio township bears a strong resemblance to the Massachusetts township.

We have seen that in Massachusetts, the principle of public administration lies in the township. The township is the focal point where people's interests and affections converge. But this ceases to be the case as you move into states where education is not as universally spread and where, consequently, the township offers fewer guarantees of wisdom and fewer elements of administration. The further you get from New England, therefore, the more township life shifts to the county. The county becomes the great administrative center, forming the intermediary power between the government and ordinary citizens.

I said that in Massachusetts, county affairs are managed by the court of sessions. The court of sessions is composed of a certain number of magistrates appointed by the governor and his council. The county has no representative body, and its budget is voted by the national legislature.

In the great state of New York, on the other hand, as in Ohio and Pennsylvania, the inhabitants of each county elect a certain number of deputies; the assembly of these deputies forms a representative body for the county. [Note: See Revised Statutes of the state of New York, part I, chapter XI, vol. 1, p. 340. Ibid., chapter XII; ibid., p. 336. Ibid., Acts of the state of Ohio. Law of February 25, 1824, on county commissioners, p. 262. See Digest of the Laws of Pennsylvania, under the heading County-States, and levies, p. 170. In the state of New York, each township elects a deputy, and this same deputy participates at the same time in the administration of the county and of the township.]

The county assembly possesses, within certain limits, the right to tax the inhabitants. In this respect it is a true legislature. It is at the same time the body that administers the county, directs the administration of the townships in several areas, and confines their powers within much narrower limits than in Massachusetts.

These are the principal differences in the constitution of the township and the county across the various states of the confederation. If I wanted to go into the details of how things are actually carried out, I would have many more dissimilarities to point out. But that is not my goal. I have not set out to give a course in American administrative law.

I have said enough, I think, to make clear the general principles on which administration in the United States rests. These principles are applied differently; they produce more or fewer consequences depending on the place. But at bottom they are everywhere the same. The laws vary; their outward appearance changes; a single spirit animates them all.

The township and the county are not organized everywhere in the same way, but you can say that the organization of the township and the county throughout the United States rests everywhere on the same idea: that each person is the best judge of what concerns only himself, and the best equipped to provide for his own particular needs. The township and the county are therefore charged with looking after their own special interests. The state governs but does not administer. You encounter exceptions to this principle, but no contrary principle.

The first consequence of this doctrine has been to have all township and county administrators chosen by the inhabitants themselves, or at least to choose these officials exclusively from among them.

Since administrators are everywhere elected -- or at least irremovable -- it follows that the rules of hierarchy could not be introduced anywhere. There have therefore been almost as many independent officials as there are offices. Administrative power has been dispersed among a multitude of hands.

Since no administrative hierarchy exists, and since administrators are elected and irremovable until the end of their term, it became necessary to introduce the courts into administration to a greater or lesser extent. Hence the system of fines, by which local bodies and their representatives are compelled to obey the laws. This system is found from one end of the Union to the other.

Moreover, the power to punish administrative offenses or to perform administrative acts when needed has not been granted to the same judges in every state.

The Anglo-Americans drew from a common source the institution of the justice of the peace; it is found in every state. But they have not always made the same use of it.

Everywhere, justices of the peace participate in the administration of townships and counties, [Note: There are even some Southern states where the magistrates of the county courts are charged with all the details of administration. See The Statute of the state of Tennessee, under the headings Judiciary, Taxes, etc.] either by administering themselves or by punishing certain administrative offenses. But in most states, the most serious of these offenses are submitted to the ordinary courts.

So: election of administrative officials, or permanence of their tenure; absence of administrative hierarchy; introduction of judicial methods into the secondary government of society -- these are the principal characteristics by which American administration can be recognized, from Maine to Florida.

There are a few states where you can begin to detect the traces of administrative centralization. The state of New York is the furthest along in this direction.

In the state of New York, officials of the central government exercise, in certain cases, a kind of oversight and control over the conduct of local bodies. [Note: Example: the management of public education is centralized in the hands of the government. The legislature appoints the members of the university, called regents; the governor and lieutenant-governor of the state are members by right. (Revised Statutes, vol. 1, p. 456.) The regents of the university visit all colleges and academies annually and make an annual report to the legislature. Their oversight is not illusory, for the following particular reasons: colleges, in order to become corporations that can buy, sell, and hold property, need a charter; and this charter is granted by the legislature only on the advice of the regents. Each year the state distributes to colleges and academies the interest on a special fund created to encourage learning. The regents are the distributors of this money. See chapter XV, Public Instruction, Revised Statutes, vol. 1, p. 455. Each year the commissioners of the public schools are required to send a report on conditions to the superintendent of the commonwealth. Ibid., p. 488. A similar report on the number and condition of the poor must be made to him annually. Ibid., p. 681.] In certain others, they form a kind of appeals tribunal for the resolution of disputes. [Note: When someone believes himself harmed by certain acts of the school commissioners (who are township officials), he can appeal to the superintendent of primary schools, whose decision is final. Revised Statutes, vol. 1, p. 487. You find from time to time, in the laws of the state of New York, provisions similar to those I have just cited as examples. But in general, these attempts at centralization are weak and unproductive. While giving the major officials of the state the right to oversee and direct lower-level agents, they do not give them the right to reward or punish them. The same person is almost never charged with both giving the order and punishing disobedience; he therefore has the right to command but not the ability to make himself obeyed. In 1830, the superintendent of schools, in his annual report to the legislature, complained that several school commissioners had not transmitted the accounts they owed him, despite his warnings. "If this omission recurs," he added, "I will be reduced to prosecuting them, under the terms of the law, before the competent courts."] In the state of New York, judicial penalties are used less than elsewhere as an administrative tool. The right to prosecute administrative offenses is also placed in fewer hands. [Note: Example: the district attorney of each county is charged with recovering all fines exceeding 50 dollars, unless the right has been expressly given by law to another magistrate. Revised Statutes, part I, chapter X, vol. 1, p. 383.]

The same tendency can be faintly detected in a few other states as well. [Note: There are several traces of administrative centralization in Massachusetts. Example: the township school committees are required to make an annual report to the secretary of state. Laws of Massachusetts, vol. 1, p. 367.] But in general, the outstanding characteristic of public administration in the United States is that it is prodigiously decentralized.

* * *

THE STATE.

I have spoken of the townships and of the administration; it remains for me to speak of the state and of the government.

Here I can move quickly without fear of not being understood. What I have to say is all laid out in written constitutions that anyone can easily obtain. [Note: See, at the end of the volume, the text of the constitution of New York.] These constitutions rest upon a simple and rational theory.

Most of the forms they prescribe have been adopted by all constitutional peoples; they have thus become familiar to us.

I therefore need to give only a brief account here. Later I will try to judge what I am about to describe.

* * *

LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE STATE.

     Division of the legislative body into two chambers. -- Senate. --
     House of Representatives. -- Different functions of these two
     bodies.

The legislative power of the state is entrusted to two assemblies. The first generally goes by the name of the senate.

The senate is usually a legislative body, but it sometimes becomes an administrative and judicial one.

It takes part in administration in several ways, depending on the various constitutions; [Note: In Massachusetts, the senate has no administrative functions.] but it is ordinarily by participating in the selection of officials that it enters the sphere of executive power.

It participates in the judicial power by ruling on certain political offenses, and also sometimes by deciding certain civil cases. [Note: As in the state of New York. See the constitution at the end of the volume.]

Its members are always few in number.

The other branch of the legislature, usually called the house of representatives, has no share at all in administrative power, and takes part in judicial power only by impeaching public officials before the senate.

Members of both chambers are subject to almost the same conditions of eligibility nearly everywhere. Both are elected in the same way and by the same citizens.

The only difference between them arises from the fact that the term of senators is generally longer than that of representatives. The latter rarely remain in office more than one year; the former usually serve two or three.

By granting senators the privilege of being elected for several years and by renewing them in staggered groups, the law has taken care to maintain within the legislature a core of men already experienced in public affairs who can exert a useful influence on newcomers.

In dividing the legislative body into two branches, the Americans did not intend to create one hereditary assembly and one elective one; they did not seek to make one an aristocratic body and the other a representative of democracy. Nor was their aim to give the first a prop for executive power while leaving the second the interests and passions of the people.

The sole advantages that result from the current two-chamber system in the United States are these: to divide legislative power, thereby slowing the movement of political assemblies; and to create a court of appeals for the revision of laws.

Time and experience have taught the Americans that, reduced to these advantages, the division of legislative power is still a necessity of the first order. Pennsylvania alone, among all the united republics, had at first tried to establish a single assembly. Franklin himself, carried along by the logical consequences of the principle of popular sovereignty, had supported this measure. They were soon obliged to change the law and establish two chambers. The principle of dividing legislative power thus received its final consecration. It can henceforth be considered a demonstrated truth that legislative action must be divided among several bodies. This theory, virtually unknown to the republics of antiquity and introduced into the world almost by accident like most great truths, misunderstood by several modern peoples, has finally passed into the political science of our day as an axiom.

* * *

EXECUTIVE POWER OF THE STATE.

     What the governor is in an American state. -- What position he
     occupies relative to the legislature. -- What are his rights and
     his duties. -- His dependence on the people.

The executive power of the state has the governor as its representative.

I have not chosen the word "representative" by accident. The governor does indeed represent the executive power, but he exercises only some of its rights.

The chief magistrate, called the governor, is placed alongside the legislature as a moderator and advisor. He is armed with a suspensive veto that allows him to halt or at least slow its movements at will. He presents the country's needs to the legislative body and makes known the means he thinks useful for addressing them. He is the natural executor of its will for all undertakings that concern the whole nation. [Note: In practice, it is not always the governor who executes the undertakings the legislature has conceived. It often happens that the legislature, at the same time it votes on a principle, appoints special agents to oversee its execution.] In the absence of the legislature, he must take all measures necessary to protect the state from violent shocks and unforeseen dangers.

The governor holds in his hands all the military power of the state. He is the commander of the militia and the head of the armed forces.

When the authority of opinion that people have agreed to grant to the law is disregarded, the governor advances at the head of the state's material force, breaks the resistance, and restores the accustomed order.

In all other respects, the governor does not intervene in the administration of the townships and counties, or does so only very indirectly through the appointment of justices of the peace, whom he cannot afterward remove. [Note: In several states, justices of the peace are not appointed by the governor.]

The governor is an elected official. Care is generally taken to elect him for only one or two years, so that he remains always in close dependence on the majority that created him.

* * *

THE POLITICAL EFFECTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECENTRALIZATION IN THE UNITED STATES.

     Distinction to be drawn between governmental centralization and
     administrative centralization. -- In the United States, no
     administrative centralization, but very great governmental
     centralization. -- Some unfortunate effects in the United States
     from extreme administrative decentralization. -- Administrative
     advantages of this system. -- The force that administers society,
     less orderly, less educated, less expert, but far greater than in
     Europe. -- Political advantages of the same system. -- In the
     United States, the homeland makes itself felt everywhere. --
     Support that the governed lend to the government. -- Provincial
     institutions more necessary as social conditions become more
     democratic. -- Why.

"Centralization" is a word that is endlessly repeated these days, yet no one, as a rule, bothers to define what it means.

There are, however, two very distinct kinds of centralization that it is important to understand clearly.

Certain interests are common to all parts of the nation, such as the making of general laws and the nation's relations with foreigners.

Other interests are specific to certain parts of the nation -- township affairs, for example.

To concentrate in a single place or in a single hand the power to direct the first kind is to establish what I will call governmental centralization.

To concentrate in the same manner the power to direct the second kind is to establish what I will call administrative centralization.

There are points at which these two kinds of centralization merge. But by taking, on the whole, the matters that fall more particularly within the domain of each, you can readily distinguish them.

It is easy to see that governmental centralization acquires immense strength when combined with administrative centralization. In this way it accustoms people to make a complete and continual abstraction of their own will -- to obey not just once and on one point, but in everything and every day. Not only does it then subdue them by force; it also captures them through their habits. It isolates them and then seizes them one by one from the common mass.

These two kinds of centralization lend each other mutual support and attract one another; but I cannot believe they are inseparable.

Under Louis XIV, France saw the greatest governmental centralization conceivable, since the same man made the general laws, had the power to interpret them, represented France abroad, and acted in her name. "I am the State," he said -- and he was right.

Yet under Louis XIV, there was much less administrative centralization than exists today.

In our own time, we see a power -- England -- in which governmental centralization is carried to a very high degree. The state seems to move as a single person; it lifts up immense masses at will, gathering and directing the full effort of its power wherever it wishes.

England, which has accomplished such great things over the past fifty years, has no administrative centralization.

For my part, I cannot conceive that a nation can live, let alone prosper, without a strong governmental centralization.

But I believe that administrative centralization only serves to enervate the peoples who submit to it, because it constantly tends to diminish civic spirit among them. Administrative centralization does manage, it is true, to gather at a given time and in a given place all the nation's available forces; but it harms the replenishment of those forces. It brings triumph on the day of battle but diminishes power over the long run. It can therefore contribute admirably to the passing greatness of one person, but not to the lasting prosperity of a people.

Take careful note: when people say a state cannot act because it has no centralization, they are almost always speaking, without knowing it, of governmental centralization. The German Empire, they repeat, was never able to get the most out of its strength. Agreed. But why? Because the national strength was never centralized there; because the state was never able to enforce obedience to its general laws; because the separate parts of that great body always had the right or the ability to refuse their cooperation to the agents of the common authority, even in matters concerning all citizens. In other words, because there was no governmental centralization. The same observation applies to the Middle Ages: what produced all the miseries of feudal society was that the power not only to administer, but to govern, was divided among a thousand hands and fractured in a thousand ways. The absence of all governmental centralization prevented the nations of Europe from marching with energy toward any goal.

We have seen that in the United States, there is no administrative centralization. You can barely find the trace of a hierarchy. Decentralization has been pushed to a degree that no European nation could tolerate, I think, without profound unease, and that even produces unfortunate effects in America. But in the United States, governmental centralization exists to the highest degree. It would be easy to prove that national power is more concentrated there than it has been in any of the old European monarchies. Not only is there in each state only one body that makes the laws; not only is there only one power that can create political life around it; but in general, care has been taken to avoid assembling numerous district or county assemblies, for fear that these assemblies might be tempted to step beyond their administrative functions and interfere with the workings of government. In America, each state's legislature faces no power capable of resisting it. Nothing can stop it in its course -- no privileges, no local immunities, no personal influence, not even the authority of reason, since the legislature represents the majority, which claims to be the sole organ of reason. Its only limits in action are therefore its own will. Beside it and under its hand stands the representative of executive power, who with the help of material force must compel the discontented to obey.

Weakness is found only in certain details of governmental action.

The American republics have no permanent armed force to suppress minorities; but minorities have never yet been reduced to making war, and the need for an army has not yet been felt. The state most often uses township or county officials to act upon the citizens. Thus, for example, in New England, it is the township assessor who apportions the tax; the township collector who levies it; the township treasurer who delivers the proceeds to the public treasury; and complaints that arise are submitted to the ordinary courts. This way of collecting taxes is slow and cumbersome; it would obstruct at every turn the workings of a government with great financial needs. In general, you want a government, for everything essential to its life, to have its own officials, chosen by it, removable by it, and rapid procedures at its disposal. But it will always be easy for the central power, organized as it is in America, to introduce, as needed, more energetic and effective means of action.

It is therefore not, as is so often repeated, because there is no centralization in the United States that the republics of the New World will perish. Far from being insufficiently centralized, it can be said that American governments are too centralized. I will prove this later. The legislative assemblies are daily swallowing up some remnant of governmental powers; they tend to gather them all into themselves, just as the Convention did. Social power, thus centralized, changes hands constantly because it is subordinate to popular power. It often lacks wisdom and foresight, because it can do everything. That is where the danger lies. It is because of its very strength, and not from weakness, that it is threatened with eventual destruction.

Administrative decentralization produces several diverse effects in America.

We have seen that the Americans have almost entirely isolated administration from government; in this they seem to me to have gone beyond the limits of sound reason, for order, even in secondary matters, is still a national interest. [Note: The authority that represents the state, even when it does not itself administer, should not, I think, surrender the right to inspect local administration. Suppose, for example, that a government agent, stationed permanently in each county, could refer administrative offenses committed in the townships and the county to the judicial power -- would order not be more uniformly maintained without local independence being compromised? Yet nothing of the kind exists in America. Above the county courts, there is nothing; and these courts are, in a sense, made aware of the administrative offenses they must punish only by accident.]

Since the state has no administrative officials of its own stationed at fixed posts throughout the territory to whom it can give a common direction, it rarely attempts to establish general rules of policing. Yet the need for such rules is keenly felt. The European is quick to notice their absence. This surface appearance of disorder convinces him at first glance that there is complete anarchy in society; only by examining the substance of things does he correct his impression.

Certain undertakings concern the entire state yet cannot be carried out because there is no national administration to direct them. Left to the care of townships and counties, entrusted to elected and temporary agents, they produce no result, or nothing lasting.

Advocates of centralization in Europe maintain that government can administer local affairs better than the localities can administer themselves. This may be true when the central power is enlightened and the localities are not, when it is active and they are inert, when it has the habit of acting and they the habit of obeying. You can even see that the more centralization increases, the more this double tendency grows, and the more the capability of the one and the incapacity of the other become pronounced.

But I deny that this is the case when the people are educated, alert to their own interests, and accustomed to thinking about them, as they are in America.

I am persuaded, on the contrary, that in such a case, the collective strength of the citizens will always be more powerful in producing social well-being than the authority of government.

I admit it is difficult to say precisely how to awaken a slumbering people, how to give it passions and knowledge it does not have. Persuading people that they must take charge of their own affairs is, I am well aware, a difficult undertaking. It would often be less trouble to interest them in the details of court etiquette than in the repair of their own town hall.

But I also believe that when central administration claims to completely replace the free cooperation of those most directly concerned, it is deceiving itself -- or trying to deceive you.

A central power, however enlightened and learned you may imagine it, cannot by itself encompass all the details of a great people's life. It cannot, because such a task exceeds human capacity. When it tries, by its own efforts alone, to create and operate so many different mechanisms, it either settles for a very incomplete result, or exhausts itself in useless effort.

Centralization easily manages, it is true, to subject people's outward behavior to a certain uniformity that you end up loving for its own sake, regardless of the things to which it is applied -- like those worshippers who adore the statue and forget the deity it represents. Centralization readily succeeds in imposing a regular pace on current affairs; in expertly managing the details of social policing; in suppressing small disorders and petty offenses; in maintaining society in a status quo that is properly speaking neither decline nor progress; in sustaining in the social body a sort of administrative drowsiness that administrators customarily call good order and public tranquility. [Note: China seems to me to offer the most perfect emblem of the kind of social well-being that a highly centralized administration can provide to peoples who submit to it. Travelers tell us that the Chinese have tranquility without happiness, industry without progress, stability without strength, and material order without public morality. Among them, society always gets along well enough, but never very well. I imagine that when China is opened to Europeans, they will find there the finest model of administrative centralization in the universe.] In a word, it excels at preventing, not at doing. When it is a question of stirring society deeply or of setting it on a rapid course, its strength fails. The moment its measures need the cooperation of individuals, you are entirely surprised by the weakness of this immense machine; it finds itself suddenly reduced to impotence.

It sometimes happens that centralization then tries, in desperation, to call upon the citizens for help. But it says to them: "You will act as I wish, as much as I wish, and precisely in the direction I wish. You will take care of these details without aspiring to direct the whole. You will work in the dark, and you will judge my work later by its results." These are not the terms on which you obtain the cooperation of the human will. It needs freedom in its movements, responsibility in its actions. Human beings are made so that they prefer to remain motionless rather than to march without independence toward a goal they do not know.

I will not deny that in the United States, people often miss those uniform rules that seem to keep constant watch over each of us.

You encounter from time to time striking examples of social carelessness and neglect. Gross blemishes appear here and there that seem completely out of step with the surrounding civilization.

Useful enterprises that require continuous care and rigorous precision to succeed often end up being abandoned -- because in America, as elsewhere, the people proceed by momentary bursts and sudden impulses.

The European, accustomed to finding a government official always at hand who meddles in more or less everything, has difficulty adjusting to the different mechanisms of township administration. In general, it can be said that the small details of social policing that make life comfortable and pleasant are neglected in America. But the essential guarantees that people in society need exist there as much as anywhere else. Among the Americans, the force that administers the state is far less orderly, less enlightened, and less expert, but a hundred times greater than in Europe. There is no country in the world where people ultimately make as many efforts to create social well-being. I know of no people who have managed to establish schools as numerous and as effective; temples more suited to the religious needs of the inhabitants; township roads better maintained. You should not look to the United States for uniformity and permanence of vision, minute attention to detail, or perfection of administrative procedures. [Note: A talented writer who, in a comparison of the finances of the United States with those of France, proved that intellect cannot always substitute for knowledge of facts, rightly reproaches the Americans for the sort of confusion that reigns in their township budgets. After providing a model of a French departmental budget, he adds: "Thanks to centralization, the admirable creation of a great man, municipal budgets from one end of the kingdom to the other, those of great cities as well as those of the humblest townships, display no less order and method." Now there is a result I certainly admire. But I see most of these French townships, whose accounting is so perfect, plunged in a deep ignorance of their true interests and given over to so invincible an apathy that society seems to vegetate rather than live in them. On the other side, I see in those same American townships whose budgets are not drawn up on methodical or uniform plans an enlightened, active, enterprising population; I see a society constantly at work. This spectacle astonishes me, because in my eyes the main purpose of good government is to produce the well-being of peoples, not to establish a certain order in the midst of their misery. I therefore wonder whether it might not be possible to attribute to the same cause both the prosperity of the American township and the apparent disorder of its finances, and both the distress of the French township and the perfection of its budget. In any case, I am suspicious of a good that I find mixed with so many ills, and I easily console myself for an ill that is compensated by so much good.] What you find there is an image of strength, a little raw perhaps, but full of power; of life, accompanied by accidents, but also by movement and effort.

I will concede, if you like, that the villages and counties of the United States would be more usefully administered by a central authority located far from them and to which they were strangers, than by officials drawn from their own midst. I will acknowledge, if you insist, that there would be more security in America, that social resources would be used more wisely and judiciously, if the administration of the entire country were concentrated in a single hand. The political advantages that the Americans derive from the system of decentralization would still make me prefer it to the opposite system.

What does it matter to me, after all, if there is an authority always on its feet, watching over the tranquility of my pleasures, rushing ahead of my footsteps to ward off every danger before I even need to think about it -- if that authority, while removing the slightest thorns from my path, is the absolute master of my liberty and my life; if it monopolizes movement and existence to such a point that everything must languish around it when it languishes, everything must sleep when it sleeps, everything must perish if it dies?

There are nations in Europe where the inhabitant considers himself a kind of settler, indifferent to the fate of the place he lives. The greatest changes take place in his country without his participation; he does not even know precisely what has happened; he suspects it; he has heard tell of the event by chance. Worse still, the fortune of his village, the policing of his street, the fate of his church and his parsonage do not concern him. He thinks that all these things have nothing to do with him and that they belong to a powerful stranger called "the government." As for himself, he enjoys these goods like a tenant farmer, without any sense of ownership and without any thought of improvement. This detachment from himself goes so far that when his own safety or that of his children is finally at stake, instead of bestirring himself to ward off the danger, he crosses his arms and waits for the entire nation to come to his aid. This man, moreover, even though he has made so complete a sacrifice of his free will, does not love obedience any more than the next person. He submits, it is true, to the pleasure of a clerk; but he takes delight in defying the law like a defeated enemy as soon as force withdraws. And so you see him ceaselessly oscillating between servitude and license.

When nations have reached this point, they must either reform their laws and their customs or perish, for the wellspring of public virtue has all but run dry: you still find subjects there, but you no longer see citizens.

I say that such nations are ripe for conquest. If they do not disappear from the world stage, it is because they are surrounded by nations similar or inferior to themselves; because there still remains within them a kind of indefinable instinct of patriotism, some unreflecting pride in the name they bear, some vague memory of their past glory which, without attaching itself precisely to anything, is enough to give them, when needed, a conservative impulse.

It would be wrong to take comfort in the thought that certain peoples have made prodigious efforts to defend a homeland in which they lived virtually as strangers. Look closely, and you will see that religion was almost always their principal motive.

The endurance, the glory, or the prosperity of the nation had become for them sacred dogmas, and in defending their homeland they were also defending the holy city in which they were all citizens.

The Turkish populations never took any part in directing the affairs of society, yet they accomplished immense feats as long as they saw the triumph of the religion of Muhammad in the conquests of the sultans. Today the religion is fading; despotism alone remains -- and they are falling.

Montesquieu, by granting despotism a force all its own, paid it, I think, an honor it did not deserve. Despotism, by itself, cannot maintain anything lasting. When you look closely, you see that what made absolute governments prosper for so long was religion, not fear.

You will never find, no matter what you do, any true power among human beings except in the free cooperation of wills. And the only things in the world that can make the whole body of citizens march for a long time toward the same goal are patriotism and religion.

It does not lie within the power of laws to revive beliefs that are dying. But it does lie within the power of laws to make people care about the fate of their country. It lies within the power of laws to awaken and direct that vague instinct of the homeland that never entirely leaves the human heart, and -- by linking it to everyday thoughts, passions, and habits -- to make it a considered and lasting sentiment. And let no one say it is too late to attempt this. Nations do not grow old in the same way as people. Each generation born within them is like a new people coming to offer itself to the hand of the lawmaker.

What I admire most in America is not the administrative effects of decentralization, but its political effects. In the United States, the homeland makes itself felt everywhere. It is an object of concern from the village all the way up to the Union as a whole. The inhabitant takes an interest in each of his country's affairs as if they were his own. He glories in the nation's glory; in the successes it achieves, he believes he recognizes his own work, and he is uplifted by them. He rejoices in the general prosperity from which he profits. His feeling for his homeland is analogous to the feeling one has for one's family, and it is still through a kind of selfishness that he takes an interest in the state.

Often the European sees in the public official only force; the American sees right. You can therefore say that in America, no one ever obeys a person -- only justice or the law.

And so the American has formed an opinion of himself that is often exaggerated but almost always beneficial. He trusts his own abilities without fear, for they seem to him sufficient for everything. When a private citizen conceives the idea of some enterprise -- even one directly connected to the well-being of society -- it does not occur to him to appeal to the public authorities for help. He makes his plan known, offers to carry it out, calls upon individual efforts to assist his own, and fights hand to hand against every obstacle. No doubt he often succeeds less well than the state would in his place; but in the long run, the overall result of all these individual enterprises far surpasses anything the government could have done.

Because the administrative authority is placed alongside those it administers, representing them in a sense, it excites neither jealousy nor hatred. Because its means of action are limited, everyone feels that they cannot rely on it alone.

So when public authority does intervene within its proper sphere, it does not find itself abandoned and alone, as it does in Europe. No one thinks that private duties have ceased because the representative of the public has come into play. On the contrary, everyone guides him, supports him, sustains him.

The action of individual forces, joining with the action of social forces, often achieves what the most concentrated and energetic administration would be incapable of carrying out.

I could cite many facts in support of what I am saying, but I prefer to take just one -- the one I know best.

In America, the means available to the authorities for discovering crimes and pursuing criminals are few.

There is no administrative police; passports are unknown. The judicial police in the United States cannot compare with ours. The agents of the public prosecutor are few in number; they do not always take the initiative in prosecuting; the investigation is rapid and oral. I doubt, however, that in any country crime escapes punishment as rarely as it does here.

The reason is that everyone considers it in their interest to furnish proof of the offense and to help apprehend the offender.

During my time in the United States, I saw the inhabitants of a county where a serious crime had been committed spontaneously form committees with the goal of pursuing the culprit and delivering him to the courts.

In Europe, the criminal is an unfortunate wretch fighting to save his neck from the agents of power; the public watches the struggle more or less as spectators. In America, he is an enemy of the human race, and all of humanity is against him.

I believe provincial institutions are useful to all peoples, but none seems to me to have a more real need for them than one whose social conditions are democratic.

In an aristocracy, you can always be sure of maintaining a certain order within liberty.

Since those who govern have much to lose, order is greatly in their interest.

It can equally be said that in an aristocracy, the people are sheltered from the excesses of despotism, because there are always organized forces ready to resist the despot.

A democracy without provincial institutions possesses no guarantee against such evils.

How can you make a multitude that has not learned to use freedom in small things bear it in great ones?

How can you resist tyranny in a country where each individual is weak and where individuals are united by no common interest?

Those who fear license and those who dread absolute power should therefore equally desire the gradual development of provincial liberties.

I am convinced, moreover, that there are no nations more exposed to falling under the yoke of administrative centralization than those whose social conditions are democratic.

Several causes contribute to this result, but among them is this one:

The permanent tendency of such nations is to concentrate all governmental power in the hands of the sole authority that directly represents the people, because beyond the people, you can see nothing but individuals who are equal and merged into a common mass.

Now, when a single power is already invested with all the attributes of government, it finds it very difficult not to seek to penetrate into the details of administration -- and it rarely fails, in the long run, to find the opportunity to do so. We have been witnesses to this ourselves.

In the French Revolution, there were two movements in opposite directions that must not be confused: one favorable to liberty, the other favorable to despotism.

Under the old monarchy, the king alone made the law. Below the sovereign power were placed some half-destroyed remnants of provincial institutions. These provincial institutions were incoherent, poorly organized, and often absurd. In the hands of the aristocracy, they had sometimes been instruments of oppression.

The Revolution declared itself at once against the monarchy and against provincial institutions. It combined in a single hatred everything that had preceded it -- absolute power and what might have tempered its rigors. It was at once republican and centralizing.

This dual character of the French Revolution is a fact that the friends of absolute power have seized upon with great care. When you see them defending administrative centralization, you think they are working in favor of despotism? Not at all -- they are defending one of the great conquests of the Revolution. In this way, you can remain popular and be an enemy of the people's rights; a hidden servant of tyranny and an avowed lover of liberty.

I have visited the two nations that have developed the system of provincial liberties to the highest degree, and I have listened to the voice of the parties that divide them.

In America, I found men who secretly aspired to destroy their country's democratic institutions. In England, I found others who openly attacked the aristocracy. But in neither country did I find a single person who did not regard provincial liberty as a great good.

In both countries, I saw people blame the ills of the state on an infinite variety of causes -- but never on township liberty.

I heard citizens attribute the greatness or the prosperity of their homeland to a multitude of reasons; but I heard them all place in the first rank, and at the head of all other advantages, provincial liberty.

Am I to believe that people who are so naturally divided that they cannot agree on religious doctrines or political theories are unanimous on a single fact -- the one they are best positioned to judge, since it unfolds before their eyes every day -- and that this fact is mistaken?

Only peoples who have few or no provincial institutions deny their usefulness -- which is to say, only those who do not know the thing speak ill of it.