In 1790, Virginia had nineteen representatives in Congress. This number continued to grow until 1813, when it reached twenty-three. Since then it has been declining. By 1833 it was down to twenty-one. During that same period, the state of New York followed the opposite trajectory: in 1790 it had ten representatives in Congress; in 1813, twenty-seven; in 1823, thirty-four; in 1833, forty. Ohio had only a single representative in 1803; in 1833 it had nineteen.

[Note: We will see below that during the last period, Virginia's population grew in the proportion of 13 per 100. It is necessary to explain how the number of a state's representatives can decline when its population, far from declining, is actually growing. I take Virginia, which I have already cited, as a point of comparison. The number of Virginia's representatives in 1823 was proportional to the total number of Union representatives; the number of Virginia's representatives in 1833 is likewise proportional to the total number of Union representatives in 1833, adjusted for the ratio of its population growth during those ten years. The ratio of the new number of Virginia's representatives to the old will therefore be proportional, on one hand, to the ratio of the new total number of representatives to the old, and on the other, to the ratio of Virginia's growth rate to that of the whole Union. Thus, for the number of Virginia's representatives to remain stable, it would suffice that the ratio of the small state's growth rate to the large one's be the inverse of the ratio of the new total number of representatives to the old; and if Virginia's population growth rate stands in a smaller ratio to the growth rate of the whole Union than the new number of Union representatives does to the old number, Virginia's representative count will decrease.]

It is hard to conceive of a durable union between two peoples, one poor and weak, the other rich and strong, even if it could be proven that the strength and wealth of the one are not the cause of the weakness and poverty of the other. The union is even harder to maintain at a time when one is losing strength while the other is in the process of gaining it.

This rapid and disproportionate growth of certain states threatens the independence of the others. If New York, with its two million inhabitants and forty representatives, wanted to dictate terms to Congress, it might well succeed. But even if the most powerful states never sought to oppress the lesser ones, the danger would still exist, because it lies in the possibility of the fact almost as much as in the fact itself.

The weak rarely have confidence in the justice and reason of the strong. States that grow less quickly than the others therefore cast looks of suspicion and envy at those favored by fortune. From this comes the deep unease and vague anxiety one notices in one part of the Union, which contrasts with the well-being and confidence that reign in the other. I believe that the hostile attitude the South has adopted has no other cause.

Southerners are, of all Americans, those who should be most attached to the Union, for they above all would suffer from being left to themselves; yet they are the only ones who threaten to break the bonds of the confederation. Why is this? It is easy to say: the South, which has furnished four presidents to the confederation, which knows that federal power is slipping from its grasp, which sees its number of representatives in Congress diminish each year while those of the North and West grow; the South, populated by ardent and irascible men, grows irritated and anxious. It turns with bitterness to examine itself; interrogating the past, it asks itself each day whether it is being oppressed. Does it discover that a law of the Union is not obviously favorable to it? It cries out that its interests are being abused; it protests passionately, and if its voice is not heard, it grows indignant and threatens to withdraw from a society whose burdens it bears without sharing its profits.

[Note: Washington, Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe.]

"The tariff laws," said the inhabitants of Carolina in 1832, "enrich the North and ruin the South; for without this, how could one conceive that the North, with its inhospitable climate and barren soil, should ceaselessly increase its wealth and power, while the South, which is like the garden of America, falls rapidly into decay?"

[Note: See the report by its committee to the Convention that proclaimed nullification in South Carolina.]

If the changes I have described took place gradually, so that each generation at least had time to pass along with the order of things it had witnessed, the danger would be less; but there is something headlong, I could almost say revolutionary, about the pace of progress in American society. The same citizen has been able to see his state march at the head of the Union and then become powerless in the federal councils. There are Anglo-American republics that have grown as fast as a man, and that were born, grew, and reached maturity in thirty years.

One must not imagine, however, that the states losing power are being depopulated or withering away; their prosperity does not stop — they even grow faster than any kingdom of Europe. But it seems to them that they are growing poor because they are not growing rich as fast as their neighbors, and they believe they are losing power because they suddenly find themselves in contact with a power greater than their own: it is therefore their feelings and their passions that are wounded, more than their interests. But is that not enough to put the confederation in danger? If, since the beginning of the world, peoples and kings had looked only to their real utility, one would scarcely know what war is among men.

[Note: The population of a country is surely the first element of its wealth. During the same period of 1820 to 1832, during which Virginia lost two representatives in Congress, its population grew in the proportion of 13.7 per 100; that of the Carolinas in the ratio of 15 per 100; and that of Georgia in the proportion of 51.5 per 100. (See American Almanac, 1832, p. 162.) Now, Russia, the country of Europe where population grows fastest, increases the number of its inhabitants in ten years only in the proportion of 9.5 per 100; France in that of 7 per 100; and Europe as a whole in that of 4.7 per 100. (See Malte-Brun, vol. 6, p. 95.)]

[Note: It must be admitted, however, that the depreciation in the price of tobacco over the past fifty years has notably diminished the comfort of Southern farmers; but this fact is independent of the will of Northerners as well as their own.]

Thus the greatest danger threatening the United States arises from their very prosperity; it tends to create among some of the confederated states the intoxication that accompanies the rapid growth of fortune, and among others the envy, suspicion, and regret that most often follow its loss.

Americans rejoice as they contemplate this extraordinary movement; they should, it seems to me, view it with regret and with fear. The Americans of the United States, whatever they do, will become one of the greatest peoples in the world; they will cover nearly all of North America with their descendants; the continent they inhabit is their domain, and it cannot escape them. What is the rush, then, to seize possession of it today? Wealth, power, and glory cannot fail to be theirs someday, and they rush toward this immense fortune as if they had only a moment to grasp it.

I believe I have demonstrated that the existence of the current confederation depends entirely on the agreement of all the confederated states to remain united; and, starting from this premise, I have investigated the causes that might lead the different states to want to separate. But there are two ways for the Union to perish: one of the confederated states may want to withdraw from the contract and violently sever the common bond — most of the remarks I have made above relate to this case; the federal government may progressively lose its power through a simultaneous tendency of the united republics to reclaim the exercise of their independence. The central power, successively stripped of all its prerogatives, reduced by tacit agreement to impotence, would become unable to fulfill its purpose, and the second Union would perish, like the first, from a kind of senile imbecility.

The gradual weakening of the federal bond, which ultimately leads to the annulment of the Union, is moreover in itself a distinct fact that can bring about many results less extreme than that one before producing it. The confederation could still exist, and yet the weakness of its government could already reduce the nation to impotence, cause anarchy at home, and slow the general prosperity of the country.

After investigating what drives the Anglo-Americans to separate, it is therefore important to examine whether, assuming the Union survives, their government is expanding or contracting its sphere of action, whether it is becoming more energetic or weaker.

Americans are obviously preoccupied by a great fear. They see that among most peoples in the world, the exercise of sovereign rights tends to become concentrated in few hands, and they are frightened by the idea that the same will eventually happen to them. Statesmen themselves feel these terrors — or at least pretend to feel them — for in America, centralization is not popular, and there is no more skillful way to court the majority than by railing against the supposed encroachments of central power. Americans refuse to see that in the countries where this centralizing tendency frightens them, there is only a single people, while the Union is a confederation of different peoples; a fact sufficient to invalidate all predictions based on analogy.

I confess that I regard these fears held by many Americans as entirely imaginary. Far from sharing their dread that sovereignty will be consolidated in the hands of the Union, I believe the federal government is visibly weakening.

To prove what I am asserting, I will not resort to ancient facts, but to those I was able to witness myself, or that took place in our own time.

When you examine carefully what is happening in the United States, you discover without difficulty the existence of two contrary tendencies; they are like two currents flowing through the same channel in opposite directions.

In the forty-five years the Union has existed, time has disposed of a multitude of provincial prejudices that originally militated against it. The patriotic feeling that attached each American to his state has become less exclusive. By coming to know each other better, the various parts of the Union have drawn closer together. The postal service, that great bond of minds, now penetrates to the depths of the wilderness; steamboats connect every point along the coast to every other, day after day. Commerce descends and ascends the interior rivers with unprecedented speed. To these facilities created by nature and industry are added the restlessness of desires, the anxiety of the spirit, the love of riches that constantly push Americans out of their homes and put them in communication with a great number of their fellow citizens. They crisscross their country in every direction; they visit all the populations that inhabit it. There is no province of France whose inhabitants know each other as well as the thirteen million people who cover the surface of the United States.

[Note: In 1832, the district of Michigan, which had only 31,639 inhabitants and was still a barely cleared wilderness, already had 940 miles of mail roads. The almost entirely wild territory of Arkansas was already traversed by 1,738 miles of mail roads. See the Report of the Postmaster General, November 30, 1833. The delivery of newspapers alone throughout the Union brought in 254,796 dollars per year.]

[Note: In the course of ten years, from 1821 to 1831, 271 steamboats were launched on the rivers that water the Mississippi valley alone. In 1829, there were 256 steamboats in the United States. See Legislative Documents, No. 240, p. 274.]

At the same time that Americans are mixing with one another, they are assimilating; the differences that climate, origin, and institutions had placed between them are diminishing. They are all converging more and more toward a common type. Every year, thousands of men leave the North and spread into every part of the Union: they bring with them their beliefs, their opinions, their customs and values; and since their education is superior to that of the people among whom they come to live, they do not take long to seize control of affairs and modify society to their advantage. This continual migration from North to South singularly favors the fusion of all provincial characters into a single national character. The civilization of the North therefore seems destined to become the common standard by which everything else will one day be measured.

As American industry advances, the commercial bonds that unite all the confederated states grow tighter, and the union enters into habits after having been in opinions. As time marches on, it finishes eliminating a host of phantom terrors that tormented the imagination of the men of 1789. The federal power has not become oppressive; it has not destroyed the independence of the states; it has not led the confederated states toward monarchy; under the Union, the small states have not fallen into dependence on the large ones. The confederation has continued to grow ceaselessly in population, wealth, and power.

I am therefore convinced that in our time, Americans face fewer natural difficulties in living united than they did in 1789; the Union has fewer enemies than it did then.

And yet, if one studies the history of the United States over the past forty-five years carefully, one will easily become convinced that federal power is declining.

It is not difficult to point to the causes of this phenomenon.

When the Constitution of 1789 was promulgated, everything was perishing in anarchy; the Union that succeeded this disorder aroused much fear and hatred, but it also had ardent friends, because it was the expression of a great need. Although more attacked then than it is today, the federal power therefore quickly reached the maximum of its strength, as generally happens with a government that triumphs after having rallied its forces in the struggle. At that time, constitutional interpretation seemed to expand rather than contract federal sovereignty, and the Union presented in several respects the spectacle of a single people, directed within and without by a single government.

But to reach that point, the people had in a sense risen above themselves.

The Constitution had not destroyed the individuality of the states, and all bodies, whatever they may be, have a secret instinct that drives them toward independence. This instinct is even more pronounced in a country like America, where every village forms a sort of republic accustomed to governing itself.

There was therefore effort on the part of states that submitted to federal preponderance. And all effort, even if crowned with great success, cannot help but weaken along with the cause that gave rise to it.

As the federal government consolidated its power, America regained its rank among nations, peace returned to the borders, public credit revived; order replaced confusion, an order that allowed individual industry to follow its natural course and develop in freedom.

It was this very prosperity that began to make people lose sight of the cause that had produced it; the danger past, Americans no longer found within themselves the energy and patriotism that had helped them avert it. Freed from the fears that preoccupied them, they easily fell back into the current of their habits and gave themselves over without resistance to the ordinary tendency of their inclinations. The moment a strong government no longer seemed necessary, people began to think it was a nuisance. Everything prospered with the Union, and no one turned away from the Union; but they wanted to barely feel the action of the power that represented it. In general, people wanted to remain united, but in each particular case they tended to become independent again. The principle of confederation was each day more easily accepted and less applied; thus the federal government, by creating order and peace, brought about its own decline.

The moment this disposition of minds began to manifest itself, the party men who live off the people's passions set about exploiting it for their own profit.

The federal government then found itself in a very critical situation; its enemies had popular favor, and it was by promising to weaken it that men earned the right to lead it.

From that point on, every time the government of the Union entered the lists against that of the states, it almost never stopped retreating. Whenever there was occasion to interpret the terms of the federal constitution, the interpretation was most often contrary to the Union and favorable to the states.

The Constitution gave the federal government the task of providing for national interests; it had been thought that it was up to the federal government to undertake or encourage, within the country, the great enterprises that were by nature likely to increase the prosperity of the whole Union — internal improvements, such as canals.

The states grew alarmed at the idea of seeing another authority besides their own dispose of a portion of their territory. They feared that the central power, acquiring in this way a formidable patronage within their own borders, would end up exercising an influence there that they wanted to reserve entirely to their own agents.

The Democratic Party, which has always opposed every expansion of federal power, raised its voice; Congress was accused of usurpation; the head of state, of ambition. The central government, intimidated by these outcries, ended up acknowledging its own error and confining itself strictly within the sphere that was drawn for it.

The Constitution gives the Union the privilege of dealing with foreign peoples. The Union had generally considered the Indian tribes bordering its territory from this perspective. As long as these savages consented to flee before civilization, the federal right was not contested; but from the day an Indian tribe undertook to establish itself permanently on a piece of land, the surrounding states claimed a right of possession over those lands and a right of sovereignty over the people who occupied them. The federal government hastened to recognize both, and, after having treated the Indians as independent peoples, it handed them over like subjects to the legislative tyranny of the states.

[Note: See in the legislative documents, which I have already cited in the chapter on the Indians, the letter of the president of the United States to the Cherokees, his correspondence on this subject with his agents, and his messages to Congress.]

Among the states that had formed along the Atlantic, several extended indefinitely westward into wildernesses where Europeans had not yet penetrated. Those whose boundaries were irrevocably fixed looked with a jealous eye at the boundless future open to their neighbors. The latter, in a spirit of conciliation and to facilitate the act of Union, agreed to draw boundaries for themselves and to cede to the confederation all the territory that might lie beyond them.

[Note: The first act of cession was made by the state of New York in 1780; Virginia, Massachusetts, Connecticut, South Carolina, North Carolina followed this example at different times; Georgia was the last; its act of cession dates only from 1803.]

Since that time, the federal government has become the owner of all the uncultivated land that lies outside the thirteen originally confederated states. It is charged with dividing and selling it, and the proceeds go exclusively into the Treasury of the Union. With this revenue, the federal government purchases Indian lands, opens roads in the new districts, and uses all its power to facilitate the rapid development of society there.

Now it has happened that in those very wildernesses, once ceded by the inhabitants of the Atlantic shore, new states have formed over time. Congress has continued to sell, for the benefit of the nation as a whole, the uncultivated lands that these states still contain within them. But today these states claim that once constituted, they should have the exclusive right to apply the proceeds of these sales to their own use. As the complaints grew increasingly threatening, Congress thought it best to strip the Union of some of the privileges it had enjoyed up to then, and at the end of 1832 it passed a law by which, without ceding to the new Western republics ownership of their uncultivated lands, it nevertheless applied the greater part of the revenue drawn from them to their benefit alone.

[Note: The president refused, it is true, to sign this law, but he fully accepted its principle. See Message of December 8, 1833.]

One need only travel through the United States to appreciate the advantages the country derives from the Bank. These advantages are of several kinds; but there is one in particular that strikes the foreigner: the notes of the Bank of the United States are accepted at the edge of the wilderness for the same value as in Philadelphia, where the Bank has its headquarters.

[Note: The current Bank of the United States was created in 1816, with a capital of 35,000,000 dollars (185,500,000 francs); its charter expires in 1836. Last year, Congress passed a law to renew it; but the president refused to sign it. The struggle is now engaged on both sides with extreme violence, and it is easy to predict the Bank's imminent fall.]

The Bank of the United States is, however, the object of great hatreds. Its directors have come out against the president, and they are accused, not without plausibility, of having abused their influence to obstruct his election. The president therefore attacks the institution they represent with all the ardor of personal enmity. What has encouraged the president to pursue his vengeance in this way is that he feels himself supported by the secret instincts of the majority.

The Bank forms the great monetary bond of the Union just as Congress is its great legislative bond, and the same passions that tend to make the states independent of the central power tend toward the destruction of the Bank.

The Bank of the United States always holds in its hands a large number of notes belonging to the provincial banks; it can at any time force these latter to redeem their notes in specie. For the Bank itself, such a danger is not to be feared; the greatness of its available resources allows it to meet all demands. Threatened thus in their existence, the provincial banks are forced to exercise restraint and to put into circulation only a number of notes proportionate to their capital. The provincial banks suffer this salutary check only with impatience. The newspapers that are in their pocket, and the president whose own interest has made him their mouthpiece, therefore attack the Bank with a kind of fury. They stir up against it the local passions and the blind democratic instinct of the country. According to them, the directors of the Bank form a permanent aristocratic body whose influence is bound to make itself felt in government and must sooner or later alter the principles of equality on which American society rests.

The Bank's struggle against its enemies is merely one incident in the great battle that the provinces are waging in America against the central power — the spirit of independence and democracy against the spirit of hierarchy and subordination. I do not claim that the enemies of the Bank of the United States are precisely the same individuals who attack the federal government on other points; but I do say that the attacks against the Bank of the United States are the product of the same instincts that militate against the federal government, and that the large number of the Bank's enemies is an ominous symptom of the weakening of the latter.

But the Union never showed itself weaker than in the famous tariff affair.

[Note: See principally, for the details of this affair, the Legislative Documents, 22nd Congress, 2nd session, No. 30.]

The wars of the French Revolution and the War of 1812, by preventing free communication between America and Europe, had created manufactures in the North of the Union. When peace reopened the way to the New World for European products, Americans thought it wise to establish a tariff system that could simultaneously protect their nascent industry and pay off the debts the war had caused them to incur.

The states of the South, which have no manufactures to encourage and are only agricultural, were not long in complaining about this measure.

I do not intend to examine here what may have been imaginary or real about their complaints; I am stating facts.

As early as 1820, South Carolina, in a petition to Congress, declared that the tariff law was unconstitutional, oppressive, and unjust. Since then, Georgia, Virginia, North Carolina, Alabama, and Mississippi made more or less energetic protests to the same effect.

Far from heeding these murmurs, Congress in 1824 and 1828 raised the tariff duties still higher and reaffirmed its principle.

Then there was produced, or rather recalled, in the South a famous doctrine that took the name of nullification.

I have shown in the appropriate place that the purpose of the federal constitution was not to establish a league, but to create a national government. The Americans of the United States, in all the cases provided for by their constitution, form but a single people. On all these points, the national will expresses itself, as among all constitutional peoples, by means of a majority. Once the majority has spoken, the minority's duty is to submit.

Such is the legal doctrine, the only one that accords with the text of the Constitution and the known intention of its framers.

The nullifiers of the South claim, on the contrary, that in uniting, Americans did not intend to merge into a single people, but merely to form a league of independent peoples; from which it follows that each state, having preserved its complete sovereignty, if not in practice at least in principle, has the right to interpret the laws of Congress and to suspend within its borders the enforcement of those it considers contrary to the Constitution or to justice.

The entire doctrine of nullification is summed up in a sentence delivered in 1833 before the United States Senate by Mr. Calhoun, the acknowledged leader of the Southern nullifiers.

"The Constitution," he said, "is a contract in which the states appeared as sovereigns. Now, whenever a contract is made between parties who recognize no common arbiter, each party retains the right to judge for itself the extent of its obligation."

It is obvious that such a doctrine destroys the federal bond in principle and in fact brings back the anarchy from which the Constitution of 1789 had delivered the Americans.

When South Carolina saw that Congress turned a deaf ear to its complaints, it threatened to apply the nullifiers' doctrine to the federal tariff law. Congress persisted in its course; finally the storm broke.

In the course of 1832, the people of South Carolina elected a national convention to consider what extraordinary measures remained to be taken; and on November 24 of the same year, this convention published, under the name of an ordinance, a law that declared the federal tariff null and void, forbade the collection of the duties specified in it, and refused to accept appeals to the federal courts. This ordinance was not to take effect until the following February, and it was indicated that if Congress modified the tariff before that time, South Carolina might agree not to pursue its threats further. Later, the desire was expressed, though vaguely and indefinitely, to submit the question to an extraordinary assembly of all the confederated states.

[Note: That is to say, a majority of the people; for the opposing party, called the Union Party, always counted a very strong and very active minority in its favor. South Carolina may have had about 47,000 voters; 30,000 were favorable to nullification, and 17,000 against.]

[Note: This ordinance was preceded by the report of a committee charged with preparing its draft; this report contains the explanation and purpose of the law. In it one reads, p. 34: "When the rights reserved to the different states by the Constitution are deliberately violated, the right and duty of these states is to intervene, in order to stop the progress of evil, to oppose usurpation, and to maintain within their respective limits the powers and privileges that belong to them as independent sovereigns. If the states did not possess this right, in vain would they claim to be sovereign. South Carolina recognizes no tribunal on earth that is placed above her. It is true that she has entered into a solemn contract of union with other states sovereign like herself, but she claims and will exercise the right to explain what that contract means in her eyes, and when this contract is violated by her associates and by the government they have created, she intends to use the evident (unquestionable) right to judge the extent of the infraction and what measures must be taken to obtain justice."]

In the meantime, South Carolina armed its militias and prepared for war.

What did Congress do? Congress, which had not listened to its subjects when they were pleading, lent an ear to their complaints the moment it saw them with weapons in hand. It passed a law according to which the tariff duties were to be progressively reduced over ten years until they no longer exceeded the needs of government. Thus Congress completely abandoned the principle of the tariff. It replaced a duty protecting industry with a purely fiscal measure. To disguise its defeat, the government of the Union resorted to an expedient commonly used by weak governments: while yielding on the facts, it stood firm on principles. At the same time that Congress was changing the tariff legislation, it passed another law by which the president was invested with extraordinary power to overcome by force the resistance that was thenceforth no longer to be feared.

[Note: What finished persuading Congress to take this step was a demonstration by the powerful state of Virginia, whose legislature offered to serve as arbiter between the Union and South Carolina. Until then, South Carolina had appeared entirely abandoned, even by the states that had protested alongside it.]

[Note: Law of March 2, 1833.]

[Note: This law was suggested by Mr. Clay, and passed in four days in both chambers of Congress by an immense majority.]

South Carolina did not even consent to leave the Union these feeble appearances of victory; the same national convention that had nullified the tariff law reassembled, accepted the concession that was offered, but at the same time declared that it persisted more firmly than ever in the nullifiers' doctrine, and, to prove it, annulled the law that conferred extraordinary powers on the president, although it was perfectly certain that no use would be made of them.

Nearly all the acts I have just described took place under the presidency of General Jackson. It cannot be denied that, in the tariff affair, Jackson upheld the rights of the Union with skill and vigor. I believe, however, that the very conduct of the man who represents the federal power should be counted among the dangers it faces today.

Some people in Europe have formed an opinion about the influence General Jackson may exercise on the affairs of his country that seems quite extravagant to those who have seen things up close.

People have heard that General Jackson won battles, that he is an energetic man, inclined by character and habit to the use of force, desirous of power, and a despot by taste. All of this may be true, but the conclusions drawn from these truths are great errors.

People have imagined that General Jackson wanted to establish a dictatorship in the United States, that he was going to make the military spirit reign there, and give the central power a dangerous expansion threatening to provincial liberties. In America, the time for such enterprises and the age of such men have not yet arrived: if General Jackson had wanted to dominate in this manner, he would certainly have lost his political position and endangered his life; so he has not been imprudent enough to try.

Far from wanting to extend federal power, the current president represents, on the contrary, the party that wants to restrict this power to the clearest and most precise terms of the Constitution, and that will not accept any interpretation favorable to the government of the Union; far from presenting himself as the champion of centralization, General Jackson is the agent of provincial jealousies. It was decentralizing passions — if I may put it that way — that brought him to supreme power. It is by flattering these passions every day that he maintains himself there and prospers. General Jackson is the slave of the majority: he follows its wishes, its desires, its half-revealed instincts — or rather, he divines them and runs to place himself at its head.

Every time the government of the states enters into a struggle with that of the Union, it is rare that the president is not the first to doubt his own right; he almost always defers to the legislative power; when there is occasion to interpret the extent of federal authority, he sides in a sense against himself; he diminishes himself, he veils himself, he effaces himself. It is not that he is naturally weak or hostile to the Union; when the majority declared itself against the pretensions of the Southern nullifiers, he was seen placing himself at its head, formulating with clarity and energy the doctrines it professed, and being the first to call for the use of force. General Jackson — to borrow a comparison from the vocabulary of American political parties — seems to me federal by taste and republican by calculation.

After thus lowering himself before the majority to win its favor, General Jackson rises again; he then moves toward the goals the majority itself pursues, or those it does not regard with a jealous eye, sweeping away all obstacles before him. Strong with a support his predecessors never enjoyed, he tramples his personal enemies wherever he finds them, with a facility no president has ever known; he takes upon himself measures that no one before him would have dared take; it even happens that he treats the national legislature with a kind of almost insulting disdain; he refuses to sign the laws of Congress, and often neglects to respond to that great body at all. He is a favorite who sometimes rough-handles his master. General Jackson's power therefore constantly increases; but the president's power decreases. In his hands, the federal government is strong; it will pass to his successor enfeebled.

Either I am greatly mistaken, or the federal government of the United States tends to grow weaker each day; it progressively withdraws from affairs, it narrows the circle of its action more and more. Naturally weak, it abandons even the appearances of strength. On the other hand, I believe I have seen that in the United States the feeling of independence is becoming increasingly vivid in the states, the love of provincial government increasingly pronounced.

People want the Union, but reduced to a shadow: they want it strong in certain cases and weak in all others; they expect that in time of war it can gather into its hands the national forces and all the resources of the country, and that in time of peace it should practically cease to exist — as if this alternation between debility and vigor were in the nature of things.

I see nothing at present that can halt this general movement of minds; the causes that produced it continue to operate in the same direction. It will therefore continue, and one can predict that, barring some extraordinary circumstance, the government of the Union will go on weakening day by day.

I believe, however, that we are still far from the time when federal power, incapable of protecting its own existence and giving the country peace, will extinguish itself of its own accord. The Union is in the customs and values of the people; they desire it; its results are obvious, its benefits visible. When people realize that the weakness of the federal government is threatening the Union's very existence, I have no doubt that a movement of reaction in favor of strength will arise.

The government of the United States is, of all the federal governments that have been established to this day, the one most naturally destined to act; as long as it is attacked only indirectly through the interpretation of its laws, as long as its substance is not profoundly altered, a change of opinion, a domestic crisis, a war, could suddenly restore all the vigor it needs.

What I have wanted to establish is simply this: many people among us think that in the United States there is a movement of minds that favors the centralization of power in the hands of the president and Congress. I maintain that one can visibly detect the opposite movement. Far from the federal government growing stronger as it ages and threatening the sovereignty of the states, I say that it tends to weaken each day, and that only the sovereignty of the Union is in peril. That is what the present reveals. What will be the final result of this tendency, what events may halt, slow, or hasten the movement I have described? The future hides them, and I do not claim to be able to lift its veil.
