PREFACE.


Americans have a democratic social order that has naturally suggested to them certain laws and certain political customs.

That same social order has also given rise among them to a multitude of feelings and opinions that were unknown in the old aristocratic societies of Europe. It has destroyed or transformed relationships that once existed, and established new ones. The face of civil society has been no less changed than the character of the political world.

I addressed the first subject in the work I published five years ago on American Democracy. The second is the subject of the present book. These two parts complete one another and form a single work.

I must immediately warn the reader against a misunderstanding that would do me great harm.

Seeing me attribute so many different effects to equality, some might conclude that I consider equality the sole cause of everything happening in our time. That would be crediting me with a very narrow view.

In our era, there are plenty of opinions, feelings, and instincts that owe their existence to facts unrelated to — or even contrary to — equality. If I took the United States as an example, I could easily show that the nature of the country, the origins of its inhabitants, the religion of its earliest founders, their acquired knowledge, their prior habits, have all exerted, and continue to exert, an immense influence on their ways of thinking and feeling — entirely independent of Democracy. Different causes, equally distinct from the fact of equality, can be found in Europe and would explain a great deal of what is happening there.

I recognize the existence of all these different causes and their power, but they are not my subject. I have not set out to explain the reason for all our inclinations and all our ideas; I have only wanted to show in what ways equality has reshaped both.

Some may find it surprising that, given my firm conviction that the democratic revolution we are witnessing is an irresistible force against which it would be neither desirable nor wise to struggle, I have often addressed such stern words to the democratic societies this revolution has created.

My answer is simple: it is precisely because I was not an enemy of Democracy that I wanted to be honest with it.

People do not accept truth from their enemies, and their friends rarely offer it to them. That is why I have spoken it.

I believed that many others would take it upon themselves to announce the new benefits that equality promises to humanity, but that few would dare to point out, from a distance, the dangers it poses. It was therefore mainly toward these dangers that I directed my attention, and having believed I saw them clearly, I was not cowardly enough to keep silent about them.

I hope that readers will find in this second work the same impartiality that people seemed to notice in the first. Placed in the midst of the contradictory opinions that divide us, I have tried to temporarily destroy in my own heart whatever favorable sympathies or hostile instincts each of them inspires in me. If those who read my book find in it a single sentence designed to flatter one of the great parties that have agitated our country, or one of the petty factions that today pester and exhaust it, let those readers raise their voices and accuse me.

The subject I have tried to embrace is immense, for it encompasses most of the feelings and ideas that the new state of the world produces. Such a subject surely exceeds my powers; in treating it, I have not managed to satisfy myself.

But if I have not been able to reach the goal I aimed for, readers will at least grant me this justice: that I conceived and pursued my enterprise in a spirit that could make me worthy of succeeding.
