CHAPTER III.

How Individualism Is Greater Right After a Democratic Revolution Than at Any Other Time.


It is above all at the moment when a democratic society is finishing its formation on the ruins of an aristocracy that this isolation of people from one another, and the selfishness that follows from it, most easily strikes the eye.

These societies do not merely contain a large number of independent citizens -- they are filled every day with people who arrived at independence only yesterday and are drunk with their new power. These newcomers conceive a presumptuous confidence in their own strength, and, unable to imagine they could ever need to call on their fellows for help, they make no secret of the fact that they think only of themselves.

An aristocracy usually falls only after a prolonged struggle, during which implacable hatreds have been kindled between the different classes. These passions outlive the victory, and you can trace their marks through the democratic confusion that follows.

Those citizens who stood at the top of the destroyed hierarchy cannot immediately forget their former greatness. For a long time they see themselves as strangers within the new society. They see in all the equals that society gives them nothing but oppressors whose fate could not possibly inspire sympathy. They have lost sight of their old equals and no longer feel bound by a common interest to their fate. Each one, withdrawing into himself, feels reduced to caring for no one but himself. Those, on the other hand, who were formerly at the bottom of the social ladder and whom a sudden revolution has brought up to the common level, enjoy their newly acquired independence with a kind of secret restlessness. If they find some of their former superiors at their side, they cast looks of triumph and fear upon them, and draw away.

It is therefore usually at the birth of democratic societies that citizens are most inclined to isolate themselves.

Democracy inclines people not to draw near to their fellows; but democratic revolutions dispose them to flee from one another, and perpetuate within equality the hatreds that inequality gave birth to.

The great advantage of the Americans is that they arrived at democracy without having to endure democratic revolutions, and that they were born equal instead of becoming so.
