CHAPTER IX.

How Americans Apply the Doctrine of Self-Interest Properly Understood to Religion.


If the doctrine of self-interest properly understood concerned only this world, it would be far from sufficient -- for there are a great many sacrifices that can find their reward only in the next one. And however much intellectual effort you put into proving the usefulness of virtue, it will always be hard to make a person live well who does not want to die.

It is therefore necessary to ask whether the doctrine of self-interest properly understood can be easily reconciled with religious belief.

The philosophers who teach this doctrine tell people that to be happy in life, they must watch over their passions and carefully rein in excess; that lasting happiness cannot be acquired without denying oneself a thousand passing pleasures; and that, in short, one must constantly triumph over oneself in order to serve oneself better.

The founders of nearly every religion have said much the same thing. Without pointing people toward a different path, they simply moved the destination further back: instead of placing in this world the reward for the sacrifices they demand, they placed it in the next.

I refuse, however, to believe that all those who practice virtue in a spirit of religion are acting only with an eye to a reward.

I have met zealous Christians who constantly forgot themselves in order to work with greater ardor for the happiness of all, and I heard them claim that they acted this way only to earn the rewards of the next world. But I cannot help thinking that they are deceiving themselves. I respect them too much to believe them.

Christianity tells us, it is true, that we must prefer others to ourselves in order to gain heaven. But Christianity also tells us that we should do good for our fellow human beings out of love for God. That is a magnificent expression. Through his intelligence, a person penetrates into the mind of God; he sees that God's purpose is order; he freely associates himself with this grand design, and while sacrificing his private interests to this admirable ordering of all things, he expects no other reward than the pleasure of contemplating it.

I do not believe, therefore, that self-interest is the only motive of religious people. But I do think that self-interest is the principal means that religions themselves use to guide people, and I have no doubt that this is the side by which they capture the masses and become popular.

I do not see clearly, then, why the doctrine of self-interest properly understood should push people away from religious belief. It seems to me, on the contrary, that I can make out how it draws them toward it.

Suppose that a person, in order to achieve happiness in this world, resists instinct at every turn and coolly reasons out every act of his life; suppose that instead of blindly giving in to the rush of his first desires, he has learned the art of fighting them, and has gotten used to sacrificing the pleasure of the moment to the permanent interest of his whole life without effort.

If such a person has faith in the religion he professes, it will cost him little to submit to the constraints it imposes. Reason itself counsels him to do so, and habit has already prepared him to bear it.

And if he has conceived doubts about the object of his hopes, he will not easily let himself be stopped by them. He will judge it wise to risk some of the goods of this world to preserve his claim to the immense inheritance promised him in the next.

"To be mistaken in believing the Christian religion true," said Pascal, "is no great loss; but what a misfortune to be mistaken in believing it false!"

Americans do not affect a crude indifference to the next life. They do not display a childish pride in scorning dangers they hope to escape.

They therefore practice their religion without shame and without weakness. But you ordinarily see, even in the midst of their zeal, something so calm, so methodical, so calculated that it seems to be reason far more than the heart that leads them to the foot of the altar.

Not only do Americans follow their religion out of interest, they often place in this world the interest one might have in following it. In the Middle Ages, priests spoke only of the next life; they scarcely bothered to prove that a sincere Christian could be a happy man here below.

But American preachers constantly return to earth, and they can hardly tear their gaze away from it. The better to reach their listeners, they show them every day how religious beliefs promote liberty and public order. And it is often hard to tell, when listening to them, whether the main purpose of religion is to secure eternal happiness in the next world or well-being in this one.
