CHAPTER XII.

How Americans Understand Equality Between Men and Women.


I have shown how democracy destroys or modifies the various inequalities that society creates. But is that all? Doesn't democracy ultimately act on that great inequality between men and women, which has seemed, up to our own time, to have its eternal foundations in nature itself?

I believe that the social movement bringing sons and fathers, servants and masters, and in general inferiors and superiors closer to the same level also elevates women, and must increasingly make them the equals of men.

But here more than ever, I feel the need to be clearly understood — because there is no subject on which the crude and undisciplined imagination of our age has given itself freer rein.

There are people in Europe who, confusing the distinct attributes of the sexes, want to make men and women not only equal beings but identical ones. They assign both the same functions, impose the same duties, and grant the same rights. They mix them together in everything — work, pleasure, business. It is easy to see that by striving to equalize the sexes in this way, you degrade them both, and that from this crude blending of nature's works, nothing can ever come but weak men and dishonorable women.

This is not how Americans have understood the kind of democratic equality that can be established between women and men. They have concluded that, since nature established such great differences between the physical and moral constitution of men and women, its clearly intended purpose was to put their different capacities to different uses. And they have judged that progress does not consist in making dissimilar beings do roughly the same things, but in ensuring that each of them performs their own task as well as possible. Americans have applied to the two sexes the great principle of political economy that dominates industry in our time. They have carefully divided the functions of men and women, so that the great work of society might be better accomplished.

America is the country in the world where the most sustained effort has been made to draw clearly separate lines of action for the two sexes — and where both have been expected to walk at an equal pace, but always on different paths. You never see American women managing the external affairs of the family, running a business, or entering the political sphere. But neither do you find any who are forced to perform the hard labor of farming, or any of the strenuous physical work that demands the development of bodily strength. There are no families so poor that they make exceptions to this rule. If the American woman cannot escape the peaceful circle of domestic occupations, she is never, on the other hand, forced out of it.

This is why American women, who often display a masculine reasoning and a thoroughly virile energy, generally maintain a very delicate appearance and always remain women in their manners, even though they sometimes show themselves to be men in mind and heart.

Nor have Americans ever imagined that the consequence of democratic principles should be to overturn marital authority and introduce confusion of powers within the family. They have concluded that every association, to be effective, must have a leader, and that the natural leader of the conjugal association is the man. They do not deny him the right to direct his partner, and they believe that in the small society of husband and wife, as in the large political society, the purpose of democracy is to regulate and legitimize necessary powers — not to destroy all power.

This view is not held by one sex and contested by the other.

I did not notice that American women regarded marital authority as a fortunate usurpation of their rights, nor that they believed it was degrading to submit to it. On the contrary, I seemed to see that they took a kind of pride in the voluntary surrender of their will, and that they found their dignity in bending themselves to the yoke rather than escaping it. This, at least, is the feeling expressed by the most virtuous among them; the others stay silent, and in the United States you do not hear adulterous wives loudly demanding the rights of women while trampling on their most sacred duties.

It has often been observed that in Europe a certain contempt lurks even in the midst of the flattery that men lavish on women. Though the European man often makes himself the slave of a woman, one can see that he never sincerely believes her to be his equal.

In the United States, women are rarely praised — but every day, they are shown to be respected.

Americans constantly display complete confidence in the reason of their partner and a deep respect for her freedom. They judge that her mind is as capable as a man's of discovering the naked truth, and her heart firm enough to follow it; and they have never sought to shelter the virtue of one sex any more than the other behind prejudice, ignorance, or fear.

It seems that in Europe, where men so easily submit to the despotic power of women, they nevertheless deny them some of the greatest attributes of the human species, treating them as seductive but incomplete beings. And what is most astonishing is that women themselves end up seeing themselves the same way, and that they are not far from considering it a privilege to be allowed to appear frivolous, weak, and fearful. American women do not claim such rights.

On the other hand, it seems that when it comes to morals, we have granted men a kind of peculiar immunity — so that there is, as it were, one standard of virtue for men and another for women, and according to public opinion, the same act can alternately be a crime or merely a fault.

Americans do not recognize this unjust division of duties and rights. Among them, the seducer is as dishonored as his victim.

It is true that Americans rarely show women the eager courtesies that people in Europe take pleasure in surrounding them with. But their conduct always shows that they consider women to be virtuous and refined, and they have such great respect for women's moral freedom that in their presence, everyone carefully watches their speech, for fear that women might be forced to hear language that offends them. In America, a young woman undertakes a long journey alone and without fear.

The legislators of the United States, who have softened nearly every provision of the penal code, punish rape with death, and there is no crime that public opinion pursues with more inexorable zeal. This is easily explained: since Americans can conceive of nothing more precious than a woman's honor and nothing more respectable than her independence, they believe no punishment is too severe for those who take these from her against her will.

In France, where the same crime is punished with much lighter sentences, it is often difficult to find a jury that will convict. Is this contempt for modesty, or contempt for women? I cannot help believing it is both.

So Americans do not believe that men and women have the duty or the right to do the same things. But they show the same respect for the role of each, and they regard them as beings of equal value, even though their destinies differ. They do not give the courage of women the same form or the same application as that of men, but they never doubt her courage. And if they believe that a man and his partner should not always use their intelligence and reason in the same way, they judge at least that the reason of the one is as sound as that of the other, and her intelligence as clear.

Americans, who have allowed women's social inferiority to persist, have therefore raised her with all their power in the intellectual and moral world to the level of man. And in this, they seem to me to have admirably understood the true meaning of democratic progress.

As for me, I will not hesitate to say it: although in the United States women rarely leave the domestic circle, and are in some respects quite dependent within it, nowhere has their position seemed higher to me. And if, now that I am approaching the end of this book — in which I have shown so many remarkable things accomplished by Americans — I were asked what I think is the main reason for the singular prosperity and growing strength of this people, I would answer that it is the superiority of its women.
