## Day 1, Story 1

Master Ciappelletto deceives a holy friar with a false confession and dies; and though he was the worst man alive, he is after death revered as a saint and called Saint Ciappelletto.


"It is only right, dearest ladies, that whatever a man does, he should begin with the holy and wonderful name of God, who made all things. And so, since I am the first to tell a story, I intend to start with one of His marvels, so that when you've heard it, our faith in Him -- as something unchangeable -- may be strengthened, and His name forever praised.

It's clear enough that everything in this world is fleeting and mortal, and that both inside and out, our lives are full of trouble, suffering, and danger. We who live tangled up in all of it -- who are, in fact, part and parcel of it -- could never endure or protect ourselves unless God's special grace gave us strength and foresight. And we shouldn't think that this grace comes down to us because of any merit of our own. No, it flows from His own goodness and from the prayers of those who were once mortal like us but who, having faithfully followed His commandments during their lives, now dwell with Him in eternal blessedness. To these saints we offer our prayers for the things we need, as if to advocates who know from experience what it's like to be human -- perhaps because we don't dare approach so great a Judge directly ourselves.

And yet we can see something even more wonderful about God's compassionate generosity toward us. It sometimes happens that we, with our limited mortal vision, unable to penetrate the secrets of God's will, are fooled by reputation into choosing as our advocate before Him someone who has actually been cast out from His presence with an eternal banishment. And yet God, from whom nothing is hidden, pays more attention to the sincerity of the person praying than to their ignorance or to the damned state of the one they're praying to, and He answers those prayers just as if the supposed saint were truly blessed in His sight.

All of which will become perfectly clear from the story I'm about to tell you -- clear, I mean, by human judgment, not by God's.


So here's what happened. Musciatto Franzesi, having risen from being a very wealthy and important merchant in France to the rank of a knight, was obliged to travel to Tuscany with Messer Charles Sansterre, brother of the King of France, who had been summoned there by Pope Boniface. Musciatto found that his business affairs were tangled up in a hundred different directions, the way merchants' affairs usually are, and he couldn't quickly or easily sort them all out. So he decided to hand them off to various agents and managed to find someone for everything -- except one problem. He couldn't figure out who to leave in charge of collecting some debts owed to him by certain Burgundians.

The reason for his hesitation was that he knew the Burgundians to be quarrelsome, dishonest, treacherous people, and he couldn't think of a single man he trusted who was also nasty enough to match their wickedness move for move. After mulling it over for a long time, he remembered a certain Master Ciapperello da Prato, who was a frequent visitor to his house in Paris. This fellow was small in stature and extremely fussy about his appearance. The French, not knowing what "Cepparello" meant and assuming it was the same as "cappello" -- which in their language would be "chaplet," a little garland -- didn't call him Cappello but Ciappelletto. And so he was known as Ciappelletto everywhere, while hardly anyone knew his real name.

Now, this Ciappelletto led the following sort of life. He was a notary by trade, and he considered it a terrible disgrace if any of his legal documents was found to be anything other than fraudulent -- and he drew very few honest ones. He would gladly have produced as many false documents as anyone wanted, and he'd have done it for free more willingly than another man would for a hefty fee. He gave false testimony with particular delight, whether anyone asked him to or not. And since oaths were taken very seriously in France in those days, and since he had absolutely no qualms about perjuring himself, he won every lawsuit he was called to testify in through sheer dishonesty.

He took wicked pleasure, and went to extraordinary lengths, in stirring up feuds and hatred and scandals between friends, between relatives, between anyone at all. The worse the fallout, the happier he was. If you invited him to a murder or any other crime, he never once said no, and he jumped into it with enthusiasm. On more than a few occasions, he had been known to wound and kill people with his own hands, and gladly.

He was a world-class blasphemer of God and the saints, flying into a rage over the smallest trifle -- he was the most hot-tempered man alive. He never set foot in a church and mocked all the sacraments in the most disgusting terms, calling them worthless. On the other hand, he was a devoted regular at taverns and other disreputable establishments.

As for women, he was about as interested in them as a dog is in being beaten with a stick. But when it came to the opposite -- well, he was more enthusiastic about that than any depraved man who ever lived.

He robbed and stole with as clear a conscience as a devout man would give to charity. He was an enormous glutton and a heavy drinker, to the point where it sometimes made him violently ill. And on top of everything else, he was a notorious gambler who used loaded dice.

But why go on and on? He was quite possibly the worst man ever born. His wickedness had been propped up for years by the wealth and influence of Messer Musciatto, who had often protected him from the consequences of his crimes -- both from the private citizens he wronged and from the law, which he offended constantly.

So when this Master Ciappelletto came to Musciatto's mind, Musciatto -- who knew perfectly well what kind of man he was -- decided he was exactly the kind of person that the treachery of the Burgundians called for. He sent for him and spoke to him like this:

"Master Ciappelletto, as you know, I'm about to leave France for good. Among the people I have business with are some Burgundians, men absolutely full of tricks, and I can't think of anyone better suited to collecting what they owe me than you -- especially since you're not doing anything at the moment. So if you'll take this on, I'll secure the support of the royal court for you and give you a fair share of whatever you recover."

Ciappelletto, who was unemployed at the time and hard up for cash, seeing that the man who had long been his shield and protector was about to leave, didn't waste a second deliberating. Driven more by necessity than anything else, he said he'd be happy to do it.

Once they'd come to an agreement, Musciatto left. Ciappelletto, armed with his patron's power of attorney and letters of recommendation from the king, headed off to Burgundy, where almost no one knew him. There, going completely against his nature, he began collecting debts in the most pleasant and agreeable manner you can imagine, as if he were saving the hostility and violence for a last resort.

While he was going about his business this way, he was staying in the home of two Florentine brothers who were moneylenders there and who treated him with great respect out of regard for Messer Musciatto. And it was during this time that he fell ill.

The two brothers immediately brought in doctors and servants to care for him and provided everything he could possibly need to recover. But none of it did any good. The doctors all agreed the old man's case was hopeless -- he'd lived hard, and he was getting worse by the day with what was clearly a fatal illness.

This worried the two brothers enormously. One day, standing just outside the room where Ciappelletto lay sick, they began talking it over between themselves.

"What are we going to do about this man?" said one to the other. "We've got a terrible problem on our hands. If we throw him out of our house while he's this sick, people would think the worst of us. They'd say, 'What kind of idiots are these? First they take the man in, then they go to all the trouble and expense of having him treated, and now, when he's at death's door and couldn't possibly have done anything to offend them, they toss him out into the street?' That would look awful.

"But on the other hand, he's been such a wicked man his whole life that he'll never agree to confess or receive any sacrament of the Church. And if he dies without confession, no church will accept his body -- they'll throw him in a ditch like a dog. And even if he does confess, his sins are so many and so horrible that it'll come to the same thing, because there's no priest or friar alive who can or will absolve him. So either way, without absolution, he'll end up in the ditches.

"And if that happens, the people of this town -- who already hate our profession and are always looking for an excuse to rob us -- will see it and rise up in a riot. They'll be screaming, 'These Italian dogs! The Church won't even bury them, and we have to put up with them here?' They'll come to our houses and strip us of everything we own, and maybe our lives too. So no matter what happens, if this man dies, we're in trouble."

Now Master Ciappelletto, who was lying near the spot where the two brothers were having this conversation, had the sharp hearing that sick people often have. He heard every word they said. He called them over and spoke to them like this:

"I don't want you to worry about me for one second, and I don't want you to be afraid you'll suffer any harm on my account. I heard what you said about me, and I'm quite sure things would go exactly the way you expect if matters took the course you're imagining. But it's going to go differently.

"I've done the Lord God so many wrongs in my lifetime that doing Him one more at the point of death won't make a bit of difference. So here's what I want you to do: find me the holiest and most worthy friar you can get your hands on -- if such a man exists -- and leave the rest to me. I guarantee I'll sort out your problems and mine so that everything goes smoothly, and you'll have nothing to complain about."

The two brothers didn't have a lot of hope in this, but they went off to a Franciscan monastery and asked for a holy and learned man to hear the confession of a Lombard who was sick in their house. They were given a venerable old friar, a man of spotless life and deep learning in the Scriptures, whom all the townspeople held in the highest reverence. They brought him home.

When the friar came to the room where Master Ciappelletto lay and sat down beside him, he began by gently comforting him. Then he asked how long it had been since his last confession.

Master Ciappelletto, who had never confessed once in his entire life, replied: "Father, it's been my habit to confess at least once a week, and often more. But it's true that since I fell ill -- these past eight days -- I haven't confessed at all, the sickness has been so hard on me."

"My son," said the friar, "you've done well, and you should keep that up. I can see that since you confess so often, this won't take me much effort in the way of listening or questioning."

"Oh, don't say that, Father," answered Ciappelletto. "No matter how often I've confessed, I've always wanted to make a full general confession of every sin I can remember, from the day I was born to the day of confession. So please, good Father, question me about absolutely everything, point by point, as thoroughly as if I'd never confessed before. Don't go easy on me just because I'm sick. I'd much rather be hard on this body of mine than pamper it and do something that might cost me my soul -- my soul, which my Savior redeemed with His precious blood."

These words greatly pleased the holy man and seemed to him a sign of a very devout mind. After warmly commending Ciappelletto for this habit, the friar began his questioning by asking whether he had ever sinned through lust with any woman.

"Father," Ciappelletto replied with a sigh, "on this point I'm ashamed to tell you the truth, because I'm afraid of sinning through vanity."

"Speak freely," said the friar. "No one ever sinned by telling the truth, whether in confession or anywhere else."

"Well then," said Ciappelletto, "since you assure me of that, I'll tell you. I am a virgin, as pure as the day I came out of my mother's womb."

"Oh, bless you!" cried the friar. "What a wonderful thing! And your virtue is all the greater because, if you'd wanted to, you had far more freedom to do otherwise than we friars or anyone else bound by a religious rule."

After this, the friar asked whether he had offended God through the sin of gluttony.

Ciappelletto gave a heavy sigh and said yes, many times. He explained that although he observed the Lenten fasts that all devout Christians keep, and although he also made it his practice to fast on bread and water at least three days every week, he had to confess that he sometimes drank the water with as much eagerness and pleasure as any drunkard guzzling wine -- especially after he'd worn himself out with prayer or pilgrimages. And many times he'd craved the simple salads of fresh herbs that women throw together when they go to the country. And every so often, eating had given him more pleasure than he felt it should have for a man who was fasting out of devotion, as he was.

"My son," said the friar, "those sins are perfectly natural and very minor. I wouldn't want you to burden your conscience with them more than necessary. It happens to every man, no matter how devout, that food tastes good after a long fast, and drink tastes good after hard work."

"Oh, Father," Ciappelletto replied, "please don't tell me that just to make me feel better. You must understand that I know perfectly well that things done in God's service ought to be done wholeheartedly and with a willing spirit. Anyone who does otherwise is sinning."

The friar, deeply pleased, said: "I'm glad you see it that way. Your pure and good conscience delights me beyond measure. But tell me -- have you sinned through avarice? Have you desired more than was proper, or kept what you should have given away?"

"Father," replied Ciappelletto, "please don't hold it against me that I'm staying in the house of these moneylenders. I have absolutely nothing to do with their business. In fact, I came here to counsel them and scold them and try to turn them away from their sinful line of work -- and I think I would have succeeded, too, if God hadn't struck me down like this.

"But I should tell you that my father left me a wealthy man. When he died, I gave most of it to charity. Since then, to support myself and to have something to give to the poor, I've done a little trading. And yes, in my business I've tried to make a profit. But whatever I earned, I always split it with God's poor -- keeping half for my own needs and giving them the other half. And my Creator has so blessed me in this that my affairs have gone from good to better ever since."

"Well done," said the friar. "But tell me, have you often given in to anger?"

"Oh!" cried Ciappelletto. "I certainly have, more times than I can count! And who wouldn't, seeing the disgusting things people do every single day? Ignoring God's commandments, showing no fear of His judgment? Many times a day I've wished I were dead rather than alive, watching young people chase after worldly vanities, hearing them curse and swear, haunting the taverns, never setting foot in church, following the ways of the world instead of the ways of God."

"My son," said the friar, "that is a righteous anger, and for my part I couldn't assign you any penance for it. But tell me, has your anger ever led you to commit murder, or to speak abusively to anyone, or to do any other wrong?"

"Good Lord, sir!" exclaimed the sick man. "You seem to me a man of God -- how can you even say such things? If I had ever had so much as a passing thought of doing any of those things, do you think God would have let me prosper as He has? Those are the doings of criminals and thugs. And whenever I've encountered such a person, all I've ever said is, 'Go your way -- may God set you right.'"

"Well said," the friar continued. "Now tell me, my son -- and God bless you -- have you ever borne false witness against anyone, or spoken ill of another person, or taken what wasn't yours without permission?"

"Oh yes, Father," replied Ciappelletto. "I have spoken ill of someone. I once had a neighbor who, with absolutely no justification, did nothing but beat his wife. One time I said something about it to her relatives, I felt such pity for the poor woman. You can't imagine how he treated her every time he'd had too much to drink."

"I see," said the friar. "Now, you tell me you've been a merchant. Have you ever cheated anyone, as merchants sometimes do?"

"Oh, yes, I have," answered Ciappelletto. "But I don't know who it was. There was a man who once brought me money he owed for cloth I'd sold him. I tossed it into a chest without counting it. About a month later, I found it was four pennies more than it should have been. I waited a full year, hoping to see the man again so I could return the money, but I never did. So I gave it away to charity."

"That's a trifling matter," said the friar, "and you dealt with it perfectly."

The friar then questioned him about many other things, and Ciappelletto answered every one in the same fashion. Just as the holy man was about to proceed to absolution, Ciappelletto spoke up.

"Father, there are still a few sins I haven't told you about."

The friar asked what they were.

"Well," said Ciappelletto, "I remember that one Saturday afternoon I had my servant sweep the house, and I failed to show proper reverence for the Lord's holy day."

"Oh, my son," said the friar, "that's nothing."

"No, don't call it nothing!" Ciappelletto protested. "Sunday deserves the highest honor. It was on that day that our Lord rose from the dead."

"All right then," said the friar. "Is there anything else?"

"Yes, Father," said Ciappelletto. "One time, without thinking, I spat in the church."

At this, the friar couldn't help smiling. "My son, that's nothing to worry about. We clergy spit in the church all day long."

"And you are very wrong to do so!" Ciappelletto shot back. "There is nothing in this world that ought to be kept as clean as the holy temple where sacrifice is offered to God."

He went on in this vein for quite some time, coming up with one trivial thing after another. And then, at last, he began to sigh. And then he began to weep -- and weep heavily -- which was something he knew very well how to do on demand.

"What's wrong, my son?" asked the friar.

"Oh, Father," sobbed Ciappelletto, "there is one sin left that I've never confessed, because I'm so deeply ashamed of it. Every time I think of it, I cry, just as you see me crying now. And I feel absolutely certain that God will never forgive me for it."

"Come now, my son," said the friar. "What are you saying? If all the sins that every person in the world has ever committed or ever will commit, from the beginning of time to the end, were gathered into one man, and that man repented and was as contrite as I can see you are -- God's mercy and lovingkindness are so great that He would freely forgive them all upon confession. So tell me what it is."

But Ciappelletto just kept weeping and said nothing. The friar urged him again. Ciappelletto wept harder. He kept the friar in suspense for a good long while. Finally, he heaved a deep, shuddering sigh and said:

"Father, since you promise to pray to God for me, I'll tell you. Know, then, that when I was a little boy... I once cursed my mother."

And with that, he burst into a fresh storm of tears.

"Oh, my son!" said the friar. "Does that really seem so terrible to you? Listen -- people blaspheme God every day and He freely forgives anyone who repents. Do you really think He won't forgive you for this? Don't weep. Take comfort. Truly, even if you had been one of those who nailed Him to the cross, He would forgive you, seeing the depth of contrition I see in you."

"Oh, Father, what are you saying?" cried Ciappelletto. "My dear, sweet mother, who carried me in her body for nine months, day and night, and held me at her breast a hundred times and more -- for me to have cursed her was a terrible, terrible thing, an enormous sin. And unless you pray to God for me, it will never be forgiven."

The friar, seeing that Ciappelletto had nothing more to say, gave him absolution and his blessing, fully convinced that everything he'd heard was the truth and that he was dealing with one of the holiest men alive. And really, who wouldn't have believed it, hearing a man speak this way on his deathbed?

When all this was done, the friar said to him: "Master Ciappelletto, with God's help you'll be well again soon. But if it should happen that God calls your blessed and well-prepared soul to Himself, would it please you to have your body buried in our monastery?"

"Oh yes, Father, very much," replied Ciappelletto. "I wouldn't want to be buried anywhere else, since you've promised to pray to God for me. Besides, I've always had a special devotion to your order. And when you return to your monastery, please have them send me the true Body of Christ, which you consecrate each morning on the altar. Unworthy as I am, I wish to receive it, with your permission. And after that, I'd like to receive holy unction as well, so that even if I've lived as a sinner, I may at least die as a Christian."

The good friar told him that this was wonderfully spoken and that it pleased him greatly, and he promised to have the sacrament brought right away. And so it was.

Meanwhile, the two brothers, terrified that Ciappelletto might be pulling some kind of trick on them, had planted themselves behind a thin partition that divided his room from the next one, where they could hear everything. They listened to his entire exchange with the friar, and at times they had to clamp their hands over their mouths to keep from exploding with laughter at the things he confessed.

"What kind of man is this?" they said to each other. "Not old age, not sickness, not the fear of death with its jaws around him, not even the fear of God -- before whose judgment seat he expects to stand any moment now -- none of it has been enough to turn him from his wicked ways or stop him from choosing to die exactly as he lived!"

Still, since his performance had been convincing enough that he'd be given a church burial, they didn't care about the rest.

Shortly after, Master Ciappelletto took communion. Then he grew rapidly worse and received last rites. And a little after vespers, on the same day he had made his magnificent confession, he died.

The two brothers, using his own money, arranged for an honorable burial. They sent word to the monastery to let the friars know, asking them to come that evening to hold the traditional vigil and to carry the body away for burial in the morning. They saw to all the necessary preparations.

The holy friar who had heard Ciappelletto's confession, learning that he had passed away, went straight to the prior of the monastery. He had the bell rung to summon the chapter, and when the friars were all assembled, he announced that Master Ciappelletto had been a truly holy man -- as was clear beyond any doubt from the confession he had heard. He urged the brothers to receive the body with the utmost reverence and devotion, expressing his confidence that God would perform many miracles through him. The prior and the rest of the friars, trusting his word completely, agreed at once.

That evening, they all went to the house where Ciappelletto's body lay, and they held a grand and solemn vigil over him. The next morning, dressed in their vestments -- white albs and embroidered copes -- carrying their books and processional crosses, chanting as they went, they came for the body and carried it back to their church with enormous pomp and ceremony. Behind them followed nearly the entire population of the city, men and women alike.

Once the body had been set down in the church, the holy friar who had taken his confession climbed into the pulpit and began to preach. He spoke in glowing terms about the dead man and his life -- his fasting, his virginity, his simplicity, his innocence, his sanctity. Among other things, he told the congregation about what Ciappelletto had confessed as his greatest sin, and how he could barely convince him that God would forgive it.

From there, the friar turned on the congregation and scolded them. "And yet you, miserable sinners that you are," he thundered, "every time the wind blows a piece of straw between your feet, you blaspheme God and the Virgin and every saint in heaven!" He went on at great length about Ciappelletto's faithfulness and purity of heart.

In short, through his sermon -- to which the people of the town gave absolute and unquestioning belief -- he planted the dead man so deeply in everyone's reverent devotion that the moment the service was over, the entire congregation rushed forward in a frenzy to kiss his hands and feet. They tore the clothes from his body, each person counting themselves blessed if they could carry off even the tiniest scrap. And they had to leave the body on display all day long so that everyone in town could come to see and venerate him.

The following night, he was honorably laid to rest in a marble tomb in one of the church's chapels. The very next morning, people began streaming in to light candles, to pray, to make vows, and to hang wax images at his tomb in fulfillment of their promises. The fame of his holiness and the people's devotion to him grew and grew, until there was hardly anyone in trouble who would pray to any other saint. They called him -- and still call him -- Saint Ciappelletto, and they swear that God has worked many miracles through him, and continues to work them every day for anyone who devoutly seeks his help.

Thus lived and died Master Cepperello da Prato, and became a saint, as you have heard. I wouldn't want to deny the possibility that he might actually be among the blessed in God's presence, because even though his life was wicked and depraved, he might have shown such genuine contrition at the very end that God took pity on him and welcomed him into His kingdom. But since that's hidden from us, I'll go by what we can see, and on that basis I'd say he's far more likely in the hands of the devil in Hell than in Paradise.

And if that is the case, we can see from it how incredibly generous God's lovingkindness is toward us. He pays no attention to our mistakes, but only to the sincerity of our faith. When we unknowingly choose as our go-between an enemy of God -- thinking he is God's friend -- God hears our prayers just as graciously as if we had turned to a truly holy intercessor.

And so, that through His grace we may all be kept safe and sound during these troubled times, in this happy company of ours, let us praise His name -- in which we began our storytelling -- and hold Him in reverence, and commend ourselves to Him whenever we are in need, trusting that we will always be heard."

And with that, she fell silent.
