## Day 3, Story 8

*Ferondo swallows a mysterious powder and is buried for dead. While the abbot who drugged him enjoys his wife, Ferondo is locked in a dark cell and told he's in Purgatory. Eventually he's "resurrected" and raises a child the abbot fathered as his own.*

When Emilia's long story came to an end — though no one in the group thought it had dragged on at all, given how many twists and turns it contained — the queen signaled to Lauretta with a nod, and she began: "Dear ladies, I have a true story to tell you that sounds more like a tall tale than anything that actually happened. It came to mind just now, hearing about someone being mourned and buried in another person's place. My story is about a living man who was entombed as dead, and who later came to believe — along with everyone else — that he had risen from the grave. Because of this, the man was practically worshipped as a saint, when really he should have been thrown in prison.

So then — there was once in Tuscany (and still is, for that matter) an abbey tucked away in a fairly remote location, the kind you see plenty of in that part of the country. The monk who'd been made abbot there was a very holy man in every respect — except when it came to women. In that department, he carried on so carefully that almost no one even suspected him, let alone caught him in the act. Everyone thought he was the most devout and upright man alive.

Now, it happened that the abbot struck up a close friendship with a very wealthy farmer named Ferondo — a dense, dull-witted blockhead if ever there was one. The abbot tolerated his company mainly because Ferondo's sheer stupidity amused him from time to time. In the course of their acquaintance, however, the abbot noticed that Ferondo had a very beautiful wife, and he fell so madly in love with her that he could think of nothing else, day or night. But when he learned that Ferondo, simpleton though he was about everything else, was sharp enough when it came to loving and guarding his wife, the abbot very nearly despaired of ever having her.

Still, he was a resourceful man. He worked things so that Ferondo started coming to the abbey gardens with his wife to enjoy themselves, and there the abbot would hold forth, very demurely, on the blessedness of eternal life and the pious deeds of saints gone by. He did this so effectively that the wife developed a desire to confess to him, and she asked Ferondo's permission to do so — which he gave.

So the lady came to make her confession, much to the abbot's delight. She sat down at his feet and, before getting into anything else, began like this: "Father, if God had given me a proper husband — or no husband at all — it might be easy for me, with your guidance, to set out on the road you say leads to eternal life. But considering what Ferondo is, and what an idiot he is, I might as well call myself a widow even though I'm married. Because as long as he's alive, I can't have another husband, and fool though he is, he's insanely jealous of me for absolutely no reason. My life with him is nothing but misery and torment. So before I get to the rest of my confession, I'm begging you as earnestly as I can — please give me some advice about this. Because if I can't find some relief here, then no amount of confession or good works is going to help me."

This speech delighted the abbot enormously. It seemed like fortune had thrown the door wide open for him. "My daughter," he said, "I can well believe it must be a terrible burden for a lovely, refined woman like yourself to be saddled with a blockhead for a husband — but it's even worse to have a jealous one. Since you've got both, I can easily believe what you say about your suffering. But to be frank, I see only one possible remedy: Ferondo must be cured of his jealousy. I know exactly how to make the medicine that will cure him — provided you can keep what I'm about to tell you a secret."

"Don't worry about that, Father," the lady answered. "I'd sooner die than repeat anything you tell me not to. But how can it be done?"

"If we want him cured," said the abbot, "he'll need to go to Purgatory."

"But how can he go there while he's still alive?" she asked.

"He'll have to die first," the abbot replied. "He'll go to Purgatory, and once he's suffered enough penance to purge him of his jealousy, we'll pray to God with certain special prayers to restore him to life — and He will."

"So I'd be a widow?" said the lady.

"Yes, for a time," the abbot answered. "But during that time, you must take care not to remarry, because God would take that very badly. And when Ferondo comes back, you'd have to return to him — and he'd be more jealous than ever."

"Well," she said, "as long as he's cured of this affliction and I don't have to spend the rest of my life in a cage, I'm willing. Do as you see fit."

"And I will," said the abbot. "But what reward do I get for such a service?"

"Whatever you like, Father, as long as it's within my power. But what could someone like me possibly offer a man like you?"

"Madam," the abbot replied, "you can do no less for me than what I'm about to do for you. Just as I'm prepared to act for your well-being and comfort, you can do something that will be the saving of my life."

"If that's the case," she said, "I'm ready."

"Then," said the abbot, "you must give me your love and let me have you. I'm burning up with desire for you."

The lady was stunned. "Good Lord, Father — what are you asking me? I thought you were a saint! Is this how holy men behave when women come to them for counsel?"

"Don't be so surprised, my dear," the abbot replied. "Holiness doesn't diminish one bit from this — holiness lives in the soul, and what I'm asking involves the body. But in any case, your dazzling beauty has such power over me that love compels me to speak plainly. And I'll tell you something: you should take pride in your beauty above all other women, knowing that it pleases even holy men, who are accustomed to gazing on the beauties of heaven. Besides, abbot though I am, I'm a man like any other — and not old yet, as you can see. This shouldn't be a hardship for you. In fact, you should welcome it, because while Ferondo is away in Purgatory, I'll keep you company every night and give you all the comfort he should have been providing. No one will ever find out, because everyone already thinks of me exactly the way you just did — and even more so. Don't reject this grace that God is sending you. There are plenty of women who'd jump at what I'm offering, and it will be yours if you're wise enough to take my advice. Besides, I have beautiful and precious jewels that I intend to give to no one but you. Come now, my sweet hope — do for me what I so willingly do for you."

The lady hung her head, not knowing how to refuse him, though it didn't feel right to give in either. The abbot, seeing her hesitate and sensing she was already half-persuaded, pressed his case with a flood of additional arguments until he convinced her that she'd be doing the right thing. She agreed, blushing, that she was ready to do whatever he wished — but only after Ferondo had been sent to Purgatory.

"Excellent," said the abbot, beaming. "We'll arrange to send him there right away. Just make sure he comes to visit me at the abbey tomorrow or the next day." With that, he slipped a beautiful ring onto her hand and sent her off. The lady was pleased with the gift and, looking forward to more, rejoined her companions. She spent the walk home regaling them with marvelous tales of the abbot's sanctity.

A few days later, Ferondo came to the abbey. The moment the abbot saw him, he set his plan in motion. He found a powder of extraordinary potency that he'd obtained in the East from a great prince, who swore it was the very stuff used by the Old Man of the Mountain whenever he wanted to put someone to sleep and transport them to his paradise, or bring them back again. Depending on the dose, it would make the person who took it sleep for a shorter or longer period, as deeply as death itself — no one would think there was any life left in them.

The abbot measured out enough to knock a man out for three days, dissolved it in a glass of cloudy wine, and gave it to Ferondo to drink in his cell. Ferondo suspected nothing. Then the abbot brought him out to the cloister and, along with some of his monks, started teasing him and making fun of his usual foolishness. Before long, the powder kicked in: a sudden, overwhelming drowsiness seized Ferondo. He nodded off while still on his feet, and then toppled over, fast asleep.

The abbot put on a great show of alarm. He had Ferondo's clothes loosened, sent for cold water to splash on his face, and tried every other remedy he could think of — as if he were trying to revive a man struck down by some stomach ailment or other mysterious affliction. When none of it worked, the monks checked his pulse, found no sign of life, and concluded unanimously that he was dead.

Word was sent to Ferondo's wife and relatives, who all came rushing over. The lady wept for a while with her kinswomen, and then the abbot had Ferondo placed, fully dressed, in a tomb. The wife went home, announcing that she intended to devote herself entirely to raising the little son she'd had with Ferondo, and settled in to manage the household and the estate he'd left behind.

That night, the abbot rose quietly, and with the help of a Bolognese monk he trusted completely — who had conveniently arrived from Bologna that very day — he lifted Ferondo out of the tomb and carried him down to a pitch-dark vault that served as a prison for monks who'd committed serious offenses. There they stripped off his clothes, dressed him in a monk's habit, laid him on a pile of straw, and left him to sleep it off. The Bolognese monk had been thoroughly briefed on what to do, and no one else knew a thing about the plan. He settled in to wait for Ferondo to wake up.

The next day, the abbot went to pay a condolence visit to the lady's house, accompanied by several of his monks. He found her dressed in black and grief-stricken. After comforting her for a while, he gently reminded her of her promise. The lady, finding herself free of both Ferondo and everyone else's scrutiny — and noticing another fine ring on the abbot's finger — said she was ready, and they arranged for him to come to her that very night.

So when night fell, the abbot disguised himself in Ferondo's clothes, took his trusted monk along as lookout, and went to her house. He lay with her in the utmost pleasure and delight until morning, then returned to the abbey. After that first visit, he made the same trip many, many times. Occasionally someone from the village would spot him coming or going, and they assumed it was Ferondo's ghost wandering the countryside doing penance. Before long, all sorts of wild stories were circulating among the simple country folk — and more than once these reports reached Ferondo's wife, who knew perfectly well what was really going on.

As for Ferondo — when he finally came to and found himself in a place he didn't recognize, the Bolognese monk burst in making a horrible racket, grabbed him, and beat him soundly with a rod. Ferondo, crying and howling, could only say, "Where am I?"

"You're in Purgatory," the monk told him.

"What?" cried Ferondo. "I'm dead?"

"You sure are," the monk confirmed.

At this Ferondo began wailing about himself, his wife, and his child, saying the most absurd things imaginable. Then the monk brought him some food and drink. Ferondo stared at it. "Wait — dead people eat?"

"They do," said the monk. "What I'm bringing you is what your wife — your former wife, that is — sent to the church this morning to have masses said for your soul. God has decreed that it be passed along to you."

"God bless her!" said Ferondo. "I always loved that woman. Before I died, I used to hold her in my arms all night long and just kiss her and kiss her — and I did the other thing too, whenever the mood struck me." Then, being famished, he fell to eating and drinking. The wine didn't taste so great, and he said, "Damn her! Why didn't she give the priest the wine from the good barrel — the one by the wall?"

When he'd finished eating, the monk grabbed him again and gave him another thorough beating with the same rod. Ferondo roared in pain. "What are you doing that for?"

"Because God has commanded that you be beaten twice a day," said the monk.

"But why?" asked Ferondo.

"Because you were jealous — and you had the best wife in the whole country."

"Well, you're not wrong about that," said Ferondo. "She really was the sweetest thing — sweeter than syrup. But I didn't know God minded if a man was jealous. If I'd known, I never would have been."

"You should have figured that out while you were down there among the living," said the monk, "and mended your ways. And if it so happens that you ever go back, make sure you remember these beatings well enough that you never act jealous again."

"Wait — the dead can go back?" said Ferondo.

"Some can," said the monk. "If God wills it."

"Well!" cried Ferondo. "If I ever get back there, I'll be the best husband in the world. I'll never hit her or say a mean word to her — except about that lousy wine she sent up here this morning, and about not sending any candles, so I had to eat in the dark."

"No, she sent plenty of candles," said the monk. "They were all burned during the masses."

"Oh, right," said Ferondo. "Well, if I do get back, I'll let her do whatever she wants. But tell me — who are you? Why are you treating me like this?"

"I'm dead too," said the monk. "I'm from Sardinia. While I was alive, I used to praise my master extravagantly for being jealous, so God sentenced me to this punishment: I have to feed you, give you water, and beat you like this until God decides otherwise about you and me."

"Is there anyone else here besides us two?" Ferondo asked.

"Oh, thousands of people," said the monk. "But you can't see or hear them, and they can't see or hear you."

"How far are we from home?" asked Ferondo.

"Ha!" said the monk. "More miles than you could shit in one sitting."

"Lord," said Ferondo. "That's far enough. We must be clean out of the world if it's all that."

And so Ferondo's time in "Purgatory" went on for a good ten months, filled with eating, drinking, and regular beatings, while the abbot faithfully visited the beautiful wife and had the time of his life with her. But eventually, as luck would have it, the lady found herself pregnant. She told the abbot immediately, and they both agreed that Ferondo needed to be recalled from Purgatory without delay and brought back to life, so she could claim the child was his.

That very night, the abbot had the Bolognese monk call out to Ferondo in a disguised voice: "Take heart, Ferondo! God is pleased to send you back to the world, where you'll have a son by your wife. See that you name him Benedict, because it's through the prayers of your holy abbot, and your wife, and for the love of Saint Benedict, that God grants you this favor."

Ferondo was overjoyed. "Wonderful! God bless Almighty God, and the abbot, and Saint Benedict, and my darling cheesy sweet honey wife!"

The abbot put enough of the powder in Ferondo's wine to knock him out for about four hours. Then, with the monk's help, he dressed Ferondo back in his own clothes and secretly returned him to the tomb where he'd been buried.

The next morning, at first light, Ferondo came to his senses. He saw a sliver of light — the first he'd seen in ten months — coming through a crack in the tomb, and he was certain he was alive again. He started hollering, "Let me out! Let me out!" and shoving his head against the lid of the tomb so hard that it shifted — it wasn't all that heavy — and he'd nearly pushed it off when the monks, just finished with morning prayers, came running. They recognized Ferondo's voice and saw him climbing out of the sepulcher. Terrified by the strangeness of it all, they bolted.

They ran to the abbot, who pretended to be rising from prayer. "My sons, have no fear," he said calmly. "Take up the cross and the holy water and follow me, so that we may witness what God, in His power, wishes to reveal to us." And that's exactly what they did.

Ferondo had emerged from the tomb looking deathly pale — which was only natural for a man who hadn't seen daylight in so long. The moment he spotted the abbot, he threw himself at his feet and said, "Father, it has been revealed to me that your prayers, along with those of Saint Benedict and my wife, have delivered me from the torments of Purgatory and restored me to life. I pray God gives you blessings now and forever."

"Praised be God's power!" said the abbot. "Go, my son, since He has sent you back. Comfort your wife, who has done nothing but weep since you departed this life, and from now on be a friend and servant of God."

"That's exactly what I was told," said Ferondo. "Just leave it to me — the second I find her, I'm going to kiss her so hard. You can't imagine how much I love that woman."

Left alone with his monks, the abbot put on a magnificent show of wonder at this "miracle" and had them sing a solemn hymn of thanks. As for Ferondo, he went back to his village, where everyone who saw him ran away in terror, the way people do when they see something unnatural. But he called them back and swore up and down that he had truly been raised from the dead. His wife pretended to be frightened of him too, but eventually the neighbors calmed down, saw that he really was alive, and started pelting him with questions.

Ferondo, acting as if he'd returned wiser than he'd left, answered every question and gave them news about the souls of their dead relatives, making up the most elaborate fables you've ever heard about how things worked in Purgatory. He told them all about the revelation he'd received from the mouth of "the Archangel Braggiel" right before he was raised up again.

He went home, took possession of his property again, and got his wife pregnant — or so he believed. As chance would have it, the timing worked out just right — at least for the sort of fools who think a woman is always pregnant for exactly nine months — and the lady gave birth to a boy, who was christened Benedict Ferondi.

Ferondo's return and his wild stories made nearly everyone believe he'd been raised from the dead, which boosted the abbot's reputation for holiness enormously. And Ferondo himself, having been thoroughly cured of his jealousy by all those beatings, never acted jealous again — just as the abbot had promised the lady he wouldn't. She was quite pleased about this and lived respectably with him, as she always had — though whenever she could arrange it conveniently, she was happy to spend time with the holy abbot, who had served her so well and so diligently in her hour of greatest need.