## Day 4, Story 7

Simona loves Pasquino. While they are together in a garden, he rubs a sage leaf against his teeth and drops dead. She is arrested, and when she tries to show the judge exactly how it happened, she dies the same way.


When Pamfilo had finished his story, the king -- showing not a trace of sympathy for Andreuola -- glanced at Emilia and signaled that it was her turn to follow the others. Without hesitation, she began:

"Dear friends, Pamfilo's story puts me in mind of one that is nothing like his in most respects, except for this: just as Andreuola lost her beloved in a garden, so did the woman I'm about to tell you about. And just as Andreuola was arrested, so was she -- though she freed herself from the law not through courage or defiance, but through an unexpected death of her own. As we've often said among ourselves, Love may prefer to set up residence in the houses of the wealthy, but that doesn't mean it refuses to rule the poor. On the contrary, Love sometimes shows its power so forcefully among humble people that it makes even the rich tremble. This will become clear -- or mostly clear -- from my story, which brings us back to our own city of Florence, from which we've wandered far today, roaming across the world and talking of so many different things.

Not so long ago, then, there lived in Florence a girl named Simona -- quite pretty and pleasant, considering her station. She was the daughter of a poor man, and she had to earn her own bread by spinning wool. But being poor in circumstances didn't mean she was poor in spirit, and she was perfectly willing to let Love into her heart. Love had been knocking for some time, through the charming words and attentive behavior of a young man no better off than she was -- a boy named Pasquino, who delivered wool for his master, a wool merchant, for her to spin.

Once she'd welcomed Love in, along with the pleasing image of this young man who loved her, she heaved a thousand sighs hotter than fire with every hank of yarn she wound around the spindle, thinking of the one who'd given it to her. Pasquino, for his part, developed a remarkably keen interest in making sure his master's wool was well spun. He supervised Simona's spinning far more closely than anyone else's, as if the yarn from her hands alone -- and no one else's -- would furnish the entire bolt of cloth. And so, with him pursuing and her delighting in being pursued, it happened that he grew bolder than usual and she shed much of her customary shyness, and they gave themselves to each other with equal enthusiasm. The pleasure they found was so great that neither one waited to be invited by the other -- they raced to be the one doing the inviting.

This happiness continued day after day, their desire only growing hotter with time, until one day Pasquino told Simona he'd like her to find a way to meet him at a certain garden, where they could be together more freely and with less risk of being noticed. Simona agreed. On Sunday, after lunch, she told her father she was going to the Church of San Gallo to earn indulgences, and instead she went to the garden Pasquino had named, bringing along a friend of hers called Lagina. There she found Pasquino waiting with a companion of his own, a fellow named Puccino -- though everyone called him Stramba. A spark immediately flew between Stramba and Lagina, so those two drifted off to one part of the garden to do as they pleased, while Simona and Pasquino withdrew to another.

In their part of the garden there was a large, magnificent bush of sage. They settled down at its base, made love, and afterward sat together happily for a long while, talking about a picnic they were planning to have there at their leisure. After a bit, Pasquino turned to the big sage bush, plucked a leaf from it, and began rubbing it against his teeth and gums. He said sage was excellent for cleaning your teeth after a meal.

He rubbed for a little while, then went back to talking about their picnic plans. But he hadn't been speaking long before his face began to change. Almost immediately, he lost his sight and his speech. And moments later, he was dead.

Simona burst into tears and screams, calling for Stramba and Lagina. They came running. When they saw Pasquino lying there, not just dead but already swelling up, his face and body covered in dark blotches, Stramba shouted: "You wicked woman! You poisoned him!"

He made such a commotion that the people living near the garden heard him and came running. They found Pasquino dead and bloated. Between Stramba's accusations and Simona's inability to explain herself -- she was half out of her mind with grief over the sudden death of her lover -- everyone concluded that Stramba was right: she must have poisoned him. She was seized and dragged off to the Provost's palace, still weeping uncontrollably.

There, at the insistence of Stramba and two more of Pasquino's friends who had shown up in the meantime -- fellows named Atticciato and Malagevole -- a judge immediately began questioning her about what had happened. But he couldn't find any evidence that she'd acted with malice or was guilty of anything. Since her account of the incident didn't quite make sense to him from words alone, he decided he needed to see the body and the scene for himself, exactly as she'd described it.

He had her brought -- without any fuss -- to where Pasquino's body still lay, swollen up like a barrel. He followed her there, marveling at the dead man's appearance, and asked her to show him exactly what had happened. So Simona walked up to the sage bush and told him the whole story. Then, to make it perfectly clear how it had all unfolded, she did exactly what Pasquino had done: she plucked a sage leaf and rubbed it against her teeth.

While Stramba and Atticciato and all of Pasquino's other friends stood there mocking her explanation as frivolous nonsense, denouncing her wickedness with increasing fury and demanding nothing less than that she be burned alive for her crime -- the wretched girl, devastated by the loss of her lover and terrified of the punishment they were screaming for, fell victim to the very same fate as Pasquino, struck down by the sage leaf she'd rubbed against her teeth.

She dropped dead, to the astonishment of everyone present.

O happy souls, whose fervent love and mortal lives both ended on the same day! Happier still, if you journeyed to the same place! And happiest of all -- at least to our way of thinking, we who remain behind among the living -- was Simona's soul: fortune would not allow her innocence to fall beneath the testimony of Stramba, Atticciato, and Malagevole, men who were probably just wool-carders or something equally lowly. Instead, fortune found her a far more honorable way out -- a death identical to her lover's -- to clear her name and follow the soul of her Pasquino, whom she had loved so dearly.

The judge stood there dumbfounded, as did everyone else, not knowing what to say. He was silent for a long time. Finally he collected himself and said: "It appears this sage is poisonous, which is not something sage normally is. But so that it can't harm anyone else, cut it down to the roots and burn it."

The garden's keeper set about doing this in the judge's presence, and no sooner had he chopped the great bush down to ground level than the cause of the two deaths became clear. Underneath the bush was an enormous toad, and they concluded that its venomous breath had poisoned the sage. No one dared go near the creature, so they piled a great mound of brushwood around it and burned it alive, along with the sage.

And so ended the judge's inquest into the death of poor Pasquino. He and his Simona, both still swollen, were buried by Stramba, Atticciato, Guccio Imbratta, and Malagevole in the Church of St. Paul, where it happened they were parishioners."
