## Day 6, Story 8

*Fresco advises his vain niece that if she really can't stand the sight of disagreeable people, she should stay away from mirrors.*

Filostrato's story gave the listening ladies a little jolt at first -- you could see it in the modest blush that crept across their faces. But then they started exchanging glances and, barely suppressing their giggles, listened through the rest of it with smiles tugging at their lips. When he finished, the queen turned to Emilia and told her to go next.

Emilia sighed as though someone had just shaken her awake from a daydream and began: "Well, dear girls, a long train of thought had carried my mind somewhere else entirely, so to obey our queen I'll settle for a story that's probably slighter than what I might have come up with if I'd been paying attention. But here it is -- the tale of a foolish young woman whose uncle tried to set her straight with a witty remark, though she wasn't smart enough to get it.

A man named Fresco da Celatico had a niece whom everyone called Ciesca. She had a pretty enough face and figure -- though nothing like the angelic beauties we hear about in stories -- but she thought so highly of herself and considered herself so superior that she'd gotten into the habit of finding fault with every single man and woman she laid eyes on. Nothing anyone did ever met her standards. She never once turned that critical eye on herself, of course, even though she was, in truth, more irritating, more difficult, and more petulant than any other woman alive. On top of all this, she was so full of pride that it would have been excessive in a member of the French royal family.

When she walked down the street, she put on so many airs and made so many sour faces that you'd have thought she was getting a whiff of sewage from every person she passed.

Setting aside her many other tiresome and obnoxious habits, one day she came home to where Fresco was sitting, plopped herself down beside him, and proceeded to puff and sigh and grimace as though she'd been deeply put upon. "Ciesca," he said, "what's all this? It's a holiday -- why are you home so early?"

She answered, practically swooning with affectation, "Well, I came back because I simply cannot believe there have ever been so many disagreeable and tiresome people in this city as there are today -- men and women both. Not a single person passed me in the street who didn't make my skin crawl. I honestly don't think there's a woman in the world who finds it more unbearable to look at ugly people than I do. I came home just to spare myself the sight."

"My girl," said Fresco, who found his niece's airs absolutely insufferable, "if disagreeable people are really so painful for you to look at, then do yourself a favor and never look in a mirror."

But Ciesca, who was emptier than a hollow reed despite believing herself a match for King Solomon in brains, completely failed to grasp what Fresco actually meant. She said that she intended to look in the mirror just as much as any other woman, thank you very much. And so she went right on being a fool -- and as far as I know, she's a fool still.