## Day 8, Story 2

*The parish priest of Varlungo sleeps with Mistress Belcolore and leaves her his cloak as a pledge. Then, after borrowing a mortar from her, he sends it back with a demand for the return of his cloak -- left, he claims, merely "as a token." The good woman grudgingly gives it back.*

Everyone -- men and women alike -- approved of what Gulfardo had done to the greedy Milanese lady. The queen turned to Panfilo with a smile and told him to go next, and he began:

"Fair ladies, it occurs to me to tell you a little story aimed at people who constantly offend against us layfolk without any possibility of retaliation -- I'm talking about the clergy. They've practically declared a holy war on our wives, and whenever they manage to get one of them in bed, they act as though they've won the same forgiveness of sins as if they'd dragged the Sultan himself in chains from Alexandria to Avignon. Meanwhile, the wretched laymen can't do the same back to them -- though we do take out our frustrations on the priests' mothers, sisters, mistresses, and daughters, going after them with no less enthusiasm than they show toward our wives. With that in mind, I want to tell you about a little village love affair -- more amusing for its ending than it is long in the telling -- from which you may draw the useful lesson that priests should not always be taken at their word.

You should know, then, that there was once at Varlungo -- a village quite near here, as you ladies either know or may have heard -- a worthy priest who was vigorous in his personal attentions to the ladies. Though he wasn't the greatest reader, he did a fine job regaling his parishioners with uplifting sayings and proverbs under the elm tree on Sundays. And whenever the menfolk went away on business, he visited their wives more diligently than any priest who'd served there before him, bringing them little gifts and holy water and the odd candle end, sometimes right to their front doors.

Now, among all his favorite female parishioners, one pleased him above all the rest -- a woman called Mistress Belcolore, the wife of a farmer who went by the name Bentivegna del Mazzo. She was a lively, buxom country girl with a tan complexion and a tight figure, as good at grinding the grain as any woman alive. What's more, she could play the tambourine, sing "The Water Runs Down to the Ravine," and lead a dance with a pretty handkerchief in her hand better than any woman in the neighborhood. All of which drove the priest so wild with desire that he was practically losing his mind over her. He'd prowl around all day just to catch a glimpse of her. When he spotted her in church on a Sunday morning, he'd belt out the Kyrie and the Sanctus with such intensity -- trying to show off his vocal range -- that it sounded more like a donkey braying. But when she wasn't there, he rushed right through that part of the service. Still, he was careful enough that neither Bentivegna nor any of the neighbors suspected a thing.

To win Mistress Belcolore over, he sent her presents from time to time -- sometimes a head of garlic (he had the finest in the whole countryside, from a garden he tended with his own hands), sometimes a basket of peas or a bunch of chives or spring onions. And whenever he got the chance, he'd give her meaningful looks and toss out a flirty comment or two. But she played the prude, pretending not to notice and sailing past him with a prim expression. The priest couldn't make any headway.

One day, as he was strolling through the neighborhood around noon, he ran into Bentivegna del Mazzo driving a donkey loaded with goods. He stopped him and asked where he was going. "Well, Father," said the farmer, "to tell you the truth, I'm heading into town on business. I'm bringing these things to Squire Bonaccorri da Ginestreto so he can help me out with some summons the judge sent me through his lawyer -- something about a mandatory court appearance."

The priest was thrilled to hear this. "Good for you, my son," he said. "Go with my blessing and come back soon. And if you happen to see Lapuccio or Naldino, don't forget to tell them to send me those leather straps for my flails."

Bentivegna said he'd take care of it and went on his way toward Florence. The priest immediately decided that now was his chance with Belcolore. He set off at a brisk pace and didn't stop until he reached her house. He went right in and called out, "God bless this house! Anyone home?"

Belcolore, who was up in the hayloft, called down, "Oh, Father -- welcome! But what are you doing out wandering in this heat?"

"God willing, I came to spend a little time with you," he said, "since I ran into your husband on his way to town."

Belcolore came downstairs, sat down, and started sorting through cabbage seeds that her husband had threshed out earlier. The priest said, "So, Belcolore -- are you really going to keep letting me die for love of you like this?"

She laughed. "What am I doing to you?"

"You're not doing anything to me," he said, "but you won't let me do to you what I'd like to do -- and what God himself commands."

"Oh, come on!" said Belcolore. "Priests do that sort of thing?"

"We absolutely do," he said, "just as well as other men. And why not? I'll tell you something -- we do far better work. And do you know why? Because we grind with a full head of water. But seriously, it'll be very much worth your while if you just hold still and let me get to it."

"And what exactly does 'worth my while' mean?" she asked. "You priests are all stingier than the devil."

"I don't know -- you tell me," he said. "What do you want? A pair of shoes? A silk headband? A nice scarlet sash? Name it."

"Oh, please!" said Belcolore. "I've got plenty of all that. But if you really care for me so much, do me a favor and I'll do what you want."

"Tell me what you need," said the priest. "I'll do it gladly."

"I have to go to Florence on Saturday," she said, "to return the wool I've spun and get my spinning wheel fixed. If you'll lend me five silver crowns -- I know you have them -- I can get my good blue dress out of pawn, and my Sunday belt too, the one from my dowry. You see, I can't go to church or anywhere decent without them. And after that, I'll do whatever you want. Always."

"God give me a good year," said the priest, "but I don't have the money on me right now. Trust me, though -- before Saturday comes, I'll make sure you get it, and gladly."

"Sure," said Belcolore. "You're all the same -- big promises, and then nothing. You think you're going to treat me the way you treated Biliuzza, who ran off with the guitar player? Not a chance -- she turned into a common tramp because of stunts like that. If you don't have the money on you, go home and get it."

"Oh, come on," the priest said. "Don't make me walk all the way home now. Can't you see my luck -- you're here alone. But by the time I get back, somebody else might be around to get in our way. I don't know when I'll find this good an opportunity again."

"That's fine," she said. "If you want to go get it, go. If not, do without."

The priest, seeing she wasn't going to cooperate without some guarantee -- whereas he would have been perfectly happy to proceed on faith alone -- said, "Look, you don't believe I'll bring you the money. So you'll trust me, I'll leave you this blue cloth cloak of mine as a pledge."

Belcolore looked up. "That cloak? What's it worth?"

"What's it worth?" said the priest. "I'll have you know this is cloth of Douai -- practically cloth of Throuai -- and some folks around here would even call it Fouray. It cost me seven crowns in hard cash from Lotto the broker not two weeks ago, and Buglietto -- who you know is an excellent judge of fabric -- tells me I got it at least five shillings under market price."

"Really!" said Belcolore. "Well, God help me, I never would have guessed. But give it here first."

The good priest, whose crossbow was already cocked and loaded, pulled off the cloak and handed it over. She put it safely away and said, "Come on, Father -- let's go to the barn. Nobody ever comes out there."

And so they did. There the priest covered her in the most enthusiastic kisses you ever saw, made her a kinswoman of God Almighty -- so to speak -- and had a grand time with her for a good long while. Afterward, he took his leave and headed back to the rectory in nothing but his cassock, looking for all the world like he was coming from officiating at a wedding.

Back home, he started thinking about how all the candle ends he collected as offerings in an entire year weren't worth half of five crowns, and it dawned on him that he'd made a bad deal. He regretted leaving the cloak behind and began scheming for a way to get it back without paying. Being a clever enough fellow in a small-minded way, he soon hit on the perfect plan -- and it worked beautifully.

The next day was a holiday, and he sent a neighbor's boy over to Mistress Belcolore's house with a message: would she be kind enough to lend him her stone mortar? Binguccio dal Poggio and Nuto Buglietti were coming for dinner, and he needed to make sauce. She sent it over. Then, around dinnertime, the priest waited until he knew Bentivegna and Belcolore were sitting down to eat. He called his clerk and said, "Take this mortar back to Belcolore, and tell her: 'His Reverence thanks you kindly and asks you to send back the cloak that the boy left as a token.'"

The clerk went to her house, found her at the table with Bentivegna, set down the mortar, and delivered the priest's message. When Belcolore heard him asking for the cloak back, she was about to give the clerk a piece of her mind, but her husband cut in with a sour look: "You took a pledge from the Father? I swear to Christ, I've half a mind to smack you one. Go on -- give it back to him right now, and the pox take you! And from now on, whatever his Reverence asks for -- even if he wants our donkey -- don't you dare say no."

Belcolore got up, grumbling, pulled the cloak out of the chest, and handed it to the clerk. "Tell his Reverence this from me," she said. "Belcolore says she swears to God you'll never pound sauce in her mortar again. You certainly didn't do her any great honor this time around."

The clerk took the cloak back and relayed her message to the priest, who laughed and said, "Tell her, next time you see her, that if she won't lend me her mortar, I won't lend her my pestle -- and that makes us even."

Bentivegna figured his wife had said what she said because he'd scolded her, and thought nothing more of it. But Belcolore held a grudge against the priest and kept him at arm's length all the way through harvest time. Then, after he threatened to have her thrown into the mouth of Lucifer himself, she got scared enough to make her peace with him over new wine and roast chestnuts, and from then on they had a fine time together whenever the mood struck them. Instead of the five crowns, the priest had new parchment put on her tambourine and a set of jingle bells strung on it, and with that she was satisfied."
