## Day 8, Story 3

*Calandrino, Bruno, and Buffalmacco go hunting along the Mugnone stream for the heliotrope -- a stone that supposedly makes its bearer invisible. Calandrino thinks he's found it. He staggers home loaded down with rocks, and when his wife sees him and scolds him, he flies into a rage and beats her -- then tells his friends the whole story, which of course they know better than he does.*

When Panfilo finished his story -- the ladies had laughed so hard at it that they were still laughing -- the queen told Elisa to go next. Still giggling, she began:

"I don't know, charming ladies, if my little story -- which is every bit as true as it is funny -- will make you laugh as hard as Panfilo's did. But I'll do my best.

In our city, which has always been full of colorful characters and eccentric types, there lived not so long ago a painter named Calandrino. He was a simpleton, with the strangest habits you ever saw. He spent most of his time in the company of two other painters -- one called Bruno, the other Buffalmacco. These two were lively, entertaining fellows, but also shrewd and sharp-witted. They hung around with Calandrino because his peculiar ways and gullibility gave them endless amusement.

There was also living in Florence at this time a hugely entertaining young man named Maso del Saggio, who was remarkably clever and could talk his way into or out of anything. When Maso heard about Calandrino's legendary simple-mindedness, he decided to have some fun at his expense by feeding him some outrageous story.

One day Maso happened to find Calandrino in the church of San Giovanni, staring intently at the carvings and paintings on the tabernacle above the altar, which had only recently been installed. Maso decided the time and place were perfect for what he had in mind. He filled in a friend on his plan, and the two of them sidled over to where Calandrino was sitting alone. Pretending not to notice him, they struck up a conversation about the magical properties of various gemstones, with Maso holding forth as authoritatively as if he were a famous jeweler.

Calandrino perked up his ears. After a while, seeing that the conversation wasn't meant to be private, he stood up and joined them -- which was exactly what Maso was hoping for. Continuing his lecture, Calandrino asked him where these miraculous stones could be found.

Maso replied that most of them came from Berlinzone, a city in the land of the Basques, in a country called Bengodi -- the Land of Plenty. There, he explained, the grapevines were tied up with sausage links, you could buy a goose for a penny with a gosling thrown in for free, and there was an entire mountain made of grated Parmesan cheese. On top of this mountain lived people who did nothing all day but make macaroni and ravioli, cook them in capon broth, and roll them down the mountainside, where whoever grabbed the most got the most. And nearby there ran a stream of the finest white wine ever tasted, without a drop of water in it.

"Oh, wonderful!" cried Calandrino. "That sounds like paradise! But tell me -- what do they do with the capons they boil for the broth?"

"The Basques eat them all," said Maso.

"Have you ever been there?" asked Calandrino.

"Have I been there?" said Maso. "If I've been once, I've been a thousand times."

"And how far away is it?" asked Calandrino.

"A million miles or more," said Maso. "You could count all night and still not reach the number."

"Then it must be even farther than the Abruzzi," said Calandrino.

"Oh, a bit farther, yes," said Maso.

Calandrino, simpleton that he was, heard Maso say all this with a perfectly straight face and without the slightest hint of a smile, and believed every word of it as though it were the most self-evident truth in the world. Taking it all as gospel, he said, "Well, that's a bit too far for my budget. But if it were closer, I'd definitely go with you sometime, just to see the macaroni come tumbling down the hill and stuff myself with it. But tell me -- are any of those magical stones found in these parts?"

"Yes, indeed," answered Maso. "There are two kinds of exceptionally powerful stones found right here. The first are the sandstone blocks of Settignano and Montisci, which, when they're shaped into millstones, produce flour -- and that's why they have a saying in those parts: 'Grace comes from God, and millstones from Montisci.' There's such an enormous supply of this sandstone that it's as cheap here as emeralds are among the people over in Bengodi, where they have mountains of emeralds bigger than Mount Morello, and they glow in the dark, I'll have you know. And listen to this: if someone were to set perfect, undrilled millstones into rings and bring them to the Sultan, he could name his price.

"The other stone is what we jewelers call the heliotrope. It has truly extraordinary powers: whoever carries it on his person becomes completely invisible to everyone else, for as long as he's holding it."

"Those are incredible powers!" said Calandrino. "But where is this second stone found?"

Maso said it was commonly found in the Mugnone -- the stream right outside Florence.

"How big is it?" asked Calandrino. "And what color?"

"They come in all sizes," said Maso, "some bigger, some smaller. But they're all nearly black."

Calandrino filed all of this away in his mind. Then, pretending he had other business to attend to, he said goodbye to Maso, secretly determined to go look for this stone. But first he decided he shouldn't do it without Bruno and Buffalmacco, his two closest friends. So he set about looking for them, wanting to get the search underway immediately, before anyone else beat them to it. He spent the entire rest of the morning hunting for them. Finally, well past noon, he remembered they were working at the convent in the Faenza district. Dropping everything else, he practically ran all the way there despite the blazing heat.

As soon as he spotted them, he called out: "Listen, friends, if you'll just hear me out, we can become the richest men in all of Florence! I've learned from a very reliable source that there's a stone in the Mugnone, and whoever carries it becomes invisible. I say we go find it right away, before anyone else does. We'll definitely find it -- I know what it looks like. And once we have it, all we have to do is walk over to the money changers' tables -- you know, the ones that are always loaded with silver coins and gold florins -- and help ourselves to as much as we want. Nobody will see us! We'll be rich overnight, instead of spending the rest of our lives smearing paint on walls like a couple of snails!"

Bruno and Buffalmacco, hearing this, started laughing behind their hands. They exchanged sidelong glances, put on expressions of astonishment, and praised Calandrino's plan as brilliant. Then Bruno asked what the stone was called.

Calandrino, blockhead that he was, had already forgotten the name. "What do we care about the name," he said, "when we know what it does? I say we skip the chatter and go find it."

"All right then," said Bruno, "what does it look like?"

"They come in all shapes," said Calandrino, "but they're all nearly black. So the way I see it, we just pick up every black stone we find until we hit the right one. Come on, let's not waste any more time!"

"Hold on a minute," said Bruno. He turned to Buffalmacco and said, "I think Calandrino's got a point. But this isn't the right time to go looking. The sun is high and shining straight down on the Mugnone, which means it's dried out all the stones. The ones that look black in the morning, when they're still wet, look white in the heat of the day. Besides, it's a workday, and there'll be all kinds of people along the banks for one reason or another. If they see us, they might figure out what we're up to and try the same thing -- and then the stone could end up in their hands, and we'd have lost everything by trying to rush it. If you agree, this seems like a job for a morning -- when you can better tell the black stones from the white ones -- and a holiday, when there won't be anyone around to see us."

Buffalmacco agreed with Bruno, and Calandrino went along with it. They settled on the following Sunday morning. Above all else, Calandrino begged them not to breathe a word of this to a living soul -- he'd been told about it in strictest confidence, he said. Then he shared everything he'd heard about the wondrous land of Bengodi, swearing up and down that it was all true.

As soon as Calandrino left, the other two agreed on their plan. Calandrino could barely contain himself as he waited out the week. When Sunday morning finally came, he got up at the crack of dawn and roused his friends. The three of them went out through the San Gallo gate, descended into the bed of the Mugnone, and started searching downstream for the stone.

Calandrino, being the most eager of the three, charged out ahead, darting nimbly this way and that. Every time he spotted a black stone, he pounced on it, scooped it up, and stuffed it inside his shirt. His companions followed along behind, picking up a stone here and there. Before long, Calandrino's shirt was bulging. So he gathered up the skirts of his tunic -- which wasn't cut in the short Flemish style -- tucked them firmly into his belt all the way around, and made himself a big pouch. That filled up too before long. Then he did the same with his cloak, and soon that was stuffed with stones as well.

When the other two saw that Calandrino was fully loaded up and dinnertime was approaching, Bruno said to Buffalmacco, following the plan they'd agreed on: "Where's Calandrino?"

Buffalmacco, who could see Calandrino standing right nearby, made a show of looking around in every direction. "I don't know. He was right in front of us just a second ago."

"A second ago?" said Bruno. "I'll bet you anything he's already at home eating his dinner! He's left us here like idiots, picking through black rocks in the Mugnone."

"Well," said Buffalmacco, "he did us one right, then, to trick us and leave us here -- since we were stupid enough to believe him in the first place. Honestly, who but the two of us would be gullible enough to think you could find an invisibility stone in the Mugnone?"

Calandrino, hearing all this, was beside himself with joy. He concluded that the heliotrope must have fallen into his hands and that its power was already working -- they were looking right at him and couldn't see him! Overjoyed at his incredible luck, he decided not to say a word and just head home. He turned around and started walking back.

Buffalmacco saw him go and said to Bruno, "What should we do? Shall we leave too?"

"Let's go," said Bruno. "But I swear to God, Calandrino will never pull one over on me again. If I were as close to him right now as I've been all morning, I'd give him such a whack on the shin with this rock that he'd remember this trick for a month."

And in the same breath, he let the stone fly and caught Calandrino right in the shin. Calandrino felt the pain, lifted his foot, and started puffing and blowing -- but kept his mouth shut and pressed on.

Then Buffalmacco picked up one of the flints he'd collected and said to Bruno, "Look at this nice stone. I wish it would hit Calandrino right in the back." He let it fly and nailed Calandrino with a solid thump right in the small of his back.

In short, the two of them kept this up all the way back along the Mugnone -- a comment here, a thrown rock there -- pelting Calandrino the whole way to the San Gallo gate. There they tossed aside whatever stones they were still carrying and stopped to have a word with the customs officers, whom they'd tipped off in advance. The officers pretended not to see Calandrino and let him pass, roaring with laughter at the joke.

Calandrino marched straight home without stopping. His house was near the Canto alla Macina, and fortune was so kind to the prank that nobody stopped him, either along the stream or through the city streets -- though this was mostly because almost everyone was at dinner. So he reached his house still carrying his enormous load of rocks.

As luck would have it, his wife -- a good-looking, respectable woman named Monna Tessa -- was standing at the top of the stairs. Annoyed at how long he'd been gone, the moment she saw him she started scolding: "Where the devil have you been? Everyone in the city has already finished eating, and here you come strolling home!"

Calandrino heard this and realized he'd been seen. He was overwhelmed with fury and heartbreak. "You wretched woman!" he screamed. "You were here? You've ruined me! But by the faith of God, you'll pay for this!"

He ran upstairs to a little room and dumped out the enormous pile of stones he'd carried home. Then, in a blind rage, he went after his wife. He grabbed her by the hair, threw her to the floor, and kicked and punched her everywhere he could reach, for as long as his arms and legs held out. He left not a hair on her head unpulled or a bone in her body unbruised, and it did her no good at all to beg for mercy with her hands clasped together.

Meanwhile, Bruno and Buffalmacco had spent a few minutes laughing with the gatekeepers, then followed Calandrino home at a leisurely pace. Arriving at his door, they heard the savage beating he was giving his wife. They called up to him, pretending they'd just gotten back.

Calandrino came to the window, sweating and red-faced with rage, and asked them to come up. They went upstairs, putting on serious faces, and found the room full of stones and the wife in one corner -- hair torn out, clothes ripped, her face black and blue with bruises, crying pitifully -- while Calandrino sat in the other corner with his belt undone, panting like a man who'd run a marathon.

They took all this in for a moment, then said, "What's all this, Calandrino? Are you building a wall? What are all these rocks? And Monna Tessa -- what happened to her? It looks like you beat her. What is going on?"

Calandrino, worn out by the weight of the stones, the fury of the beating he'd given his wife, and his grief at the good luck he believed he'd lost, couldn't catch enough breath to string a sentence together. When he didn't answer quickly enough, Buffalmacco continued: "Listen, Calandrino, whatever other reason you had for being angry, you shouldn't have played us for fools the way you did. You talked us into going to search for this magic stone, and then you ditched us in the Mugnone like a pair of idiots and took off without even saying goodbye. We're not happy about this. And I can tell you right now -- this is the last trick you'll ever play on us."

At this, Calandrino forced himself to speak. "Don't be mad, friends -- it's not what you think. Unlucky wretch that I am, I actually found the stone! Listen -- I'll prove it. When you first started asking each other where I was, I was standing less than ten yards away from you. But you started walking off and couldn't see me, so I went on ahead and came back here, keeping just a little in front of you the whole way."

Then, starting from the very beginning, he told them everything they'd said and done, first to last, and showed them the bruises on his shins and back from the stones they'd thrown. "And I'll tell you something else," he went on. "When I came through the gate carrying all these stones you see here -- not a word was said to me. And you know how those gatekeepers are, always wanting to inspect everything and hassle you. On top of that, I ran into several friends and neighbors along the way -- people who would normally stop me for a chat and invite me for a drink -- and not one of them said a single word to me. Not even half a word! Because they couldn't see me!

"But then, when I finally got home, this damned devil of a woman appeared right in front of me -- and as you know, women make everything lose its power. So I, who could have been the luckiest man in all of Florence, am now the unluckiest. That's why I beat her for as long as I could move my fists, and I don't know what's stopping me from slitting her throat right now. Cursed be the day I first laid eyes on her, and the day she set foot in this house!"

And with that, he worked himself into a fresh rage and was about to get up and beat her all over again.

Bruno and Buffalmacco listened to all this and pretended to be absolutely amazed, nodding along and confirming everything Calandrino said -- even though they were fighting so hard not to laugh that they were practically bursting. But when they saw him leap up to go after his wife again, they jumped in front of him and held him back. They told him the wife wasn't to blame at all -- he had only himself to blame, since he knew perfectly well that women make things lose their power, and yet he hadn't warned her to stay out of his sight that day. God, they said, must have robbed him of that foresight, either because this stroke of fortune wasn't meant to be his, or because he'd been planning to cheat his friends -- he should have told them the instant he realized he'd found the stone.

After a long back-and-forth, they managed, with considerable effort, to broker a peace between Calandrino and his poor battered wife. And then they left him there, miserable and surrounded by a house full of rocks."
