## Day 8, Story 7

A scholar falls in love with a widow, who tricks him into spending a winter's night freezing in the snow while she's in bed with her lover. Later, through his own cunning, he traps her naked on top of a tower in the blazing July sun, exposed to flies, horseflies, and scorching heat.


The ladies had laughed heartily at the unfortunate Calandrino and would have laughed even more, except that it bothered them to see him fleeced of the capons on top of being robbed of his pig. But once the story was over, the queen told Pampinea to tell hers, and she promptly began:

"Dearest ladies, it often happens that craft is defeated by craft, and so it's a sign of very little wisdom to take pleasure in making fools of other people. For several stories now, we've been laughing at tricks played on various people, with no vengeance ever recorded against the tricksters. But now I intend to make you feel some sympathy for a just punishment that rebounded on a woman of our own city -- a woman whose own trick nearly killed her. Hearing this won't be without profit to you, either, because it should make you much more careful about mocking other people. And that would be an excellent use of your good sense.

Not many years ago there lived in Florence a young woman named Elena: beautiful, proud, of very distinguished family, and well provided for in worldly goods. Having been widowed, she chose never to remarry, because she'd fallen in love with a handsome and charming young man of her own choosing. Freed from every other care, she regularly enjoyed herself with him, with the help of a trusted maid.

Around this same time, a young gentleman of our city named Rinieri, who had studied for years in Paris -- not to peddle his learning for money, as many do, but to understand the true nature of things and their causes, which is exactly what befits a gentleman -- returned to Florence. He lived there in the manner of a respected citizen, honored for both his noble birth and his scholarship.

But as often happens -- that those who understand the deepest things are the quickest to be ensnared by love -- so it was with Rinieri. One day, seeking some amusement at a public gathering, this Elena appeared before his eyes, all dressed in black as our widows wear, and she seemed to him more beautiful and more pleasing than any woman he'd ever seen. In his heart he told himself that the man God allowed to hold her naked in his arms could truly call himself blessed. He studied her furtively, again and again, and knowing that great and precious things are never won without effort, he resolved to devote all his energy and skill to pleasing her, in the hope that he might win her love and eventually have his fill of her.

The young widow -- who was not in the habit of keeping her eyes cast modestly downward but rather moved them about artfully, sizing up the room and taking quick note of who admired her -- spotted Rinieri right away. She laughed to herself and thought, "I haven't come here for nothing today. Unless I'm mistaken, I've caught a woodcock by the beak." She began to steal glances at him from the corner of her eye, doing her best to show him she'd noticed his attention. Her reasoning was that the more men she attracted and ensnared with her charms, the more valuable her beauty would seem -- especially to the one she'd actually given her love to.

The learned scholar, setting aside his philosophical studies, turned all his thoughts to her. Hoping to please her, he found out where she lived and started finding excuses to walk past her house, coming and going under various pretexts. The lady, vain about this attention for the reasons already mentioned, made a show of being delighted to see him. So he found a way to befriend her maid, confided his love, and begged the maid to intercede with her mistress on his behalf.

The maid promised freely and told her lady everything. Elena listened with the most delighted laughter in the world and said, "Do you see where this man has come to lose the brains he brought back from Paris? Well then -- we'll give him exactly what he's looking for. When he speaks to you again, tell him I love him far more than he loves me, but that I have to protect my reputation so I can hold my head high among the other ladies. If he's really as clever as they say, he should value me all the more for it."

Oh, the foolish woman -- she had no idea, dear ladies, what it really means to match wits with a scholar.

The maid found Rinieri and delivered her mistress's message. He was overjoyed. He pressed his suit harder, writing letters and sending gifts. Everything was accepted, but all he got back were vague, noncommittal replies. And in this way, she strung him along for a very long time.

Eventually, having told her lover about all of this -- which made him somewhat jealous of Rinieri at times, and a bit angry with her -- Elena decided to prove to him that his suspicions were groundless. She sent her maid to the scholar, who by now was growing very insistent, to tell him on her mistress's behalf that she hadn't yet had an opportunity to be with him since he'd first declared his love, but that she hoped to be able to during the Christmas holidays. If he was willing, he should come to her courtyard on Christmas night, and she'd come for him as soon as she could.

The scholar was the happiest man alive. He went to her house at the appointed time. The maid let him into the courtyard, locked him in, and left him there to wait for her lady.

That evening, Elena had sent for her lover. After a merry supper together, she told him what she planned to do that night. "And now," she added, "you can see for yourself exactly how deep the love is that I've supposedly been carrying on with the man you've been so jealous about."

Her lover heard this with great satisfaction and was eager to see the proof in action.

As it happened, it had snowed heavily during the day, and everything was blanketed in white. The scholar hadn't been waiting long in the courtyard before he started feeling colder than he would have liked. But expecting to warm up soon enough, he gritted his teeth and endured it.

After a while, the lady said to her lover, "Let's go to the window and see what your rival is doing -- and hear what he says when the maid goes to talk to him. It should be entertaining."

They went to a window from which they could see without being seen. They heard the maid call out to the scholar from another window: "Rinieri, my lady is the most miserable woman alive. One of her brothers showed up tonight unexpectedly -- he talked and talked and then insisted on staying for supper, and he still hasn't left. But she thinks he'll go soon. She hasn't been able to come to you, but she will shortly. She begs you not to be upset about the wait."

Rinieri, believing every word, replied, "Tell my lady not to worry about me. Just ask her to come as soon as she can."

The maid went back inside and straight to bed. The lady, turning to her lover, said, "Well? What do you think? If I cared about him the way you're afraid I do, would I let him stand down there freezing?"

With that, she went to bed with her partly reassured lover, and there they stayed for a very long time, laughing and making sport and mocking the wretched scholar.

Meanwhile, Rinieri paced the courtyard, trying to keep warm with exercise. He had nowhere to sit and no shelter from the cold and damp. He cursed the brother's long visit and mistook every sound for the door opening to admit him. But he hoped in vain.

The lady, having enjoyed herself with her lover until nearly midnight, said, "What do you think of our scholar, my darling? Which is greater -- his intelligence, or the love I bear him? Will the cold I'm putting him through now drive the doubts from your heart that my little jokes gave you the other day?"

"Heart of my heart," he answered, "yes -- I know perfectly well that you're my treasure, my peace, my joy, and all my hope -- just as I am yours."

"Then kiss me a thousand times," she said, "so I can see if you mean it." He held her tight and kissed her not a thousand times but more than a hundred thousand.

After they'd lain together a while longer, the lady said, "Come -- let's get up and go check whether the fire has died down at all in this new suitor of mine, who writes to me every day that he's burning alive with love."

They got up and went to the same window. Looking down into the courtyard, they saw the scholar dancing a frantic jig in the snow -- the fastest, most energetic dance you ever saw, driven by the violent chattering of his teeth. The lady said, "Well, my love? Don't you think I know how to make a man dance without trumpets or bagpipes?"

"You certainly do, my darling," he answered, laughing.

"Let's go down to the door," she said. "You stay quiet while I talk to him. We'll see what he says -- it should be just as funny as watching him."

They crept down to the front door. Without opening it, the lady called softly through a small hole: "Rinieri?"

Hearing his name, he praised God, too quickly assuming he was about to be let in. He hurried to the door. "Here I am, my lady. Open up, for God's sake -- I'm dying of cold."

"Oh, I'm sure you are," she said. "I know you're the chilly type. Is it really so terribly cold? Just because there's a little snow? I've heard the nights are much colder in Paris. I can't let you in yet -- that wretched brother of mine who came to dinner still hasn't left. But he will soon, and then I'll come right down and open the door. I could barely slip away from him just now, to come encourage you not to give up."

"Please, my lady," cried the scholar, "for God's sake, let me in so I can at least wait under cover! It's started snowing again -- harder than ever -- and I'll wait for you as long as you like."

"Oh, my sweet," she said, "I wish I could, but this door makes such a terrible noise when it opens -- my brother would hear it instantly."

"Then go make him leave!" said Rinieri. "And please, have them build up a good fire so I can warm myself the moment I come in. I'm so cold I can barely feel my own body."

"That shouldn't be possible," said the lady, "if what you've written to me so many times is true -- that you burn with love for me. Now I have to go. Wait, and keep your spirits up."

With her lover, who had heard every word and was thoroughly delighted, she went back to bed. That night they slept very little -- they spent nearly all of it in pleasure and amusement and in mocking Rinieri.

The miserable scholar -- by now practically turning into a stork, his teeth were chattering so hard -- eventually realized he'd been played. He tried the door again and again. He searched for any other way out of the courtyard. Finding none, he paced back and forth like a caged lion, cursing the weather, the lady's cruelty, the endless night, and his own gullibility. His fury against her was so intense that the long, ardent love he'd carried for her was transformed in an instant into fierce and bitter hatred. He turned over a thousand plans in his mind, searching for a way to get his revenge -- which he now desired far more passionately than he'd ever desired to be with her.

At last, after an eternity, the night began to give way to dawn. The maid, as instructed by her mistress, came down and opened the courtyard door. Putting on a sympathetic face, she said, "Bad luck to that brother for coming last night! He kept us all on pins and needles and made you freeze half to death. But you know what? Be patient. What couldn't happen tonight will happen another time. Believe me -- nothing could have displeased my lady more than this."

The enraged scholar -- who was a wise man and understood that threats are nothing but weapons that arm the threatened -- locked away everything his unchecked fury would have loved to unleash and said in a calm, even voice, without a trace of anger: "Honestly, it was the worst night I've ever had. But I understand perfectly well that my lady isn't to blame for it. She came down here herself, out of compassion for me, to apologize and give me hope. And as you say -- what didn't happen tonight will happen another time. Give her my regards, and God be with you."

Nearly frozen stiff, he dragged himself home as best he could. At his house, half dead with exhaustion, he collapsed into bed and woke up to find his arms and legs almost crippled. He sent for doctors, told them about the cold he'd endured, and put himself under their care. They applied the strongest and most urgent remedies, and even then, it took some time before they managed to undo the damage to his tendons and restore his ability to move. If he hadn't been young, and if the warm weather hadn't been coming on, it would have been far worse. But eventually he recovered his health and strength. He kept his hatred to himself, and outwardly he pretended to be more in love with his widow than ever.

After some time, fortune gave him his chance.

The young man Elena loved had fallen for another woman and now wanted nothing to do with her -- wouldn't speak to her, wouldn't do a thing for her. She wasted away in tears and misery. Her maid, who pitied her greatly but could find no way to lift her mistress's spirits, hit upon a wild idea: perhaps the scholar, through some kind of magic or sorcery, could make the lover come back. She remembered that the scholar was supposed to be a great expert in such things and said as much to her mistress. Elena, who was not particularly wise, never stopped to consider that if the scholar actually knew magic, he'd have used it on his own behalf. She took the maid's suggestion seriously and told her to go find out if he'd be willing to help, with a promise that in return she'd do anything he asked.

The maid delivered the message faithfully. When the scholar heard it, he was overjoyed. "Praised be God!" he said to himself. "The time has come when, with Your help, I can make that wicked woman pay for what she did to me in return for the great love I bore her."

To the maid, he said: "Tell my lady not to worry about this. Even if her lover were in India, I could quickly make him come to her begging forgiveness for everything he's done. But the method she'll need to follow -- I'll explain that to her in person, whenever and wherever she likes. Tell her that, and give her my encouragement."

The maid carried back his answer. A meeting was arranged at the church of Santa Lucia del Prato. There the lady and the scholar met privately, and she -- forgetting entirely that she'd once nearly killed him -- openly laid out her problem and begged for his help.

"Madam," the scholar answered, "it's true that among the many things I studied in Paris was the art of necromancy, and I certainly know everything there is to know about it. But because the practice is supremely displeasing to God, I'd sworn never to use it, for myself or anyone else. Still, the love I bear you is so powerful that I don't know how to refuse you anything. So even if this one act were enough to damn me to hell, I'm prepared to do it, since it's what you want. But I must warn you: the thing is harder than you might imagine, especially when a woman wants to reclaim a man's love, or a man a woman's. It can only be done by the person herself. It must be done at night, in a solitary place, with no companions. I don't know how you feel about those conditions."

The lady, more driven by love than by good sense, replied: "Love pushes me so hard that there's nothing I wouldn't do to get back the man who's wrongfully abandoned me. But please -- tell me what I'll need to prove my courage."

The scholar -- who had a streak of real malice under that learned exterior -- said: "Madam, I must make a pewter image in the name of the man you wish to recover. When I send it to you, you must take it to a running stream, all alone, at the hour of first sleep, when the moon is well into its waning phase, and bathe yourself in the stream seven times with the image, completely naked. After that, still naked, you must climb a tree or go to the top of some uninhabited building and face north. Holding the image in your hand, say the words I'll give you -- seven times. When you've done that, two of the most beautiful maidens you've ever seen will appear. They'll greet you courteously and ask what you desire. Tell them clearly and completely what you want, and make absolutely sure you don't mix up any names. Once you've told them, they'll leave, and you can come back down to where you left your clothes, get dressed, and go home. Before the middle of the following night, your lover will come to you in tears, begging your forgiveness. And I promise you -- from that moment on, he will never leave you for another woman."

The lady believed every word of this and felt half-comforted already, as if she could already feel her lover in her arms.

"Don't worry," she said, "I can do all of this perfectly. I have the ideal spot for it. I have a farm near the upper end of the Val d'Arno, right on the riverbank. And it's July now, so bathing will be pleasant. What's more, I remember there's a little abandoned tower not far from the river -- the only people who ever go near it are shepherds who sometimes climb up on the chestnut-wood ladder to a platform at the top, to look for their stray animals. Otherwise, it's completely isolated and out of the way. I'll go there, and I'll follow your instructions to the letter."

The scholar, who knew both the farm and the tower very well, was delighted to have his plan confirmed. "Madam," he said, "I've never been to that area, so I don't know your farm or the tower. But if it's as you describe, there couldn't be a better place. So when the time is right, I'll send you the image and the incantation. But I beg you -- when you've gotten what you want and you realize how well I've served you, please remember me and keep your promise."

She swore she would, without fail. She said goodbye and went home. The scholar, thrilled that his plan seemed likely to work, fashioned an image covered in mysterious-looking symbols of his own invention and wrote out a string of nonsense disguised as an incantation. When the time was right, he sent both to the lady with a message that she should proceed that very night without delay. Then he secretly made his way, with a servant, to the house of a friend who lived near the tower, so he could carry out his plan.

The lady set out with her maid and went to the farm. When night fell, she pretended to go to bed and sent the maid off to sleep. Then, at the hour of first sleep, she slipped quietly out of the house and made her way to the bank of the Arno near the tower. She looked carefully in every direction, listened, and hearing and seeing no one, undressed. She hid her clothes under a bush and bathed seven times in the river with the image. Then, still naked, image in hand, she headed for the tower.

The scholar, who had hidden himself with his servant among the willows and other trees near the tower at nightfall, watched the whole performance. As she passed close by him, her naked body so white that it conquered the darkness of the night, and as he studied her breasts and the rest of her -- seeing how beautiful she was and reflecting on what was about to become of all that beauty -- he did feel a twinge of pity. At the same time, the urgings of the flesh ambushed him with sudden force, causing a certain part of his anatomy that had been lying down to stand straight up, urging him to leap from his hiding place, seize her, and take his pleasure. Between pity and lust, he nearly gave in. But then he remembered who he was, how grievous the injury he'd suffered, who had done it, and why -- and his rage was rekindled. Pity and appetite were banished alike. He held firm to his purpose and let her pass.

The lady climbed the tower, faced north, and began reciting the words the scholar had given her. Meanwhile, the scholar crept quietly into the tower and, little by little, removed the ladder that led to the platform where she stood. Then he waited to see what she would do and say.

The lady repeated her incantation seven times, then began looking for the two beautiful maidens. She waited and waited. It grew cooler than she would have liked. She watched the dawn begin to appear, despairing that nothing had happened the way the scholar had promised.

"I'm afraid," she said to herself, "that he's given me a night like the one I gave him. But if that's his game, he's chosen his revenge badly -- this night hasn't been a third as long as his was, and the cold doesn't begin to compare."

Then, not wanting daylight to catch her up there, she tried to climb down. The ladder was gone. It was as if the ground had dropped out from under her. She fainted dead away on the platform.

When she came to, she burst into pitiful weeping and wailing. She understood all too well that the scholar had done this. She cursed herself for having wronged others and then for having trusted a man she had every reason to consider her enemy. She stayed like that for a long time.

Then she looked around for any way down and found none. She broke down again, sobbing with bitter self-pity: "Oh, miserable woman! What will your brothers say? Your relatives? Your neighbors? What will all of Florence say when they find out you were discovered up here, naked? Your reputation -- which has always been so spotless -- will be revealed as a fraud. And even if you tried to make up some lying excuse -- if any excuse could even be found -- that cursed scholar knows everything about your affairs and won't let you get away with it. Oh, wretched woman! At a single stroke, you'll lose the man you so foolishly loved and your honor as well!"

With that, she was so overcome with misery that she nearly threw herself off the tower. But the sun had just risen, and she moved toward one side of the tower wall to see if some boy might be passing with cattle, someone she could send for her maid.

As it happened, the scholar had fallen asleep at the foot of a bush and was just waking up. They saw each other. He called up to her: "Good morning, madam. Have the maidens arrived yet?"

The lady, seeing and hearing him, started weeping furiously all over again and begged him to come into the tower so she could speak with him. He was courteous enough to oblige. She lay face-down on the platform with only her head showing through the opening and said through her tears:

"Rinieri, if I gave you a bad night, you've certainly gotten your revenge. Even though it's July, I've been freezing up here all night, naked as I am -- and I've cried so much over the trick I played on you and over my own stupidity in trusting you that it's a miracle I have any eyes left. I'm begging you -- not for love of me, since you have no reason to love me, but for your own honor as a gentleman -- let what you've already done be enough to avenge the wrong I did you. Have my clothes brought to me and let me come down. Don't try to take from me the one thing you could never give back even if you wanted to: my honor. If I took one night away from you, I can repay you with many nights whenever you like. Let this be enough. Be content, as a man of honor, that you were able to take your revenge and make me confess it. Don't use your strength against a woman. An eagle gets no glory from conquering a dove. For the love of God and for your own honor, have mercy on me."

The scholar, with cold determination, turned over in his mind the injury he'd suffered. He saw her tears and heard her pleading. He felt both pleasure and pain at the same time -- pleasure in the revenge he'd wanted more than anything, and pain because his humanity stirred him to pity the poor woman. But his humanity was not strong enough to overcome his fierce appetite for vengeance.

"Madam Elena," he answered, "if my prayers -- which, I'll admit, I didn't know how to bathe in tears or coat with honey the way you clearly know how to deliver yours -- if my prayers had been enough, that night when I was dying of cold in your snow-filled courtyard, to get you to put me under the smallest bit of shelter, it would be easy for me to listen to yours now. But if you're suddenly so much more concerned about your honor than you used to be, and if it bothers you to be stuck up there naked, why don't you direct those prayers to the man in whose arms you had no problem lying naked that night -- the night you remember so well -- while you listened to me stumbling around your courtyard, stamping in the snow, my teeth chattering? Get help from him. Have him bring you your clothes and put the ladder back. Try to make him care about your honor -- this honor you've never hesitated to risk for his sake, not just that night but a thousand other times. Why don't you call out to him? Who should come rescue you, if not him? You're his. And what should he care about, if not you?

"Call him, foolish woman, and see whether the love you have for him -- and his brains and yours put together -- can get you out of the trap my stupidity got you into. Remember? While you were in bed with him, you asked him which he thought was greater: my stupidity or the love you bore him. You can't be generous to me now with something I no longer want, and you couldn't have denied it to me if I still did. Keep your nights for your lover, if you manage to get off this tower alive. Let them be yours and his. One of those nights was more than enough for me. Being made a fool of once is plenty.

"And now, being clever with words, you try to win me over by flattery, calling me a gentleman and a man of honor -- hoping to get me to be magnanimous and forgive your wickedness. But your sweet talk won't cloud my judgment now the way your lying promises did before. I know myself now. I didn't learn as much about myself during my whole time in Paris as you taught me in a single one of your nights.

"But even supposing I were magnanimous -- you're not the kind of person magnanimity should be wasted on. For wild beasts like you, the proper end of punishment -- and of revenge too -- is death. What I'm doing to you is really just a correction, since true vengeance would have to far exceed the offense. And if I really wanted to avenge myself -- considering what you did to my soul -- your life wouldn't be enough. Nor would the lives of a hundred women like you. Killing you would only mean killing a vile, wicked, worthless little tramp.

"And what are you, really, beyond this fraction of good looks that a few years will ruin, filling your face with wrinkles? How are you any different from any other miserable serving-girl? And yet it was no fault of yours that you didn't manage to kill a man of worth -- a 'man of honor,' as you called me a moment ago -- whose life may in a single day be of more use to the world than a hundred thousand of your kind could be as long as the world lasts.

"Through this suffering of yours, I'm going to teach you what it means to mock men of intelligence -- and scholars in particular. I'll give you reason never to fall into such foolishness again, if you survive this. But if you're really so eager to come down, why don't you just throw yourself off? That way, with God's help, you'd break your neck, free yourself from the torment you're in, and make me the happiest man in the world, all at once. That's all I have to say. I was clever enough to get you up there. Now you be clever enough to get yourself down -- just as you were clever enough to make a fool of me."

While the scholar delivered this speech, the wretched lady wept without stopping. The time passed and the sun kept climbing. When he finally fell silent, she spoke again:

"You heartless man -- if that accursed night was so terrible for you, and if my offense seems so unforgivable that neither my youth and beauty nor my bitter tears and humble prayers can move you to any pity, then at least let this one thing soften you a little and ease the harshness of your anger: the fact that I recently put my trust in you and confided all my secrets to you, which gave you the very means to make me see my sin. Because if I hadn't trusted you, you would have had no way to take this revenge you seem to have wanted so desperately.

"Please, let go of your anger and forgive me. If you'll pardon me and help me down from here, I'm ready to give up that faithless young man entirely and have you as my only lover and lord -- even though you mock my beauty and call it short-lived and worthless. Whatever it may be compared to other women's, I know at least this much: it deserves to be valued as the desire and delight and pleasure of men in their youth, and you're not old yourself.

"And even though you're treating me cruelly, I can't believe you'd actually want to watch me die in such a hideous way -- jumping from this tower in desperation, right before your eyes. Those eyes -- if you weren't the liar you've since become -- once found me so pleasing. Please, have mercy! For God's sake, have pity! The sun is getting hotter and hotter, and just as the terrible cold tormented me last night, the heat is starting to torment me now."

The scholar, who was dragging out the conversation for his own amusement, replied:

"Madam, you didn't put your trust in me out of any love for me. You did it to get your lover back. So that deserves even harsher treatment. And if you think this tower was the only way I could have taken my revenge, you're foolish. I had a thousand other options. While I was pretending to love you, I'd laid a thousand traps at your feet, and it wouldn't have been long before you fell into one of them. And any of those traps would have caused you more pain and more shame than this. I chose this one not to go easy on you, but because it would give me satisfaction the quickest.

"And even if every other plan had failed me, I'd still have had the pen. I would have written such things about you, in such a way, that when you found out -- and you would have found out -- you'd have wished a thousand times a day that you'd never been born. The power of the pen is far greater than people realize who haven't experienced it firsthand. I swear to God -- may He grant me as much joy at the end of this revenge as He's given me at the beginning -- I would have written things about you so devastating that you'd have been ashamed not just in front of other people, but in front of yourself. You'd have gouged out your own eyes rather than look at yourself in the mirror. So don't blame the ocean for what a little stream has done.

"As for your love, or whether you belong to me -- I don't care a bit, as I've already said. Go ahead and belong to the man you belonged to before, if you can. I used to hate him, but now I actually like him, considering how he's treated you lately.

"You women fall in love with young men and crave their affections because you see their fresh complexions, their dark beards, the way they strut and dance and joust. Men who are a bit older had all those things once -- and they also know things the young ones have yet to learn. You think young men are better riders, and you believe they cover more ground in a day than older men. Well, I'll grant you this: they do shake the bedframe more vigorously. But men of experience know where the fleas bite. A small meal with flavor beats a huge bland one every time. Hard riding wears out even the youngest man; an easy pace may get you to the inn a little later, but at least you arrive in one piece.

"You creatures don't see -- brainless animals that you are -- how much evil hides behind that little scrap of good looks. Young men aren't satisfied with one woman. They want every one they see, and they think they deserve them all. So their love can never be stable -- as you yourself can now testify from personal experience. They believe they deserve to be worshipped and adored by their mistresses, and their greatest glory is bragging about their conquests. That one flaw alone has driven many a woman into the arms of the friars -- who at least keep their mouths shut.

"You say nobody knew about your affair except your maid and me? You're wrong, and you're deluding yourself if you believe it. His whole neighborhood talks of nothing else, and so does yours. But the last person to hear these things is usually the one they're about. And young men rob you, while older men give you gifts.

"So -- since you chose badly, you can stay with the man you gave yourself to. Leave me to others. I've found a lady of far greater worth, one who knew me better than you did. And if you want stronger proof of what my eyes feel than my words seem to give you, just go ahead and throw yourself off right now. Your soul -- which I'm sure will be received straight into the devil's arms -- will be able to see for itself whether my eyes are troubled by watching you fall.

"But I suspect you won't do me that favor. So let me suggest this: if the sun starts to burn you, remember the cold you made me suffer. Mix the two together, and I'm sure you'll find the sunshine much more bearable."

The anguished lady, seeing that the scholar's words all pointed toward a merciless conclusion, burst into tears again.

"Listen," she said, "since nothing I say can move you to pity, at least let the love you bear for that other lady you say you've found -- the one you say is wiser than me -- let that move you. Forgive me for her sake, and bring me my clothes, and let me come down."

At this, the scholar laughed. Seeing that the morning was now well past mid-morning, he replied: "Well, when you put it that way -- invoking such a lady -- I don't see how I can refuse. Tell me where your clothes are and I'll go get them and help you down."

The lady, believing this, felt a little better. She told him where she'd left her clothes. He went out of the tower, ordered his servant to stay nearby, watch the tower, and not let anyone in until he returned, and then headed off to his friend's house. There he ate a leisurely dinner, and when he felt like it, took a nap.

The lady, left on the tower, encouraged just enough by that false hope and yet utterly miserable, sat up and crept to the side of the wall where there was a sliver of shade. There she waited, accompanied by the most bitter thoughts. She waited, now hoping and now despairing that the scholar would return with her clothes. She drifted from one thought to another and eventually, overcome by grief and exhaustion -- having not slept at all the night before -- she fell asleep.

The sun, which was brutally hot, had risen to its highest point and was beating down full force, directly and mercilessly, on her tender, delicate body and her uncovered head. It burned her flesh wherever it touched and cracked it open in tiny fissures all over, and the pain was so intense that it woke her despite her deep exhaustion. When she stirred, it felt as though all her scorched skin was cracking and splitting apart with the movement -- the way a charred sheepskin does when you stretch it. Her head ached so violently she thought it would burst, which was no surprise. The stone platform of the tower was so burning hot that she couldn't find a place to put her feet or any other part of her body. She couldn't stand still. She shifted this way and that, weeping.

And on top of everything else, there wasn't a breath of wind. Flies and horseflies descended on her in swarms, settling on her cracked and blistered skin and stinging her so savagely that each bite felt like a spear thrust. She kept flailing her hands at them, cursing herself, her life, her lover, and the scholar without pause.

Tortured and stung and pierced to the core by the unspeakable heat of the sun, the flies, the horseflies, hunger, and above all thirst -- plus a thousand agonizing thoughts -- she struggled to her feet and looked around, hoping to see or hear someone nearby. She was prepared to call out for help, no matter what the consequences.

But even this last recourse had been taken from her by her hostile fortune. The farmworkers had all left the fields because of the heat -- none had come to work nearby that day, since they were all home threshing grain. She heard nothing but crickets. She could see the Arno in the distance, and the sight of water only made her thirst worse. She could see woods and shady spots and scattered houses in every direction, and each one was a fresh torment of longing.

What more can we say about this unfortunate woman? The sun overhead, the scorching stone underfoot, the stinging insects all around -- they had so ravaged her that where she had been white enough the night before to outshine the darkness, she was now as red as raw meat, and so covered in bloody welts and blisters that anyone who saw her would have thought her the most hideous creature in the world.

She stayed there like that, with no hope and no plan, expecting death more than anything else. It was now past the middle of the afternoon when the scholar woke from his nap, remembered his lady, and returned to the tower to see what had become of her. He sent his servant, who hadn't eaten yet, off to get food.

The lady, hearing his voice, dragged herself -- weak and wretched from the horrible ordeal she'd endured -- to the trapdoor. She sat down at its edge and said through her tears: "Rinieri, you've more than avenged yourself. If I made you freeze in my courtyard by night, you've made me roast -- no, burn -- on this tower by day, and die of hunger and thirst into the bargain. For the love of God, I beg you: come up here. Since I can't bring myself to end my own life, do it for me. Death is what I want more than anything, given the torments I'm suffering. Or if you won't grant me that, at least bring me a cup of water to wet my mouth. My tears aren't enough -- my throat is so dry and burning that I can barely breathe."

The scholar could hear from her voice how weak she was. He could see, too, that her body was completely burned by the sun. Between her feebleness and her humble prayers, he felt a small stirring of compassion. But he answered nonetheless:

"You wicked woman -- you won't die by my hand. You can die by your own, if that's what you want. You'll get as much water from me to ease your heat as I got fire from you to ease my cold. The one thing I truly regret is that while I had to cure the damage from my freezing with the heat of stinking manure, your burns will be soothed by cool, sweet-smelling rosewater. And while I nearly lost my limbs and my life, you'll just shed your skin from the heat -- like a snake molting -- and be as pretty as ever."

"God help me!" cried the lady. "May God give beauty earned this way to my worst enemies! But you -- more cruel than any wild beast -- how can you bear to torture me like this? What worse could I expect from you if I'd murdered your entire family with the cruelest torments? Truly, I can't imagine what greater cruelty could be inflicted on a traitor who'd brought a whole city to ruin than what you've done to me: roasting me alive in the sun, letting the flies devour me, and refusing me even a cup of water -- when even convicted murderers on their way to execution are given wine to drink if they ask for it.

"But since I see you're immovable in your savage cruelty and nothing I suffer can touch you, I'll resign myself to die with patience. May God, whom I beg to look with just eyes on what you've done, have mercy on my soul."

With that, she crawled painfully to the middle of the platform, despairing of surviving the ferocious heat. Again and again, on top of all her other torments, she thought she would faint from thirst. She never stopped weeping and lamenting her misery.

Finally, at the hour of vespers, the scholar decided he'd done enough. He had his servant pick up the lady's clothes and wrap them in his cloak. Then he went to her house, where he found the maid sitting in front of the door, sad and helpless, not knowing what to do.

"Good woman," he said, "what's become of your mistress?"

"Sir, I don't know. I expected to find her in bed this morning, where I thought I saw her go last night. But she's not there, and she's not anywhere else either. I'm worried sick. Can you tell me anything about her?"

"I wish I'd had you up there with her," he said, "right where she's been, so I could have punished you for your part in this the same way I've punished her. But mark my words: you won't escape my hands. I'll pay you back for your role in this so thoroughly that you'll never mock another man without remembering me."

Then he told his servant, "Give her the clothes and tell her she can go to her mistress, if she wants."

The servant handed over the clothes. The maid recognized them, and hearing what Rinieri said, was terrified they'd killed her mistress. She could barely keep from screaming. Then, as the scholar walked away, she set off for the tower, weeping the whole way.

It happened that one of the lady's farmworkers had lost two of his pigs that day and had come looking for them. He arrived at the tower shortly after the scholar's departure. Poking around everywhere, looking for his pigs, he heard the agonized crying from above and shouted up: "Who's up there?"

The lady recognized his voice and called him by name. "For God's sake," she said, "find my maid and get her to come up here to me."

The man recognized her too. "Good heavens, ma'am -- who got you up there? Your maid's been looking for you all day. But who would ever have thought to look up here?"

He found the two posts of the ladder, set them upright, and began lashing the rungs back in place with willow ties. While he was working, the maid arrived. She rushed into the tower and, unable to hold back any longer, started beating her own face with her fists and screaming: "Oh, my poor lady! Where are you?"

"Up here, sister," the lady called down as loudly as she could. "Don't cry -- just bring my clothes, quickly."

When the maid heard her voice, she was somewhat comforted. With the farmworker's help, she climbed the now mostly repaired ladder and reached the platform. When she saw her mistress lying there on the ground, naked, utterly spent and pale, looking more like a half-burned log than a human being, she dug her nails into her own face and began weeping over her as if she were dead.

The lady begged her, for God's sake, to be quiet and help her get dressed. She learned from the maid that no one knew where she'd been except the people who'd brought the clothes and the farmworker standing right there. She was somewhat comforted by this and begged them both, for the love of God, never to breathe a word of this to anyone.

After much discussion, the farmworker lifted the lady in his arms -- since she couldn't walk -- and carried her safely out of the tower. But the poor maid, who'd stayed behind, came down the ladder less carefully. Her foot slipped, she fell from the ladder to the ground, and broke her thigh. She started screaming in pain so loud it sounded like a wounded lion.

The farmworker set the lady down on the grass, went back to see what had happened to the maid, and found her with her thigh broken. He carried her out too and laid her on the grass beside her mistress. The lady, seeing this disaster on top of everything else -- the one person she'd been counting on most for help now lying there with a broken leg -- was so utterly undone that she broke down weeping again, so piteously that not only could the farmworker not console her, but he started weeping himself.

As the sun sank low, the distraught lady begged him not to let nightfall catch them there. He went to his house and returned with his wife and two brothers, carrying a plank. They laid the maid on the plank and carried her home, while the farmworker himself comforted the lady with a little cold water and kind words, lifted her in his arms, and carried her to her own bedroom.

His wife gave her a wine-soaked piece of bread to eat, then undressed her and put her to bed. That night, they arranged to have both the lady and the maid transported to Florence.

Once there, the lady -- who had no shortage of cleverness when it came to making up stories -- invented a tale that bore no resemblance to what had actually happened. She convinced her brothers, her sisters, and everyone else that the whole thing had been caused by some kind of demonic bewitchment. Doctors were called in immediately, and they managed -- not without causing her considerable additional pain and anguish -- to cure her of a severe fever, though she left her skin stuck to the bedsheets more than once in the process. They also healed the maid's broken thigh.

After that, the lady gave up her lover for good. From then on, she wisely refrained both from mocking others and from falling in love. As for the scholar, when he heard the maid had broken her thigh, he considered his vengeance fully complete and went on his way, content, without saying another word about the matter.

So that's what happened to the foolish young lady and her pranks -- because she thought she could play games with a scholar the same way she would with anyone else, not understanding that scholars -- I won't say all of them, but most -- know where the devil keeps his tail. So take care, ladies, when you think about making fun of people, and especially of scholars."
