## Day 8, Story 10

A Sicilian con woman expertly fleeces a merchant of everything he brought to Palermo; but he pretends to return with far more merchandise, borrows money from her on the strength of it, and leaves her with nothing but seawater and tow.


You hardly need to ask how much the queen's story had made the ladies laugh -- suffice it to say that every last one of them had tears running down their cheeks a dozen times over from laughing so hard. When it was finished, Dioneo knew his turn had come.

"Gracious ladies," he said, "it's a well-known fact that a trick is most satisfying when the person being outwitted is a master trickster herself. And so, while you've all told excellent stories, I intend to tell you one that should please you more than any of the rest, since the woman who got cheated was a far greater artist of deception than any of the men or women who were duped in the stories you've heard today.


In every coastal town with a port, there used to be a custom -- and probably still is -- that whenever merchants arrive with goods, they unload everything into a warehouse, which in many places is called the customhouse, operated either by the city or by the local lord. There, they submit to the officials a detailed invoice of all their merchandise and its value. The officials then assign each merchant a storage room where he locks up his goods. They also record everything in the customs ledger under each merchant's name, and the merchant pays his fees either on the full lot or on whatever portion he withdraws. It's from this customs ledger that the local brokers learn what goods are in the warehouse, how much of them there are, and who owns them. Then, as opportunities arise, the brokers negotiate exchanges, trades, sales, and other deals with the merchants.

This was the practice in Palermo, Sicily, among many other places. And there, too, there were -- and still are -- plenty of women who are very beautiful but sworn enemies of virtue. Anyone who doesn't know them would take them for great ladies of the highest respectability. But their business isn't shaving men -- it's skinning them alive. The moment they spot a foreign merchant, they check the customs ledger to find out what he's got in storage and what he's worth. Then, with their charm and their alluring ways and the sweetest words imaginable, they set about luring the merchant into the trap of their love. They've hooked plenty of men this way, stripping some of the better part of their goods and others of absolutely everything. Some poor devils have left their goods, their ships, their flesh, and their very bones in these women's hands -- so skillfully does the barberess know how to wield her razor.


Not long ago, one of our young Florentines arrived in Palermo, sent there by his employers. His name was Niccolo da Cignano, though everyone called him Salabaetto. He had a consignment of woolen cloths left over from the Salerno fair, worth about five hundred gold florins. He filed his invoice at the customhouse, locked up the goods in a warehouse, and -- being in no particular rush to sell -- started going around the city enjoying himself.

He was fair-skinned, blond-haired, and very handsome and charming. It wasn't long before one of these barberesses -- a woman who styled herself Madam Biancofiore -- caught wind of his affairs and started giving him the eye. He noticed, and since he took her for some grand lady, he assumed she was attracted to him for his good looks. He decided to handle this love affair with the utmost discretion. So, without saying a word to anyone, he began strolling back and forth past her house.

She noticed this. After a few days of carefully stoking his interest with smoldering glances and pretending to languish for him, she secretly sent him one of her women -- a true master of the go-between's art. This woman, with a great deal of preamble and nearly with tears in her eyes, told Salabaetto that his good looks and charming ways had so captivated her mistress that she could find no rest, day or night. More than anything in the world, she wanted to meet him in private at a bathhouse, whenever it might please him. Then she pulled a ring from her purse and presented it to him as a gift from her mistress.

Salabaetto, hearing this, was the happiest man alive. He took the ring, rubbed it against his eyes and kissed it, then slipped it on his finger. He told the woman that if Madam Biancofiore loved him, the feeling was more than mutual: he loved her more than life itself and was ready to go wherever she wished, at any hour. The messenger carried back this answer, and Salabaetto was promptly told at which bathhouse to expect the lady the following afternoon, after vespers.


He went to the appointed place right on time, without breathing a word to anyone, and found that the bathhouse had already been reserved by the lady. He hadn't waited long when two slave girls arrived, loaded down with supplies: one carrying a beautiful large cotton mattress on her head, the other a huge basket full of linens and other things. They set the mattress on a bedframe in one of the private rooms and covered it with the finest silk-edged sheets, a snow-white Cypriot counterpane, and two exquisitely embroidered pillows. Then they undressed, stepped into the bath, and scrubbed it spotless.

It wasn't long before the lady herself arrived with two more slave girls. She greeted Salabaetto with wild enthusiasm, and at the first opportunity, after covering him in hugs and kisses and heaving the most extravagant sighs imaginable, she said to him, "I don't know what man but you could have brought me to this. You've set a fire burning in my soul, you little Tuscan dog."

Then, at her urging, they both undressed and stepped into the bath together, along with two of the slave girls. There, without letting anyone else lay a finger on him, she washed Salabaetto from head to foot with her own hands, using soap scented with musk and cloves. Afterward, she had the slave girls wash and massage her. When they were done, the girls brought out two linen sheets so white and fine that they smelled overwhelmingly of roses -- everything in the room seemed made of roses. They wrapped Salabaetto in one and the lady in the other, then lifted them both in their arms and carried them to the waiting bed.

Once they'd stopped sweating, the slave girls unwrapped them from those sheets and left them lying naked on the others. Meanwhile, out of the basket came gorgeous silver perfume bottles filled with scented water -- rose, jasmine, orange blossom, citron flower -- and the girls sprinkled them from head to foot. Then came boxes of candied fruits and wines of the finest quality, and the two of them refreshed themselves for a while.

Salabaetto felt as if he'd arrived in Paradise. He stole a thousand glances at the lady -- who really was very beautiful -- and every moment felt like a hundred years until those slave girls would finally leave and he'd have her in his arms. At last, at her command, the girls withdrew from the room, leaving a single torch burning. She threw her arms around Salabaetto, and he around her, and they stayed together for a very long time -- to the Florentine's immense pleasure, since he was utterly convinced that she was burning with love for him.

When she felt it was time to get up, she called the slave girls back in and they dressed. They had another round of wine and sweets, and washed their hands and faces with perfumed water. As they were about to part, the lady said to Salabaetto, "If it would please you, it would make me so happy if you came to my house this evening for dinner and to spend the night."

Salabaetto, by this point completely captured by her beauty and the artful sweetness of her manners, firmly believing that she loved him with all her heart, replied, "Madam, your every wish is my supreme pleasure. Tonight and always, I intend to do whatever pleases you and whatever you command."


So the lady went home and had her bedroom lavishly decorated with her finest dresses and furnishings, ordered a magnificent dinner prepared, and waited for Salabaetto. As soon as darkness fell, he went to her house and was received with open arms. They dined in style, waited on hand and foot.

Afterward, they retired to her bedroom, where he was engulfed by the marvelous fragrance of aloeswood. The bed was gorgeously appointed, and he noticed beautiful Cypriot songbirds in cages and expensive dresses hanging on every hook. All of this, taken together and individually, convinced him that she must be some great and wealthy lady. And although he'd heard some whispers about the way she made her living, he absolutely refused to believe them. Even if he half-admitted she might have cheated other men before, nothing on earth could have made him believe it could happen to him.

He spent that night with her in the most exquisite delight, falling more deeply in love by the hour. In the morning, she fastened a stylish little silver belt around his waist, with a lovely purse attached, and said, "My sweet Salabaetto, I entrust myself to your memory. Just as my body is at your pleasure, so is everything here and everything I have at your service and command."

Salabaetto, overjoyed, kissed and embraced her, then left and went to where the other merchants gathered.


He continued seeing her, on and off, without it costing him a cent, and grew more entangled by the day. Then he sold his woolens for cash and made a good profit. The lady heard about this immediately -- not from him, but from others.

That night, when Salabaetto came to visit, she played with him and flirted and kissed and caressed him, pretending to be so desperately in love that she seemed about to die in his arms. She even tried to give him two beautiful silver cups, but he wouldn't accept them -- he'd already received from her, at one time or another, gifts worth a good thirty gold florins, without ever managing to get her to accept so much as a penny's worth in return.

When she'd worked him into a thorough frenzy of passion and generosity, one of her slave girls called her out of the room -- exactly as she'd planned. She left and came back a few minutes later in tears, threw herself face-down on the bed, and began wailing as if her heart would break.

Salabaetto was alarmed. He gathered her in his arms and started crying himself. "My God, sweetheart, what's wrong? What happened? For God's sake, tell me!"

The lady let herself be begged for a good long while before answering. "Oh, my sweet lord, I don't know what to do or say! I've just received a letter from Messina. My brother writes that unless I sell or pawn everything I own and send him a thousand gold florins within eight days, they'll cut off his head. I have no idea how I can raise that kind of money so quickly. If I had just two more weeks, I could get it from a certain source that owes me much more than that. Or I could sell one of our properties. But I can't do either in time. I'd rather be dead than receive news like this!" And she went on sobbing as if her world had ended.

Salabaetto -- whose common sense had been largely incinerated by the fires of love, so that he took her tears for real and her words for gospel truth -- said, "Madam, I can't oblige you with a thousand florins, but I can certainly let you have five hundred, if you think you can pay me back within two weeks. Lucky for you, I just sold my goods yesterday. Otherwise, I couldn't have lent you a penny."

"Oh no!" cried the lady. "You mean you've been short of money? Why didn't you ask me? I may not have a thousand, but I had at least a hundred or two hundred I could have given you! Now you've taken away all my courage to accept what you're offering."

Salabaetto fell even harder. "Madam, please don't hold back on that account. If I'd had a need like yours, I would certainly have asked you."

"Oh, my Salabaetto," the lady replied, "now I truly see that yours is a real and perfect love. Without even being asked, you freely offer me such a huge sum in my time of crisis. I was already entirely yours, but after this, I'll be even more so. I'll never forget that I owe you my brother's life. But God knows I take the money reluctantly, since you're a merchant and merchants do all their business with cash. Still, necessity compels me, and I have every assurance I can pay you back quickly, so I'll accept. And for the rest of it, if I can't find a faster way, I'll pawn everything I own."

Weeping, she let herself collapse against Salabaetto's chest. He comforted her. After spending the night together, he went out the next morning -- eager to prove himself her most generous servant, without even waiting for her to ask -- and brought her five hundred shiny gold florins. She took them with tears in her eyes and laughter in her heart. Salabaetto was content with nothing more than her promise.


The moment the lady had the money, the signs changed. Where before he'd had free access to her whenever he pleased, now suddenly there were always reasons why six times out of seven he couldn't get in. And when he did get in, the warm welcomes and passionate embraces were gone. The repayment deadline came and went -- not by a day, but by a month, then two. When he asked for his money, he got excuses instead of florins.

His eyes finally opened. He saw the con woman's artistry and his own stupidity for what they were. But there was nothing he could say to her about it beyond whatever she felt like hearing, since he had no receipt, no contract, no witness. He was ashamed to complain to anyone else, partly because he'd been warned about women like her and partly because of the ridicule he knew he'd deserve for his foolishness. He was miserable beyond words and silently cursed his own gullibility.


Then he received several letters from his employers demanding that he convert the money and send it to them. Knowing that if he didn't, his embezzlement would come to light, he decided to leave. He boarded a small ship and sailed -- not to Pisa, as he should have, but to Naples.

Now, it happened that his old friend Pietro dello Canigiano was living in Naples at the time, serving as treasurer to the Empress of Constantinople. Pietro was a man of great intelligence, sharp wits, and a close friend to both Salabaetto and his family. Salabaetto, trusting him as a discreet man, poured out the whole sorry tale -- what he'd done and the disaster that had befallen him -- and begged for help and advice in making a living there, swearing he would never go back to Florence.

Canigiano was upset. "This is a mess," he said. "You've behaved badly, carried yourself badly, cheated your employers, and blown a mountain of money on a woman. But what's done is done -- we need to figure out what comes next."

Being the shrewd man he was, Canigiano quickly came up with a plan and laid it out for Salabaetto, who liked it immediately and set about putting it into action.

He had a little money of his own, and Canigiano lent him more. With these funds, he packed up a number of bales -- tightly bound and corded to look like serious merchandise -- and bought twenty oil casks, which he filled up. Then he loaded everything onto a ship and sailed back to Palermo.

At the customhouse, he presented his bill of lading and declared the value of the casks. He had everything entered under his name and locked up in the warehouse, saying he didn't intend to touch any of it until some other merchandise he was expecting had arrived.


Biancofiore got wind of all this in no time. Hearing that the goods he'd already brought were worth a good two thousand florins, and that the shipment he was still expecting was valued at over three thousand more, she decided she'd been thinking too small. She resolved to return the five hundred florins so she could get her hands on the lion's share of the five thousand.

She sent for him. Salabaetto, now much wiser, went to her house. She pretended to know nothing about what he'd brought back and received him with a great show of affection.

"Listen," she said, "if you were upset with me for not repaying your money on the exact day I promised --"

Salabaetto laughed. "To tell you the truth, madam, it did bother me a little -- seeing as I'd have torn my own heart out and given it to you if I thought it would make you happy. But let me tell you just how upset I am with you: my love for you is so great that I've sold most of what I own and brought merchandise here worth more than two thousand florins. I'm expecting another shipment from the west worth over three thousand more. I plan to set up a permanent warehouse in this city and settle here for good -- just so I can always be near you. I'm more content with your love than any lover has ever been with any woman."

"Salabaetto," the lady answered, "you know that anything that's good for you is good for me, since I love you more than my own life. It makes me so happy that you've come back with plans to stay, because I expect to have many more good times with you. But let me explain myself a little. During those last days before you left, there were times you came here and couldn't get in, and times you did get in but weren't given the warm welcome you were used to -- and I know the money wasn't returned on time either. You have to understand, I was going through a terrible ordeal at that point, overcome with worry and grief. When you're in a state like that, no matter how much you love someone, you can't always put on a happy face or give them the attention they deserve.

"And you must know that it's incredibly difficult for a woman to come up with a thousand gold florins. People lie to us all day long -- they promise and don't deliver. So we're forced to lie in turn. That's the only reason I didn't pay you back -- not because of any fault in my heart. But I did get the money shortly after you left, and if I'd known where to send it, believe me, I would have. Since I didn't know, I kept it safe for you."

She sent for a purse that contained the very coins he'd given her and placed it in his hands. "Count them," she said. "There should be five hundred."

Salabaetto had never been so pleased. He counted the coins, found them all there, tucked the purse away, and said, "Madam, I'm convinced you're telling the truth. You've done more than enough to prove your love, and I want you to know that because of this -- and because of the love I bear you -- you could never ask me for any sum I can lay my hands on without my giving it to you. Once I'm established here, you can put that to the test."


Having renewed their love affair with these pretty words, Salabaetto went back to spending time with her, and she went back to lavishing attention on him, showing him every kindness and honor and faking the most passionate devotion.

But Salabaetto intended to repay her trick with a trick. One day, having received an invitation to come to her house for dinner and to spend the night, he arrived looking so miserable and gloomy that it seemed as if he were about to die.

Biancofiore threw her arms around him, kissed him, and pressed him to tell her what was wrong. He let himself be begged for a long while, then finally answered.

"I'm ruined. The ship carrying the merchandise I was expecting has been captured by the corsairs of Monaco. They're demanding a ransom of ten thousand gold florins, and my share is a thousand. I don't have a penny, because the five hundred you returned to me I immediately sent to Naples to invest in a shipment of cloth to bring here. If I tried to sell the goods I have in the warehouse right now, I'd get half a penny on the penny -- it's the wrong time to sell. And I'm not well enough known here yet to find anyone who'd lend me the money. I don't know what to do. If I don't send the ransom quickly, the merchandise will be shipped off to Monaco and I'll never see it again."

The lady was deeply alarmed at the thought of losing him entirely. She considered what she could do to keep him from going to Monaco and said, "God knows how much this pains me, for your sake. But what good does it do to tear your hair out? If I had the money, God knows I'd give it to you in a heartbeat. But I don't have it. However -- there is a certain person here who lent me the five hundred I was short the other day. The problem is, he charges outrageous interest -- at least thirty percent. If you want to borrow from him, he'll need a solid guarantee. Now, for my part, I'm ready to pledge everything I own -- my possessions and my very self -- as security for whatever he'll lend on that. But how will you guarantee the rest?"

Salabaetto immediately understood what was motivating her generosity, and he guessed that she was the one who'd be doing the lending. This suited him perfectly. He thanked her and said that, with need pressing him this hard, he wouldn't let the usurious interest stop him. He added that as collateral for the remainder, he would pledge the merchandise he had in the customhouse, having it registered in the lender's name. Of course, he'd keep the key to the warehouse himself, both so he could show the goods if asked and so that nothing would be touched, moved, or tampered with.

The lady said this was perfectly reasonable and more than adequate security. As soon as morning came, she sent for a broker she trusted and, after discussing the arrangement with him, gave him a thousand gold florins. The broker lent the money to Salabaetto and had the goods in the customhouse registered in his own name. They drew up their contracts and counter-contracts, settled everything to both sides' satisfaction, and went about their other business.

At the first opportunity, Salabaetto boarded a ship with fifteen hundred gold florins and sailed to Naples, to Pietro dello Canigiano. From there, he sent his employers a full and honest accounting for the woolens they'd originally consigned to him. He repaid Pietro and everyone else he owed, and spent several merry days celebrating with Canigiano over the trick he'd played on the Sicilian trickstress. Then, having decided he was done being a merchant, he took himself off to Ferrara.


Meanwhile, back in Palermo, Biancofiore realized that Salabaetto had left the city. She began to wonder, then to worry. After waiting a good two months and seeing no sign of him, she had the broker break open the warehouse.

First they tried the casks. She was expecting oil. What she found was seawater -- every single one of them -- with just a thin layer of oil at the top, near the bung hole. Then they cut open the bales. They were stuffed with tow -- plain, worthless tow. Two of them did contain actual cloth, but all told, everything in that warehouse wasn't worth more than two hundred florins.

Biancofiore, forced to admit she'd been outfoxed, wept long and bitterly over the five hundred she'd returned and even longer over the thousand she'd lent. As she often said afterward:

"If you deal with a Tuscan, you'd best not be cross-eyed."

And so, having earned nothing but a loss and a lesson, she learned at her own expense that some people are just as clever as she was."


Dioneo's story was finished, and Lauretta, knowing that her reign had come to its end, praised Canigiano's cunning advice -- which had clearly proved sound by its results -- and Salabaetto's shrewdness in carrying it out, which deserved no less admiration. Then she lifted the laurel wreath from her own head and set it on Emilia's, saying with womanly grace, "Madam, I don't know how pleasant a queen you'll make us, but at least we'll have a beautiful one. See to it that your deeds match your looks."

She returned to her seat. Emilia blushed a little -- not so much at being made queen as at hearing herself publicly praised for the thing women most love to be praised for -- and her face turned the color of fresh-bloomed roses at dawn. She kept her eyes lowered until the redness faded, then gave instructions to the steward about the group's arrangements and addressed them all.

"Delightful ladies, it's common to see oxen, after they've toiled under the yoke for part of the day, unyoked and set free to graze wherever they please in the woods. And we can see just as plainly that gardens planted with all sorts of trees are not less beautiful than groves of nothing but oaks -- they're far more beautiful. So, considering how many days we've been telling our stories under the constraint of a fixed theme, I think that -- like workers who need a holiday to come back refreshed -- a little freedom would do us good. Therefore, for tomorrow's storytelling, I'm not going to restrict you to any particular subject. Let each person tell whatever story they please. I'm quite sure that the variety of topics will entertain us just as much as sticking to a single theme -- if not more. And having done this, whoever succeeds me as ruler can, with renewed confidence, impose whatever restrictions they see fit."

With that, she set everyone free until suppertime.

They all praised the queen's wisdom. Rising from their seats, they went their separate ways: the ladies to weaving garlands and amusing themselves, the young men to games and songs. They passed the time this way until supper, which they ate in high spirits around the beautiful fountain. Afterward, they sang and danced according to their usual custom. At last, to follow the tradition of her predecessors, the queen asked Pamfilo to sing a song -- despite the fact that several others had already performed of their own accord. He obliged without hesitation:

> Such is your pleasure, Love,
> And such the joy I feel thereby,
> That I am happy, burning in your fire.
>
> The overflowing gladness in my heart
> For the high, precious joy
> To which you've led me --
> Too vast to be contained -- spills over
> And shows upon my face
> The happiness I know.
> For being in love
> With one so worthy and so far above
> Makes sweet to me the burning I endure.
>
> I cannot sketch in words or song, O Love,
> The thing I feel,
> Nor voice the bliss I know.
> And even if I could, I'd have to hide it,
> For once revealed, I think
> It would turn to sorrow.
> Yet I'm so content
> That every word would limp and fail
> If I tried to speak the smallest part of it.
>
> Who would have dreamed these arms of mine
> Could ever reach
> The place where they have held her close?
> Or that my face would ever touch
> So fair a shrine
> As that which, by her grace, I've won?
> Such fortune I would never
> Have been believed to hold -- and so I burn,
> Concealing the bright source of all my joy.

This was the end of Pamfilo's song. Everyone had joined in the refrains, but more than a few of them paid unusually close attention to the words, trying to guess what it was that he sang he must keep hidden. Various theories were whispered, but none of them hit the mark. Finally, the queen, seeing that the song was done and that the young ladies and gentlemen were all ready for rest, commanded everyone to bed.

Here ends the Eighth Day of the Decameron.
