## Day 10, Story 10

*The Marquis of Saluzzo, pressured by his subjects to marry, chooses a peasant girl for his wife and proceeds to test her obedience through a series of increasingly cruel trials -- taking away her children, pretending to divorce her, and humiliating her in every way he can devise. She endures it all. Whether this makes her a saint or him a monster is a question the story leaves entirely open.*

The king's long story came to an end, and everyone seemed to have enjoyed it greatly. Then Dioneo said with a laugh, "That fellow who was looking forward to bringing down the ghost's raised tail that night wouldn't have given two cents for all the praise you've been heaping on Messer Torello." Then, knowing he was the only one left to tell a story, he began:

"My gentle ladies, it seems to me that this entire day has been given over to kings and sultans and people of that sort. So, not to stray too far from the rest of you, I'd like to tell you about a marquis -- not an act of magnificence, but a monstrous piece of folly. Even though things worked out well for him in the end, I wouldn't advise anyone to follow his example. It was a thousand pities he got away with it.

A long time ago, the head of the house among the Marquises of Saluzzo was a young man named Gualtieri. He had neither wife nor children and spent his time doing nothing but hunting and hawking. He had no thought of marrying or having children -- which, by the way, should have been considered very wise.

His vassals, however, didn't like this one bit. They begged him repeatedly to take a wife, so that he wouldn't die without an heir and they wouldn't be left without a lord. They even offered to find him a bride from the right kind of family -- someone he could have high hopes for and be happy with.

Gualtieri answered them: 'My friends, you're trying to force me into something I was absolutely determined never to do. Think about how hard it is to find a woman whose temperament truly suits your own, and how many of the wrong kind there are, and how miserable life becomes when a man ends up with someone who doesn't fit him. And when you say you can judge the daughters by studying their parents, and that's how you'll find me a wife I'll like -- that's nonsense. I don't know how you'd ever truly know the fathers, let alone the secrets of the mothers. And even if you did, daughters are often nothing like their parents.

'But since it makes you happy to see me in chains, fine -- I'll do as you wish. But so that I'll have no one to blame but myself if things go badly, I intend to find my own wife. And I'm telling you now: whoever she may be, if you don't honor her as your lady and mistress, you'll learn the hard way how much I resent having taken a wife against my will, just to please you.'

The good men agreed to his terms, as long as he actually married.

Now, for some time, Gualtieri had been taken with the bearing of a poor girl from a village near his estate. She seemed pretty enough, and he figured he could live a perfectly comfortable life with her. So without looking any further, he decided to marry her. He sent for her father -- an extremely poor man -- and arranged with him to take her as his wife.

That done, he gathered all his friends from the surrounding countryside and said to them: 'My friends, you wanted me to marry, and I've agreed to it -- more to please you than from any desire of my own. You remember what you promised me: that you'd accept whoever I chose and honor her as your lady and mistress. Well, the time has come for me to keep my promise to you, and for you to keep yours to me. I've found a young woman after my own heart, and in a few days I intend to marry her and bring her home. So start thinking about how to make the wedding celebration a fine one, and how to receive her with honor -- so that I can be satisfied with your promise, just as you'll have reason to be satisfied with mine.'

The good folk all answered cheerfully that they were delighted, and that whoever she was, they'd accept her as their lady and honor her in every way. Then they all set about preparing a grand and joyful festival. Gualtieri did the same: he arranged an enormous, magnificent wedding and invited many friends, relatives, and great gentlemen of the region. He also had a quantity of fine, rich clothes made, cut to the measurements of a girl who seemed to him about the same build as the young woman he planned to marry. And he prepared rings, belts, a beautiful crown, and everything a bride could need.

On the day he'd set for the wedding, Gualtieri mounted his horse around mid-morning, along with everyone who'd come to celebrate. When everything was ready, he said, "Gentlemen, it's time to go fetch the bride." Then he rode with his whole company to the village and went straight to the girl's father's house. They found her hurrying back from the spring with a jug of water, rushing so she could go with the other women to watch the arrival of Gualtieri's bride.

When the marquis saw her, he called her by name -- Griselda -- and asked where her father was. "My lord, he's inside," she answered shyly.

Gualtieri dismounted and told everyone to wait. He went into the poor house alone, found her father -- whose name was Giannucolo -- and said, "I've come to marry Griselda. But first I want to ask her a few things, in your presence."

He asked her whether, if he took her as his wife, she would always try to please him; whether she would never take offense at anything he might say or do; whether she would be obedient in all things -- and many other questions of the same kind. To every one, she answered yes.

Gualtieri took her by the hand and led her outside. There, in front of his entire company and everyone else present, he had her stripped naked. Then he sent for the clothes he'd had made and had her dressed and shod on the spot. He had the crown placed on her hair, tangled as it was. Everyone stared in astonishment. "Gentlemen," he said, "this is the woman I intend to make my wife -- if she'll have me." Then he turned to her, standing there flushed and bewildered, and said, "Griselda, will you have me as your husband?"

"Yes, my lord," she answered.

"And I will have you as my wife," he said, and married her right there, in front of them all. He had her mounted on a palfrey and led her, with a splendid escort, to his mansion, where the wedding was celebrated with as much joy and magnificence as if he'd married the daughter of the King of France.

The young bride seemed to have changed not just her clothes but her entire nature. She was, as we've already said, beautiful in face and figure, and she now became as gracious, as charming, and as refined as she was lovely. She seemed not the daughter of Giannucolo the shepherd but the child of some great nobleman. Everyone who'd known her before was amazed. She was so obedient to her husband and so devoted in his service that he considered himself the happiest man alive. She was so kind and generous to his subjects that there wasn't one of them who didn't love and honor her wholeheartedly, praying for her health and happiness and success. Where people had once said Gualtieri had been foolish to marry her, they now declared with one voice that he was the wisest and most perceptive man in the world -- because no one else could have seen the nobility hidden beneath those poor clothes and that country life.

In short, it wasn't long before she'd earned such a reputation -- not just in her husband's territory but everywhere -- for her virtues and her good works that she completely reversed whatever anyone had said against Gualtieri for marrying her.

She hadn't been with Gualtieri long before she became pregnant, and in due time gave birth to a baby girl. Gualtieri was overjoyed. But soon after, a strange new idea took hold of him: he wanted to test her patience through long suffering and unbearable treatment. First he needled her with words, pretending to be upset and telling her that his subjects were furious about her low birth, especially now that she was bearing children. They were doing nothing but grumble, he said, bitterly resentful about the birth of her daughter.

The lady heard all this without the slightest change in her expression. "My lord," she said, "do with me whatever you believe will be best for your honor and your peace of mind. I'll be content with anything, because I know I'm worth less than any of them, and that I was never worthy of the position you so generously raised me to."

This answer pleased Gualtieri very much. He could see she hadn't been puffed up with pride by any of the honors he or others had shown her. But a little while later, having told her in general terms that his subjects couldn't tolerate the daughter she'd borne, he sent a servant to her -- a man he'd carefully coached. The servant came to her with a grief-stricken expression and said, "Madam, if I don't want to die, I have to do what my lord commands. He's ordered me to take your daughter and--" He said no more.

The lady, hearing this and seeing the servant's face and remembering what her husband had said, understood that the man had been ordered to kill the child. Without the slightest change in her expression -- though her heart was being torn apart -- she took the baby from the cradle, kissed her, blessed her, and placed her in the servant's arms. "Here," she said. "Do exactly what your lord has ordered. But don't leave her body to be eaten by animals and birds -- unless he's told you to do that too."

The servant took the child and reported what the lady had said to Gualtieri. Marveling at her composure, he sent the child with his servant to a kinswoman of his in Bologna, asking her to raise and educate the girl carefully, without ever revealing whose daughter she was.

In time, the lady became pregnant again and gave birth to a boy, which made Gualtieri very happy. But what he'd already done wasn't enough. He probed even deeper, striking an even crueler blow. One day he told her, with a troubled look, "Wife, ever since you bore this son, I haven't been able to live in peace with my people. They're furious that a grandson of Giannucolo might one day become their lord. I'm afraid that if I don't want to be driven from my own lands, I'll have to do what I did before -- and eventually, I'll have to leave you and take another wife."

The lady listened patiently. Her only answer was: "My lord, think only of your own satisfaction. Do what makes you happy, and don't worry about me. Nothing matters to me except what pleases you."

Not many days later, Gualtieri sent for the boy in the same way he'd sent for the girl, and making the same show of having him killed, dispatched him to Bologna to be raised alongside his sister. The lady said nothing different and showed no different face than she had with the girl. Gualtieri was astonished and told himself that no other woman could have endured what she endured. If he hadn't seen with his own eyes how tenderly she cared for the children when it pleased him to let her, he might have thought she simply didn't love them. But he knew better. He knew she did it out of sheer strength of will.

His subjects, believing he'd had the children killed, condemned him harshly, calling him a cruel and heartless man. They felt the deepest pity for his wife. But when the women who came to console her over the death of her children offered their sympathy, she said only this: "Whatever pleases the man who fathered them pleases me too."

At last, several years after the girl's birth, Gualtieri decided the time had come for the final, supreme test of her endurance. He announced publicly that he could no longer stand being married to Griselda, that he realized he'd been young and foolish when he married her, and that he intended to petition the Pope for an annulment so he could take a new wife.

Many worthy men rebuked him for this, but he answered them with nothing more than: it must be so.

The lady heard all of it. It seemed to her she should prepare herself to go back to her father's house and tend sheep again, as she'd done before, while she watched another woman enjoy the man to whom she'd given all her love. It tore at her. But just as she'd borne every other blow of hostile fortune, she steeled herself to bear this one too, keeping her face composed.

Before long, Gualtieri had forged letters from Rome, made to look like a papal dispensation allowing him to leave Griselda and remarry. He summoned her before a crowd of people and said: "Wife, the Pope has granted me a dispensation to take a new wife and put you aside. Because my ancestors were great lords of this region, while yours have always been peasants, I've decided you will no longer be my wife. You'll return to Giannucolo's house with the dowry you brought me, and I'll bring home another woman -- one better suited to my station."

The lady, hearing this, fought back her tears -- defying the very nature of women -- though not without terrible pain. "My lord," she said, "I always knew that my humble birth was no match for your nobility. The life I've had with you, I've always understood was owed to you and to God, not to me. I never treated it as something given to me -- I always thought of it as something lent. It pleases you now to take it back. It must, and does, please me to return it.

"Here is the ring you married me with. Take it. You tell me to carry off the dowry I brought here. To do that, you'll need no treasurer, and I'll need no purse or packhorse -- because I haven't forgotten that you took me naked. If you think it proper that this body, which has carried children you fathered, should be paraded before everyone, then naked I'll go. But I beg you, in exchange for the virginity I brought here and don't take away with me -- let me at least carry off one single shift, over and above my dowry."

Gualtieri, who wanted to weep more than anything, kept a stony face. "Take a shift, then," he said.

Everyone around him begged him to give her at least a dress, so that the woman who'd been his wife for thirteen years wouldn't be seen leaving his house in nothing but a shift -- such a mean and shameful departure. But their pleas were useless.

So the lady, having commended them all to God, walked out of his house in her shift, barefoot, with nothing on her head. She made her way back to her father, followed by the tears and lamentations of everyone who saw her. Giannucolo -- who had never been able to believe that Gualtieri would really keep his daughter as his wife and had lived in daily expectation of exactly this -- had saved the clothes she'd taken off on her wedding morning. He brought them to her now. She put them on and went back to the small chores of her father's house, enduring the savage assault of hostile fortune with a steady heart.

Having done all this, Gualtieri announced to his people that he'd chosen a bride from the family of the Counts of Panago, and he made great preparations for the wedding. Then he sent for Griselda and said to her: "I'm about to bring home this new wife of mine, and I want to receive her in proper style when she first arrives. You know I have no women in my household who know how to prepare the rooms or handle all the things a celebration like this requires. No one understands these domestic matters better than you. So I want you to arrange everything. Invite whatever ladies you think best, and receive them as if you were still the lady of this house. Then, when the wedding is over, you can go back home."

Every word was a knife in Griselda's heart -- she'd been unable to give up her love for him as easily as she'd given up her good fortune. "My lord," she answered, "I am ready and willing."

And so, in her rough homespun clothes, she went back into the house she'd left in nothing but a shift, and began sweeping and tidying the rooms, hanging tapestries, setting out coverings, overseeing the preparation of food -- putting her hand to everything as if she were some lowly kitchen maid. She didn't stop until every room was decorated and everything was arranged exactly as it should be. Then she sent out invitations in Gualtieri's name to all the ladies of the region and waited for the day of the feast.

When the day came, dressed in her poor clothes but carrying herself with the grace and dignity of a noblewoman, she welcomed every lady who arrived with a cheerful face.

Meanwhile, Gualtieri had arranged for his two children to be brought from Bologna by his kinswoman, who had married into the family of the Counts of Panago. The girl was now twelve years old and as beautiful as anyone had ever seen. The boy was six. Gualtieri had sent word to his kinsman in Bologna asking him to come to Saluzzo with the boy and the girl, to bring a fine and honorable company with him, and to tell everyone that he was bringing the young lady to be Gualtieri's new wife -- without revealing who she really was to anyone.

The gentleman did as the marquis asked. He set out with the girl, the boy, and a splendid retinue, and after several days' journey arrived at Saluzzo around dinnertime. They found all the local people and many others from the surrounding area waiting to see Gualtieri's new bride.

The girl was received by the ladies and brought into the hall where the tables were set. Griselda came forward to meet her, dressed in her homespun, and greeted her warmly: "Welcome, my lady, and a most heartfelt welcome to you."

The other ladies -- who had begged Gualtieri, urgently but in vain, to let Griselda stay in a back room, or at least lend her one of her old dresses so she wouldn't have to appear like this before his guests -- took their seats at the table, and the meal was served. Everyone was watching the girl, and the general verdict was that Gualtieri had made a good trade. Among all the admirers, Griselda herself was the most generous with her praise, commending both the girl and her young brother.

Gualtieri had now observed that the strangeness of his behavior hadn't shaken her in the least. He was certain that this wasn't because she was too slow to understand -- he knew perfectly well how sharp she was. He decided the time had finally come to pull her out of the bitterness that he had no doubt she was hiding behind that constant, steady face.

He called her over and said to her, smiling, in front of everyone: "So, what do you think of our bride?"

"My lord," she answered, "I think very well of her. If she's as wise as she is beautiful -- and I believe she is -- I have no doubt you'll live as the happiest man in the world. But I beg you, with all my heart, don't inflict on her the same wounds you once inflicted on the woman who used to be yours. I don't think she could survive them. She's younger, and she's been raised in comfort, whereas the other one had known nothing but hard work since she was a child."

Gualtieri, seeing that she truly believed the girl was to be his new wife and still spoke nothing but good of her, had her sit down beside him. "Griselda," he said, "the time has come for you to reap the reward of your long patience -- and for those who've called me cruel and unjust and monstrous to understand that everything I did, I did with a purpose. I wanted to teach you how to be a wife. I wanted to show these people how to choose one and how to treat one. And I wanted to secure for myself a life of lasting peace for as long as I had to live with you.

"When I first decided to marry, I was terrified that peace would elude me. And so, to test you, I tried you and tormented you in every way you know. And because I've never once found that you departed from my wishes, in word or in deed, I now have from you the happiness I wanted. So now I mean to give you back, in a single moment, everything I took from you over all those years, and to heal with one supreme joy all the pain I caused you.

"Take this girl, whom you believe to be my bride, and her brother, and know them for your children and mine. These are the ones everyone believed for so long that I'd had barbarously murdered. And I am your husband, who loves you above all things, and who believes he can say, without boasting, that no man alive has more reason to be happy with his wife than I do."

With that, he embraced her and kissed her. Then he rose and went with Griselda -- who was weeping with joy -- to where their daughter sat, stunned by what she was hearing. He embraced her tenderly, and then the boy, and the truth broke over them and over everyone else in the room.

The ladies sprang up from the table, overjoyed, and led Griselda to a chamber where, with far happier purpose, they stripped off her rough clothes and dressed her again in one of her own magnificent gowns. They brought her back to the hall looking every inch the noblewoman -- which, in truth, she had looked even in rags.

There she was reunited with her children in a scene of indescribable joy. Everyone was overcome with happiness. The feasting and celebration went on for days. People agreed that Gualtieri was a wise man, though they all felt the tests he'd put his wife through were excessively harsh -- no, intolerable. But above all, everyone agreed that Griselda was the wisest of them all.

The Count of Panago returned to Bologna after a few days. Gualtieri took Giannucolo away from his labors and established him in a position that befitted the father-in-law of a marquis, so that he lived out his remaining days in honor and comfort. Gualtieri then made a fine marriage for his daughter and lived long and happily with Griselda, honoring her in every way he could.

What more can be said? Even in poor cottages, divine spirits rain down from heaven -- just as there are those in royal palaces who'd be better off tending pigs than ruling over men. Who besides Griselda could have endured the savage, unheard-of trials that Gualtieri put her through -- not just dry-eyed, but with a cheerful face? Though perhaps it would have served him right if he'd married someone who, when he threw her out of the house in her shift, had gone and found some other man to shake her coat with, and gotten a nice new dress out of the deal."

Dioneo's story was finished, and the ladies talked about it at great length -- some taking one side, some the other, some criticizing one aspect and others praising something else. Then the king, looking up at the sky and seeing that the sun was already low and the hour of vespers close at hand, began to speak without rising from his seat:

"Lovely ladies, I think you all know as well as I do that the wisdom of mortals doesn't consist only in remembering the past and observing the present. The truly wise -- or so all thinking people agree -- are those who can use both past and present to foresee what's coming.

"Tomorrow, as you know, it will be fifteen days since we left Florence, seeking some diversion to preserve our health and our lives -- escaping the grief and suffering and misery that have filled our city ever since this plague began. This, I believe, we've done well and honorably. Because even though we've told merry stories -- some of them the kind that might tempt weaker minds toward less than virtuous behavior -- and we've eaten and drunk well, and danced and sung and made music, all things that could encourage people of little backbone, I have not seen a single act, heard a single word, found a single thing to criticize -- not on your side, and not on ours. I've seen nothing here but perfect propriety, unbroken harmony, and a constant spirit of familial affection. This makes me deeply proud, for your honor and for mine.

"But I'm worried that if we stay much longer, all this pleasant routine might turn tedious. And people could start talking about us lingering here too long. Besides, each of us has had our turn to wear the crown. So I think it's time -- if you agree -- for us to go back where we came from. Not to mention that if you think about it, other people in the neighborhood already know about our group, and if we stay, the numbers could swell in a way that would ruin everything.

"If you approve, I'll keep the crown until our departure, which I propose for tomorrow morning. If you decide otherwise, I already know who should wear it for the next day."

The ladies and the young men debated this for a while, but in the end they all agreed the king's plan was both sensible and right, and they decided to follow it. The king called the steward, discussed the arrangements for the next morning, and then dismissed the group until suppertime. He stood up, and the ladies and young men rose after him, each going off to their usual amusements.

When suppertime came, they sat down to eat with great pleasure. Afterward, they fell to singing and playing music and dancing. When Lauretta had led one round of dancing, the king called on Fiammetta to sing a song. She happily began:

> If love could come without jealousy,
> I know no woman born
> Who'd be as glad as me.
>
> If joyful youth and beauty
> Could content a woman's heart,
> Or courage, worth, and wit,
> Sweet words, and perfect manners played with art --
> Then I'm the one, for all of it
> Lives in the man I love; I see it fit
> Together there, love-worn,
> All gathered up in him, my hope, for me.
>
> But since I know too well
> That other women are as wise as I,
> I tremble and I fear,
> And in my dread I spell
> In other eyes that same desire -- and why
> He steals my heart is clear
> To all; so what should be my joy most dear
> Leaves me instead forlorn,
> Sighing my way through love's own misery.
>
> If I could trust his faith
> As much as I can see his worth, then I
> Would never jealous be;
> But men give lovers wraith --
> So many temptresses catch every eye,
> However true they'd be,
> That I despair and half would gladly die,
> By every doubt now torn,
> Lest someone steal him right away from me.
>
> So let each lady hear
> My prayer to God: don't set your sights on him
> Or do me any wrong;
> For if I find one near
> Who works with words or looks or any whim
> To snare the love I long
> For -- let my beauty vanish -- I'll be strong
> Enough, though beauty-shorn,
> To make her rue it very bitterly.

As soon as Fiammetta finished her song, Dioneo, who was sitting beside her, said with a laugh, "Madam, you'd do everyone a great favor if you'd tell us who he is, so they don't steal him from you out of sheer ignorance -- since you'd take it so badly!"

After this, several more songs were sung. The night was now nearly half gone, and at the king's command, they all went to bed. When the new day dawned, they rose, and the steward -- having already sent all their belongings on ahead -- followed their wise king back to Florence. The three young men parted from the seven ladies at Santa Maria Novella, where they'd first met, and went their separate ways to attend to their own affairs. The ladies, when they felt the time was right, returned to their homes.

Here ends the tenth and final day of the Decameron.
