## Conclusion of the Author


Most noble ladies, for whose comfort I set out on this long labor -- I believe I have now, with the help of God (granted, I trust, by your kind prayers rather than any merit of my own), fully accomplished what I promised at the beginning of this book. And so, having given thanks first to God and then to you, the time has come to let my pen and my tired hand rest.

But before I do, I want to briefly address a few objections that some of you, or perhaps others, might raise -- even if only in your thoughts. Because I'm quite certain these stories enjoy no special immunity from criticism. In fact, I made that point myself at the beginning of the Fourth Day.

There will be some among you, perhaps, who'll say I took too many liberties in writing these stories -- that I had ladies say things, and far too often listen to things, that decent women shouldn't say or hear. I deny this. There is nothing so indecent that it can't be told, as long as you use the right words to tell it -- and I believe I've done exactly that.

But let's suppose for a moment that it's true (I have no intention of arguing with you -- you'd win). I can offer plenty of reasons for why I did what I did.

First: if anything in these stories crosses a line, the nature of the stories themselves demanded it. Anyone with a reasonable eye and a working brain can see that I couldn't have told them any other way without mangling them beyond recognition. And if maybe there's a little word here or there that's a bit freer than your prim, self-righteous prudes would like -- the kind of people who weigh words instead of deeds, and care more about looking good than being good -- then I say this: it should be no more forbidden for me to write such words than it is for men and women everywhere to say, all day long, "hole" and "peg" and "mortar" and "pestle" and "sausage" and "salami" and a hundred other things just like them.

And beyond that, my pen deserves no less freedom than the painter's brush. No one criticizes the painter -- or at least, no one with any sense -- when he paints not just Saint Michael striking the serpent with a sword, or Saint George slaying the dragon with a lance, but Adam as a man and Eve as a woman, and nails the feet of Christ Himself -- who chose to die on the cross for the salvation of the human race -- sometimes with one nail and sometimes with two. If they can paint all that, surely I can write a few lively words.

What's more, it should be perfectly obvious that these stories were not told in a church, where matters of faith require the purest language and the purest thoughts -- even though, if you look through the church's own scriptures, you'll find plenty of stories racier than anything I've written. Nor were they told in a school of philosophy, where standards of decency are just as high. They were told in gardens, in a place of pleasure and recreation, among young men and women who were nonetheless mature in judgment and not the sort to be led astray by a story. And they were told at a time when even the most virtuous people were wandering around with their pants on their heads, if it meant staying alive.

Besides, these stories -- like everything else in the world -- can help you or harm you, depending on who's listening. Who doesn't know that wine is a wonderful thing for healthy people, according to Cinciglione and Scolajo and plenty of others, but terrible for someone with a fever? Should we say wine is worthless just because it hurts the sick? Who doesn't know that fire is one of the most useful -- no, most essential -- things in human life? Should we say fire is evil because it burns down houses and villages and cities? Weapons, likewise, protect the lives of those who want to live in peace, and yet they also kill people -- not through any fault of their own, but because of the wickedness of those who misuse them.

A corrupt mind never understood a word in a healthy way. And just as decent language does nothing for a depraved mind, language that's a little rough around the edges can't contaminate a mind that's sound -- any more than mud can dim the rays of the sun, or earthly filth can stain the beauty of the sky.

What books, what words, what writings are holier, worthier, more sacred than the Holy Scriptures themselves? And yet there have been plenty of people who, by twisting them to perverse ends, have dragged themselves and others straight to hell. Everything is good for something, and misused, can be harmful in a thousand ways. The same goes for my stories. If anyone is determined to draw wicked lessons or wicked inspiration from them, the stories won't stop him -- not if the wickedness is already in there, or if he's willing to twist and distort them until it is. And if someone wants to find profit and pleasure in them, the stories won't refuse him that either. They will always be called useful and proper, so long as they are read at the right times and by the right people -- the times and the people they were written for.

If some lady needs to go say her rosary, or bake pies and cakes for her confessor, she can leave these stories alone. They won't chase anyone down and force themselves to be read. Though I should mention -- your saintly ladies do say and even do some pretty remarkable things themselves, from time to time.


There will also be ladies who say that some of these stories would have been better left out. Fair enough. But I could only write the stories that were actually told. If the storytellers had told better ones, I'd have written better ones. But even if people insist on pretending that I both invented and wrote them (which I did not), I wouldn't be ashamed that they weren't all equally good. There is no craftsman alive -- except God -- who does everything perfectly. Look at Charlemagne: he was the first to create the Paladins, but he couldn't make enough of them to fill an army. When you've got a multitude of things, you're bound to find them in all different qualities. No field was ever so well tended that you couldn't find nettles, thistles, or a few brambles mixed in with the good crops.

And let's be honest: since I was writing for simple young ladies -- which is what most of you are -- it would have been foolish to go killing myself searching for the most exquisite, refined material, or to tie myself in knots trying to speak with extreme precision. In any case, whoever goes browsing through these stories can skip the ones that offend and read the ones that entertain. Every story carries a label on its forehead telling you what it holds inside, so no one will be led into error.


I'm sure there will also be people who say some of the stories are too long. To them I say: if you have better things to do, it's foolish to read these stories at all, even if they were short. A long time has passed between when I started writing and this moment, when I've finally reached the end of my labors. But I haven't forgotten that I offered this work to women with time on their hands, not to anyone else. And for someone reading to pass the time, nothing is too long, as long as it does the job.

Short things are much better suited to students, who study not to kill time but to use it wisely. But you, ladies -- you have all the hours in the day that you don't spend on the pleasures of love. And since none of you goes off to study in Athens or Bologna or Paris, things need to be spelled out for you at somewhat greater length than for people who've had their wits sharpened by education.

And I have no doubt there are those among you who'll say these stories are full of jokes and wisecracks and clever nonsense, and that a man of substance and gravity shouldn't have written such things. To you I'm obliged to give thanks -- and I do -- for being so zealously protective of my reputation. But here's my answer: I confess to being a man of weight, and to having been weighed many times in my life. So, speaking to those ladies who haven't weighed me personally, let me assure you: I am not heavy. In fact, I'm so light I float like a cork in water. And considering that the sermons friars deliver these days to scold people for their sins are absolutely stuffed with jokes and wisecracks and ridicule, I figured the same wouldn't be out of place in my stories, which were written to cheer women out of their melancholy. Still, if anyone laughs too much because of them, the Lamentations of Jeremiah, the Passion of our Savior, and the Penitence of Mary Magdalene should cure that easily enough.


And who can doubt that some people will accuse me of having a mean and poisonous tongue, because in certain places I wrote the truth about friars? Those who say so must be forgiven, since it's impossible to believe they're motivated by anything other than righteous indignation. After all, friars are wonderful people. They avoid hardship for the love of God. They grind their grain when the water's running high. And they never kiss and tell. If it weren't for the fact that they all smell a bit like goats, their company would be perfectly delightful.

Still, I'll admit that the things of this world have no permanence and are constantly changing, and the same may be true of my tongue. Not trusting my own judgment -- which I avoid as much as I can in matters concerning myself -- a neighbor of mine told me not long ago that my tongue was the finest and sweetest in the world. And honestly, if that were true, there wouldn't have been many of the stories above left to write. But since those who level such accusations speak out of spite, let what I've said be enough of an answer.

And so, leaving each of you to say and believe whatever you like, it's time for me to stop talking. I humbly thank the One who, after such a long labor, has brought us safely, with His help, to the end we hoped for.

And you, lovely ladies -- go in peace, and may His grace be with you. Remember me, if any of you found any pleasure or profit in reading these stories.


Here ends the book called Decameron, also known as Prince Galahalt.
