Erdnase System of Stock Shuffling

The common method of stocking which has just been explained is very simple and easy to understand but extremely difficult to execute perfectly. The principal objections are that drawing from the bottom is an unnatural movement, that it requires much skill to accomplish the feat gracefully, and a great deal of practice to acquire the skill, and that this difficult and unnatural movement has to be executed for every card that is put in the stock, thereby increasing the chances of attracting attention when the stock is large. The new method about to be described is infinitely easier of execution, and the movements are so natural and regular that a very indifferent performer can defy the closest scrutiny. The cards may be shuffled with the utmost rapidity, or worked in quite slowly, without fear of exposing the action. The time required is not greater than usually taken in an ordinary shuffle, and the calculations are simple.

The principal aids in this new method are the jogs and the break, and they are used to hold and separate and locate solely by the sense of touch, the various divisions created during the shuffle. The entire stock is run up independent of sight, and, in fact, the dealer can no more follow the action with his eyes than can those who are most interested in scrutinizing his work. We will give as a first illustration the action required for stocking two cards in any game that is dealt one card at a time to each player. The position given for shuffling must be maintained.

*Two-Card Stock*.—The two desired cards are placed on top, under-cut about half the deck, in-jog top card, run two less than twice the number of players, out-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog; run one less than number of players, throw to break, run number of players, in-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top. This action places the two desired cards so that they will fall to the dealer in the first two rounds.

The reader who has mastered the blind shuffles should find it a very simple matter to perform this stock. His knowledge of the terms must be clear, and he must have the slight skill necessary to make the run, jog, break, and throw, as required in the blind shuffles. If a perfect understanding of this simple stock is obtained it will make the whole subject easy of comprehension. We will describe the action at length.

Assuming that it is a five-handed poker game. Two kings, the desired cards, which are placed on top. The first action is to "under-cut about half the deck," then "in-jog top card;" that is, to push one of the kings slightly over the little finger end of the left-hand packet with the left thumb. It is done the instant the under-cut is made, and just before the right hand makes the downward motion to shuffle. "Run two less than twice the number of players," which would be eight; "out-jog," that is, run the next card out over the left first finger by shifting the right hand slightly outward, "and shuffle off," which means to shuffle the balance of the right hand packet into the left hand without design. The left little and first fingers now hold the in and out-jogs. (See Fig. 33.)

[Figure bg]

The next operation is, "Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog." The right hand fingers easily find the out-jog, the right thumb presses up a little on the in-jog card, and forms and holds a space, as the under packet is drawn out. (See Fig. 34.) "Run one less than number of players," four, "throw to break," that is, pass the rest of the cards above the break in one packet into the left hand, which is done by lessening the right thumb pressure somewhat and slightly accelerating the downward motion. (See Fig. 35.) "Run number of players," five, "in-jog and shuffle off." The in-jog is made in this instance by shifting the right hand inward so that the card drawn off by the left thumb will fall slightly over the little finger. Then "under-cut to in-jog, and throw on top" will be understood.

[Figure bh]

[Figure bi]

The only action in any of the formulas for this method of stocking that will be found at all difficult is that of jogging the top card. It must be done rapidly and just at the moment the right hand is descending to shuffle.

*Three-Card Stock*.—Any game in which cards are dealt singly. Three desired cards on top. Under-cut about half deck, in-jog top card, run two less than twice the number of players, out-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog; run one less than number players, throw to break, run one, in-jog running one less than twice number of players, out-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top. Under-cut to out-jog, run one less than number of players and throw balance on top. This gives the dealer the three desired cards in three rounds.

In the second shuffle of this stock where directed to "in-jog running one less than number players," the in-jog card is counted in the run. "Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top" is to make a simple cut of the deck below the in-jog card.

*Four-Card Stock*.—For any game in which cards are dealt singly. Three of the desired cards are placed on top, one on bottom. Under-cut about one-third deck, in-jog top card, run two less than twice number players, out-jog and shuffle off to last card, so that it will be left on top. Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog, run one less than number players, throw to break, run one, in-jog running one less than twice number players, out-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top. Under-cut to out-jog, run one less than number players and throw balance on top. This gives the four desired cards to the dealer in four rounds.

The action of shuffling the last card on top is not at all difficult. A little practice enables the right hand to release all but the bottom card with ease and accuracy. It must be done quite frequently, and the knack can be acquired without trouble.

In the examples given the selected cards are stocked to fall to the dealer, but of course this is not always desired. It is just as simple to give them to any player by adding to or taking from the top, which may be done by varying the original calculation or by continuing a blind shuffle. If one card is taken from the top the player on the right gets the cards. If one is added they go to the player on the left, and so forth.

The stock must be run up without hurry or hesitation, at the dealer's customary gait. Rapidity is not essential, but smoothness and uniformity are. The break is formed, and the jogs are found, in the usual time necessary for drawing out the under cut. To go through the whole stock slowly is much better than to change the pace. The four-card stock for five players can be run up in fifteen seconds or less, but there is no reason why much greater time should not be taken.

The philosophy of the action may be reasoned out or not, as the student sees fit; but in any case to accomplish the stock gracefully and expeditiously he must not stop in the middle of the shuffle to calculate. The formula and figures must be literally at his fingers' ends. Most players stick to one or two games, and a little practice at that particular stock makes it as easy as habit. The highest tribute that can be paid to the method is the fact that certain players whom we have instructed, can execute the stock with the greatest facility and yet confess they cannot tell why the particular action produces the result, and they are totally unable to see what becomes of the selected cards until the shuffle is completed. However, it requires no feat of memory, and a few repetitions of the same formula enables one to stock and talk at the same time.

*Five-Card Stock*.—For any game in which cards are dealt singly. Four desired cards on top, one on bottom. Under-cut about one-third deck, in-jog top card, run two less than twice number players, out-jog and shuffle last card on top. Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog; run one less than number players, throw to break, run two, in-jog one and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top. Under-cut about one-third deck, in-jog top card, run two less than twice number players, out-jog and shuffle last card to top. Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog; run one less than number players, throw to break, run three times number players, in-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top. This gives the dealer the five cards in five rounds.

The formula appears long, but much of the shuffle is a repetition, very simple, and takes but a second or two longer than the four-card stock.

To show the possibilities of this method, we give a fancy stock for a game of Poker that will throw four of a kind to the dealer and leave two sets of fours on the top for the draw.

*Twelve-Card Stock*.—For Draw Poker. Three sets of fours on top, the set for the dealer to be the undermost. Take whole deck in right hand, run nine and throw balance on top, forming in-jog with throw. Under-cut about one-third deck, forming break at in-jog, in-jog top card, run two less than twice number players, out-jog, shuffle off to break and throw on top. Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog, run one less than number players, throw to break, run one, in-jog running one less than three times number players, out-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top. Under-cut to out-jog, run one less than number players and throw on top. This gives the dealer the first of his set of four on the second round, and leaves the other two sets on top for the draw. If the dealer's set is the highest of the three it matters little to him how the draw is made, as none of the players can get a better hand even by drawing four.

The action is the same as the four-card stock, with the exception of the first shuffle, which arranges three of the dealer's set on the top, and his fourth card at the break on top of the other two sets. Then—as in the next shuffle the break is thrown on top—it brings the dealer's set in precisely the same position as the first shuffle in the four-card stock. The balance of the action is the same only that the second under-cut shuffle in-jogs one less than three times number players, instead of one less than twice number players; and this is done to put the extra number of cards in the stock so that the five rounds may be dealt and leave the other sets intact for the draw.

We term this example a fancy stock, as it is very rarely that an opportunity occurs for selecting three sets of four of a kind; but the procedure is the same for two sets, or for sets of three, or pairs, or, in fact, for the stocking of any number or kind, with slight variation in the calculation.

The foregoing illustrations of stocking are applicable for Whist, Hearts, Poker, Cribbage and all games wherein the cards are dealt singly. It is much simpler to stock when the cards are dealt two or more at a time, and in this class are Euchre, Coon Can, Penuckle, varieties of All Fours, Piquet, etc. We shall illustrate the simplicity of a Euchre Stock. The hungriest dealer would not desire more than four cards, as in nine cases out of ten it will give him a lone hand.

*Euchre Stock*.—Four-handed game. Four desired cards on top. Under-cut about three-quarters of deck, run seventeen, in-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top. This will give three of the desired cards to the dealer and turn the fourth for trump. The dealer takes two cards the first round and three on the last, thereby getting three of the desired cards on the last round and turning the fourth for trump. The calculation is in merely counting the number of cards required in the deal before reaching the desired cards, which are for the dealer and the trump. In a three-handed game the run would be twelve—i. e., five less. In a two-handed game, seven. As described above, the shuffle is too short. A blind shuffle should be first executed, leaving the desired cards on top, and then the stock run up. If the two bowers are among the desired cards the left must not be turned for trumps, so it may be placed at any position among the desired cards save the under one.

If the desired cards are to be given to the dealer's partner the action is almost as short.

*Euchre Stock*.—Four-handed game. Four desired cards on top for partner and trump. Under-cut about three-quarters of deck, in-jog top card, run sixteen, out-jog and shuffle off. Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog, in-jog first card running eleven, throw to break, run three and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and shuffle off. This gives the player opposite the dealer three of the desired cards on the second round, and turns the fourth card for trumps.

For the benefit of the reader who wishes to understand the philosophy of the procedure, we will explain the calculation fully. We must first determine how the desired cards must stand when the shuffle is completed. The order for dealing the first round is, three, two, three, two; and the second round two, three, two, three. Now, to give his partner three desired cards on the second round they must stand the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth cards from the top, and the fourth desired card must stand the twenty-first from the top to turn for trumps. It would be easy to stock from these figures, but there is a shorter way. As there are only thirty-two cards in the Euchre deck, the desired cards must be nearer the bottom than the top, so if we count from the bottom we will find the trump card is the twelfth, with five indifferent cards between it and the other three desired cards. The eleven cards below the trump and the five above give us the number sixteen, which is the first run in the shuffle. The second run in the shuffle is eleven, which action makes the division, and the rest of the action is for the purpose of inserting the desired cards in the divisions created.

Any one who can understand and execute the Euchre examples, should have no trouble in stocking for any of the other games wherein two or more cards are dealt at a time. The more at a time the simpler to run up more desired cards. But two good cards on each deal are quite sufficient to turn the tide strongly in favor of the advantage player, and for practical purposes stocking more than three should not be attempted. Simple ability to make the run and the in-jog, enables one to stock two or three cards in any game that deals two or three at a time.
