The Erdnase System of Cull Shuffling

In most card games where there is a stake at issue the scrutiny is so close and the rules are so strict, that the expert card handler finds little opportunity to make an open selection of any particular cards. The slightest action that indicates such a purpose invites suspicion, and there is an old adage much quoted that runs, "If suspected, quit." However, we shall describe a new method of making many selections without a possibility of the design being detected, and in a manner so natural and regular that not a movement is made that indicates anything more than the purpose of thoroughly shuffling the deck.

The necessary preparation for the cull shuffle is to note at what particular number the first of the desired cards will stand from the top when thrown on the deck, and at what number the next will stand from the first, and so on for as many cards as are to be culled. For instance, if there are three desired cards, the first the eighth from the top, the next the fourth from that, and the next the sixth card further down, their order is fixed in the mind as eight, four, six. The lowest desired card is eighteenth card from the top of the deck, but the count is made from one desired card to the other. If the desired cards were together, the first one the eighth from the top, and the others the next two cards, the count would stand eight, one, one.

The calculation of the positions the cards will take when thrown on the deck is made before the dealer gathers them up to shuffle, or as he is doing so. It is a very simple matter to note the order in which two or three desirable cards lie, or, for that matter, five or six. In some games the note is made as the tricks are taken. In others the last cards that are faced on the table give sufficient choice. For instance, if two hands are shown in a Poker game, one holding a small pair and the other a side card to match the pair, a glance would determine the order the three of a kind would take when thrown on the deck. Of course, it would not do to make up the desired cards from one hand. Lightning don't strike in the same place often, and the dealer would naturally feel a little diffident about holding the same good cards that were contained in the last hand shown. The Cull Shuffle will bring the desired cards to the bottom of the deck. As a first example we will cull two desired cards.

*To Cull Two Cards, Numbers* 8, 4.—Under-cut about half deck, in-jog first card and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog, run one less than first number, in-jog, running one more than second number, out-jog and shuffle off. (The two desired cards are now located at top and bottom of the middle packet, which is held by the in and out-jogs.) Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog, in-jog first card (a desired card), throw to break, and shuffle off. (The two desired cards are now together, being the in-jog card and the next above it.) Under-cut to in-jog and shuffle off. This leaves the two desired cards at the bottom.

The action is a little confusing at first, but when this system of culling is understood it becomes very simple. The first under-cut and shuffle-off, in the foregoing example, has no bearing on the result, but it places the cards to be worked on well down in the deck, and this aids in making the whole shuffle appear regular.

*To Cull Three Cards, Numbers* 7, 5, 9.—Under-cut about half deck, in-jog first card and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog, run one less than first number, in-jog running one more than second number, out-jog running one less than third number, and throw on top. (Two of the desired cards are now at top and bottom of middle packet and the third on top of the deck.) Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog, in-jog top card, run one, throw to break and shuffle off. (The three cards are now together at in-jog.) Under-cut to in-jog, and shuffle off, leaving the three desired cards at the bottom.

It is necessary to put some little brains into so simple a problem as adding two and two together, and to become accomplished at culling one must have an understanding of the cause and effect of the various actions. It is impossible to give a formula that will answer for every situation. There is no end to the variety of positions the desired cards may be in. But with a thorough knowledge of the two examples given, and the reason for each particuar action, the student will be fairly established on the road to success, and have overcome by far the greatest difficulty.

*To Cull Four Cards, Numbers* 3, 6, 2, 5.—Under-cut about one-third deck, in-jog first card and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog, run one less than first number, in-jog running one more than second number, out-jog running one less than third number, and throw on top. (Two of the cards are now at top and bottom of middle packet, one on top of deck, and the last at its original number from top card.) Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog, in-jog top card, run one, throw to break and shuffle off. (Three cards are now together at in-jog, and last card at its number below in-jog.) Under-cut to in-jog and run one less than last number and throw on top. (Three of the cards are now at the bottom, the fourth on top.)

The top card can now be brought to the bottom with its fellows by an under-cut to top card and a throw on top; or, under-cut about half deck, in-jog top card, and throw on top; then under-cut to in-jog and shuffle off.

To under-cut to top card and throw on top, or, in other words, to run one and throw balance on top, if done rapidly, appears like a simple cut, and the fact that but one card is taken from the top to the bottom cannot be detected.

These examples of culling, if fairly well executed, have all the appearance of an ordinary shuffle, and when performed with the smoothness and grace of a clever card handler it is absolutely impossible to detect the least manipulation.

It will be noticed in the examples given that culling is largely a repetition of the same actions, as the number to be culled increases; and consequently the time required is greater. But should the desired cards run together in pairs, as threes or more, the action and time are shortened proportionately. Sets of cards running together are treated much as though each set were one card. If the order be 6, 1, 1, 1, 4, 1, 1, the action of getting them all together will be much the same as though they were but two cards at 6, 4. If the order were 5, 1, 1, 1, 3, 1, 1, 7, 1, the action would be about the same as a three-card cull shuffle, though there are nine desired cards actually run down to the bottom.

*To Cull Nine Cards, Numbers* 5, 1, 1, 1, 3, 1, 1, 7, 1.—Under-cut about one-third deck, in-jog first card and shuffle off. Under-cut to in-jog and run one less than first number, in-jog running all cards to and including last card of second set. (This run is nine, four in first set, two indifferent cards, three in second set.) Out-jog running one less than next number (six), and throw on top. (This places first two sets at top and bottom of middle packet, and third set on top.) Under-cut to out-jog, forming break at in-jog, in-jog top card, run second set (three) throw to break and shuffle off. (All the desired cards are now together, but the in-jog divides the last two.) Under-cut to in-jog and throw on top. This leaves one card on top and eight on bottom.

This example might well be termed a fancy cull, as running down so many cards will rarely be attempted, but it shows the possibilities of the system. Before the shuffle is begun the entire action should be mentally rehearsed so that there will be no hesitation in the procedure.

There is no difficult sleight-of-hand manipulation connected with the operation. Any one who can shuffle can cull, if he has the understanding. Rapidity is not nearly so important as regularity of time and movement.

There are many ways of making the cull shuffle more simple. The dealer can gather up the cards with a great deal of judgment yet without apparent design. He will never face a card or cards, or never change the positions in any group, but he can pick up any card or group of cards in the order best suited to his design without attracting attention. He can note the order the cards fall, in any particular trick, how many cards or tricks have been thrown on top of those he desires, the order of any discard exposed, his own discard, and the last cards played on the table. There are scores of opportunities to note the order of desirable cards in any game. If the dealer has an ally the two may work together in gathering up the cards, and the possibilities are doubled.

When the desired cards are run down to the bottom the dealer could continue the shuffle and run up a top stock, but the time required for the two operations would be too long. The usual practice is to deal from the bottom. Fifteen or twenty seconds is plenty of time to execute a three-card cull shuffle, and it can be done in half the time
