The Exclusive Coterie

*The Exclusive Coterie.*—In Effect. The four Queens are selected and laid face down in a row on the table. Three indifferent cards are placed on each Queen. Now the company selects one of the four packets, and it is found to consist of the four Queens only.

Sleights: Palm and Shift.

Patter and Execution.—"Ladies and gentlemen, I shall endeavor to illustrate, with the aid of this ordinary deck of cards, how futile are the efforts of plebeians to break intothat select circle of society known as the Beau-monde, and especially how such entree is prevented by the polite but frigid exclusiveness of its gentler members.

"We shall assume that it is the occasion of a public reception, our table the hall, our deck the common herd, and we may fittingly select the four Queens as representing the feminine portion of the Smart Set." (Lay four Queens face down on table.) "Will some one now kindly see that there are no more Queens in the deck." (Hand deck for inspection.) "There are no more Queens in the deck? Thanks!" (Take deck back.) "But are we all quite sure that the cards on the table are the four Queens? Please examine them." (Hand them to one of the company, and now secretly palm three cards in right hand.) "They are the four Queens? Kindly place them on the deck." (Extend deck in left hand and when Queens are placed on top secretly place palmed cards on top of them.) "Now, as our table is supposed to be the scene of this grand function, we shall station those four particularly exclusive ladies at different points in the room" (lay out the first three top cards face down), "giving her majesty the Queen of ——" (hesitate and carelessly turn Queen face up apparently to see the suit, and allow the company to see it also, then name the suit), "the post of honor near the entrance." (Lay first Queen on the table and make a shift, holding location of other three Queens.) "Now, as would naturally be the case, we shall besiege these high strung patrician ladies with attentions from the lower orders, which the rest of the deck represents, by first surrounding her majesty on the right with three cards from the top" (lay three cards on first table card), "and to show no partiality we shall cut the deck hap-hazard, and plague our second liege lady with three of the first presumptuous plebeians we may find there" (cut off small packet and place three cards on second table card), "and though the proximity or even notice of any of these common persons are equally abhorrent to our grand dames we shall treat them all alike by again cutting and surrounding her majesty at the entrance with three more rank outsiders" (this time cut to location of shift, and place the three Queens on table Queen), "and permit three more from the bottom who have been least crowding and therefore more deserving to proffer their homage to the other fair one." (Lay three bottom cards on the other table card.)

"Now, ladies and gentlemen, as you have seen, I have brutally taken advantage of these unprotected and tenderly nurtured creatures by placing them in circumstances that must be extremely galling to their aristocratic sensibilities. Will they endure such conditions? Having some knowledge of the marvelous subtlety, finesse and resources of the sex, I feel confident they can, with tact and discretion, easily elude their persecutors, and form a more congenial coterie among themselves. Will some one please select two of these packets?" (Whichever packets are selected place those two that do not contain the Queens at the back of the table side by side.) "Thanks. Now kindly tell me which of the two remaining packets I shall take?" (In any case pick up the two packets, placing the Queens at the front of the table and the second packet back beside the others. The question is purposely ambiguous.)

"Now we must see whether I were over-confident in predicting that the Queens would seek each other's society. If they are all found in one packet I was right. In which packet would they be most likely to congregate? As the front packet was your selection, and as it is given the most prominent position, I think the fatal vanity of the sex would tempt them to be there. We shall see." (Turn up four Queens, then face the other three packets, showing no Queens among them.)

It will have been seen by the foregoing that the presentation of a card trick may contain much more bosh than action, and indeed the performance of the one just described might be advantageously prolonged by a great deal more nonsense. In all card entertainments the more palaver the more the interest is excited, and the address and patter of the performer will count as much if not more than his skill in manipulation.
