The Top and Bottom Production

*The Top and Bottom Production.*—In Effect: Four persons freely select two cards each. All are restored to the deck, which is thoroughly shuffled. The top and bottom cards are now shown not to be any of those selected. The performer then causes the several pairs to instantly appear at top and bottom as called for.

Sleights: Two-Handed Shift, Palm and Blind Shuffle.

Execution and Patter: "Ladies and Gentlemen: For the purpose of this experiment, I shall request several individuals in the company to each select two cards. I wish you to take particular note of those you draw so that you will know them again." (Allow four persons, whom we shall call A., B., C. and D., to freely select two cards each. When all are selected, take them back in the reverse order, saying to D.) "Will you kindly place your two in the deck?" (When this is done, shift, palm off, and hand deck to be shuffled. Take back deck, replace palmed cards on top, turn to C.) "Please place your two in the middle." (Shift without closing two packets, appearing as a simple cut, and have C.'s cards now placed on D.'s. Again shift to top, and execute blind shuffle, jogging first card, and leaving selected cards in the middle. Now cut to, and include jog card, and have B.'s cards placed on first two pairs. Repeat the action taken last and have A.'s cards replaced in same manner, then shift and blind shuffle, and run three extra cards on top of the four pairs which are now on top of the pack.)

"Now, ladies and gentlemen, we have had eight cards selected by four of you, and all have been thoroughly shuffled in the deck. It is needless to say that I do not know which cards were selected, or that I have no idea where they are. However, we shall look at those near the top and bottom to see if any are in that position." (Turn deck over and show two or three of the bottom cards, turn deck back and take off top three in right hand, showing faces; then as replacing, push over next card with the left thumb, so that left little finger may be inserted under it, and shift all four to the bottom. This will leave A.'s two cards at top and bottom.) "Were any of the selected cards among those I have just shown? No? Well, I am about to perform what under ordinary circumstances would be a very difficult feat indeed, but with this trained and perfectly educated deck, becomes ridiculously simple and easy. It is to cause the selected cards to appear at the top and bottom, in any order that you may desire." (To A.) "If you will tell me, sir, what cards you drew, I shall call upon them to appear instantly. You say they are the Seven of Diamonds and the Jack of Spades? Well, now, Seven and Jack, come!" (Hold deck in left hand, click with little finger, show bottom card, take off top and show with right hand, push next card over side when replacing and shift two to bottom. This leaves B.'s cards at top and bottom.) "You see how willingly the cards obey me. Now, sir (to B.), let me know the cards you selected and we shall see if they are as active?" (When names are given, produce as before. Now execute blind shuffle again, running three extra cards on top. Again show several at bottom, then show top three, and this time push over two cards with left thumb when replacing top cards, and shift five to bottom. This leaves B.'s cards in position.) "We have still another pair to find, and though they seem excessively modest in keeping away from the top and bottom, I have no doubt they will be in evidence when called upon. What two did you draw, sir?" (to C. When names are given show as before, then shift two cards to bottom, leaving D.'s at top and bottom. Now affect to have forgotten about D.'s cards, and drop the deck on the table as though the trick were terminated. When reminded by the company that D.'s cards were not produced, show some slight embarrassment.) "Yes, that is true. I had forgotten that all were not produced, and as the deck has been out of my possession, I cannot exact the same obedience from them. However, if you will tell me the names of the last two cards, I shall try to find them myself." (When names are given, seize deck with right hand, toss it a yard or so straight upwards, retaining top and bottom cards in hand by friction, thrust hand among descending pack and apparently find the last two in the act.)
