III. Absolute Proofs of Consistency

The limitations inherent in the use of models for establishing consistency, and the growing apprehension that the standard formulations of many mathematical systems might all harbor internal contradictions, led to new attacks upon the problem. An alternative to relative proofs of consistency was proposed by Hilbert. He sought to construct "absolute" proofs, by which the consistency of systems could be established without assuming the consistency of some other system. We must briefly explain this approach as a further preparation for understanding Gödel's achievement.

The first step in the construction of an absolute proof, as Hilbert conceived the matter, is the *complete formalization* of a deductive system. This involves draining the expressions occurring within the system of all meaning: they are to be regarded simply as empty signs. How these signs are to be combined and manipulated is to be set forth in a set of precisely stated rules. The purpose of this procedure is to construct a system of signs (called a "calculus") which conceals nothing and which has in it only that which we explicitly put into it. The postulates and theorems of a completely formalized system are "strings" (or finitely long sequences) of meaningless marks, constructed according to rules for combining the elementary signs of the system into larger wholes. Moreover, when a system has been completely formalized, the derivation of theorems from postulates is nothing more than the transformation (pursuant to rule) of one set of such "strings" into another set of "strings." In this way the danger is eliminated of using any unavowed principles of reasoning. Formalization is a difficult and tricky business, but it serves a valuable purpose. It reveals structure and function in naked clarity, as does a cut-away working model of a machine. When a system has been formalized, the logical relations between mathematical propositions are exposed to view; one is able to see the structural patterns of various "strings" of "meaningless" signs, how they hang together, how they are combined, how they nest in one another, and so on.

A page covered with the "meaningless" marks of such a formalized mathematics does not *assert* anything—it is simply an abstract design or a mosaic possessing a determinate structure. Yet it is clearly possible to describe the configurations of such a system and to make statements about the configurations and their various relations to one another. One may say that a "string" is pretty, or that it resembles another "string," or that one "string" appears to be made up of three others, and so on. Such statements are evidently meaningful and may convey important information about the formal system. It must now be observed, however, that such meaningful statements about a meaningless (or formalized) mathematical system plainly do not themselves belong to that system. They belong to what Hilbert called "meta-mathematics," to the language that is *about* mathematics. Meta-mathematical statements are statements about the signs occurring within a formalized mathematical system (i.e., a calculus)—about the kinds and arrangements of such signs when they are combined to form longer strings of marks called "formulas," or about the relations between formulas that may obtain as a consequence of the rules of manipulation specified for them.

A few examples will help to an understanding of Hilbert's distinction between mathematics (i.e., a system of meaningless signs) and meta-mathematics (meaningful statements about mathematics, the signs occurring in the calculus, their arrangement and relations). Consider the expression:

	2 + 3 = 5

This expression belongs to mathematics (arithmetic) and is constructed entirely out of elementary arithmetical signs. On the other hand, the *statement*

	'2 + 3 = 5' is an arithmetical formula

asserts something about the displayed expression. The statement does not express an arithmetical fact and does not belong to the formal language of arithmetic; it belongs to meta-mathematics, because it characterizes a certain string of arithmetical signs as being a formula. The following statement belongs to meta-mathematics:

	If the sign '=' is to be used in a formula of arithmetic, the sign must be flanked both left and right by numerical expressions.

This statement lays down a necessary condition for using a certain arithmetical sign in arithmetical formulas: the structure that an arithmetical formula must have if it is to embody that sign. Consider next the three formulas:

	*x* = *x*
	0 = 0
	0 ≠ 0

Each of these belongs to mathematics (arithmetic), because each is built up entirely out of arithmetical signs. But the statement:

	'*x*' is a variable

belongs to meta-mathematics, since it characterizes a certain arithmetical sign as belonging to a specific class of signs (i.e., to the class of variables). Again, the following statement belongs to meta-mathematics:

	The formula '0 = 0' is derivable from the formula '*x* = *x*' by substituting the numeral '0' for the variable '*x*'.

It specifies in what manner one arithmetical formula can be obtained from another formula, and thereby describes how the two formulas are related to each other. Similarly, the statement

	'0 ≠ 0' is not a theorem

belongs to meta-mathematics, for it says of a certain formula that it is not derivable from the axioms of arithmetic, and thus asserts that a certain relation does not hold between the indicated formulas of the system. Finally, the next statement belongs to meta-mathematics:

	Arithmetic is consistent

(i.e., it is not possible to derive from the axioms of arithmetic two formally contradictory formulas—for example, the formulas '0 = 0' and '0 ≠ 0'). This is patently about arithmetic, and asserts that pairs of formulas of a certain sort do not stand in a specific relation to the formulas that constitute the axioms of arithmetic.³

Footnote: ³ It is worth noting that the meta-mathematical statements given in the text do not contain as constituent parts of themselves any of the *mathematical signs and formulas* that appear in the examples. At first glance this assertion seems palpably untrue, for the signs and formulas are plainly visible. But, if the statements are examined with an analytic eye, it will be seen that the point is well taken. The meta-mathematical statements contain the *names* of certain arithmetical expressions, but not the arithmetical expressions themselves. The distinction is subtle but both valid and important. It arises out of the circumstance that the rules of English grammar require that no sentence literally contain the objects to which the expressions in the sentence may refer, but only the *names* of such objects. Obviously, when we talk about a city we do not put the city itself into a sentence, but only the name of the city; and, similarly, if we wish to say something about a word (or other linguistic sign), it is not the word itself (or the sign) that can appear in the sentence, but only a name for the word (or sign). According to a standard convention we construct a name for a linguistic expression by placing single quotation marks around it. Our text adheres to this convention. It is correct to write:

It may be that the reader finds the word 'meta-mathematics' ponderous and the concept puzzling. We shall not argue that the word is pretty; but the concept itself will perplex no one if we point out that it is used in connection with a special case of a well-known distinction, namely between a subject matter under study and discourse about the subject matter. The statement 'among phalaropes the males incubate the eggs' pertains to the subject matter investigated by zoologists, and belongs to zoology; but if we say that this assertion about phalaropes proves that zoology is irrational, our statement is not about phalaropes, but about the assertion and the discipline in which it occurs, and is meta-zoology. If we say that the *id* is mightier than the *ego,* we are making noises that belong to orthodox psychoanalysis; but if we criticize this statement as meaningless and unprovable, our criticism belongs to meta-psychoanalysis. And so in the case of mathematics and meta-mathematics. The formal systems that mathematicians construct belong in the file labeled "mathematics"; the description, discussion, and theorizing about the systems belong in the file marked "meta-mathematics."

	Chicago is a populous city.

But it is incorrect to write:

	Chicago is tri-syllabic.

To express what is intended by this latter sentence, one must write:

	'Chicago' is tri-syllabic.

Likewise, it is incorrect to write:

	*x* = 5 is an equation.

We must, instead, formulate our intent by:

	'*x* = 5' is an equation.

The importance to our subject of recognizing the distinction between mathematics and meta-mathematics cannot be overemphasized. Failure to respect it has produced paradoxes and confusion. Recognition of its significance has made it possible to exhibit in a clear light the logical structure of mathematical reasoning. The merit of the distinction is that it entails a careful codification of the various signs that go into the making of a formal calculus, free of concealed assumptions and irrelevant associations of meaning. Furthermore, it requires exact definitions of the operations and logical rules of mathematical construction and deduction, many of which mathematicians had applied without being explicitly aware of what they were using.

Hilbert saw to the heart of the matter, and it was upon the distinction between a formal calculus and its description that he based his attempt to build "absolute" proofs of consistency. Specifically, he sought to develop a method that would yield demonstrations of consistency as much beyond genuine logical doubt as the use of finite models for establishing the consistency of certain sets of postulates—by an analysis of a finite number of structural features of expressions in completely formalized calculi. The analysis consists in noting the various types of signs that occur in a calculus, indicating how to combine them into formulas, prescribing how formulas can be obtained from other formulas, and determining whether formulas of a given kind are derivable from others through explicitly stated rules of operation. Hilbert believed it might be possible to exhibit every mathematical calculus as a sort of "geometrical" pattern of formulas, in which the formulas stand to each other in a finite number of structural relations. He therefore hoped to show, by exhaustively examining these structural properties of expressions within a system, that formally contradictory formulas cannot be obtained from the axioms of given calculi. An essential requirement of Hilbert's program in its original conception was that demonstrations of consistency involve only such procedures as make no reference either to an infinite number of structural properties of formulas or to an infinite number of operations with formulas. Such procedures are called "finitistic"; and a proof of consistency conforming to this requirement is called "absolute." An "absolute" proof achieves its objectives by using a minimum of principles of inference, and does not assume the consistency of some other set of axioms. An absolute proof of the consistency of arithmetic, if one could be constructed, would therefore show by a finitistic meta-mathematical procedure that two contradictory formulas, such as '0 = 0' and its formal negation '∼ (0 = 0)'—where the sign '∼' means 'not'—cannot both be derived by stated rules of inference from the axioms (or initial formulas).⁴

Footnote: ⁴ Hilbert did not give an altogether precise account of just what meta-mathematical procedures are to count as finitistic. In the original version of his program the requirements for an absolute proof of consistency were more stringent than in the subsequent explanations of the program by members of his school.

It may be useful, by way of illustration, to compare meta-mathematics as a theory of proof with the theory of chess. Chess is played with 32 pieces of specified design on a square board containing 64 square subdivisions, where the pieces may be moved in accordance with fixed rules. The game can obviously be played without assigning any "interpretation" to the pieces or to their various positions on the board, although such an interpretation could be supplied if desired. For example, we could stipulate that a given pawn is to represent a certain regiment in an army, that a given square is to stand for a certain geographical region, and so on. But such stipulations (or interpretations) are not customary; and neither the pieces, nor the squares, nor the positions of the pieces on the board signify anything *outside* the game. In this sense, the pieces and their configurations on the board are "meaningless." Thus the game is analogous to a formalized mathematical calculus. The pieces and the squares of the board correspond to the elementary signs of the calculus; the legal positions of pieces on the board, to the formulas of the calculus; the initial positions of pieces on the board, to the axioms or initial formulas of the calculus; the subsequent positions of pieces on the board, to formulas derived from the axioms (i.e., to the theorems); and the rules of the game, to the rules of inference (or derivation) for the calculus. The parallelism continues. Although configurations of pieces on the board, like the formulas of the calculus, are "meaningless," statements about these configurations, like meta-mathematical statements about formulas, are quite meaningful. A "meta-chess" statement may assert that there are twenty possible opening moves for White, or that, given a certain configuration of pieces on the board with White to move, Black is mate in three moves. Moreover, general "meta-chess" theorems can be established whose proof involves only a finite number of permissible configurations on the board. The "meta-chess" theorem about the number of possible opening moves for White can be established in this way; and so can the "meta-chess" theorem that if White has only two Knights and the King, and Black only his King, it is impossible for White to force a mate against Black. These and other "meta-chess" theorems can, in other words, be proved by finitistic methods of reasoning, that is, by examining in turn each of a finite number of configurations that can occur under stated conditions. The aim of Hilbert's theory of proof, similarly, was to demonstrate by such finitistic methods the impossibility of deriving certain contradictory formulas in a given mathematical calculus.
