VI. The Idea of Mapping and Its Use in Mathematics

The sentential calculus is an example of a mathematical system for which the objectives of Hilbert’s theory of proof are fully realized. To be sure, this calculus codifies only a fragment of formal logic, and its vocabulary and formal apparatus do not suffice to develop even elementary arithmetic. Hilbert’s program, however, is not so limited. It can be carried out successfully for more inclusive systems, which can be shown by meta-mathematical reasoning to be both consistent and complete. By way of example, an absolute proof of consistency is available for a system of arithmetic that permits the *addition* of cardinal numbers though not their multiplication. But is Hilbert’s finitistic method powerful enough to prove the consistency of a system such as *Principia,* whose vocabulary and logical apparatus are adequate to express the whole of arithmetic and not merely a fragment? Repeated attempts to construct such a proof were unsuccessful; and the publication of Gödel’s paper in 1931 showed, finally, that all such efforts operating within the strict limits of Hilbert’s original program must fail.

What did Gödel establish, and how did he prove his results? His main conclusions are twofold. In the first place (though this is not the order of Gödel’s actual argument), he showed that it is impossible to give a meta-mathematical proof of the consistency of a system comprehensive enough to contain the whole of arithmetic—unless the proof itself employs rules of inference in certain essential respects different from the Transformation Rules used in deriving theorems within the system. Such a proof may, to be sure, possess great value and importance. However, if the reasoning in it is based on rules of inference much more powerful than the rules of the arithmetical calculus, so that the consistency of the assumptions in the reasoning is as subject to doubt as is the consistency of arithmetic, the proof would yield only a specious victory: one dragon slain only to create another. In any event, if the proof is not finitistic, it does not realize the aims of Hilbert’s original program; and Gödel’s argument makes it unlikely that a finitistic proof of the consistency of arithmetic can be given.

Gödel’s second main conclusion is even more surprising and revolutionary, because it demonstrates a fundamental limitation in the power of the axiomatic method. Gödel showed that *Principia,* or any other system within which arithmetic can be developed, is *essentially incomplete.* In other words, given *any* consistent set of arithmetical axioms, there are true arithmetical statements that cannot be derived from the set. This crucial point deserves illustration. Mathematics abounds in general statements to which no exceptions have been found that thus far have thwarted all attempts at proof. A classical illustration is known as “Goldbach’s theorem,” which states that every even number is the sum of two primes. No even number has ever been found that is not the sum of two primes, yet no one has succeeded in finding a proof that Goldbach’s conjecture applies without exception to all even numbers. Here, then, is an example of an arithmetical statement that may be true, but may be non-derivable from the axioms of arithmetic. Suppose, now, that Goldbach’s conjecture were indeed universally true, though not derivable from the axioms. What of the suggestion that in this eventuality the axioms could be modified or augmented so as to make hitherto unprovable statements (such as Goldbach’s on our supposition) derivable in the enlarged system? Gödel’s results show that even if the supposition were correct the suggestion would still provide no final cure for the difficulty. That is, even if the axioms of arithmetic are augmented by an indefinite number of other true ones, there will always be further arithmetical truths that are not formally derivable from the augmented set.¹³

Footnote: ¹³ Such further truths may, as we shall see, be established by some form of meta-mathematical reasoning about an arithmetical system. But this procedure does not fit the requirement that the calculus must, so to speak, be self-contained, and that the truths in question must be exhibited as the formal consequences of the specified axioms within the system. There is, then, an *inherent* limitation in the axiomatic method as a way of systematizing the whole of arithmetic.

How did Gödel prove these conclusions? Up to a point the structure of his argument is modeled, as he himself pointed out, on the reasoning involved in one of the logical antinomies known as the “Richard Paradox,” first propounded by the French mathematician Jules Richard in 1905. We shall outline this paradox.

Consider a language (e.g., English) in which the purely arithmetical properties of cardinal numbers can be formulated and defined. Let us examine the definitions that can be stated in the language. It is clear that, on pain of circularity or infinite regress, some terms referring to arithmetical properties cannot be defined explicitly—for we cannot define everything and must start somewhere—though they can, presumably, be understood in some other way. For our purposes it does not matter which are the undefined or “primitive” terms; we may assume, for example, that we understand what is meant by ‘an integer is divisible by another’, ‘an integer is the product of two integers’, and so on. The property of being a prime number may then be defined by: ‘not divisible by any integer other than 1 and itself’; the property of being a perfect square may be defined by: ‘being the product of some integer by itself’; and so on.

We can readily see that each such definition will contain only a finite number of words, and therefore only a finite number of letters of the alphabet. This being the case, the definitions can be placed in serial order: a definition will precede another if the number of letters in the first is smaller than the number of letters in the second; and, if two definitions have the same number of letters, one of them will precede the other on the basis of the alphabetical order of the letters in each. On the basis of this order, a unique integer will correspond to each definition and will represent the number of the place that the definition occupies in the series. For example, the definition with the smallest number of letters will correspond to the number 1, the next definition in the series will correspond to 2, and so on.

Since each definition is associated with a unique integer, it may turn out in certain cases that an integer will possess the very property designated by the definition with which the integer is correlated.¹⁴ Suppose, for instance, the defining expression ‘not divisible by any integer other than 1 and itself’ happens to be correlated with the order number 17; obviously 17 itself has the property designated by that expression. On the other hand, suppose the defining expression ‘being the product of some integer by itself’ were correlated with the order number 15; 15 clearly does not have the property designated by the expression. We shall describe the state of affairs in the second example by saying that the number 15 has the property of being *Richardian;* and, in the first example, by saying that the number 17 does *not* have the property of being *Richardian.* More generally, we define *’x* is Richardian’ as a shorthand way of stating *’x* does *not* have the property designated by the defining expression with which *x* is correlated in the serially ordered set of definitions’.

Footnote: ¹⁴ This is the same sort of thing that would happen if the English word ‘short’ appeared in a list of words, and we characterized each word of the list by the descriptive tags “short” or “long.” The word ‘short’ would then have the tag “short” attached to it.

We come now to a curious but characteristic turn in the statement of the Richard Paradox. The defining expression for the property of being Richardian ostensibly describes a numerical property of integers. The expression itself therefore belongs to the series of definitions proposed above. It follows that the expression is correlated with a position-fixing integer or number. Suppose this number is *n.* We now pose the question, reminiscent of Russell’s antinomy: Is *n* Richardian? The reader can doubtless anticipate the fatal contradiction that now threatens. For *n* is Richardian if, and only if, *n* does not have the property designated by the defining expression with which *n* is correlated (i.e., it does not have the property of being Richardian). In short, *n* is Richardian if, and only if, *n* is not Richardian; so that the statement *’n* is Richardian’ is both true and false.

We must now point out that the contradiction is, in a sense, a hoax produced by not playing the game quite fairly. An essential but tacit assumption underlying the serial ordering of definitions was conveniently dropped along the way. It was agreed to consider the definitions of the *purely arithmetical* properties of integers—properties that can be formulated with the help of such notions as arithmetical addition, multiplication, and the like. But then, without warning, we were asked to accept a definition in the series that involves reference to the *notation* used in formulating arithmetical properties. More specifically, the definition of the property of being Richardian does not belong to the series initially intended, because this definition involves meta-mathematical notions such as the number of letters (or signs) occurring in expressions. We can outflank the Richard Paradox by distinguishing carefully between statements *within* arithmetic (which make no reference to any system of notation) and statements about some system of notation in which arithmetic is codified.

The reasoning in the construction of the Richard Paradox is clearly fallacious. The construction nevertheless suggests that it may be possible to “map” or “mirror” meta-mathematical statements about a sufficiently comprehensive formal system in the system itself. The idea of “mapping” is well known and plays a fundamental role in many branches of mathematics. It is used, of course, in the construction of ordinary maps, where shapes on the surface of a sphere are projected onto a plane, so that the relations between the plane figures mirror the relations between the figures on the spherical surface. It is used in coordinate geometry, which translates geometry into algebra, so that geometric relations are mapped by algebraic ones. (The reader will recall the discussion in Section II, which explained how Hilbert used algebra to establish the consistency of his axioms for geometry. What Hilbert did, in effect, was to map geometry onto algebra.) Mapping also plays a role in mathematical physics where, for example, relations between properties of electric currents are represented in the language of hydrodynamics. And mapping is involved when a pilot model is constructed before proceeding with a full-size machine, when a small wing surface is observed for its aerodynamic properties in a wind tunnel, or when a laboratory rig made up of electric circuits is used to study the relations between large-size masses in motion. A striking visual example is presented in Fig. 3, which illustrates a species of mapping that occurs in a branch of mathematics known as projective geometry.

The basic feature of mapping is that an abstract structure of relations embodied in one domain of “objects” can be shown to hold between “objects” (usually of a sort different from the first set) in another domain. It is this feature which stimulated Gödel in constructing his proofs. If complicated meta-mathematical statements about a formalized system of arithmetic could, as he hoped, be translated into (or mirrored by) arithmetical statements within the system itself, an important gain would be achieved in facilitating meta-mathematical demonstrations. For just as it is easier to deal with the algebraic formulas representing (or mirroring) intricate geometrical relations between curves and surfaces in space than with the geometrical relations themselves, so it is easier to deal with the arithmetical counterparts (or “mirror images”) of complex logical relations than with the logical relations themselves.

[Figure ac: Fig. 3, drawn for this edition — (a) The theorem of Pappus. A, B, C lie on line I and A′, B′, C′ on line II; the points R, S, T where AB′ crosses A′B, AC′ crosses A′C, and BC′ crosses B′C lie on one line, III. (b) Its dual. Lines A, B, C pass through point I and lines A′, B′, C′ through point II; the lines R, S, T, each drawn through a pair of the crossing points, pass through one point, III.]

The two figures have the same *abstract structure,* though in appearance they are markedly different. Figure 3 (a) is so related to Figure 3 (b) that *points* of the former correspond to *lines* of the latter, while *lines* of the former correspond to *points* of the latter. In effect, (b) is a map of (a): a point in (b) represents (or is the “mirror image” of) a line in (a), while a line in (b) represents a point in (a).

The exploitation of the notion of mapping is the key to the argument in Gödel’s famous paper. Following the style of the Richard Paradox, but carefully avoiding the fallacy involved in its construction, Gödel showed that meta-mathematical statements *about* a formalized arithmetical calculus can indeed be represented by arithmetical formulas *within* the calculus. As we shall explain in greater detail in the next section, he devised a method of representation such that neither the arithmetical formula corresponding to a certain true meta-mathematical statement about the formula, nor the arithmetical formula corresponding to the denial of the statement, is demonstrable within the calculus. Since one of these arithmetical formulas must codify an arithmetical truth, yet neither is derivable from the axioms, the axioms are incomplete. Gödel’s method of representation also enabled him to construct an arithmetical formula corresponding to the meta-mathematical statement ‘The calculus is consistent’ and to show that this formula is not demonstrable within the calculus. It follows that the meta-mathematical statement cannot be established unless rules of inference are used that cannot be represented within the calculus, so that, in proving the statement, rules must be employed whose own consistency may be as questionable as the consistency of arithmetic itself. Gödel established these major conclusions by using a remarkably ingenious form of mapping.
