VIII. Concluding Reflections

The import of Gödel’s conclusions is far-reaching, though it has not yet been fully fathomed. These conclusions show that the prospect of finding for every deductive system (and, in particular, for a system in which the whole of arithmetic can be expressed) an absolute proof of consistency that satisfies the finitistic requirements of Hilbert’s proposal, though not logically impossible, is most unlikely.³¹ They show also that there is an endless number of true arithmetical statements which cannot be formally deduced from any given set of axioms by a closed set of rules of inference. It follows that an axiomatic approach to number theory, for example, cannot exhaust the domain of arithmetical truth. It follows, also, that what we understand by the process of mathematical proof does not coincide with the exploitation of a formalized axiomatic method. A formalized axiomatic procedure is based on an initially determined and fixed set of axioms and transformation rules. As Gödel’s own arguments show, no antecedent limits can be placed on the inventiveness of mathematicians in devising new rules of proof. Consequently, no final account can be given of the precise logical form of valid mathematical demonstrations. In the light of these circumstances, whether an all-inclusive definition of mathematical or logical truth can be devised, and whether, as Gödel himself appears to believe, only a thoroughgoing philosophical “realism” of the ancient Platonic type can supply an adequate definition, are problems still under debate and too difficult for further consideration here.³²

Footnote: ³¹ The possibility of constructing a finitistic absolute proof of consistency for arithmetic is not excluded by Gödel’s results. Gödel showed that no such proof is possible that can be represented within arithmetic. His argument does not eliminate the possibility of strictly finitistic proofs that cannot be represented within arithmetic. But no one today appears to have a clear idea of what a finitistic proof would be like that is *not* capable of formulation within arithmetic.

Footnote: ³² Platonic realism takes the view that mathematics does not create or invent its “objects,” but discovers them as Columbus discovered America. Now, if this is true, the objects must in some sense “exist” prior to their discovery. According to Platonic doctrine, the objects of mathematical study are not found in the spatio-temporal order. They are disembodied eternal Forms or Archetypes, which dwell in a distinctive realm accessible only to the intellect. On this view, the triangular or circular shapes of physical bodies that can be perceived by the senses are not the proper objects of mathematics. These shapes are merely imperfect embodiments of an indivisible “perfect” Triangle or “perfect” Circle, which is un-created, is never fully manifested by material things, and ca be grasped solely by the exploring mind of the mathematician. Gödel appears to hold a similar view when he says, “Classes and concepts may . . . be conceived as real objects . . . existing independently of our definitions and constructions. It seems to me that the assumption of such objects is quite as legitimate as the assumption of physical bodies and there is quite as much reason to believe in their existence” (Kurt Gödel, “Russell’s Mathematical Logic,” in *The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell* (ed. Paul A. Schilpp, Evanston and Chicago, 1944), p. 137).

Gödel’s conclusions bear on the question whether a calculating machine can be constructed that would match the human brain in mathematical intelligence. Today’s calculating machines have a fixed set of directives built into them; these directives correspond to the fixed rules of inference of formalized axiomatic procedure. The machines thus supply answers to problems by operating in a step-by-step manner, each step being controlled by the built-in directives. But, as Gödel showed in his incompleteness theorem, there are innumerable problems in elementary number theory that fall outside the scope of a fixed axiomatic method, and that such engines are incapable of answering, however intricate and ingenious their built-in mechanisms may be and however rapid their operations. Given a definite problem, a machine of this type might be built for solving it; but no one such machine can be built for solving every problem. The human brain may, to be sure, have built-in limitations of its own, and there may be mathematical problems it is incapable of solving. But, even so, the brain appears to embody a structure of rules of operation which is far more powerful than the structure of currently conceived artificial machines. There is no immediate prospect of replacing the human mind by robots.

Gödel’s proof should not be construed as an invitation to despair or as an excuse for mystery-mongering. The discovery that there are arithmetical truths which cannot be demonstrated formally does not mean that there are truths which are forever incapable of becoming known, or that a “mystic” intuition (radically different in kind and authority from what is generally operative in intellectual advances) must replace cogent proof. It does not mean, as a recent writer claims, that there are “ineluctable limits to human reason.” It does mean that the resources of the human intellect have not been, and cannot be, fully formalized, and that new principles of demonstration forever await invention and discovery. We have seen that mathematical propositions which cannot be established by formal deduction from a given set of axioms may, nevertheless, be established by “informal” meta-mathematical reasoning. It would be irresponsible to claim that these formally indemonstrable truths established by meta-mathematical arguments are based on nothing better than bare appeals to intuition.

Nor do the inherent limitations of calculating machines imply that we cannot hope to explain living matter and human reason in physical and chemical terms. The possibility of such explanations is neither precluded nor affirmed by Gödel’s incompleteness theorem. The theorem does indicate that the structure and power of the human mind are far more complex and subtle than any non-living machine yet envisaged. Gödel’s own work is a remarkable example of such complexity and subtlety. It is an occasion, not for dejection, but for a renewed appreciation of the powers of creative reason.
