Definitions

1. By self-caused I mean that whose essence involves existence: that whose nature cannot be conceived except as existing.

2. A thing is called finite after its kind when it can be limited by another thing of the same nature. A body, for instance, is called finite because we can always conceive a greater body. In the same way a thought is limited by another thought. But a body is not limited by a thought, nor a thought by a body.

3. By substance I mean that which is in itself and is conceived through itself: that whose conception can be formed without needing the conception of anything else.

4. By attribute I mean that which the intellect perceives as constituting the essence of substance.

5. By mode I mean the modifications of substance: that which exists in, and is conceived through, something other than itself.

Footnote: "Affectiones"

6. By God I mean a being absolutely infinite—that is, a substance consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expresses eternal and infinite essence.

Explanation. I say absolutely infinite, not infinite after its kind. Of a thing infinite only after its kind, infinite attributes may be denied; but that which is absolutely infinite contains in its essence everything that expresses reality, and involves no negation.

7. A thing is called free when it exists solely by the necessity of its own nature and its action is determined by itself alone. A thing is called necessary, or rather constrained, when something outside it determines it to exist and act in a fixed and definite way.

8. By eternity I mean existence itself, insofar as it is conceived to follow necessarily from the definition of the eternal thing alone.

Explanation. Existence of this kind is conceived as an eternal truth, like the essence of a thing, and so cannot be explained by duration or time—even though duration may be conceived as having no beginning and no end.

Axioms

1. Everything that exists, exists either in itself or in something else.

2. That which cannot be conceived through anything else must be conceived through itself.

3. From a given definite cause an effect necessarily follows; and conversely, if there is no definite cause, no effect can follow.

4. Knowledge of an effect depends on, and involves, knowledge of the cause.

5. Things that have nothing in common cannot be understood one through the other: the conception of one does not involve the conception of the other.

6. A true idea must agree with the thing it is an idea of.

7. If a thing can be conceived as not existing, its essence does not involve existence.

Proposition 1

Substance is by nature prior to its modifications.

Proof. This is clear from Definition 3 of this Part and Definition 5 of this Part.

Proposition 2

Two substances with different attributes have nothing in common.

Proof. Also evident from Definition 3 of this Part. Each must exist in itself and be conceived through itself; in other words, the conception of one does not imply the conception of the other.

Proposition 3

Things that have nothing in common cannot be one the cause of the other.

Proof. If they have nothing in common, then one cannot be understood by means of the other (Axiom 5 of this Part), and therefore one cannot be the cause of the other (Axiom 4 of this Part). Q.E.D.

Proposition 4

Two or more distinct things are distinguished from one another either by a difference in the attributes of their substances or by a difference in their modifications.

Proof. Everything that exists, exists either in itself or in something else (Axiom 1 of this Part)—that is (by Definition 3 of this Part; Definition 5 of this Part), there is nothing outside the understanding except substance and its modifications. So there is nothing besides the understanding by which several things could be distinguished from one another except substances, or, what comes to the same thing (see Axiom 4 of this Part), their attributes and modifications. Q.E.D.

Proposition 5

There cannot exist in the universe two or more substances having the same nature or attribute.

Proof. If there were several distinct substances, they would have to be distinguished from one another either by a difference in their attributes or by a difference in their modifications (Proposition 4 of this Part). If only by their attributes, then it must be granted that there cannot be more than one substance with any given attribute. If by their modifications—since substance is by nature prior to its modifications (Proposition 1 of this Part)—then, setting the modifications aside and considering substance in itself, that is, truly (Definition 3 of this Part; Definition 6 of this Part), one substance cannot be conceived as different from another—that is (by Proposition 4 of this Part), there cannot be several substances, but one substance only. Q.E.D.

Proposition 6

One substance cannot be produced by another substance.

Proof. There cannot be in the universe two substances with the same attribute, that is, two substances with anything in common (Proposition 2 of this Part), and therefore (Proposition 3 of this Part) one cannot be the cause of the other, nor can one be produced by the other. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that a substance cannot be produced by anything outside itself. For in the universe there is nothing but substances and their modifications (as appears from Axiom 1 of this Part; Definition 3 of this Part; Definition 5 of this Part). Now (by Proposition 6 of this Part) substance cannot be produced by another substance; therefore it cannot be produced by anything outside itself. Q.E.D. This is shown still more readily by the absurdity of the opposite. For if substance were produced by an external cause, knowledge of it would depend on knowledge of that cause (Axiom 4 of this Part), and (by Definition 3 of this Part) it would not then be substance at all.

Proposition 7

Existence belongs to the nature of substance.

Proof. Substance cannot be produced by anything outside itself (Proposition 6 of this Part, Corollary), so it must be its own cause—that is, its essence necessarily involves existence, or existence belongs to its nature.

Proposition 8

Every substance is necessarily infinite.

Proof. There can be only one substance with any given attribute, and existence follows from its nature (Proposition 7 of this Part); its nature therefore involves existence, either as finite or as infinite. It does not exist as finite, for (by Definition 2 of this Part) it would then be limited by something else of the same kind, which would also necessarily exist (Proposition 7 of this Part), and there would be two substances with the same attribute, which is absurd (Proposition 5 of this Part). It therefore exists as infinite. Q.E.D.

Note 1. Since finite existence involves a partial negation, and infinite existence is the absolute affirmation of a thing's nature, it follows (solely from Proposition 7 of this Part) that every substance is necessarily infinite.

Note 2. No doubt those who think loosely about things, and are not used to knowing them through their first causes, will find the demonstration of Proposition 7 of this Part hard to follow. Such people make no distinction between the modifications of substances and the substances themselves, and do not know how things are produced; so they attribute to substances the beginning they observe in natural objects. People ignorant of true causes confuse everything—they think trees might talk as well as men, that men might be formed from stones as easily as from seed, and imagine that any form might change into any other. In the same way, those who confuse the two natures, divine and human, readily attribute human passions to God, especially while they do not know how passions arise in the mind. But if people would only consider the nature of substance, they would have no doubt about the truth of Proposition 7 of this Part. In fact this proposition would be a universal axiom and counted a truism. For by substance they would understand that which is in itself and is conceived through itself—that is, something whose conception does not require the conception of anything else—whereas modifications exist in something outside themselves, and are conceived by means of a conception of the thing they exist in. This is why we can have true ideas of modifications that do not exist: although they may have no actual existence apart from the intellect conceiving them, their essence is so bound up in something outside themselves that they can be conceived through it. Substances, on the other hand, can have no truth outside the intellect except their existence, because they are conceived through themselves. So for a person to say that he has a clear and distinct—that is, a true—idea of a substance, but is not sure whether that substance exists, would be the same as saying that he had a true idea but was not sure whether it was false (a little thought will make this plain); and for anyone to claim that substance is created would be to say that a false idea is true—the height of absurdity. It must therefore be admitted that the existence of substance, like its essence, is an eternal truth. And from this we can conclude by another line of reasoning that there is only one such substance. I think it worth doing at once; and to proceed in order, we must first lay down:

1. The true definition of a thing neither involves nor expresses anything beyond the nature of the thing defined. From which it follows:

2. No definition implies or expresses any particular number of individuals, since it expresses nothing beyond the nature of the thing defined. The definition of a triangle, for instance, expresses nothing beyond the nature of a triangle: it does not imply any fixed number of triangles.

3. For each existing thing there must necessarily be a cause why it exists.

4. This cause of existence must either be contained in the nature and definition of the thing, or lie outside it.

It follows that if a given number of individual things exist in nature, there must be a cause why exactly that number exists, neither more nor fewer. For example, if twenty men exist in the universe (for simplicity I will suppose them existing at the same time, with no predecessors), and we want to account for the existence of these twenty, it will not be enough to give the cause of human existence in general; we must also show why there are exactly twenty, neither more nor fewer, since a cause must be assigned for the existence of each one. Now this cause cannot lie in the nature of man, for the true definition of man involves no consideration of the number twenty. So the cause of the existence of these twenty men, and therefore of each of them, must be sought outside each individual. Hence we may lay down the absolute rule that everything which can consist of several individuals must have an external cause. And since it has already been shown that existence belongs to the nature of substance, existence must be included in its definition, and must be deducible from that definition alone. But from its definition (Proposition 2 of this Part, Note; Proposition 3 of this Part, Note) we cannot infer the existence of several substances; therefore there is only one substance of any given nature. Q.E.D.

Proposition 9

The more reality or being a thing has, the more attributes it has (Definition 4 of this Part).

Proposition 10

Each attribute of the one substance must be conceived through itself.

Proof. An attribute is what the intellect perceives of substance as constituting its essence (Definition 4 of this Part), and therefore must be conceived through itself (Definition 3 of this Part). Q.E.D.

Note. It is clear from this that although two attributes are in fact conceived as distinct—that is, one without the help of the other—we cannot conclude from that that they constitute two entities, or two different substances. For it is the nature of substance that each of its attributes is conceived through itself, since all the attributes it has have always existed in it together, and none could have been produced by any other; each simply expresses the reality or being of substance. So it is far from absurd to ascribe several attributes to one substance. Nothing in nature is clearer than that every entity must be conceived under some attribute, and that its reality or being is in proportion to the number of its attributes expressing necessity, or eternity and infinity. It is therefore perfectly clear that an absolutely infinite being must be defined as consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expresses a certain eternal and infinite essence.

If anyone now asks by what sign he can tell one substance from another, let him read the following propositions, which show that there is only one substance in the universe, and that it is absolutely infinite. He would be looking for such a sign in vain.

Proposition 11

God, or substance consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expresses eternal and infinite essence, necessarily exists.

Proof. Deny it if you can, and conceive that God does not exist. Then his essence does not involve existence. But that (Proposition 7 of this Part) is absurd. Therefore God necessarily exists.

Another proof. For everything whatever a cause or reason must be assigned, either for its existence or for its non-existence. If a triangle exists, a reason or cause must be given for its existence; if it does not exist, a cause must also be given, one that prevents it from existing or annuls its existence. This reason or cause must either be contained in the nature of the thing or lie outside it. The reason for the non-existence of a square circle, for instance, is indicated in its own nature: it would involve a contradiction. And the existence of substance likewise follows from its nature alone, since its nature involves existence (see Proposition 7 of this Part).

But the reason why a triangle or a circle exists does not follow from the nature of those figures; it follows from the order of nature as a whole, in extension. From that order it must follow either that a triangle necessarily exists or that it is impossible for it to exist. So much is self-evident. And it follows from all this that a thing necessarily exists if there is no cause or reason to prevent it.

If, then, no cause or reason can be given that prevents God from existing, or that destroys his existence, we must conclude that he necessarily does exist. And if such a reason or cause could be given, it would have to be drawn either from God's own nature or from outside it—that is, from another substance of another nature. For if it were of the same nature, that would be to admit that God exists. But a substance of another nature could have nothing in common with God (by Proposition 2 of this Part), and so could neither cause nor destroy his existence.

Since, then, a reason or cause that would annul the divine existence cannot be drawn from anything outside the divine nature, it must, if God does not exist, be drawn from God's own nature, which would involve a contradiction. To make such a claim about a being absolutely infinite and supremely perfect is absurd. Therefore neither within God's nature nor outside it can any cause or reason be assigned that would annul his existence. Therefore God necessarily exists. Q.E.D.

Another proof. The power of not existing is a lack of power, and conversely the power of existing is a power, as is obvious. If, then, the only things that necessarily exist are finite beings, finite beings are more powerful than a being absolutely infinite, which is plainly absurd. So either nothing exists, or a being absolutely infinite necessarily exists as well. Now we do exist, either in ourselves or in something else that necessarily exists (see Axiom 1 of this Part; Proposition 7 of this Part). Therefore a being absolutely infinite—that is, God (Definition 6 of this Part)—necessarily exists. Q.E.D.

Note. In this last proof I deliberately showed God's existence a posteriori, so that the proof would be easier to follow, not because God's existence does not follow a priori from the same premises. For since the power of existing is a power, it follows that the more reality there is in a thing's nature, the more strength it has for existing. So a being absolutely infinite, such as God, has from himself an absolutely infinite power of existing, and therefore absolutely exists. Perhaps many will not see the force of this proof, being accustomed to consider only things that arise from external causes. Of such things they observe that those which come quickly into existence also quickly disappear, whereas they regard as harder to bring about—that is, not so easily brought into existence—those they conceive as more complicated.

To clear up this misconception I need not discuss how much truth there is in the proverb "what comes quickly, goes quickly," nor whether, from the point of view of nature as a whole, all things are equally easy. I need only point out that I am not speaking here of things that come about through causes outside themselves, but of substances, which (by Proposition 6 of this Part) cannot be produced by any external cause. Things produced by external causes, whether they have many parts or few, owe whatever perfection or reality they possess entirely to the power of that external cause; their existence arises from the perfection of their cause, not from their own. But whatever perfection substance possesses is due to no external cause, so the existence of substance must arise from its own nature alone, which is nothing but its essence. The perfection of a thing, then, does not annul its existence but asserts it; imperfection does annul it. So we can be more certain of the existence of a being absolutely infinite or perfect—that is, of God—than of the existence of anything else. For since his essence excludes all imperfection and involves absolute perfection, every ground for doubting his existence is removed, and we are given the utmost certainty on the question. This, I think, will be clear to any reasonably attentive reader.

Proposition 12

No attribute of substance can be truly conceived from which it would follow that substance can be divided.

Proof. The parts into which substance so conceived would be divided will either keep the nature of substance or they will not. If the former, then (by Proposition 8 of this Part) each part will be infinite, and (by Proposition 6 of this Part) self-caused, and (by Proposition 5 of this Part) must consist of a different attribute—so that several substances could be formed out of one, which (by Proposition 6 of this Part) is absurd. Moreover, the parts (by Proposition 2 of this Part) would have nothing in common with their whole, and the whole (by Definition 4 of this Part; Proposition 10 of this Part) could exist and be conceived without its parts, which everyone will admit is absurd. If we take the second alternative—that the parts will not keep the nature of substance—then, if the whole substance were divided into equal parts, it would lose the nature of substance and cease to exist, which (by Proposition 7 of this Part) is absurd.

Proposition 13

Substance absolutely infinite is indivisible.

Proof. If it could be divided, the parts into which it was divided would either keep the nature of absolutely infinite substance or not. If the former, we should have several substances of the same nature, which (by Proposition 5 of this Part) is absurd. If the latter, then (by Proposition 7 of this Part) substance absolutely infinite could cease to exist, which (by Proposition 11 of this Part) is also absurd.

Corollary. It follows that no substance, and consequently no extended substance, insofar as it is substance, is divisible.

Note. The indivisibility of substance can be understood more easily like this. The nature of substance can only be conceived as infinite, and by a part of substance nothing can be understood but finite substance, which (by Proposition 8 of this Part) involves an obvious contradiction.

Proposition 14

Besides God no substance can exist or be conceived.

Proof. God is a being absolutely infinite, of whom no attribute expressing the essence of substance can be denied (by Definition 6 of this Part), and he necessarily exists (by Proposition 11 of this Part). If any substance besides God existed, it would have to be explained by some attribute of God, and then two substances with the same attribute would exist, which (by Proposition 5 of this Part) is absurd. Therefore no substance besides God can exist, or consequently be conceived. And if it could be conceived, it would have to be conceived as existing; but that (by the first part of this proof) is absurd. Therefore besides God no substance can exist or be conceived. Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. It follows clearly, first, that God is one: that is (by Definition 6 of this Part), there is only one substance in the universe, and it is absolutely infinite, as we have already indicated (in Proposition 10 of this Part, Note).

Corollary 2. It follows, second, that extension and thought are either attributes of God or (by Axiom 1 of this Part) modifications of the attributes of God.

Proposition 15

Whatsoever is, is in God, and without God nothing can be, or be conceived.

Proof. Besides God no substance exists or can be conceived (by Proposition 14 of this Part), that is (by Definition 3 of this Part), nothing that is in itself and is conceived through itself. But modes (by Definition 5 of this Part) can neither be nor be conceived without substance, so they can only be in the divine nature and can only be conceived through it. And substances and modes are the whole of what exists (by Axiom 1 of this Part). Therefore without God nothing can be, or be conceived. Q.E.D.

Note. Some assert that God, like a man, consists of body and mind and is subject to passions. How far such people have strayed from the truth is clear enough from what has been said. But I pass them over. For everyone who has reflected at all on the divine nature denies that God has a body, and finds excellent proof of it in the fact that by body we understand a definite quantity, so long, so broad, so deep, bounded by a certain shape—and it is the height of absurdity to say such a thing of God, a being absolutely infinite. But meanwhile, in the other arguments they use to prove their point, they show that they think of corporeal or extended substance as wholly apart from the divine nature, and say it was created by God. By what power it could have been created they have no idea; which shows plainly that they do not know the meaning of their own words. I have proved clearly enough, at least in my own judgment (Proposition 6 of this Part, Corollary, Note 2; Proposition 8 of this Part, Corollary), that no substance can be produced or created by anything other than itself. And I showed (in Proposition 14 of this Part) that besides God no substance can exist or be conceived. From which we concluded that extended substance is one of the infinite attributes of God. But to explain this more fully, I will refute my opponents' arguments, which all start from the following points.

Extended substance, insofar as it is substance, consists (they think) of parts; and so they deny that it can be infinite, or consequently that it can belong to God. They illustrate this with many examples, of which I will take one or two. If extended substance is infinite, they say, conceive it divided into two parts. Each part will be either finite or infinite. If finite, then an infinite is composed of two finite parts, which is absurd. If infinite, then one infinite is twice as large as another infinite, which is also absurd.

Again, if an infinite line is measured out in feet, it will consist of an infinite number of such parts; and it would equally consist of an infinite number of parts if each part measured only an inch—so one infinity would be twelve times as great as another.

Lastly, if from a single point two diverging lines are drawn, at first a definite distance apart but produced to infinity, it is certain that the distance between them will keep increasing until at length it changes from definite to indefinable. Since these absurdities follow, they say, from considering quantity as infinite, the conclusion is drawn that extended substance must be finite and cannot belong to the nature of God.

The second argument is also drawn from God's supreme perfection. God, they say, being a supremely perfect being, cannot be passive; but extended substance, insofar as it is divisible, is passive. It follows that extended substance does not belong to the essence of God.

Such are the arguments I find on the subject in writers who use them to prove that extended substance is unworthy of the divine nature and cannot possibly belong to it. But an attentive reader will see that I have already answered them, since all their arguments rest on the assumption that extended substance is composed of parts, and I have shown that assumption to be absurd (Proposition 12 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 13 of this Part). Moreover, anyone who reflects will see that all these absurdities—if absurdities they are, which I am not now discussing—do not follow at all from the notion of an infinite quantity, but only from the notion that an infinite quantity is measurable and composed of finite parts. The only fair conclusion to draw, therefore, is that infinite quantity is not measurable and cannot be composed of finite parts. Which is exactly what we have already proved (in Proposition 12 of this Part). So the weapon they aimed at us has in fact recoiled on themselves. If they still insist on concluding from their own absurdity that extended substance must be finite, they are behaving like a man who asserts that circles have the properties of squares, finds himself landed in absurdities, and then denies that circles have a centre from which all lines drawn to the circumference are equal. For they take extended substance, which can only be conceived as infinite, one and indivisible (Proposition 8 of this Part; Proposition 5 of this Part; Proposition 12 of this Part), and then assert, in order to prove it finite, that it is composed of finite parts and can be multiplied and divided.

Others, likewise, after asserting that a line is composed of points, can produce plenty of arguments to prove that a line cannot be infinitely divided. It is no less absurd to assert that extended substance is made up of bodies or parts than it would be to assert that a solid is made up of surfaces, a surface of lines, and a line of points. This must be admitted by everyone who knows clear reason to be infallible, and most of all by those who deny that a vacuum is possible. For if extended substance could be divided so that its parts were really separate, why should one part not be destroyed while the others stayed joined together as before? And why should they all be fitted into one another so as to leave no vacuum? Surely, of things really distinct from one another, one can exist without the other and remain in its original condition. Since, then, there is no vacuum in nature (of which more later), and all the parts must come together to prevent one, it follows that the parts cannot really be distinguished, and that extended substance, insofar as it is substance, cannot be divided.

If anyone asks me the further question why we are naturally so prone to divide quantity, I answer that we conceive quantity in two ways: abstractly and superficially, as we imagine it, or as substance, as we conceive it by the intellect alone. If we regard quantity as it is represented in our imagination, which we do often and more easily, we shall find it finite, divisible and made up of parts. But if we regard it as it is represented in our intellect, and conceive it as substance—which is very difficult to do—we shall find, as I have sufficiently proved, that it is infinite, one and indivisible. This will be plain enough to anyone who distinguishes between the intellect and the imagination, especially if he remembers that matter is everywhere the same, and that its parts are distinguishable only insofar as we conceive matter as modified in different ways—so that its parts are distinguished not really but modally. Water, for instance, insofar as it is water, we conceive to be divided, and its parts to be separated one from another; but not insofar as it is extended substance, for from that point of view it is neither separated nor divisible. Again, water, insofar as it is water, is produced and destroyed; but insofar as it is substance, it is neither produced nor destroyed.

I think I have now answered the second argument as well; it rests on the same assumption as the first, that matter, insofar as it is substance, is divisible and composed of parts. And even if it were, I do not see why it should be thought unworthy of the divine nature, since besides God (by Proposition 14 of this Part) there is no substance from which it could receive its modifications. All things, I repeat, are in God; and everything that comes to pass comes to pass solely through the laws of God's infinite nature, and follows (as I shall shortly show) from the necessity of his essence. So it can in no way be said that God is passive with respect to anything other than himself, or that extended substance is unworthy of the divine nature, even supposing it divisible, so long as it is granted to be infinite and eternal. But enough of this for the present.

Proposition 16

From the necessity of the divine nature there must follow an infinite number of things in infinite ways—that is, everything that can fall within the sphere of an infinite intellect.

Proof. This proposition will be clear to anyone who remembers that from the given definition of any thing the intellect infers several properties which really do follow necessarily from it (that is, from the actual essence of the thing defined), and that it infers more properties the more reality the definition of the thing expresses—that is, the more reality the essence of the thing defined involves. Now since the divine nature has absolutely infinite attributes (by Definition 6 of this Part), each of which expresses infinite essence after its kind, it follows that from the necessity of its nature an infinite number of things—that is, everything that can fall within the sphere of an infinite intellect—must necessarily follow. Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. It follows that God is the efficient cause of everything that can fall within the sphere of an infinite intellect.

Corollary 2. It also follows that God is a cause in himself, and not through an accident of his nature.

Corollary 3. It follows, thirdly, that God is the absolutely first cause.

Proposition 17

God acts solely by the laws of his own nature, and is constrained by no one.

Proof. We have just shown (in Proposition 16 of this Part) that from the necessity of the divine nature alone—or, what comes to the same thing, from the laws of his nature alone—an infinite number of things follow absolutely, in an infinite number of ways. And we proved (in Proposition 15 of this Part) that without God nothing can be or be conceived, but that all things are in God. So there can be nothing outside him by which he could be conditioned or constrained to act. Therefore God acts solely by the laws of his own nature, and is constrained by no one. Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. It follows, first, that there is no cause, either outside God or within him, besides the perfection of his own nature, that moves him to act.

Corollary 2. It follows, second, that God is the sole free cause. For God alone exists by the sole necessity of his nature (by Proposition 11 of this Part; Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1) and acts by the sole necessity of his own nature; therefore God is (by Definition 7 of this Part) the sole free cause. Q.E.D.

Note. Others think God is a free cause because he can, as they suppose, bring it about that the things we have said follow from his nature—the things in his power—should not come to pass, or should not be produced by him. But this is the same as saying that God could bring it about that it should follow from the nature of a triangle that its three interior angles are not equal to two right angles; or that from a given cause no effect should follow, which is absurd.

I shall also show below, without the help of this proposition, that neither intellect nor will belongs to God's nature. I know there are many who think they can show that supreme intellect and free will do belong to God's nature, on the ground that they know of nothing more perfect to attribute to God than what is the highest perfection in ourselves. And although they conceive God as actually supremely intelligent, they do not believe he can bring into existence everything he actually understands, since they think that would destroy his power. If God had created everything in his intellect, they argue, he could not create anything more, and this they think would clash with his omnipotence. So they prefer to assert that God is indifferent to all things, and creates nothing except what he has decided, by some absolute act of will, to create. But I think I have shown clearly enough (by Proposition 16 of this Part) that from God's supreme power, or infinite nature, an infinite number of things—that is, all things—have necessarily flowed forth in an infinite number of ways, and always flow from the same necessity, in the same way as it follows from the nature of a triangle, from eternity and for eternity, that its three interior angles are equal to two right angles. So the omnipotence of God has been in act from all eternity, and will remain in act for all eternity. This way of treating the question attributes to God, in my opinion, a far more perfect omnipotence. For on the other view we are forced to confess that God understands an infinite number of creatable things which he will never be able to create; for if he created everything he understands, he would, on their showing, exhaust his omnipotence and make himself imperfect. So to establish that God is perfect they would be reduced to establishing at the same time that he cannot bring about everything his power extends to—a hypothesis that seems to me utterly absurd, and utterly at odds with God's omnipotence.

Further, to say a word here about the intellect and the will that we attribute to God: if intellect and will do belong to God's eternal essence, we must take these words in a sense quite different from the one they usually bear. For the intellect and will that would constitute God's essence would have to be as far apart as the poles from the human intellect and will, and would in fact have nothing in common with them but the name—about as much correspondence as there is between the Dog, the constellation in the sky, and a dog, the animal that barks. I prove it as follows. If intellect belongs to the divine nature, it cannot, as ours is generally thought to be, come after the things understood or exist alongside them, since God is prior to all things by reason of his causality (Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 1). On the contrary, the truth and formal essence of things is what it is because it exists as such, by representation, in the intellect of God. So the intellect of God, insofar as it is conceived to constitute God's essence, is in reality the cause of things, both of their essence and of their existence. This seems to have been recognised by those who have asserted that God's intellect, God's will and God's power are one and the same. Since, then, God's intellect is the sole cause of things, both of their essence and of their existence, it must differ from them in respect of its essence and in respect of its existence. For a cause differs from the thing it causes precisely in what the latter gains from the former.

For example, a man is the cause of another man's existence but not of his essence (for the essence is an eternal truth), and so the two men may be entirely alike in essence but must differ in existence; and hence if one of them ceases to exist, the other does not necessarily cease with him. But if the essence of one could be destroyed and made false, the essence of the other would be destroyed too. So a thing which is the cause both of the essence and of the existence of a given effect must differ from that effect both in essence and in existence. Now the intellect of God is the cause both of the essence and of the existence of our intellect; therefore God's intellect, insofar as it is conceived to constitute the divine essence, differs from our intellect both in essence and in existence, and can agree with it in nothing but the name, as we said before. The reasoning would be exactly the same for the will, as anyone can easily see.
