Proposition 18

God is the indwelling cause of all things, and not a cause standing outside them.

Proof. All things that are, are in God and must be conceived through God (by Proposition 15 of this Part); therefore (by Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 1) God is the cause of the things that are in him. That is our first point. Further, besides God there can be no substance (by Proposition 14 of this Part), that is, nothing existing in itself outside God. That is our second point. God, therefore, is the indwelling cause of all things, and not a cause standing outside them. Q.E.D.

Proposition 19

God, and all the attributes of God, are eternal.

Proof. God (by Definition 6 of this Part) is substance, which (by Proposition 11 of this Part) necessarily exists, that is (by Proposition 7 of this Part) existence belongs to its nature, or, what comes to the same thing, follows from its definition. Therefore God is eternal (by Definition 8 of this Part). Further, by the attributes of God we must understand what (by Definition 4 of this Part) expresses the essence of the divine substance—in other words, what belongs to substance; that, I say, must be involved in the attributes of substance. Now eternity belongs to the nature of substance (as I have already shown in Proposition 7 of this Part); therefore eternity must belong to each of the attributes, and so all are eternal. Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition is also evident from the way in which (in Proposition 11 of this Part) I demonstrated the existence of God. It is evident, I repeat, from that proof, that the existence of God, like his essence, is an eternal truth. Further (in Proposition 19 of my Principles of the Cartesian Philosophy) I have proved the eternity of God in another way, which I need not repeat here.

Proposition 20

The existence of God and his essence are one and the same.

Proof. God (by Proposition 19 of this Part) and all his attributes are eternal, that is (by Definition 8 of this Part), each of his attributes expresses existence. So the same attributes of God that explain his eternal essence explain at the same time his eternal existence—in other words, what constitutes God's essence constitutes at the same time his existence. Therefore God's existence and God's essence are one and the same. Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. It follows that God's existence, like his essence, is an eternal truth.

Corollary 2. It follows, second, that God and all the attributes of God are unchangeable. For if they could change in respect of existence, they would also have to be able to change in respect of essence—that is, plainly, to change from true to false, which is absurd.

Proposition 21

All things that follow from the absolute nature of any attribute of God must always exist and be infinite; in other words, they are eternal and infinite through that attribute.

Proof. Conceive, if you can (supposing the proposition to be denied), that something in some attribute of God can follow from the absolute nature of that attribute and yet be finite, with an existence or duration that is determined: for instance, the idea of God expressed in the attribute of thought. Now thought, insofar as it is supposed to be an attribute of God, is necessarily (by Proposition 11 of this Part) infinite in its nature. But insofar as it possesses the idea of God, it is supposed finite. It cannot, however, be conceived as finite unless it is limited by thought (by Definition 2 of this Part); and it is not limited by thought insofar as thought has constituted the idea of God, for so far it is supposed to be finite. Therefore it is limited by thought insofar as thought has not constituted the idea of God—which nevertheless (by Proposition 11 of this Part) must necessarily exist.

We have therefore granted a thought that does not constitute the idea of God; and so the idea of God does not follow naturally from thought's nature insofar as it is absolute thought, since thought is conceived both as constituting and as not constituting the idea of God. This is against our hypothesis. Therefore, if the idea of God expressed in the attribute of thought—or indeed anything else in any attribute of God, for we may take any example, since the proof holds universally—follows from the necessity of the absolute nature of that attribute, the thing in question must be infinite. That was our first point.

Furthermore, a thing that follows in this way from the necessity of the nature of any attribute cannot have a limited duration. For suppose it can. Suppose something that follows from the necessity of the nature of some attribute exists in some attribute of God—the idea of God expressed in the attribute of thought, for instance—and suppose that at some time it did not exist, or is about to cease to exist.

Now thought, being an attribute of God, must necessarily exist unchanged (by Proposition 11 of this Part; Proposition 20 of this Part, Corollary 2); and beyond the limits of the duration of the idea of God—supposing it at some time not to have existed, or not to be going to exist—thought would have had to exist without the idea of God, which is contrary to our hypothesis, since we supposed that, thought being given, the idea of God necessarily flowed from it. Therefore the idea of God expressed in thought, or anything that necessarily follows from the absolute nature of some attribute of God, cannot have a limited duration, but is eternal through that attribute. That is our second point. And note that the same proposition may be affirmed of anything that in any attribute follows necessarily from God's absolute nature.

Proposition 22

Whatever follows from any attribute of God, insofar as that attribute is modified by a modification which exists necessarily and as infinite through it, must also exist necessarily and as infinite.

Proof. The proof of this proposition is like that of the one before it.

Proposition 23

Every mode that exists both necessarily and as infinite must follow either from the absolute nature of some attribute of God, or from an attribute modified by a modification which exists necessarily and as infinite.

Proof. A mode exists in something else, through which it must be conceived (Definition 5 of this Part), that is (Proposition 15 of this Part), it exists solely in God and can be conceived only through God. If, therefore, a mode is conceived as existing necessarily and as infinite, it must be inferred or perceived through some attribute of God, insofar as that attribute is conceived as expressing infinity and necessity of existence—in other words (Definition 8 of this Part), eternity; that is, insofar as it is considered absolutely. A mode, then, which exists necessarily and as infinite, must follow from the absolute nature of some attribute of God, either directly (Proposition 21 of this Part) or through some modification which follows from the absolute nature of that attribute; that is (by Proposition 22 of this Part), one which exists necessarily and as infinite.

Proposition 24

The essence of things produced by God does not involve existence.

Proof. This proposition is evident from Definition 1 of this Part. For that whose nature, considered in itself, involves existence is self-caused, and exists by the sole necessity of its own nature.

Corollary. It follows that God is the cause not only of things coming into existence but of their continuing in existence—or, in the language of the schools, God is the cause of the being of things (essendi rerum). For whether things exist or do not exist, whenever we consider their essence we see that it involves neither existence nor duration; so their essence cannot be the cause of either. God must be the sole cause, since to him alone does existence belong (Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1). Q.E.D.

Proposition 25

God is the efficient cause not only of the existence of things but also of their essence.

Proof. Deny it, and God is not the cause of the essence of things; and then the essence of things can (by Axiom 4 of this Part) be conceived without God. That (by Proposition 15 of this Part) is absurd. Therefore God is the cause of the essence of things. Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition follows more clearly from Proposition 16 of this Part. For it is evident from that proposition that, given the divine nature, the essence of things must be inferred from it no less than their existence. In a word, God must be called the cause of all things in the same sense in which he is called the cause of himself. The following corollary will make this clearer still.

Corollary. Individual things are nothing but modifications of the attributes of God, or modes by which the attributes of God are expressed in a fixed and definite way. The proof appears from Proposition 15 of this Part and Definition 5 of this Part.

Proposition 26

A thing determined to act in a particular way has necessarily been so determined by God; and a thing that has not been so determined by God cannot determine itself to act.

Proof. That by which things are said to be determined to act in a particular way is necessarily something positive; this is obvious. Therefore God, by the necessity of his nature, is the efficient cause both of its essence and of its existence (Proposition 25 of this Part; Proposition 16 of this Part). That is our first point. Our second point plainly follows from it. For if a thing that had not been determined by God could determine itself, the first part of our proof would be false, and that, as we have shown, is absurd.

Proposition 27

A thing that has been determined by God to act in a particular way cannot make itself undetermined.

Proof. This proposition is evident from the third axiom.

Proposition 28

No individual thing—nothing finite, that is, and having a determined existence—can exist or be determined to act unless it is determined for existence and action by another cause, which is also finite and has a determined existence; and this cause in its turn cannot exist or be determined to act unless it is determined for existence and action by another cause, which is also finite and has a determined existence; and so on to infinity.

Proof. Whatever is determined to exist and act has been so determined by God (by Proposition 26 of this Part; Proposition 24 of this Part, Corollary).

But what is finite and has a determined existence cannot be produced by the absolute nature of any attribute of God, for whatever follows from the absolute nature of any attribute of God is infinite and eternal (by Proposition 21 of this Part). It must therefore follow from some attribute of God insofar as that attribute is considered as in some way modified; for substance and modes are the whole of what exists (by Axiom 1 of this Part; Definition 3 of this Part; Definition 5 of this Part), and modes are simply modifications of the attributes of God. But a determined thing cannot follow from God, or from any of his attributes, insofar as that attribute is modified by a modification which is infinite and eternal. Therefore it must follow from, or be determined for existence and action by, God or one of his attributes insofar as they are modified by some modification which is finite and has a determined existence. That is our first point. And this cause, or this modification, must in its turn be determined by another cause, also finite and with a determined existence, for the reason by which we established the first part of this proof; and that last by another, for the same reason; and so on, for the same reason, to infinity. Q.E.D.

Note. Since certain things must be produced immediately by God—namely those which follow necessarily from his absolute nature—and the rest through these primary things, which nevertheless can neither exist nor be conceived without God, it follows: first, that God is absolutely the proximate cause of the things immediately produced by him. I say absolutely, not "after his kind," as is usually stated. For the effects of God can neither exist nor be conceived without their cause (Proposition 15 of this Part; Proposition 24 of this Part, Corollary). Second, that God cannot properly be called the remote cause of individual things, except to distinguish them from what he produces immediately, or rather from what follows from his absolute nature. For by a remote cause we understand a cause in no way joined to its effect; and all things that are, are in God, and depend on God so entirely that without him they can neither be nor be conceived.

Proposition 29

Nothing in the universe is contingent; all things are determined by the necessity of the divine nature to exist and to act in a particular way.

Proof. Whatever is, is in God (Proposition 15 of this Part). But God cannot be called contingent, for (by Proposition 11 of this Part) he exists necessarily and not contingently. Further, the modes of the divine nature follow from it necessarily and not contingently (Proposition 16 of this Part); and they follow so whether we consider the divine nature absolutely or as in some way determined to act (Proposition 27 of this Part). Further, God is the cause of these modes not only insofar as they simply exist (by Proposition 24 of this Part, Corollary) but also insofar as they are considered as determined to act in a particular way (Proposition 26 of this Part). If they are not determined by God (Proposition 26 of this Part), it is impossible, and not contingent, that they should determine themselves; and if they are determined by God, it is impossible, and not contingent, that they should make themselves undetermined. Therefore all things are determined by the necessity of the divine nature, not only to exist but to exist and act in a particular way, and there is nothing contingent. Q.E.D.

Note. Before going further, I want to explain here what we should understand by nature viewed as active (natura naturans) and nature viewed as passive (natura naturata). I say explain, or rather call attention to it, for I think it is already clear enough from what has been said. By nature viewed as active we should understand what is in itself and is conceived through itself, or those attributes of substance which express eternal and infinite essence—in other words (Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1; Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary 2), God, insofar as he is considered as a free cause.

By nature viewed as passive I understand everything that follows from the necessity of God's nature, or of any of God's attributes: that is, all the modes of the attributes of God, insofar as they are considered as things which are in God and which without God can neither exist nor be conceived.

Proposition 30

The intellect in act, whether finite or infinite, must comprehend the attributes of God and the modifications of God, and nothing else.

Proof. A true idea must agree with its object (Axiom 6 of this Part); in other words, obviously, whatever is contained in the intellect by representation must exist in nature. But in nature (by Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1) there is no substance but God, nor any modifications but those (Proposition 15 of this Part) which are in God and can neither be nor be conceived without God. Therefore the intellect in act, whether finite or infinite, must comprehend the attributes of God and the modifications of God, and nothing else. Q.E.D.

Proposition 31

The intellect in act, whether finite or infinite, along with will, desire, love and the rest, must be referred to nature viewed as passive, not to nature viewed as active.

Proof. By the intellect we do not, obviously, mean absolute thought, but only a particular mode of thinking, different from other modes such as love and desire, and therefore (Definition 5 of this Part) requiring to be conceived through absolute thought. It must (by Proposition 15 of this Part; Definition 6 of this Part) be conceived through some attribute of God which expresses the eternal and infinite essence of thought, in such a way that without that attribute it could neither be nor be conceived. It must therefore be referred to nature viewed as passive rather than to nature viewed as active, as must the other modes of thinking. Q.E.D.

Note. In speaking of the intellect in act I am not admitting that there is such a thing as intellect in potentiality. Wishing to avoid all confusion, I want to speak only of what we perceive most clearly, namely the very act of understanding, than which nothing is perceived more clearly. For we cannot perceive anything without at the same time adding to our knowledge of the act of understanding.

Proposition 32

Will cannot be called a free cause, but only a necessary one.

Proof. Will is only a particular mode of thinking, like intellect; therefore (by Proposition 28 of this Part) no act of will can exist or be determined to act unless it is determined by some cause other than itself, and that cause by a third, and so on to infinity. And if will is supposed infinite, it must still be determined to exist and act by God—not by virtue of his being substance absolutely infinite, but by virtue of his possessing an attribute which expresses the infinite and eternal essence of thought (by Proposition 23 of this Part). So however it is conceived, whether as finite or as infinite, it requires a cause by which it is determined to exist and act. Therefore (Definition 7 of this Part) it cannot be called a free cause, but only a necessary or constrained one. Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. It follows, first, that God does not act from freedom of the will.

Corollary 2. It follows, second, that will and intellect stand in the same relation to the nature of God as motion and rest do, and as absolutely all natural phenomena do, which must be determined by God (Proposition 29 of this Part) to exist and act in a particular way. For will, like the rest, needs a cause by which it is determined to exist and act in a particular way. And although, once will or intellect is granted, an infinite number of results may follow, God cannot on that account be said to act from freedom of the will, any more than the infinite number of results that follow from motion and rest would justify us in saying that motion and rest act by free will. So will belongs to God no more than anything else in nature does; it stands in the same relation to him as motion, rest and the like, which we have shown to follow from the necessity of the divine nature and to be determined by it to exist and act in a particular way.

Proposition 33

Things could not have been produced by God in any other way, or in any other order, than the way and order in which they have in fact been produced.

Proof. All things follow necessarily from the nature of God (Proposition 16 of this Part), and are determined by the nature of God to exist and act in a particular way (Proposition 29 of this Part). If, then, things could have had a different nature, or could have been determined to act in a different way, so that the order of nature would have been different, God's nature would also have been able to be different from what it now is; and therefore (by Proposition 11 of this Part) that different nature would also have had to exist, and consequently there could have been two or more Gods. That (by Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1) is absurd. Therefore things could not have been produced by God in any other way, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note 1. Having thus shown, more clearly than the noonday sun, that there is nothing to justify our calling things contingent, I want to explain briefly what we should mean by the word contingent. But first I will explain the words necessary and impossible.

A thing is called necessary either in respect of its essence or in respect of its cause; for the existence of a thing follows necessarily either from its essence and definition or from a given efficient cause. And a thing is called impossible for the same sorts of reason: either because its essence or definition involves a contradiction, or because there is no external cause determined to produce such an effect. But a thing can be called contingent in no respect except in relation to a defect in our knowledge.

A thing whose essence we do not know to involve a contradiction or not, or which we know involves no contradiction but whose existence we are still in doubt about because the order of causes escapes us—such a thing, I say, can appear to us neither necessary nor impossible. So we call it contingent, or possible.

Note 2. It clearly follows from what has been said that things have been produced by God in the highest perfection, since they have followed necessarily from a most perfect nature. Nor does this prove any imperfection in God; on the contrary, it is his perfection that has compelled us to affirm it. From the contrary proposition it would clearly follow, as I have just shown, that God is not supremely perfect; for if things had been produced in any other way, we should have to assign God a nature different from the one we are bound to attribute to him when we consider an absolutely perfect being.

I do not doubt that many will dismiss this idea as absurd and refuse to give their minds to it, simply because they are used to assigning God a freedom very different from the one we (Definition 7 of this Part) have deduced. They assign him, in short, absolute free will. But I am also convinced that if such people reflect on the matter and weigh our chain of propositions properly, they will reject the freedom they now attribute to God, not merely as worthless but as a serious obstacle to organised knowledge. There is no need for me to repeat what I said in the note to Proposition 17 of this Part. But for my opponents' sake I will show further that even if it were granted that will belongs to the essence of God, it would still follow from his perfection that things could not have been created by him other than they are, or in a different order. This is easily proved if we reflect on what my opponents themselves concede: that it depends solely on the decree and will of God that each thing is what it is—for otherwise God would not be the cause of all things—and that all God's decrees have been ratified from all eternity by God himself, for otherwise God would be convicted of imperfection or change. But in eternity there is no when, no before and no after; and so it follows solely from the perfection of God that God never can decree, and never could have decreed, anything but what is, and that God did not exist before his decrees and would not exist without them. But it will be said that even supposing God had made a different universe, or had ordained different decrees from all eternity concerning nature and her order, we could not conclude any imperfection in God. Those who say this must admit that God can change his decrees. For if God had ordained decrees about nature and her order different from those he has ordained—in other words, if he had willed and conceived something different about nature—he would have had to have a different intellect from the one he has, and a different will. And if we may assign God a different intellect and a different will without any change in his essence or his perfection, what would prevent him from changing the decrees he has made about created things and remaining perfect all the same? For his intellect and will concerning created things and their order are the same in respect of his essence and perfection, however they are conceived.

Further, all the philosophers I have read admit that in God there is no potential intellect, only actual; and since they also admit that God's intellect, God's will and God's essence are identical, it follows that if God had had a different actual intellect and a different will, his essence too would have been different. And so, as I concluded at the start, if things had been produced by God in a different way from the way they have been, God's intellect and will—that is, as they admit, his essence—would have had to be different, which is absurd.

Since, then, things could not have been produced by God in any but the actual way and order in which they have been, and since the truth of this proposition follows from God's supreme perfection, we can have no sound reason for persuading ourselves that God did not wish to create everything that was in his intellect, and to create it in the same perfection in which he understood it.

But it will be said that there is in things no perfection and no imperfection; that what is in them, and makes them called perfect or imperfect, good or bad, depends solely on the will of God, and that if God had so willed he might have brought it about that what is now perfection should be the extreme of imperfection, and the other way round. But what is such a claim except an open declaration that God, who necessarily understands what he wills, might bring it about by his will that he should understand things differently from the way he does understand them? That, as we have just shown, is the height of absurdity. So I may turn the argument back on those who use it: all things depend on the power of God. For things to be different from what they are, God's will would have to be different. But God's will cannot be different, as we have just demonstrated very clearly, from God's perfection. Therefore neither can things be different. I confess that the theory which subjects all things to the will of an indifferent deity, and makes them all depend on his decree, is less far from the truth than the theory of those who hold that God acts in all things with a view to promoting what is good. For these last seem to set up something outside God, which does not depend on God, and which God looks to in acting as a model, or aims at as a definite goal. This is only another name for subjecting God to the rule of fate—an utter absurdity in the case of God, whom we have shown to be the first and only free cause both of the essence of all things and of their existence. I need spend no more time refuting such wild theories.

Proposition 34

God's power is identical with his essence.

Proof. From the sole necessity of God's essence it follows that God is the cause of himself (Proposition 11 of this Part) and of all things (Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary). Therefore the power of God, by which he and all things are and act, is identical with his essence. Q.E.D.

Proposition 35

Whatever we conceive to be in God's power necessarily exists.

Proof. Whatever is in God's power must (by Proposition 34 of this Part) be comprehended in his essence in such a way that it necessarily follows from it, and therefore necessarily exists. Q.E.D.

Proposition 36

There is nothing from whose nature some effect does not follow.

Proof. Whatever exists expresses God's nature or essence in a definite and determined way (by Proposition 25 of this Part, Corollary); that is (by Proposition 34 of this Part), whatever exists expresses in a definite and determined way God's power, which is the cause of all things. Therefore an effect must (by Proposition 16 of this Part) necessarily follow. Q.E.D.
