Preface, Definitions, Axioms, the Physics, Propositions 1 to 13

Preface

I now pass on to explaining what must necessarily follow from the essence of God, the eternal and infinite being—not all of it (for we proved in Part 1, Proposition 16, that an infinite number must follow in an infinite number of ways), but only what can lead us, as if by the hand, to knowledge of the human mind and its highest blessedness.

Definitions

1. By body I mean a mode which expresses in a definite and determined way the essence of God insofar as he is considered as an extended thing (see Part 1, Proposition 25, Corollary).

2. I consider as belonging to the essence of a thing that which, being given, the thing is necessarily given also, and which, being taken away, the thing is necessarily taken away also; in other words, that without which the thing can neither be nor be conceived, and which itself can neither be nor be conceived without the thing.

3. By idea I mean the conception which the mind forms because it is a thinking thing.

Explanation. I say conception rather than perception, because the word perception seems to imply that the mind is passive towards its object, whereas conception seems to express an activity of the mind.

4. By an adequate idea I mean an idea which, considered in itself and without reference to its object, has all the properties or intrinsic marks of a true idea.

Explanation. I say intrinsic in order to exclude the mark that is extrinsic, namely the agreement between the idea and its object (ideatum).

5. Duration is the indefinite continuance of existing.

Explanation. I say indefinite because it cannot be determined by the existence of the existing thing itself, nor by its efficient cause, which necessarily gives the thing its existence but does not take it away.

6. Reality and perfection I use as meaning the same thing.

7. By particular things I mean things that are finite and have a determined existence. But if several individual things work together in one action, so as to be all at once the effect of one cause, I consider them all, so far, as one particular thing.

Axioms

1. The essence of man does not involve necessary existence; that is, in the order of nature it may come about that this or that man exists, or does not exist.

2. Man thinks.

3. Modes of thinking, such as love and desire and the other passions, do not occur unless there is in the same individual an idea of the thing loved, desired, and so on. But an idea can exist without any other mode of thinking being present.

4. We perceive that a certain body is affected in many ways.

5. We feel and perceive no particular things except bodies and modes of thought.

Note. The Postulates are given after the conclusion of Proposition 13 of this Part.

Proposition 1

Thought is an attribute of God, or God is a thinking thing.

Proof. Particular thoughts, this thought and that, are modes which express the nature of God in a definite and determined way (Part 1, Proposition 25, Corollary). God therefore possesses the attribute (Part 1, Definition 5) whose concept is involved in all particular thoughts, and through which they are conceived. Thought, then, is one of the infinite attributes of God which express God's eternal and infinite essence (Part 1, Definition 6). In other words, God is a thinking thing. Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition is also evident from the fact that we can conceive an infinite thinking being. For the more thoughts a thinking being is conceived as thinking, the more reality or perfection it is conceived as containing. Therefore a being which can think an infinite number of things in an infinite number of ways is, in respect of thinking, necessarily infinite. Since, then, from the consideration of thought alone we conceive an infinite being, thought is necessarily (Part 1, Definition 4; Part 1, Definition 6) one of the infinite attributes of God, which is what we wanted to show.

Proposition 2

Extension is an attribute of God, or God is an extended thing.

Proof. The proof of this proposition is like that of the last.

Proposition 3

In God there is necessarily the idea not only of his essence but also of everything that necessarily follows from his essence.

Proof. God (by Proposition 1 of this Part) can think an infinite number of things in infinite ways, or (what is the same thing, by Part 1, Proposition 16) can form the idea of his essence and of everything that necessarily follows from it. Now everything that is in God's power necessarily is (Part 1, Proposition 35). Therefore such an idea as we are considering necessarily is, and is in God alone (Part 1, Proposition 15). Q.E.D.

Note. Most people understand by the power of God the free will of God, and his right over everything that exists—which is why all existing things are generally reckoned contingent. For it is said that God has the power to destroy everything and reduce it to nothing. And the power of God is very often compared to the power of kings. But we have refuted this doctrine (Part 1, Proposition 32, Corollary 1; Part 1, Proposition 2), and we have shown (Part 1, Proposition 16) that God acts by the same necessity by which he understands himself: in other words, just as it follows from the necessity of the divine nature, as everyone admits, that God understands himself, so by the same necessity it follows that God performs infinite acts in infinite ways. We further showed (Part 1, Proposition 34) that God's power is identical with God's essence in action; so it is as impossible for us to conceive God as not acting as to conceive him as not existing. If I were to pursue the subject, I could point out that the power commonly attributed to God is not only human—showing that God is conceived by most people as a man, or in the likeness of a man—but actually involves a negation of power. But I am unwilling to go over the same ground so often. I only beg the reader, again and again, to turn over in his mind what I said in Part One from Proposition 16 of this Part to the end. No one will be able to follow my meaning unless he is scrupulously careful not to confuse the power of God with the human power and right of kings.

Proposition 4

The idea of God, from which an infinite number of things follow in infinite ways, can only be one.

Proof. Infinite intellect comprehends nothing but the attributes of God and his modifications (Part 1, Proposition 30). Now God is one (Part 1, Proposition 14, Corollary). Therefore the idea of God, from which an infinite number of things follow in infinite ways, can only be one. Q.E.D.

Proposition 5

The actual being of ideas has God for its cause only insofar as he is considered as a thinking thing, and not insofar as he is unfolded in any other attribute. That is, the ideas both of the attributes of God and of particular things have for their efficient cause not their objects (ideata), the things perceived, but God himself insofar as he is a thinking thing.

Proof. This proposition is evident from Proposition 3 of this Part. We there drew the conclusion that God can form the idea of his essence, and of everything that necessarily follows from it, solely because he is a thinking thing, and not because he is the object of his own idea. So the actual being of ideas has God for its cause insofar as he is a thinking thing. It may also be proved differently. The actual being of ideas is, obviously, a mode of thought—that is (Part 1, Proposition 25, Corollary), a mode which expresses the nature of God in a certain way insofar as he is a thinking thing—and therefore (Part 1, Proposition 10) involves the conception of no other attribute of God, and consequently (by Part 1, Axiom 4) is not the effect of any attribute but thought. Therefore the actual being of ideas has God for its cause insofar as he is considered as a thinking thing, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 6

The modes of any given attribute are caused by God insofar as he is considered through the attribute of which they are modes, and not insofar as he is considered through any other attribute.

Proof. Each attribute is conceived through itself, without any other (Part 1, Proposition 10), so the modes of each attribute involve the conception of that attribute and of no other. Thus (Part 1, Axiom 4) they are caused by God only insofar as he is considered through the attribute whose modes they are, and not insofar as he is considered through any other. Q.E.D.

Corollary. Hence the actual being of things which are not modes of thought does not follow from the divine nature because that nature has prior knowledge of the things. Things represented in ideas follow, and are derived from, their own attribute in the same way and by the same necessity as ideas follow, on our showing, from the attribute of thought.

Proposition 7

The order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of things.

Proof. This proposition is evident from Part 1, Axiom 4. For the idea of anything caused depends on knowledge of the cause of which it is an effect.

Corollary. Hence God's power of thinking is equal to his realised power of acting: that is, whatever follows from the infinite nature of God in the world of extension (formaliter) follows without exception, in the same order and connection, from the idea of God in the world of thought (objective).

Note. Before going any further, I want to recall what has been pointed out above: that whatever can be perceived by an infinite intellect as constituting the essence of substance belongs altogether to one substance only. Consequently thinking substance and extended substance are one and the same substance, comprehended now through one attribute and now through the other. So too a mode of extension and the idea of that mode are one and the same thing, expressed in two ways. This truth seems to have been dimly recognised by those Jews who held that God, God's intellect, and the things understood by God are identical. A circle existing in nature, for instance, and the idea of that circle, which is also in God, are one and the same thing displayed through different attributes. And so, whether we conceive nature under the attribute of extension, or under the attribute of thought, or under any other attribute, we shall find the same order, one and the same chain of causes—that is, the same things following in either case.

I said that God is the cause of an idea—of the idea of a circle, for instance—insofar as he is a thinking thing, and the cause of the circle insofar as he is an extended thing, simply because the actual being of the idea of a circle can only be perceived as having for its proximate cause another mode of thinking, and that another, and so on to infinity. So as long as we consider things as modes of thinking, we must explain the order of the whole of nature, the whole chain of causes, through the attribute of thought alone; and insofar as we consider things as modes of extension, we must explain the order of the whole of nature through the attribute of extension alone; and so with the other attributes. Therefore of things as they are in themselves God is really the cause, since he consists of infinite attributes. For the present I cannot explain my meaning more clearly.

Proposition 8

The ideas of particular things, or of modes, that do not exist must be comprehended in the infinite idea of God in the same way as the formal essences of particular things or modes are contained in the attributes of God.

Proof. This proposition is evident from the last; it is understood more clearly from the note before it.

Corollary. Hence, so long as particular things do not exist except insofar as they are comprehended in the attributes of God, their representations in thought, that is their ideas, do not exist except insofar as the infinite idea of God exists. And when particular things are said to exist not only insofar as they are involved in the attributes of God but also insofar as they are said to endure, their ideas will also involve the existence through which they are said to endure.

Note. If anyone wants an example to throw more light on this, I am afraid I cannot give one that adequately explains what I am speaking of here, since it is unique; but I will try to illustrate it as far as I can. The nature of a circle is such that if any number of straight lines intersect within it, the rectangles formed by their segments will be equal to one another; so an infinite number of equal rectangles are contained in a circle. Yet none of these rectangles can be said to exist except insofar as the circle exists, nor can the idea of any of them be said to exist except insofar as it is comprehended in the idea of the circle. Now suppose that of this infinite number of rectangles two only exist. The ideas of those two exist not only insofar as they are contained in the idea of the circle, but also as involving the existence of those rectangles; and that is what distinguishes them from the ideas of the remaining rectangles.

Proposition 9

The idea of an individual thing actually existing is caused by God not insofar as he is infinite, but insofar as he is considered as affected by another idea of a thing actually existing, of which he is the cause insofar as he is affected by a third idea, and so on to infinity.

Proof. The idea of an individual thing actually existing is an individual mode of thinking, and is distinct from other modes (by Proposition 8 of this Part, Corollary, Note); so (by Proposition 6 of this Part) it is caused by God only insofar as he is a thinking thing. But not (by Part 1, Proposition 28) insofar as he is a thing thinking absolutely: only insofar as he is considered as affected by another mode of thinking; and he is the cause of this second one as being affected by a third, and so on to infinity. Now the order and connection of ideas is (by Proposition 7 of this Part) the same as the order and connection of causes. Therefore the cause of a given individual idea is another individual idea, or God insofar as he is considered as modified by that idea; and of this second idea God is the cause insofar as he is affected by another idea, and so on to infinity. Q.E.D.

Corollary. Whatever takes place in the individual object of any idea, the knowledge of it is in God only insofar as he has the idea of that object.

Proof. Whatever takes place in the object of any idea, the idea of it is in God (by Proposition 3 of this Part), not insofar as he is infinite but insofar as he is considered as affected by another idea of an individual thing (by Proposition 8 of this Part); and (by Proposition 7 of this Part) the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of things. Therefore the knowledge of what takes place in any individual object will be in God only insofar as he has the idea of that object. Q.E.D.

Proposition 10

The being of substance does not belong to the essence of man; in other words, substance does not constitute the actual being of man.

Footnote: "Forma"

Proof. The being of substance involves necessary existence (Part 1, Proposition 7). If, therefore, the being of substance belonged to the essence of man, then substance being given, man would necessarily be given also (Definition 2 of this Part), and consequently man would necessarily exist, which is absurd (Axiom 1 of this Part). Therefore, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition may also be proved from Part 1, Proposition 5, where it is shown that there cannot be two substances of the same nature; for since there can be many men, the being of substance is not what constitutes the actual being of man. The proposition is evident, too, from the other properties of substance—that substance is by nature infinite, unchangeable, indivisible, and so on—as anyone may see for himself.

Corollary. It follows that the essence of man is constituted by certain modifications of the attributes of God. For (by Proposition 10 of this Part) the being of substance does not belong to the essence of man. That essence, therefore (by Proposition 1 of this Part; Proposition 15 of this Part), is something which is in God, and which without God can neither be nor be conceived, whether it is a modification (Proposition 1 of this Part; Proposition 25 of this Part, Corollary) or a mode which expresses God's nature in a definite and determined way.

Note. Everyone must surely admit that nothing can be or be conceived without God. All agree that God is the one and only cause of all things, both of their essence and of their existence; that is, God is the cause of things not only in respect of their coming to be (secundum fieri) but also in respect of their being (secundum esse).

At the same time many assert that whatever a thing cannot be or be conceived without belongs to the essence of that thing; so they believe either that the nature of God belongs to the essence of created things, or that created things can be or be conceived without God—or, as is more likely, they hold inconsistent doctrines. The cause of such confusion is, I think, mainly that they do not keep to the proper order of philosophical thinking. The nature of God, which should be reflected on first, since it is prior both in the order of knowledge and in the order of nature, they have taken to be last in the order of knowledge, and have put first what they call the objects of sense. So while they are considering natural things they pay no attention at all to the divine nature; and when they afterwards turn their minds to studying the divine nature they cannot keep in view the first hypotheses with which they overlaid their knowledge of natural things, since those hypotheses are no help towards understanding the divine nature. It is hardly surprising, then, that such people contradict themselves freely.

But I pass over this. My only intention here was to give a reason for not saying that whatever a thing cannot be or be conceived without belongs to the essence of that thing. Individual things can neither be nor be conceived without God, and yet God does not belong to their essence. I said that "I consider as belonging to the essence of a thing that which, being given, the thing is necessarily given also, and which, being taken away, the thing is necessarily taken away also; or that without which the thing can neither be nor be conceived, and which itself can neither be nor be conceived without the thing" (Definition 2 of this Part).

Proposition 11

The first element constituting the actual being of the human mind is the idea of some particular thing actually existing.

Proof. The essence of man (by Proposition 10 of this Part) is constituted by certain modes of the attributes of God, namely (by Axiom 2 of this Part) by modes of thinking, among all of which (by Axiom 3 of this Part) the idea is prior in nature; and when the idea is given, the other modes—those the idea is prior to—must be in the same individual (by Part 2, Axiom 3). Therefore an idea is the first element constituting the human mind. But not the idea of a non-existent thing, for then (Proposition 8 of this Part, Corollary) the idea itself could not be said to exist. It must therefore be the idea of something actually existing. But not of an infinite thing, for an infinite thing (Part 1, Proposition 21; Part 1, Proposition 22) must always necessarily exist, and this would (by Axiom 1 of this Part) be absurd. Therefore the first element constituting the actual being of the human mind is the idea of something actually existing. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that the human mind is part of the infinite intellect of God. So when we say that the human mind perceives this or that, we are saying that God has this or that idea—not insofar as he is infinite, but insofar as he is displayed through the nature of the human mind, or insofar as he constitutes the essence of the human mind. And when we say that God has this or that idea not only insofar as he constitutes the essence of the human mind but also insofar as he has, along with the human mind, the idea of another thing as well, then we are saying that the human mind perceives a thing partly, or inadequately.

Note. Here, I do not doubt, readers will come to a halt, and think of many things that will make them hesitate. I therefore beg them to go with me slowly, step by step, and to pass no judgment on what I say until they have read to the end.

Proposition 12

Whatever takes place in the object of the idea constituting the human mind must be perceived by the human mind; that is, there will necessarily be an idea of it in the human mind. In other words, if the object of the idea constituting the human mind is a body, nothing can take place in that body without being perceived by the mind.

Proof. Whatever takes place in the object of any idea, the knowledge of it is necessarily in God (Proposition 9 of this Part, Corollary) insofar as he is considered as affected by the idea of that object—that is (Proposition 11 of this Part), insofar as he constitutes the mind of something. Therefore whatever takes place in the object constituting the idea of the human mind, the knowledge of it is necessarily in God insofar as he constitutes the essence of the human mind; that is (by Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), the knowledge of that thing will necessarily be in the mind—in other words, the mind perceives it.

Note. This proposition is also evident, and is more clearly understood, from Proposition 7 of this Part, which see.

Proposition 13

The object of the idea constituting the human mind is the body—that is, a certain mode of extension actually existing, and nothing else.

Proof. If the body were not the object of the human mind, the ideas of the modifications of the body would not be in God (Proposition 9 of this Part, Corollary) in virtue of his constituting our mind, but in virtue of his constituting the mind of something else; that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), the ideas of the modifications of the body would not be in our mind. But (by Axiom 4 of this Part) we do have the idea of the modifications of the body. Therefore the object of the idea constituting the human mind is the body, and the body as it actually exists (Proposition 11 of this Part). Further, if there were any other object of the idea constituting the mind besides the body, then, since nothing can exist from which some effect does not follow (Part 1, Proposition 36), there would necessarily have to be in our mind an idea which was the effect of that other object (Proposition 11 of this Part); but (Part 1, Axiom 5) there is no such idea. Therefore the object of our mind is the body as it exists, and nothing else. Q.E.D.

Note. We thus understand not only that the human mind is united to the body, but also what the union of mind and body consists in. Nobody, however, will be able to grasp it adequately or distinctly without first having adequate knowledge of the nature of our body. The propositions we have advanced so far have been entirely general, applying no more to men than to other individual things, all of which are animated, though in different degrees. For of everything there is necessarily an idea in God, of which God is the cause in just the same way as he is of the idea of the human body; so whatever we have asserted of the idea of the human body must necessarily be asserted of the idea of everything else. Yet on the other hand we cannot deny that ideas differ from one another as their objects do, one being more excellent than another and containing more reality, just as the object of one idea is more excellent than the object of another and contains more reality.

Footnote: "Animata"

So in order to determine what makes the human mind differ from other things, and in what it surpasses them, we need to know the nature of its object, that is, of the human body. What that nature is I cannot explain here, nor is it necessary for the proof of what I am advancing. I will only say in general that the more a given body is fitted, beyond others, for doing many things at once or undergoing many impressions at once, the more its mind is fitted, beyond others, for forming many perceptions at once; and the more the actions of a body depend on itself alone, and the fewer other bodies take part with it in acting, the more its mind is fitted for distinct understanding. We can thus recognise the superiority of one mind over another, and can further see why we have only a very confused knowledge of our own body, along with many related questions which I shall deduce in the following propositions from what has been said. It is therefore worth explaining and proving my present statements more strictly, and to do that I must first lay down a few propositions about the nature of bodies.

1. All bodies are either in motion or at rest.

2. Every body moves sometimes more slowly, sometimes more quickly.

Lemma 1

Bodies are distinguished from one another in respect of motion and rest, quickness and slowness, and not in respect of substance.

Proof. The first part of this I take to be self-evident. That bodies are not distinguished in respect of substance is plain both from Part 1, Proposition 5 and from Part 1, Proposition 8. It comes out still more clearly from Part 1, Proposition 15, Note.

Lemma 2

All bodies agree in certain respects.

Proof. All bodies agree in involving the conception of one and the same attribute (Definition 1 of this Part), and in being capable of moving more slowly or more quickly, and of being absolutely in motion or at rest.

Lemma 3

A body in motion or at rest must be determined to motion or rest by another body, and that other body has been determined to motion or rest by a third, and that third by a fourth, and so on to infinity.

Proof. Bodies are individual things (Definition 1 of this Part) which (Lemma 1 of this Part) are distinguished from one another in respect of motion and rest; so (Part 1, Proposition 28) each must necessarily be determined to motion or rest by another individual thing, namely (Proposition 6 of this Part) by another body, which other body is also (Axiom 1 of this Part) in motion or at rest. And this body in turn can only have been set in motion or brought to rest by being determined to motion or rest by a third body; and that third by a fourth, and so on to infinity. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that a body in motion keeps moving until it is determined to rest by some other body, and a body at rest stays at rest until it is determined to motion by some other body. This is indeed self-evident. For when I suppose, say, that a body A is at rest, and take no account of other bodies in motion, I can affirm nothing about A except that it is at rest. If it afterwards comes about that A is in motion, that cannot have resulted from its having been at rest, since nothing could follow from that but its remaining at rest. If on the other hand A is given as in motion, then so long as we consider A alone we shall be unable to affirm anything about it except that it is in motion. If A is later found to be at rest, that rest cannot be the result of A's previous motion, since motion can only have led to continued motion; the state of rest must therefore have resulted from something that was not in A, namely from an external cause determining A to rest.

Axiom 1. All the ways in which one body is affected by another follow at once from the nature of the body affected and the nature of the body affecting; so that one and the same body may be moved in different ways according to the difference in the nature of the bodies moving it, and different bodies may be moved in different ways by one and the same body.

Axiom 2. When a body in motion strikes another body at rest which it cannot move, it rebounds so as to continue its motion, and the angle made by the line of the rebound with the plane of the body at rest will be equal to the angle made by the line of incidence with the same plane.

So far we have been speaking only of the simplest bodies, which are distinguished from one another only by motion and rest, quickness and slowness. We now pass on to compound bodies.

Definition. When a number of bodies, of the same or different size, are pressed together by other bodies so that they remain in contact, or if they move at the same or different speeds in such a way that they keep a fixed relation of movement among themselves, we say that those bodies are in union, and that together they compose one body, or individual, which is distinguished from other bodies by this union.

Axiom 3. According as the parts of an individual, or compound body, are in contact over a greater or smaller surface, they will be moved from their position with greater or less difficulty; and consequently the individual will be brought to take another form with greater or less difficulty. Bodies whose parts are in contact over large surfaces are called hard; those whose parts are in contact over small surfaces, soft; those whose parts are in motion among one another, fluid.

Lemma 4

If certain bodies are separated from a body, or individual, composed of several bodies, and at the same time an equal number of other bodies of the same nature take their place, the individual will keep its nature as before, without any change in its actuality (forma).

Proof. Bodies (Lemma 1 of this Part) are not distinguished in respect of substance; what constitutes the actuality (formam) of an individual consists (by the Definition before Lemma 4) in a union of bodies; and this union, though there is a continual exchange of bodies, will by our hypothesis be maintained. The individual, therefore, will keep its nature as before, both in respect of substance and in respect of mode. Q.E.D.

Lemma 5

If the parts composing an individual grow greater or smaller, but in such proportion that they all keep the same mutual relations of motion and rest, the individual will still keep its original nature, and its actuality will not be changed.

Proof. The same as for the last Lemma.

Lemma 6

If certain bodies composing an individual are made to change the motion they have in one direction for motion in another, but in such a way that they can continue their motions and keep the same mutual relations as before, the individual will keep its own nature without any change of its actuality.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident, for the individual is supposed to keep everything that we spoke of in its definition as its actual being.

Lemma 7

Furthermore, the individual so composed keeps its nature whether it is moving as a whole or at rest, and whether it moves in this direction or that, so long as each part keeps its own motion and preserves its communication with the other parts as before.

Proof. This proposition is evident from the definition of an individual prefixed to Lemma 4 of this Part.

Note. We thus see how a composite individual may be affected in many different ways and yet preserve its nature. So far we have conceived an individual as composed of bodies distinguished from one another only in respect of motion and rest, speed and slowness—that is, of bodies of the simplest kind. If we now conceive another individual composed of several individuals of different natures, we shall find that the number of ways in which it can be affected without losing its nature is greatly multiplied. Each of its parts would consist of several bodies, and therefore (by Lemma 6 of this Part) each part would admit, without any change of its nature, of quicker or slower motion, and would consequently be able to transmit its motions to the remaining parts more quickly or more slowly. And if we further conceive a third kind of individual, composed of individuals of this second kind, we shall find that it can be affected in a still greater number of ways without any change in its actuality. We may easily go on in this way to infinity, and conceive the whole of nature as one individual whose parts—that is, all bodies—vary in infinite ways without any change in the individual as a whole. I should feel bound to explain and demonstrate this at greater length if I were writing a treatise on body. But I have already said that this is not my object; I have touched on the question only because it lets me prove easily what I have in view.
