Postulates, Propositions 14 to 39

Postulates

1. The human body is composed of a number of individual parts, of different natures, each of which is in itself extremely complex.

2. Of the individual parts composing the human body, some are fluid, some soft, some hard.

3. The individual parts composing the human body, and consequently the human body itself, are affected in a great variety of ways by external bodies.

4. The human body needs, for its preservation, a great many other bodies by which it is, so to speak, continually regenerated.

5. When a fluid part of the human body is determined by an external body to strike often against a soft part, it changes the surface of that soft part, and leaves on it, as it were, the impression of the external body that drives it.

6. The human body can move external bodies, and arrange them in a variety of ways.

Proposition 14

The human mind is capable of perceiving a great many things, and is so in proportion as its body is capable of receiving a great many impressions.

Proof. The human body (by Postulate 3 of this Part; Postulate 6 of this Part) is affected in very many ways by external bodies, and is capable of affecting external bodies in very many ways. But (Proposition 12 of this Part) the human mind must perceive everything that takes place in the human body. The human mind is therefore capable of perceiving a great many things, and is so in proportion, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 15

The idea constituting the actual being of the human mind is not simple, but composed of a great many ideas.

Proof. The idea constituting the actual being of the human mind is the idea of the body (Proposition 13 of this Part), which (Postulate 1 of this Part) is composed of a great many complex individual parts. But there is necessarily in God the idea of each individual part of which the body is composed (Proposition 8 of this Part, Corollary); therefore (Proposition 7 of this Part) the idea of the human body is composed of these many ideas of its component parts. Q.E.D.

Proposition 16

The idea of every way in which the human body is affected by external bodies must involve the nature of the human body and also the nature of the external body.

Proof. All the ways in which any given body is affected follow from the nature of the body affected and also from the nature of the body affecting it (by Axiom 1, after the Corollary to Lemma 3), so their idea also necessarily (by Part 1, Axiom 4) involves the nature of both bodies. Therefore the idea of every way in which the human body is affected by external bodies involves the nature of the human body and of the external body. Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. It follows, first, that the human mind perceives the nature of a great many bodies along with the nature of its own.

Corollary 2. It follows, second, that the ideas we have of external bodies indicate the constitution of our own body rather than the nature of the external bodies. I have illustrated this at length in the Appendix to Part One.

Proposition 17

If the human body is affected in a way that involves the nature of some external body, the human mind will regard that external body as actually existing, or as present to itself, until the human body is affected in a way that excludes the existence or presence of that external body.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident. For as long as the human body continues to be so affected, so long will the human mind (Proposition 12 of this Part) regard this modification of the body—that is (by Proposition 16 of this Part), it will have the idea of the mode as actually existing, and this idea involves the nature of the external body. In other words, it will have an idea that does not exclude but posits the existence or presence of the nature of the external body. Therefore the mind (by Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 1) will regard the external body as actually existing, until it is affected, and so on. Q.E.D.

Corollary. The mind is able to regard as present those external bodies by which the human body has once been affected, even though they no longer exist or are not present.

Proof. When external bodies so determine the fluid parts of the human body that they often strike against the softer parts, they change the surface of the softer parts (Postulate 5 of this Part); hence (Axiom 2, after the Corollary to Lemma 3) the fluid parts rebound from them differently than they did before that change. And afterwards, when they strike the new surfaces by their own spontaneous motion, they will rebound in the same way as when they were driven against those surfaces by external bodies. Consequently, so long as they go on rebounding in that way, they will affect the human body in the same way, and the mind (Proposition 12 of this Part) will again take note of it—that is (Proposition 17 of this Part), the mind will again regard the external body as present, and will do so as often as the fluid parts of the human body strike those surfaces by their own spontaneous motion. So although the external bodies by which the human body was once affected no longer exist, the mind will nevertheless regard them as present as often as this action of the body is repeated. Q.E.D.

Note. We thus see how it comes about, as often happens, that we regard as present many things that are not. It is possible that the same result may come about by other causes; but I think it is enough here to have indicated one possible explanation, as good as if I had pointed out the true cause. Indeed I do not think I am far from the truth, since all my assumptions rest on postulates that are based, almost without exception, on experience—experience that cannot be disputed by those who have shown, as we have, that the human body exists as we feel it (Proposition 13 of this Part, Corollary). Furthermore (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 2), we clearly understand the difference between, say, the idea of Peter that constitutes the essence of Peter's mind, and the idea of that same Peter which is in another man, say Paul. The first answers directly to the essence of Peter's own body, and implies existence only so long as Peter exists. The second indicates the disposition of Paul's body rather than the nature of Peter; and so, while that disposition of Paul's body lasts, Paul's mind will regard Peter as present to itself, even though Peter no longer exists. Further, to keep the usual terms, we will call the modifications of the human body whose ideas represent external bodies to us as present the images of things, though they do not reproduce the shapes of things. And when the mind regards bodies in this way, we say that it imagines. I want to draw attention here, in order to indicate where error lies, to the fact that the imaginations of the mind, looked at in themselves, contain no error. The mind does not err simply by imagining; it errs only insofar as it is considered to be without the idea that excludes the existence of the things it imagines to be present to it. If the mind, while imagining non-existent things as present to it, is at the same time aware that they do not really exist, this power of imagining must be set down to the strength of its nature and not to a fault—especially if this power of imagining depends on its own nature alone, that is (Part 1, Definition 7), if it is free.

Proposition 18

If the human body has once been affected by two or more bodies at the same time, then when the mind afterwards imagines one of them it will at once remember the others too.

Proof. The mind (Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary) imagines a given body because the human body is affected and disposed by the impressions of an external body in the same way as it was affected when certain of its parts were acted on by that external body. But by our hypothesis the body was then so disposed that the mind imagined two bodies at once; therefore it will in the second case also imagine two at once, and the mind, when it imagines one, will at once remember the other. Q.E.D.

Note. We now clearly see what memory is. It is simply a certain linking of ideas involving the nature of things outside the human body, a linking that occurs in the mind according to the order and linking of the modifications of the human body. I say, first, a linking of those ideas only which involve the nature of things outside the human body, not of ideas that express the nature of those things; for ideas of the modifications of the human body are, strictly speaking (Proposition 16 of this Part), ideas that involve the nature both of the human body and of external bodies. I say, second, that this linking occurs according to the order and linking of the modifications of the human body, in order to distinguish it from the linking of ideas that follows the order of the intellect, by which the mind perceives things through their first causes, and which is the same in all men. And from this we can further understand clearly why the mind should pass at once from the thought of one thing to the thought of another that has no likeness to it. For instance, a Roman would pass at once from the thought of the word pomum to the thought of the fruit, an apple, which has no likeness to that articulate sound and nothing in common with it, except that the man's body has often been affected by the two together—that is, the man has often heard the word pomum while looking at the fruit. In the same way every man will pass from one thought to another according as habit has arranged the images of things in his body. A soldier, for instance, seeing the tracks of a horse in sand, will pass at once from the thought of a horse to the thought of a horseman, and from that to the thought of war; while a countryman will pass from the thought of a horse to the thought of a plough, a field, and so on. Thus every man will follow one train of thought or another according as he has been in the habit of joining and linking the images of things in this way or that.

Proposition 19

The human mind has no knowledge of the body, and does not know that it exists, except through the ideas of the modifications by which the body is affected.

Proof. The human mind is the very idea, or knowledge, of the human body (Proposition 13 of this Part), which (Proposition 9 of this Part) is in God insofar as he is regarded as affected by another idea of a particular thing actually existing—since (Postulate 4 of this Part) the human body needs a great many bodies by which it is, as it were, continually regenerated, and the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of causes (Proposition 7 of this Part). This idea will therefore be in God insofar as he is regarded as affected by the ideas of a great many particular things. Thus God has the idea of the human body, or knows the human body, insofar as he is affected by a great many other ideas, and not insofar as he constitutes the nature of the human mind; that is (by Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), the human mind does not know the human body. But the ideas of the modifications of the body are in God insofar as he constitutes the nature of the human mind, that is, the human mind perceives those modifications (Proposition 12 of this Part), and consequently (Proposition 16 of this Part) perceives the human body itself, and as actually existing. So the mind perceives the human body only to that extent. Q.E.D.

Proposition 20

The idea, or knowledge, of the human mind is also in God, following in God in the same way, and being referred to God in the same way, as the idea or knowledge of the human body.

Proof. Thought is an attribute of God (Proposition 1 of this Part); therefore (Proposition 3 of this Part) there must necessarily be in God the idea both of thought itself and of all its modifications, and consequently of the human mind as well (Proposition 11 of this Part). Further, this idea or knowledge of the mind does not follow from God insofar as he is infinite, but insofar as he is affected by another idea of an individual thing (Proposition 9 of this Part). But (Proposition 7 of this Part) the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of causes; therefore this idea or knowledge of the mind is in God, and is referred to God, in the same way as the idea or knowledge of the body. Q.E.D.

Proposition 21

This idea of the mind is united to the mind in the same way as the mind is united to the body.

Proof. That the mind is united to the body we have shown from the fact that the body is the object of the mind (Proposition 12 of this Part; Proposition 13 of this Part); and so, for the same reason, the idea of the mind must be united with its object, that is, with the mind, in the same way as the mind is united to the body. Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition is understood much more clearly from what we said in the note to Proposition 7 of this Part. We there showed that the idea of the body and the body itself—that is, mind and body (Proposition 13 of this Part)—are one and the same individual, conceived now under the attribute of thought and now under the attribute of extension. So the idea of the mind and the mind itself are one and the same thing, conceived under one and the same attribute, namely thought. The idea of the mind, I repeat, and the mind itself are in God by the same necessity, and follow from him by the same power of thinking. Strictly speaking, the idea of the mind—that is, the idea of an idea—is nothing but the distinctive character (forma) of the idea insofar as it is conceived as a mode of thought without reference to its object. If a man knows anything, he by that very fact knows that he knows it, and at the same time knows that he knows that he knows it, and so on to infinity. But I will treat of this later.

Proposition 22

The human mind perceives not only the modifications of the body but also the ideas of those modifications.

Proof. The ideas of the ideas of modifications follow in God in the same way, and are referred to God in the same way, as the ideas of those modifications; this is proved just as Proposition 20 of this Part was. But the ideas of the modifications of the body are in the human mind (Proposition 12 of this Part), that is, in God insofar as he constitutes the essence of the human mind; therefore the ideas of these ideas will be in God insofar as he has the knowledge, or idea, of the human mind—that is (Proposition 21 of this Part), they will be in the human mind itself, which therefore perceives not only the modifications of the body but also the ideas of those modifications. Q.E.D.

Proposition 23

The mind does not know itself except insofar as it perceives the ideas of the modifications of the body.

Proof. The idea, or knowledge, of the mind (Proposition 20 of this Part) follows in God in the same way, and is referred to God in the same way, as the idea or knowledge of the body. But since (Proposition 19 of this Part) the human mind does not know the human body itself, that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), since the knowledge of the human body is not referred to God insofar as he constitutes the nature of the human mind, neither is the knowledge of the mind referred to God insofar as he constitutes the essence of the human mind. Therefore (by Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary) the human mind, so far, has no knowledge of itself. Further, the ideas of the modifications by which the body is affected involve the nature of the human body itself (Proposition 16 of this Part), that is (Proposition 13 of this Part), they agree with the nature of the mind; so the knowledge of these ideas necessarily involves knowledge of the mind. But (by Proposition 22 of this Part) the knowledge of these ideas is in the human mind itself; so the human mind, so far and no further, has knowledge of itself. Q.E.D.

Proposition 24

The human mind does not involve an adequate knowledge of the parts composing the human body.

Proof. The parts composing the human body do not belong to the essence of that body except insofar as they communicate their motions to one another in a certain fixed relation (the Definition after Lemma 3), and not insofar as they can be regarded as individuals without reference to the human body. The parts of the human body are highly complex individuals (Postulate 1 of this Part), whose parts (Lemma 4 of this Part) can be separated from the human body without destroying its nature or distinctive character in any way, and can communicate their motions (Axiom 1, after Lemma 3) to other bodies in another relation. Therefore (Proposition 3 of this Part) the idea, or knowledge, of each part will be in God insofar (Proposition 9 of this Part) as he is regarded as affected by another idea of a particular thing, which particular thing is prior in the order of nature to that part (Proposition 7 of this Part). And we may say the same of every part of every individual composing the human body. So the knowledge of each part composing the human body is in God insofar as he is affected by a great many ideas of things, and not insofar as he has the idea of the human body alone—that is, the idea constituting the nature of the human mind (Proposition 13 of this Part). Therefore (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary) the human mind does not involve an adequate knowledge of the human body. Q.E.D.

Proposition 25

The idea of each modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the external body.

Proof. We have shown that the idea of a modification of the human body involves the nature of an external body insofar as that external body determines the human body in a given way. But insofar as the external body is an individual with no reference to the human body, the knowledge or idea of it is in God (Proposition 9 of this Part) insofar as God is regarded as affected by the idea of a further thing which (Proposition 7 of this Part) is naturally prior to that external body. Therefore an adequate knowledge of the external body is not in God insofar as he has the idea of the modification of the human body; in other words, the idea of the modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the external body. Q.E.D.

Proposition 26

The human mind does not perceive any external body as actually existing except through the ideas of the modifications of its own body.

Proof. If the human body is in no way affected by a given external body, then (Proposition 7 of this Part) neither is the idea of the human body—in other words, the human mind—affected in any way by the idea of the existence of that external body, nor does it perceive its existence at all. But insofar as the human body is affected in some way by a given external body, to that extent (Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary) the mind perceives that external body. Q.E.D.

Corollary. Insofar as the human mind imagines an external body, it does not have an adequate knowledge of it.

Proof. When the human mind regards external bodies through the ideas of the modifications of its own body, we say that it imagines (see Proposition 17 of this Part, Note); and the mind can only imagine external bodies as actually existing. Therefore (by Proposition 25 of this Part), insofar as the mind imagines external bodies, it does not have an adequate knowledge of them. Q.E.D.

Proposition 27

The idea of each modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the human body itself.

Proof. Every idea of a modification of the human body involves the nature of the human body insofar as the human body is regarded as affected in a given way (Proposition 16 of this Part). But since the human body is an individual that can be affected in a great many other ways, the idea of that modification, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 28

The ideas of the modifications of the human body, insofar as they are referred only to the human mind, are not clear and distinct but confused.

Proof. The ideas of the modifications of the human body involve the nature both of the human body and of external bodies (Proposition 16 of this Part); and they must involve the nature not only of the human body but of its parts as well, since the modifications are ways (Postulate 3 of this Part) in which the parts of the human body, and consequently the human body as a whole, are affected. But (by Proposition 24 of this Part; Proposition 25 of this Part) an adequate knowledge of external bodies, and of the parts composing the human body, is not in God insofar as he is regarded as affected by the human mind, but insofar as he is regarded as affected by other ideas. These ideas of modifications, insofar as they are referred to the human mind alone, are like conclusions without premisses—in other words, confused ideas. Q.E.D.

Note. The idea constituting the nature of the human mind is proved in the same way not to be clear and distinct when considered in itself alone; and so likewise is the idea of the human mind, and the ideas of the ideas of the modifications of the human body, insofar as they are referred to the mind only, as anyone may easily see.

Proposition 29

The idea of the idea of each modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the human mind.

Proof. The idea of a modification of the human body (Proposition 27 of this Part) does not involve an adequate knowledge of that body—in other words, does not adequately express its nature; that is (Proposition 13 of this Part), it does not adequately agree with the nature of the mind. Therefore (Part 1, Axiom 6) the idea of this idea does not adequately express the nature of the human mind, or involve an adequate knowledge of it.

Corollary. It follows that the human mind, when it perceives things in the common order of nature, has no adequate knowledge of itself, of its own body, or of external bodies, but only a confused and fragmentary knowledge. For the mind does not know itself except insofar as it perceives the ideas of the modifications of the body (Proposition 23 of this Part). It perceives its own body (Proposition 19 of this Part) only through the ideas of the modifications, and perceives external bodies only by the same means. So insofar as it has such ideas of modifications, it has no adequate knowledge of itself (Proposition 29 of this Part), nor of its own body (Proposition 27 of this Part), nor of external bodies (Proposition 25 of this Part), but only a fragmentary and confused knowledge of them (Proposition 28 of this Part, Note). Q.E.D.

Note. I say expressly that the mind has no adequate knowledge, but only a confused knowledge, of itself, of its own body and of external bodies, whenever it perceives things in the common order of nature—that is, whenever it is determined from outside, by the chance play of circumstance, to regard this or that; and not when it is determined from within, by regarding several things at once, to understand where they agree, differ and conflict. Whenever it is determined from within in any way, it regards things clearly and distinctly, as I will show below.

Proposition 30

We can have only a very inadequate knowledge of the duration of our body.

Proof. The duration of our body does not depend on its essence (Axiom 1 of this Part), nor on the absolute nature of God (Part 1, Proposition 21). But (Part 1, Proposition 28) it is determined to exist and act by causes which are themselves determined to exist and act in a fixed and definite way by other causes, and those again by others, and so on to infinity. The duration of our body therefore depends on the common order of nature, on the constitution of things. Now however a thing is constituted, adequate knowledge of it is in God insofar as he has the ideas of all things, and not insofar as he has the idea of the human body only (Proposition 9 of this Part, Corollary). Therefore the knowledge of the duration of our body is very inadequate in God insofar as he is regarded only as constituting the nature of the human mind; that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), this knowledge is very inadequate in our mind. Q.E.D.

Proposition 31

We can have only a very inadequate knowledge of the duration of particular things outside ourselves.

Proof. Every particular thing, like the human body, must be determined by another particular thing to exist and act in a fixed and definite way; and this other particular thing must likewise be determined by a third, and so on to infinity (Part 1, Proposition 28). And since, as we showed in the previous proposition, this common property of particular things means that we have only a very inadequate knowledge of the duration of our own body, we must draw the same conclusion about the duration of particular things: that we can have only a very inadequate knowledge of it. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that all particular things are contingent and perishable. For we can have no adequate idea of their duration (by Proposition 31 of this Part), and that is what we must understand by the contingency and perishableness of things (Part 1, Proposition 33, Note 1). For (Part 1, Proposition 29) nothing is contingent in any other sense.

Proposition 32

All ideas, insofar as they are referred to God, are true.

Proof. All ideas that are in God agree in every respect with their objects (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary); therefore (Part 1, Axiom 6) they are all true. Q.E.D.

Proposition 33

There is nothing positive in ideas that makes them be called false.

Proof. Deny it if you can, and conceive a positive mode of thinking that constitutes the distinctive character of falsehood. Such a mode of thinking cannot be in God (Proposition 32 of this Part), and outside God it can neither be nor be conceived (Part 1, Proposition 15). Therefore there is nothing positive in ideas that makes them be called false. Q.E.D.

Proposition 34

Every idea which in us is absolute, or adequate and perfect, is true.

Proof. When we say that an idea in us is adequate and perfect, we are saying, in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), that the idea is adequate and perfect in God insofar as he constitutes the essence of our mind; and consequently (Proposition 32 of this Part) we are saying that such an idea is true. Q.E.D.

Proposition 35

Falsity consists in the privation of knowledge which inadequate, fragmentary or confused ideas involve.

Proof. There is nothing positive in ideas that makes them be called false (Proposition 33 of this Part). But falsity cannot consist in simple privation, since it is minds and not bodies that are said to err and be mistaken; nor can it consist in absolute ignorance, since ignorance and error are not the same. So it consists in the privation of knowledge which inadequate, fragmentary or confused ideas involve. Q.E.D.

Note. In the note to Proposition 17 of this Part I explained how error consists in the privation of knowledge; but to throw more light on the subject I will give an example. Men are mistaken in thinking themselves free; their opinion is made up of consciousness of their own actions and ignorance of the causes by which those actions are determined. Their idea of freedom, therefore, is simply their not knowing any cause of their actions. As for their saying that human actions depend on the will, this is a mere phrase with no idea to answer to it. What the will is, and how it moves the body, none of them know; those who boast of such knowledge, and invent dwellings and lodgings for the soul, usually provoke either laughter or disgust. So too, when we look at the sun, we imagine it to be about two hundred feet away from us. The error does not lie simply in that fancy, but in the fact that while we imagine it so we do not know the sun's true distance, or the cause of the fancy. For although we afterwards learn that the sun is more than six hundred of the earth's diameters away from us, we shall still fancy it to be near; we imagine the sun as near us not because we are ignorant of its true distance, but because the modification of our body involves the essence of the sun insofar as our body is affected by it.

Proposition 36

Inadequate and confused ideas follow by the same necessity as adequate, or clear and distinct, ideas.

Proof. All ideas are in God (Part 1, Proposition 15), and insofar as they are referred to God they are true (Proposition 32 of this Part) and (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary) adequate. So there are no confused or inadequate ideas except in respect of a particular mind (compare Proposition 24 of this Part; Proposition 28 of this Part). Therefore all ideas, adequate or inadequate, follow by the same necessity (Proposition 6 of this Part). Q.E.D.

Proposition 37

That which is common to all things (compare Lemma 2 of this Part), and which is equally in a part and in the whole, does not constitute the essence of any particular thing.

Proof. Deny it if you can, and conceive that it constitutes the essence of some particular thing—say the essence of B. Then (Definition 2 of this Part) it can neither exist nor be conceived without B; but that is against our hypothesis. Therefore it does not belong to B's essence, nor does it constitute the essence of any particular thing. Q.E.D.

Proposition 38

Those things which are common to all, and which are equally in a part and in the whole, cannot be conceived except adequately.

Proof. Let A be something common to all bodies and equally present in a part of any given body and in the whole. I say that A cannot be conceived except adequately. For the idea of it in God will necessarily be adequate (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary), both insofar as God has the idea of the human body and insofar as he has the idea of the modifications of the human body, which (Proposition 16 of this Part; Proposition 25 of this Part; Proposition 27 of this Part) involve in part the nature of the human body and the nature of external bodies; that is (Proposition 12 of this Part; Proposition 13 of this Part), the idea in God will necessarily be adequate both insofar as he constitutes the human mind and insofar as he has the ideas that are in the human mind. Therefore the mind (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary) necessarily perceives A adequately, and perceives it adequately both insofar as it perceives itself and insofar as it perceives its own body or any external body; nor can A be conceived in any other way. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that there are certain ideas, or notions, common to all men; for (by Lemma 2 of this Part) all bodies agree in certain respects, which (by Proposition 38 of this Part) must be perceived by everyone adequately, that is, clearly and distinctly.

Proposition 39

That which is common to, and a property of, the human body and those other bodies which usually affect the human body, and which is equally present in each part of either and in the whole, will be represented in the mind by an adequate idea.

Proof. Let A be that which is common to, and a property of, the human body and external bodies, and equally present in the human body and in those external bodies, in each part of each external body and in the whole. There will be an adequate idea of A in God (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary), both insofar as he has the idea of the human body and insofar as he has the ideas of those external bodies. Now suppose the human body is affected by an external body through what it has in common with it, namely A. The idea of this modification will involve the property A (Proposition 16 of this Part), and therefore (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary) the idea of this modification, insofar as it involves the property A, will be adequate in God insofar as God is affected by the idea of the human body; that is (Proposition 13 of this Part), insofar as he constitutes the nature of the human mind. Therefore (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary) this idea is also adequate in the human mind. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that the mind is fitted to perceive more things adequately in proportion as its body has more in common with other bodies.
