Proposition 40

Whatever ideas in the mind follow from ideas that are adequate in it are themselves adequate too.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident. For when we say that an idea in the human mind follows from ideas that are adequate in it, we are saying, in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), that there is an idea in the divine intellect of which God is the cause—not insofar as he is infinite, nor insofar as he is affected by the ideas of a great many particular things, but only insofar as he constitutes the essence of the human mind.

Note 1. I have now set out the cause of those notions which are common to all men and which form the basis of our reasoning. But there are other causes of certain axioms or notions which it would be worth setting out by this method of ours, for we should then see which notions are more useful than others and which have hardly any use at all; and further, which notions are common to all men, and which are clear and distinct only to those who are free of prejudice; and we should detect those which are ill founded. We should also see where the notions called secondary come from, and consequently the axioms founded on them, along with other points of interest connected with these questions. But I have decided to pass over the subject here, partly because I have set it aside for another treatise, and partly because I am afraid of wearying the reader at too great length. Still, so as not to leave out anything that needs to be known, I will briefly set down where the terms called transcendental come from—terms such as Being, Thing, Something. These arose from the fact that the human body, being limited, is only capable of forming a certain number of images distinctly within itself at the same time (Proposition 17 of this Part, Note). If that number is exceeded, the images begin to be confused; and if the number the body can form distinctly is greatly exceeded, they will all run together into total confusion. This being so, it is evident (from Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 18 of this Part) that the human mind can distinctly imagine as many things at once as its body can form images at once. When the images become quite confused in the body, the mind also imagines all bodies confusedly, without distinction, and comprehends them as it were under one attribute, namely under the attribute of Being, Thing, and so on. The same conclusion can be drawn from the fact that images are not always equally vivid, and from other similar causes which there is no need to explain here; for our purpose it is enough to consider one. They all come down to this: that these terms stand for ideas confused in the highest degree. From similar causes arise the notions we call general, such as man, horse, dog. They arise from this, that so many images—of men, for instance—are formed at once in the human mind that the power of imagining breaks down, not entirely, but far enough for the mind to lose count of the small differences between individuals (their colour, their size, and so on) and of their exact number, and to imagine distinctly only that in which all the individuals agree insofar as the body is affected by them; for that is the point at which each of them chiefly affected the body. This the mind expresses by the name man, and predicates of an infinite number of particular individuals; for, as we have said, it cannot imagine their exact number. We must note, however, that these general notions are not formed by all men in the same way. They vary from one person to another according as the point varies by which the body has most often been affected, and which the mind most easily imagines or remembers. Those who have most often looked with admiration at the stature of a man will understand by the name man an animal of upright stature; those used to attending to some other feature will form a different general image of man—that man is an animal that laughs, a two-footed animal without feathers, a rational animal—and so in other cases, everyone will form general images of things according to the habit of his body.

It is not to be wondered at, then, that so many controversies have arisen among philosophers who try to explain natural things merely by the images they have formed of them.

Note 2. From all that has been said it is clear that we perceive things and form our general notions in several ways: first (Proposition 1 of this Part), from particular things presented to our intellect through the senses in a fragmentary, confused and unordered way (Proposition 29 of this Part, Corollary); I have settled on calling such perceptions knowledge from the mere suggestions of experience.

Footnote: A Baconian phrase. Nov. Org. Aph. 100. [Pollock, p. 126, n.]

Second (Proposition 2 of this Part), from symbols—from having read or heard certain words, for instance, we remember things and form ideas of them like those through which we imagine things (Proposition 18 of this Part, Note). I shall call both these ways of regarding things knowledge of the first kind, opinion, or imagination. Third (Proposition 3 of this Part), from having notions common to all men and adequate ideas of the properties of things (Proposition 38 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 39 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 40 of this Part); this I call reason, and knowledge of the second kind. Besides these two kinds of knowledge there is, as I shall show later, a third, which we will call intuition. This kind of knowledge proceeds from an adequate idea of the absolute essence of certain attributes of God to an adequate knowledge of the essence of things. I will illustrate all three kinds by a single example. Three numbers are given, and a fourth is to be found which is to the third as the second is to the first. Tradesmen multiply the second by the third and divide the product by the first without hesitating, either because they have not forgotten the rule they were given by a teacher without any proof, or because they have often tried it with simple numbers, or by virtue of the proof of the nineteenth proposition of the seventh book of Euclid, that is, by the general property of proportionals.

But with very simple numbers none of this is needed. Given one, two and three, everyone can see that the fourth proportional is six; and this is much clearer, because we infer the fourth number from an intuitive grasp of the ratio the first bears to the second.

Proposition 41

Knowledge of the first kind is the only source of falsity; knowledge of the second and third kinds is necessarily true.

Proof. To knowledge of the first kind we assigned (in Proposition 40 of this Part, Note 2) all those ideas that are inadequate and confused; therefore this kind of knowledge is the only source of falsity (Proposition 35 of this Part). And we assigned to the second and third kinds those ideas that are adequate; therefore these kinds are necessarily true (Proposition 34 of this Part). Q.E.D.

Proposition 42

Knowledge of the second and third kinds, and not of the first, teaches us to tell the true from the false.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident. Anyone who knows how to distinguish true from false must have an adequate idea of true and false; that is (Proposition 40 of this Part, Note 2), he must know the true and the false by the second or third kind of knowledge.

Proposition 43

He who has a true idea knows at the same time that he has a true idea, and cannot doubt the truth of what he perceives.

Proof. A true idea in us is an idea which is adequate in God insofar as he is displayed through the nature of the human mind (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary). Suppose there is in God, insofar as he is displayed through the human mind, an adequate idea A. The idea of this idea must also necessarily be in God, and be referred to him in the same way as the idea A (by Part 2, Proposition 20, the proof of which is of universal application). But the idea A is supposed to be referred to God insofar as he is displayed through the human mind; therefore the idea of the idea A must be referred to God in the same way. That is (by Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), the adequate idea of the idea A will be in the mind that has the adequate idea A. Therefore he who has an adequate idea, or who knows a thing truly (Proposition 34 of this Part), must at the same time have an adequate idea, or true knowledge, of his own knowledge—that is, plainly, he must be certain of it. Q.E.D.

Note. I explained in the note to Proposition 21 of this Part what is meant by the idea of an idea; but the proposition above is plain enough in itself. No one who has a true idea is unaware that a true idea involves the highest certainty. To have a true idea is only another way of saying that one knows a thing perfectly, or as well as possible. Indeed no one can doubt this unless he thinks that an idea is something lifeless, like a picture on a panel, and not a mode of thinking—the very act of understanding. And who, I ask, can know that he understands something unless he first understands it? Who can know that he is certain of a thing unless he is first certain of it? And what can be clearer or more certain than a true idea, as a standard of truth? As light displays both itself and the dark, so truth is the standard both of itself and of falsity.

I think I have thus sufficiently answered these questions: if a true idea is distinguished from a false one only insofar as it is said to agree with its object, then a true idea has no more reality or perfection than a false one, since the two are distinguished only by an extrinsic mark; and consequently a man who has true ideas has no advantage over one who has only false ones. And further, how does it come about that men have false ideas? And last, how can anyone be sure that he has ideas which agree with their objects? These questions, I repeat, I have in my opinion sufficiently answered. The difference between a true and a false idea is plain: from what was said in Proposition 35 of this Part, the first is related to the second as being is to not-being. The causes of falsity I have set out very clearly in Proposition 19 of this Part and Proposition 35 of this Part with its note, and from what is said there the difference between a man who has true ideas and a man who has only false ones is clear. As for the last question—how a man can be sure that he has ideas which agree with their objects—I have just pointed out plainly enough that his knowledge arises from the simple fact that he has an idea which corresponds with its object; in other words, that truth is its own standard. We may add that our mind, insofar as it perceives things truly, is part of the infinite intellect of God (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), and therefore the clear and distinct ideas of the mind are as necessarily true as the ideas of God.

Proposition 44

It is not in the nature of reason to regard things as contingent, but as necessary.

Proof. It is in the nature of reason to perceive things truly (Proposition 41 of this Part), namely (Part 1, Axiom 6) as they are in themselves—that is (Part 1, Proposition 29), not as contingent but as necessary. Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. It follows that it is only through our imagination that we regard things, whether past or future, as contingent.

Note. I will briefly explain how this way of looking at things arises. We showed above (Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary) that the mind always regards things as present to itself, even when they do not exist, until causes arise which exclude their existence and presence. And we showed (Proposition 18 of this Part) that if the human body has once been affected by two external bodies at the same time, then when the mind afterwards imagines one of them it will at once remember the other—that is, it will regard both as present to itself, unless causes arise which exclude their existence and presence. Further, no one doubts that we imagine time from imagining some bodies to move more slowly than others, some more quickly, and some at equal speed. Suppose, then, that a child saw Peter yesterday for the first time in the morning, Paul at noon and Simon in the evening, and that today he sees Peter again in the morning. It is evident, from Proposition 18 of this Part, that as soon as he sees the morning light he will imagine the sun travelling the same part of the sky as it did when he saw it the day before—in other words, he will imagine a whole day; and along with his imagining of the morning he will imagine Peter, with noon Paul, and with evening Simon. That is, he will imagine the existence of Paul and Simon in relation to a future time. If on the other hand he sees Simon in the evening, he will refer Peter and Paul to a past time, imagining them along with his imagining of a time past. And if it should happen that on some other evening he sees James instead of Simon, then on the following morning he will associate with his imagining of evening sometimes Simon and sometimes James, but not both together, since he is supposed to have seen one or the other in the evening, not both. So his imagination will waver, and with the imagining of future evenings he will associate first one and then the other—that is, he will imagine neither of them in the future as certain, but both as contingent. This wavering of the imagination will be the same if the imagination is concerned with things we regard in this way as standing in relation to past or present time. Consequently we may imagine things as contingent whether they are referred to the present, the past or the future.

Corollary 2. It is in the nature of reason to perceive things under a certain form of eternity (sub quâdam æternitatis specie).

Proof. It is in the nature of reason to regard things not as contingent but as necessary (Proposition 44 of this Part). Reason perceives this necessity of things truly (Proposition 41 of this Part)—that is (Part 1, Axiom 6), as it is in itself. But (Part 1, Proposition 16) this necessity of things is the very necessity of God's eternal nature; therefore it is in the nature of reason to regard things under this form of eternity. We may add that the foundations of reason are the notions (Proposition 38 of this Part) which answer to what is common to all things, and which (Proposition 37 of this Part) do not answer to the essence of any particular thing; and which must therefore be conceived without any relation to time, under a certain form of eternity.

Proposition 45

Every idea of every body, or of every particular thing actually existing, necessarily involves the eternal and infinite essence of God.

Proof. The idea of a particular thing actually existing necessarily involves both the existence and the essence of that thing (Proposition 8 of this Part). Now particular things cannot be conceived without God (Part 1, Proposition 15); and since (Proposition 6 of this Part) they have God for their cause insofar as he is regarded under the attribute of which they are modes, their ideas must necessarily involve (Part 1, Axiom 4) the conception of that attribute—that is (Part 1, Proposition 6), the eternal and infinite essence of God. Q.E.D.

Note. By existence I do not here mean duration—that is, existence conceived abstractly, as a kind of quantity. I am speaking of the very nature of existence, which is assigned to particular things because they follow in infinite numbers and in infinite ways from the eternal necessity of God's nature (Part 1, Proposition 16). I am speaking, I repeat, of the very existence of particular things insofar as they are in God. For although each particular thing is determined by another particular thing to exist in a given way, the force by which each particular thing perseveres in existing follows from the eternal necessity of God's nature (compare Part 1, Proposition 24, Corollary).

Proposition 46

The knowledge of God's eternal and infinite essence which every idea involves is adequate and perfect.

Proof. The proof of the last proposition is universal; and whether a thing is considered as a part or as a whole, the idea of it—whether of the whole or of the part (by Proposition 45 of this Part)—will involve God's eternal and infinite essence. So what gives knowledge of God's eternal and infinite essence is common to all things, and is equally in the part and in the whole; therefore (Proposition 38 of this Part) this knowledge will be adequate. Q.E.D.

Proposition 47

The human mind has an adequate knowledge of God's eternal and infinite essence.

Proof. The human mind has ideas (Proposition 22 of this Part) by which (Proposition 23 of this Part) it perceives itself, and its own body (Proposition 19 of this Part), and external bodies (Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 1; Proposition 17 of this Part) as actually existing; therefore (Proposition 45 of this Part; Proposition 46 of this Part) it has an adequate knowledge of God's eternal and infinite essence. Q.E.D.

Note. We see from this that God's infinite essence and his eternity are known to all. And since all things are in God and are conceived through God, we can infer from this knowledge a great many things which we may know adequately, and can form that third kind of knowledge I spoke of in the note to Proposition 40 of this Part, whose excellence and use I shall have occasion to speak of in Part Five. Men do not have as clear a knowledge of God as they have of general notions, because they cannot imagine God as they imagine bodies, and because they have attached the name God to the images of things they are used to seeing—which they can hardly avoid, being men and continually affected by external bodies. Indeed, many errors can be traced to this one head: that we do not apply names to things correctly. When a man says that the lines drawn from the centre of a circle to its circumference are not equal, he is certainly attaching some other meaning to the word circle than the one mathematicians give it. So too, when men make mistakes in calculation, they have one set of figures in their minds and another on the paper. If we could see into their minds, they are not making a mistake; they seem to be, because we think they have the same numbers in their minds as they have on the paper. Otherwise we should not believe them to be in error, any more than I thought a man was in error whom I recently heard shouting that his hall had flown into his neighbour's hen—for his meaning seemed clear enough to me. A great many controversies have arisen from men not explaining their meaning properly, or not interpreting other people's meaning properly. For in fact, when they flatly contradict themselves, they are taking now one side of the argument and now the other, in order to oppose the opinions they think mistaken and absurd in their opponents.

Proposition 48

In the mind there is no absolute or free will; the mind is determined to will this or that by a cause which has itself been determined by another cause, and that by another, and so on to infinity.

Proof. The mind is a fixed and definite mode of thought (Proposition 11 of this Part), and therefore cannot be the free cause of its own actions (Part 1, Proposition 17, Corollary 2); in other words, it cannot have an absolute faculty of willing or refusing. It must (by Part 1, Proposition 28) be determined by a cause which has itself been determined by another cause, and that by another, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. It is proved in the same way that there is in the mind no absolute faculty of understanding, desiring, loving and so on. It follows that these and similar faculties are either entirely fictitious or merely abstract and general terms of the sort we habitually form from particular things. Intellect and will stand in the same relation to this or that idea, or this or that volition, as "stoniness" does to this or that stone, or "man" to Peter and Paul. The cause that leads men to think themselves free has been set out in the Appendix to Part One. But before going further I should remark that by the will to affirm and decide I mean the faculty, not the desire. I mean, I repeat, the faculty by which the mind affirms or denies what is true or false, not the desire by which the mind wants a thing or turns away from it. Having proved that these faculties of ours are general notions which cannot be distinguished from the particular instances they are drawn from, we must now ask whether volitions themselves are anything besides the ideas of things. We must ask, that is, whether there is in the mind any affirmation or negation beyond what the idea, insofar as it is an idea, involves. On this see the following proposition, and Definition 3 of this Part, so that the idea of pictures does not suggest itself. For by ideas I do not mean images such as are formed at the back of the eye, or in the middle of the brain, but conceptions of thought.

Proposition 49

There is in the mind no volition, no affirmation and no negation, beyond what an idea, insofar as it is an idea, involves.

Proof. There is in the mind no absolute faculty of willing or refusing, but only particular volitions—this or that affirmation, this or that negation. Let us take a particular volition: the mode of thinking by which the mind affirms that the three interior angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles. This affirmation involves the conception, or idea, of a triangle; that is, without the idea of a triangle it cannot be conceived. To say that the concept A must involve the concept B is the same as saying that A cannot be conceived without B. Further, this affirmation cannot be made (Axiom 3 of this Part) without the idea of a triangle. Therefore this affirmation can neither be nor be conceived without the idea of a triangle. And the idea of a triangle must itself involve this same affirmation, that its three interior angles are equal to two right angles. So conversely this idea of a triangle can neither be nor be conceived without this affirmation; and therefore this affirmation belongs to the essence of the idea of a triangle, and is nothing besides. What we have said of this volition—which we picked at random—may be said of any other: that it is nothing but an idea. Q.E.D.

Corollary. Will and understanding are one and the same.

Proof. Will and understanding are nothing beyond individual volitions and ideas (Proposition 48 of this Part, Note). But a particular volition and a particular idea are one and the same (by Proposition 48 of this Part); therefore will and understanding are one and the same. Q.E.D.

Note. We have thus removed the cause commonly assigned for error. For we showed above that falsity consists solely in the privation of knowledge involved in fragmentary and confused ideas. So a false idea, insofar as it is false, does not involve certainty. When we say that a man rests content in what is false and has no doubts about it, we are not saying that he is certain, only that he does not doubt, or that he rests content in what is false because there are no reasons to make his imagination waver (see Proposition 44 of this Part, Note). So although the man is supposed to rest content in what is false, we shall never say he is certain; for by certainty we mean something positive (Proposition 43 of this Part, Note), not merely the absence of doubt.

However, so that the foregoing proposition may be fully explained, I will draw attention to a few further points, and then answer the objections that may be brought against our doctrine. Last, in order to remove every scruple, I have thought it worth pointing out some of the advantages that follow from it. I say "some", for they will be better appreciated from what we shall set out in the fifth part.

I begin, then, with the first point, and warn my readers to make an accurate distinction between an idea, or conception of the mind, and the images of things that we imagine. And they must further distinguish between ideas and the words by which we signify things. These three—images, words and ideas—are by many people either run together entirely or not distinguished with sufficient care; and so people are generally ignorant of how absolutely necessary a knowledge of this doctrine of the will is, both for philosophy and for the wise ordering of life. Those who think ideas consist in images formed in us by contact with external bodies persuade themselves that the ideas of things we can form no mental picture of are not ideas at all, but only fictions we invent by the free decree of our will. They thus regard ideas as though they were lifeless pictures on a panel, and, full of this misconception, do not see that an idea, insofar as it is an idea, involves an affirmation or a negation. And those who confuse words with ideas, or with the affirmation an idea involves, think they can will something contrary to what they feel, affirm or deny. This misconception is easily laid aside by anyone who reflects on the nature of thought, which in no way involves the conception of extension; he will then clearly understand that an idea, being a mode of thinking, consists neither in the image of anything nor in words. The essence of words and images is made up of bodily motions, which in no way involve the conception of thought.

These few words will do on that subject; I pass on to the objections that may be raised against our doctrine. The first is advanced by those who think that the will has a wider scope than the understanding and is therefore different from it. Their reason for believing the will has a wider scope is that they claim they need no increase in their faculty of assent—that is, of affirming or denying—in order to assent to an infinity of things we do not perceive, but that they do need an increase in their faculty of understanding. The will is thus distinguished from the intellect, the latter being finite and the former infinite. Second, it may be objected that experience seems to teach us very plainly that we are able to suspend judgment before assenting to what we perceive; and this is confirmed by the fact that no one is said to be deceived insofar as he perceives something, but only insofar as he assents or dissents.

A man who imagines a winged horse, for instance, does not by that admit that a winged horse exists; that is, he is not deceived unless he also admits that a winged horse does exist. So nothing seems more clearly taught by experience than that the will, the faculty of assent, is free and different from the faculty of understanding. Third, it may be objected that one affirmation does not seem to contain more reality than another; in other words, that we do not seem to need any greater power to affirm that what is true is true than to affirm that what is false is true. Yet we have seen that one idea has more reality or perfection than another, for as some objects are more excellent than others, so are the ideas of them; and this too seems to point to a difference between the understanding and the will. Fourth, it may be objected: if man does not act from free will, what will happen when the incentives to action are equally balanced, as with Buridan's ass? Will he die of hunger and thirst? If I say he will, I shall seem to be thinking of an ass, or a statue of a man, rather than an actual man. If I say he will not, then he would be determining his own action, and would consequently have the power to go and do whatever he liked. Other objections might be raised too; but since I am not bound to set out everything anyone may dream up, I will only undertake to refute the ones I have mentioned, and that as briefly as I can.

To the first objection I answer that I admit the will has a wider scope than the understanding, if by understanding is meant only clear and distinct ideas; but I deny that the will has a wider scope than perception, than the faculty of forming conceptions. Nor do I see why the faculty of willing should be called infinite any more than the faculty of feeling. For just as by the same faculty of willing we can affirm an infinite number of things—one after another, since we cannot affirm an infinite number at once—so by the same faculty of feeling we can feel or perceive, in succession, an infinite number of bodies. If it is said that there is an infinite number of things we cannot perceive, I answer that we cannot reach such things by any thinking, and consequently not by any faculty of willing either. But it may still be urged that if God wished us to perceive them, he would have to endow us with a greater faculty of perception, though not with a greater faculty of willing than we already have. This is the same as saying that if God wished us to understand an infinite number of other entities, he would have to give us a greater understanding, but not a more universal idea of entity than the one we already have, in order to grasp those infinite entities. For we have shown that the will is a universal entity, or idea, by which we explain all particular volitions—that is, what is common to them all.

Since, then, our opponents hold that this idea, common or universal to all volitions, is a faculty, it is hardly surprising that they claim such a faculty extends into the infinite, beyond the limits of the understanding; for what is universal is predicated alike of one, of many and of an infinite number of individuals.

To the second objection I reply by denying that we have a free power of suspending judgment. When we say that someone suspends judgment, we mean simply that he sees he does not perceive the matter adequately. Suspension of judgment is therefore, strictly speaking, a perception and not an act of free will. To illustrate the point, suppose a boy imagining a horse and perceiving nothing else. Since this imagining involves the existence of the horse (Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary), and the boy perceives nothing that would exclude its existence, he will necessarily regard the horse as present; he will not be able to doubt its existence, though he is not certain of it. We have daily experience of this in dreams; and I do not suppose anyone would maintain that while he is dreaming he has the free power of suspending judgment about the things in his dream, and of bringing it about that he should not dream what he dreams he sees. Yet it happens all the same that even in dreams we suspend judgment—namely, when we dream that we are dreaming.

Further, I grant that no one is deceived so far as actual perception goes; that is, I grant that the mind's imaginings, regarded in themselves, involve no error (Proposition 17 of this Part, Note). But I deny that a man makes no affirmation in the act of perceiving. For what is the perception of a winged horse but affirming that a horse has wings? If the mind could perceive nothing but the winged horse, it would regard the horse as present to itself; it would have no reason to doubt its existence and no power of dissent, unless the imagining of a winged horse were joined to an idea that ruled out the existence of such a horse, or unless the mind perceived that its idea of a winged horse was inadequate—in which case it will either necessarily deny the existence of such a horse or necessarily be in doubt about it.

I think I have already anticipated my answer to the third objection: that the will is something universal, predicated of all ideas, and signifies only what is common to them all, namely an affirmation. Its adequate essence must therefore, insofar as it is conceived in the abstract, be in every idea, and in that respect alone the same in all—not insofar as it is considered as constituting an idea's essence, for in that respect particular affirmations differ from one another as much as ideas do. The affirmation involving the idea of a circle, for instance, differs from the one involving the idea of a triangle as much as the idea of a circle differs from the idea of a triangle.

Further, I absolutely deny that we need an equal power of thinking to affirm that what is true is true and to affirm that what is false is true. These two affirmations, if we regard the mind, stand to one another as being to not-being; for there is nothing positive in ideas which constitutes the actual reality of falsehood (Proposition 35 of this Part, Note; Proposition 47 of this Part, Note).

We must therefore conclude that we are easily deceived when we confuse universals with singulars, and beings of reason and abstractions with real things. As for the fourth objection, I am quite ready to admit that a man placed in the balance described—perceiving nothing but hunger and thirst, a certain food and a certain drink, each equally far from him—would die of hunger and thirst. And if I am asked whether such a man should not be considered an ass rather than a man, I answer that I do not know; neither do I know how we should consider a man who hangs himself, or how we should consider children, fools and madmen.

It remains to point out the advantages of knowing this doctrine as it bears on conduct, and these may easily be gathered from what has been said. The doctrine is good:

1. Because it teaches us to act solely according to the decree of God, and to share in the divine nature, and the more so the more perfect the actions we perform and the more we understand God. Such a doctrine not only completely calms our spirit but also shows us where our highest happiness or blessedness lies, namely in the knowledge of God alone, by which we are led to act only as love and piety bid us. We may thus clearly see how far from a true estimate of virtue are those who expect to be decorated by God with high rewards for their virtue and their best actions, as though for having endured the direst slavery—as if virtue and the service of God were not in themselves happiness and perfect freedom.

2. Because it teaches us how we ought to conduct ourselves with respect to the gifts of fortune, or matters not in our power and not following from our own nature. For it shows us that we should await and endure fortune's smiles and frowns with an equal mind, seeing that everything follows from the eternal decree of God by the same necessity by which it follows from the essence of a triangle that its three angles are equal to two right angles.

3. This doctrine improves social life, since it teaches us to hate no one, to despise no one, to mock, envy or be angry with no one. Further, it tells us that each should be content with his own and helpful to his neighbour, not from any womanish pity, favour or superstition, but solely under the guidance of reason, as the time and occasion require, as I shall show in Part Three.

4. Last, this doctrine confers no small advantage on the commonwealth, for it teaches how citizens should be governed and led—not so as to become slaves, but so that they may freely do what is best.

I have now fulfilled the promise I made at the beginning of this note, and with it I bring the second part of my treatise to a close. I think I have explained the nature and properties of the human mind at sufficient length, and, considering the difficulty of the subject, with sufficient clearness. I have laid a foundation on which many excellent conclusions may be raised, of the highest use and most necessary to be known, as will in part be made plain in what follows.
