Preface

Most writers on the emotions and on human conduct seem to be treating not of natural things that follow nature's general laws but of matters outside nature altogether. They appear to conceive man to be situated in nature as a kingdom within a kingdom: they believe that he disturbs rather than follows nature's order, that he has absolute control over his actions, and that he is determined by nothing but himself. They put human weakness and inconstancy down not to the power of nature in general but to some mysterious flaw in human nature, which they accordingly bewail, deride, despise or, as usually happens, abuse; and whoever succeeds in hitting off the weakness of the human mind more eloquently or more sharply than the rest is looked on as a seer. There has been no lack of very excellent men, to whose labour and industry I confess myself much indebted, who have written many admirable things about the right way of life and given mankind a great deal of wise advice. But no one, so far as I know, has defined the nature and strength of the emotions, or what the mind can do to restrain them.

I have not forgotten that the illustrious Descartes, though he believed the mind has absolute power over its own actions, tried to explain the human emotions by their first causes and at the same time to point out a way by which the mind might reach absolute dominion over them. But in my opinion he achieves nothing beyond a display of the sharpness of his own great intellect, as I shall show in the proper place. For the present I want to come back to those who would rather abuse or deride the human emotions than understand them. Such people will no doubt think it strange that I should undertake to treat of human vice and folly geometrically, and should want to set out by rigorous reasoning the very things they cry out against as contrary to reason, as trifling, absurd and horrifying. But this is my plan. Nothing happens in nature that can be set down to a flaw in nature; for nature is always the same, and everywhere one and the same in her power and capacity to act. That is, nature's laws and rules, by which everything happens and changes from one form to another, are everywhere and always the same; and so there must be one and the same way of understanding the nature of all things whatever, namely through nature's universal laws and rules. So the passions of hatred, anger and envy, considered in themselves, follow from this same necessity and power of nature; they answer to definite causes through which they are understood, and have properties as much worth knowing as the properties of anything else that gives us delight simply to contemplate. I shall therefore treat of the nature and strength of the emotions by the same method I used before in my investigations concerning God and the mind. I shall consider human actions and desires exactly as if I were concerned with lines, planes, and solids.

Definitions

1. By an adequate cause I mean a cause through which its effect can be clearly and distinctly perceived. By an inadequate, or partial, cause I mean a cause through which, taken by itself, its effect cannot be understood.

2. I say that we act when something takes place, within us or outside us, of which we are the adequate cause; that is (by Definition 1 of this Part), when through our nature something takes place within us or outside us which can be clearly and distinctly understood through our nature alone. On the other hand, I say that we are passive when something takes place within us, or follows from our nature outside us, of which we are only the partial cause.

3. By emotion I mean the modifications of the body by which the body's power of acting is increased or diminished, helped or checked, together with the ideas of those modifications.

Note. If we can be the adequate cause of any of these modifications, I then call the emotion an activity; otherwise I call it a passion, a state in which the mind is passive.

Postulates

1. The human body can be affected in many ways which increase or diminish its power of acting, and in other ways which make its power of acting neither greater nor less.

Note. This postulate, or axiom, rests on Postulate 1 of this Part and Part 2, Lemma 5 and Part 2, Lemma 7, which see after Part 2, Proposition 13.

2. The human body can undergo many changes and still retain the impressions, or traces, of objects (compare Part 2, Postulate 5), and consequently the same images of things (see Part 2, Proposition 17, Note).

Proposition 1

Our mind is in some cases active and in some cases passive. Insofar as it has adequate ideas it is necessarily active, and insofar as it has inadequate ideas it is necessarily passive.

Proof. In every human mind there are some adequate ideas and some that are fragmentary and confused (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note). Those ideas which are adequate in the mind are adequate also in God, insofar as he constitutes the essence of that mind (Part 2, Proposition 40, Corollary); and those which are inadequate in the mind are likewise (by Part 2, Proposition 40, Corollary) adequate in God—not insofar as he contains in himself the essence of that mind alone, but insofar as he contains, at the same time, the minds of other things as well. Again, from any given idea some effect must necessarily follow (Part 1, Proposition 36); and of that effect God is the adequate cause (Definition 1 of this Part), not insofar as he is infinite but insofar as he is conceived as affected by the given idea (Part 2, Proposition 9). But of the effect of which God is the cause insofar as he is affected by an idea which is adequate in a given mind, of that effect, I say, the mind in question is the adequate cause (Part 2, Proposition 11, Corollary). Therefore our mind, insofar as it has adequate ideas (Definition 2 of this Part), is in some cases necessarily active; that was our first point. Again, whatever necessarily follows from an idea which is adequate in God not by virtue of his having in himself the mind of one man only, but by virtue of his containing, along with that man's mind, the minds of other things too—of such an effect (Part 2, Proposition 11, Corollary) that man's mind is not an adequate but only a partial cause. So (Definition 2 of this Part) the mind, insofar as it has inadequate ideas, is in some cases necessarily passive; that was our second point. Therefore our mind, and so on. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that the mind is the more liable to be acted upon the more inadequate ideas it has, and conversely is the more active the more adequate ideas it has.

Proposition 2

Body cannot determine mind to think, nor can mind determine body to motion or rest, or to anything else, if there is anything else.

Proof. All modes of thinking have God for their cause by virtue of his being a thinking thing, and not by virtue of his being displayed under any other attribute (Part 2, Proposition 6). What determines the mind to thought, therefore, is a mode of thought and not a mode of extension; that is (Part 2, Definition 1), it is not body. That was our first point. Again, the motion and rest of a body must arise from another body, which has itself been determined to motion or rest by a third; and absolutely everything that takes place in a body must spring from God insofar as he is regarded as affected by some mode of extension, and not by some mode of thought (Part 2, Proposition 6). That is, it cannot spring from the mind, which is a mode of thought. That was our second point. Therefore body cannot determine mind, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. This is made clearer by what was said in the note to Part 2, Proposition 7, namely that mind and body are one and the same thing, conceived first under the attribute of thought and second under the attribute of extension. It follows that the order, or chain, of things is the same whether nature is conceived under one attribute or the other; and consequently that the order of activity and passivity in our body runs together in nature with the order of activity and passivity in the mind. The same conclusion is evident from the way we proved Part 2, Proposition 12.

Nevertheless, though this is the case and there is no further room for doubt, I can scarcely believe—until the fact is proved by experience—that men can be brought to consider the question calmly and fairly, so firmly are they convinced that it is at the mind's bidding alone that the body is set in motion or brought to rest, or performs any number of actions depending solely on the mind's will or its exercise of thought. Yet no one has so far laid down the limits of the body's powers; that is, no one has yet been taught by experience what the body can do by the laws of nature alone, insofar as nature is regarded as extension. No one so far has gained such accurate knowledge of the mechanism of the body that he can explain all its functions. Nor need I point out that many actions are observed in animals which far surpass human ingenuity, and that sleepwalkers do many things in their sleep that they would not dare to do awake. These instances are enough to show that the body can, by the laws of its own nature alone, do many things at which its own mind is amazed.

Again, no one knows how, or by what means, the mind moves the body, nor how many degrees of motion it can give the body, nor how fast it can move it. So when men say that this or that bodily action has its origin in the mind, which has dominion over the body, they are using words without meaning, or confessing in fine language that they do not know the cause of the action and are not troubled by their ignorance.

But, they will say, whether or not we know the means by which the mind acts on the body, we do at least have experience of the fact that unless the mind is fit to think, the body remains inert. And we have experience that the mind alone decides whether we speak or stay silent, along with a variety of similar things which we accordingly say depend on the mind's decree. As to the first point, I ask such objectors whether experience does not also teach that if the body is inactive the mind is at the same time unfit for thinking. When the body is at rest in sleep, the mind is at the same time in a state of torpor and has no power of thinking such as it has when the body is awake. And I think everyone's experience will confirm that the mind is not at all times equally fit for thinking on a given subject: as the body is more or less fit to be stimulated by the image of this or that object, so the mind is more or less fit to contemplate that object.

But it will be urged that from the laws of nature considered simply as extended substance we could never deduce the causes of buildings, of paintings, and of things of that kind, which are produced by human art alone; and that the human body, unless it were determined and guided by the mind, would not be capable of building a single temple. But I have just pointed out that the objectors cannot fix the limits of the body's power, or say what can be concluded from its nature alone, while they have experience of many things being done by the laws of nature alone which they would never have believed possible except under the direction of a mind—such as the actions sleepwalkers perform in their sleep, and marvel at when awake. I would further call attention to the mechanism of the human body, which far surpasses in complexity anything human art has put together—not to repeat what I have already shown, that from nature, under whatever attribute she is considered, infinite results follow. As for the second objection, I suggest that the world would be much happier if men were as able to keep silence as they are to speak. Experience shows abundantly that men can govern anything more easily than their tongues, and restrain anything more easily than their appetites. Hence it comes about that many believe we are free only in respect of things we desire moderately, because our desire for such things can easily be checked by the thought of something else often remembered, but that we are not free at all in respect of what we seek with violent emotion, since our desire then cannot be quieted by the remembrance of anything else. Yet if such people had not learned from experience that we do many things we afterwards repent of, and that we often, when torn by conflicting emotions, see the better and follow the worse, there would be nothing to stop them believing we are free in everything. So an infant believes it freely desires milk, an angry child believes it freely desires revenge, a timid child believes it freely desires to run away; a drunken man believes he utters from the free decision of his mind words he would rather have kept back when sober; and so a raving man, a chattering woman, a child and others of the same sort believe they speak from the free decision of their minds, when in fact they cannot restrain their impulse to talk. Experience teaches us no less clearly than reason that men believe themselves free simply because they are conscious of their actions and unaware of the causes by which those actions are determined; and it is plain, further, that the mind's decrees are only another name for the appetites, and therefore vary as the state of the body varies. Everyone shapes his actions by his emotions; those torn between conflicting emotions do not know what they want; those under no emotion at all are easily swayed this way or that. All this clearly shows that a decision of the mind and an appetite, or determined state, of the body are simultaneous—or rather are one and the same thing, which we call a decision when it is regarded under the attribute of thought and explained through it, and a determined state when it is regarded under the attribute of extension and deduced from the laws of motion and rest. This will be plainer still in what follows. For now I want to call attention to another point: that we cannot act by a decision of the mind unless we remember having done so. We cannot say a word, for instance, without remembering that we have. Again, it is not in the mind's free power to remember or forget a thing at will. So the mind's freedom must in any case be limited to the power of uttering or not uttering what it remembers. But when we dream that we speak, we believe that we speak from a free decision of the mind—and yet we do not speak, or if we do, it is by a spontaneous motion of the body. Again, we dream that we are concealing something, and we seem to act by the same decision of the mind by which, awake, we keep silent about something we know. Last, we dream that by a free decision of our mind we do something we should not dare to do awake.

Now I should like to know whether there are two sorts of decisions in the mind, one sort illusory and the other free. If our folly does not carry us that far, we must admit that the decision of the mind which is believed to be free is not distinguishable from imagination or memory, and is nothing more than the affirmation which an idea, by virtue of being an idea, necessarily involves (Part 2, Proposition 49). So these decisions of the mind arise in the mind by the same necessity as the ideas of things actually existing. And therefore those who believe that they speak, or keep silent, or act in any way by the free decision of their minds are dreaming with their eyes open.

Proposition 3

The activities of the mind arise solely from adequate ideas; its passive states depend solely on inadequate ideas.

Proof. The first element constituting the essence of the mind is nothing but the idea of the actually existing body (Part 2, Proposition 11; Part 2, Proposition 13), which (Part 2, Proposition 15) is composed of many other ideas, some of them adequate and some inadequate (Part 2, Proposition 29, Corollary; Part 2, Proposition 38, Corollary). Whatever therefore follows from the nature of the mind, and has the mind for its proximate cause through which it must be understood, must follow either from an adequate idea or from an inadequate one. But insofar as the mind (Proposition 1 of this Part) has inadequate ideas it is necessarily passive; so the activities of the mind follow solely from adequate ideas, and the mind is passive only insofar as it has inadequate ideas. Q.E.D.

Note. We see, then, that passive states are attributed to the mind only insofar as it contains something involving negation, or insofar as it is regarded as a part of nature which cannot be clearly and distinctly perceived through itself without the other parts. I could show in the same way that passive states are attributed to individual things just as they are to the mind, and cannot be perceived in any other way; but my purpose is only to treat of the human mind.

Proposition 4

Nothing can be destroyed except by a cause outside itself.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident. The definition of anything affirms the essence of that thing and does not deny it; it posits the thing's essence and does not take it away. So as long as we consider only the thing itself, without taking external causes into account, we shall not be able to find in it anything that could destroy it. Q.E.D.

Proposition 5

Things are naturally contrary—that is, cannot exist in the same subject—insofar as one is capable of destroying the other.

Proof. If they could agree together, or exist together in the same subject, then there would be in that subject something which could destroy it; but that, by the last proposition, is absurd. Therefore things, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 6

Everything, insofar as it is in itself, endeavours to persist in its own being.

Proof. Individual things are modes by which the attributes of God are expressed in a definite and determined way (Part 1, Proposition 25, Corollary); that is (Part 1, Proposition 34), they are things which express in a definite and determined way the power of God, by which God is and acts. Now nothing contains in itself anything by which it can be destroyed, or which can take away its existence (Proposition 4 of this Part); on the contrary, it is opposed to everything that could take away its existence (Proposition 5 of this Part). Therefore, so far as it can and so far as it is in itself, it endeavours to persist in its own being. Q.E.D.

Proposition 7

The endeavour by which each thing endeavours to persist in its own being is nothing but the actual essence of that thing.

Proof. From the given essence of anything certain consequences necessarily follow (Part 1, Proposition 36), and things have no power except what necessarily follows from their determined nature (Part 1, Proposition 29). So the power of any given thing, the endeavour by which it acts or tries to act, alone or with other things—that is (Proposition 6 of this Part), the power or endeavour by which it endeavours to persist in its own being—is nothing but the given, or actual, essence of the thing itself. Q.E.D.

Proposition 8

The endeavour by which a thing endeavours to persist in its own being involves no finite time, but an indefinite time.

Proof. If it involved a limited time, which fixed the thing's duration, then it would follow from the very power by which the thing exists that the thing could not exist beyond the limits of that time but must be destroyed; and that (Proposition 4 of this Part) is absurd. So the endeavour by which a thing exists involves no definite time. On the contrary, since (Proposition 4 of this Part) by the same power by which it already exists it will always continue to exist unless destroyed by some external cause, this endeavour involves an indefinite time.

Proposition 9

The mind, both insofar as it has clear and distinct ideas and insofar as it has confused ones, endeavours to persist in its being for an indefinite time, and is conscious of this endeavour.

Proof. The essence of the mind is constituted by adequate and inadequate ideas (Proposition 3 of this Part); therefore (Proposition 7 of this Part), both insofar as it has the one and insofar as it has the other, it endeavours to persist in its own being, and that for an indefinite time (Proposition 8 of this Part). And since the mind (Part 2, Proposition 23) is necessarily conscious of itself through the ideas of the modifications of the body, the mind is therefore (Proposition 7 of this Part) conscious of its own endeavour.

Note. This endeavour, when referred to the mind alone, is called will; when referred to mind and body together it is called appetite. Appetite is nothing but the very essence of man, from whose nature there necessarily follow the things that serve his preservation, and which he is determined by that nature to do.

Further, there is no difference between appetite and desire, except that desire is generally used of men insofar as they are conscious of their appetite, and may accordingly be defined thus: desire is appetite together with the consciousness of it. It is plain from all this that we do not strive for, wish for, long for or desire anything because we judge it to be good; on the contrary, we judge a thing to be good because we strive for it, wish for it, long for it, desire it.

Proposition 10

An idea which excludes the existence of our body cannot be in our mind, but is contrary to it.

Proof. Whatever can destroy our body cannot be in it (Proposition 5 of this Part). So neither can the idea of such a thing be in God insofar as he has the idea of our body (Part 2, Proposition 9, Corollary); that is (Part 2, Proposition 11; Part 2, Proposition 13), the idea of that thing cannot be in our mind. On the contrary, since (Part 2, Proposition 11; Part 2, Proposition 13) the first element constituting the essence of the mind is the idea of the human body as actually existing, it follows that the first and chief endeavour of our mind is the endeavour to affirm the existence of our body. So an idea which denies the existence of our body is contrary to our mind, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 11

Whatever increases or diminishes, helps or hinders our body's power of acting, the idea of it increases or diminishes, helps or hinders our mind's power of thinking.

Proof. This proposition is evident from Part 2, Proposition 7 or from Part 2, Proposition 14.

Note. We see, then, that the mind can undergo great changes, passing sometimes to a greater and sometimes to a lesser perfection. These passive transitions explain to us the emotions of pleasure and pain. By pleasure, therefore, in what follows I shall mean a passive state in which the mind passes to a greater perfection; by pain, a passive state in which the mind passes to a lesser perfection. Further, the emotion of pleasure referred to mind and body together I shall call stimulation (titillatio) or merriment (hilaritas); the emotion of pain in the same relation I shall call suffering or melancholy. But we must bear in mind that stimulation and suffering are attributed to a man when one part of his nature is affected more than the rest, merriment and melancholy when all the parts are affected alike. What I mean by desire I have explained in the note to Proposition 9 of this Part. Beyond these three I recognise no other primary emotion; I shall show as I go on that all the rest arise from these three. But before going further I should like to explain Proposition 10 of this Part at greater length, so that we may clearly understand how one idea is contrary to another. In the note to Part 2, Proposition 17 we showed that the idea constituting the essence of the mind involves the existence of the body so long as the body exists. Again, it follows from what we pointed out in the Corollary to Part 2, Proposition 8 that the present existence of our mind depends solely on the fact that the mind involves the actual existence of the body. And last, we showed (Part 2, Proposition 17; Part 2, Proposition 18, Note) that the mind's power of imagining and remembering things also depends on its involving the actual existence of the body. From which it follows that the present existence of the mind and its power of imagining are removed as soon as the mind ceases to affirm the present existence of the body. Now the cause why the mind ceases to affirm this existence of the body cannot be the mind itself (Proposition 4 of this Part), nor can it be the fact that the body ceases to exist. For (by Part 2, Proposition 6) the cause why the mind affirms the existence of the body is not that the body began to exist; so, for the same reason, it does not cease to affirm the body's existence because the body ceases to exist. Rather (Part 2, Proposition 17) this follows from another idea which excludes the present existence of our body, and consequently of our mind, and which is therefore contrary to the idea constituting the essence of our mind.

Proposition 12

The mind, as far as it can, endeavours to conceive those things which increase or help the body's power of acting.

Proof. So long as the human body is affected in a way that involves the nature of some external body, the human mind will regard that external body as present (Part 2, Proposition 17); and consequently (Part 2, Proposition 7), so long as the human mind regards an external body as present—that is (Part 2, Proposition 17, Note), conceives it—the human body is affected in a way that involves the nature of that external body. So, so long as the mind conceives things which increase or help our body's power of acting, the body is affected in ways which increase or help its power of acting (Postulate 1 of this Part); and consequently (Proposition 11 of this Part) the mind's power of thinking is for that time increased or helped. Therefore (Proposition 6 of this Part; Proposition 9 of this Part) the mind, as far as it can, endeavours to imagine such things. Q.E.D.

Proposition 13

When the mind conceives things which diminish or hinder the body's power of acting, it endeavours as far as it can to remember things which exclude their existence.

Proof. So long as the mind conceives anything of that kind, the power of mind and body is diminished or checked (compare Proposition 12 of this Part, Proof); and it will go on conceiving it until the mind conceives something else which excludes its present existence (Part 2, Proposition 17). That is, as I have just shown, the power of mind and body is diminished or checked until the mind conceives something else which excludes the existence of the first thing conceived. Therefore the mind (Proposition 9 of this Part), as far as it can, will endeavour to conceive or remember that other thing. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that the mind shrinks from conceiving those things which diminish or check its own power and the body's.

Note. From what has been said we may clearly understand the nature of love and hate. Love is nothing but pleasure accompanied by the idea of an external cause; hate is nothing but pain accompanied by the idea of an external cause. We see, further, that a man who loves necessarily endeavours to have, and to keep with him, the object of his love, while a man who hates endeavours to remove and destroy the object of his hatred. But I shall treat of these matters at greater length later.

Proposition 14

If the mind has once been affected by two emotions at the same time, then whenever it is afterwards affected by one of them it will be affected by the other too.

Proof. If the human body has once been affected by two bodies at once, then whenever the mind afterwards conceives one of them it will at once remember the other as well (Part 2, Proposition 18). But the mind's conceptions indicate the emotions of our body rather than the nature of external bodies (Part 2, Proposition 16, Corollary 2). Therefore, if the body, and consequently the mind (Definition 3 of this Part), has once been affected by two emotions at the same time, then whenever it is afterwards affected by one of them it will be affected by the other too.

Proposition 15

Anything can accidentally be the cause of pleasure, pain or desire.

Proof. Suppose the mind is affected by two emotions at once, one of which neither increases nor diminishes its power of acting, while the other does increase or diminish it (Postulate 1 of this Part). It is evident from the last proposition that whenever the mind is afterwards affected by the first, through its true cause, which by hypothesis neither increases nor diminishes its power of acting, it will at the same time be affected by the second, which does increase or diminish that power—that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), it will be affected with pleasure or pain. So the first of the two emotions will be the cause of pleasure or pain, not in itself, but accidentally. It can easily be shown in the same way that a thing may accidentally be the cause of desire. Q.E.D.

Corollary. Simply from having regarded a thing with the emotion of pleasure or pain, though that thing is not the efficient cause of the emotion, we can love it or hate it.

Proof. For from that fact alone it comes about (Proposition 14 of this Part) that the mind, afterwards conceiving that thing, is affected with the emotion of pleasure or pain—that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), that the power of mind and body is increased or diminished, and so on; and consequently (Proposition 12 of this Part) that the mind desires or shrinks from conceiving it (Proposition 13 of this Part, Corollary); in other words (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), that it loves or hates it. Q.E.D.

Note. From this we understand how it can happen that we love or hate a thing without knowing any cause for our emotion—merely, as the phrase is, from sympathy or antipathy. And we should put in the same class those objects which affect us pleasurably or painfully simply because they resemble other objects that affect us in the same way. This I shall show in the next proposition. I am aware that the authors who first introduced the terms "sympathy" and "antipathy" meant by them certain occult qualities in things; but I think we may nevertheless use the same terms for known and manifest qualities.

Proposition 16

Simply from conceiving that a given object has some point of resemblance with another object which usually affects the mind with pleasure or pain, we shall regard the first object with love or hate, even though the point of resemblance is not the efficient cause of those emotions.

Proof. The point of resemblance was in the object (by hypothesis) when we regarded it with pleasure or pain; so (Proposition 14 of this Part), when the mind is affected by the image of it, the mind will at once be affected by one emotion or the other; and consequently the thing which we perceive to have that same point of resemblance will accidentally (Proposition 15 of this Part) be a cause of pleasure or pain. So (by Proposition 15 of this Part, Corollary), although the point in which the two objects resemble one another is not the efficient cause of the emotion, we shall still regard the first object with love or hate. Q.E.D.

Proposition 17

If we conceive that a thing which usually affects us with pain has some point of resemblance with another thing which usually affects us with an equally strong pleasure, we shall hate it and at the same time love it.

Proof. The thing in question is (by hypothesis) in itself a cause of pain, and (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note) insofar as we imagine it with that emotion we shall hate it. And insofar as we conceive that it has some point of resemblance to something else which usually affects us with an equally strong pleasure, we shall love it with an equally strong impulse of pleasure (Proposition 16 of this Part). So we shall both hate and love the same thing. Q.E.D.

Note. This state of mind, arising from two contrary emotions, is called vacillation. It stands to the emotions as doubt stands to the imagination (Part 2, Proposition 44, Note); vacillation and doubt differ only as the greater differs from the less. But we should bear in mind that I have deduced this vacillation from causes which give rise to one of the emotions through themselves and to the other accidentally. I have done so in order that they might be more easily deduced from what went before; but I do not deny that vacillation generally arises from an object which is the efficient cause of both emotions. The human body is composed (Part 2, Postulate 1) of a great many individual parts of different natures, and may therefore (Axiom 1, after Lemma 3, which follows Part 2, Proposition 13) be affected in a great many different ways by one and the same body; and conversely, since one and the same thing can be affected in many ways, it can also affect one and the same part of the body in many different ways. So we can easily conceive that one and the same object may be the cause of many and conflicting emotions.
