Proposition 18

A man is affected with pleasure or pain by the image of a thing past or future as much as by the image of a thing present.

Proof. So long as a man is affected by the image of anything, he will regard that thing as present even though it does not exist (Part 2, Proposition 17, Corollary), and will not conceive it as past or future except insofar as its image is joined to the image of time past or future (Part 2, Proposition 44, Note). So the image of a thing, regarded in itself alone, is the same whether it is referred to time past, time future or time present; that is (Part 2, Proposition 16, Corollary), the disposition, or emotion, of the body is the same whether the image is of a thing past, future or present. So the emotion of pleasure or pain is the same whether the image is of a thing past or future. Q.E.D.

Note 1. I call a thing past or future according as we have been or shall be affected by it: according as we have seen it or are about to see it, according as it has refreshed us or will refresh us, according as it has harmed us or will harm us. For in conceiving it so, we affirm its existence; that is, the body is affected by no emotion which excludes the thing's existence, and therefore (Part 2, Proposition 17) the body is affected by the image of the thing just as if the thing were actually present. However, since it generally happens that those who have had many experiences waver so long as they regard a thing as past or future, and are usually in doubt about the outcome (Part 2, Proposition 44, Note), it follows that the emotions arising from such images are not constant, but are generally disturbed by the images of other things until men become certain of the outcome.

Note 2. From what has just been said we understand what is meant by hope, fear, confidence, despair, joy and disappointment. Hope is nothing but an inconstant pleasure arising from the image of something past or future whose outcome we are unsure of. Fear is an inconstant pain, likewise arising from the image of something we are in doubt about. If the element of doubt is removed from these emotions, hope becomes confidence and fear becomes despair—in other words, the pleasure or pain arising from the image of something we had hoped for or feared. Joy, again, is the pleasure arising from the image of something past whose outcome we had doubted; disappointment is the pain opposed to joy.

Footnote: Conscientiæ morsus—thus rendered by Mr. Pollock.

Proposition 19

He who conceives that the object of his love is destroyed will feel pain; if he conceives that it is preserved, he will feel pleasure.

Proof. The mind endeavours as far as it can to conceive those things which increase or help the body's power of acting (Proposition 12 of this Part); in other words (Proposition 12 of this Part, Note), the things it loves. But conception is helped by whatever posits the existence of a thing and hindered by whatever excludes it (Part 2, Proposition 17). Therefore the images of things which posit the existence of the object of love help the mind's endeavour to conceive that object—in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), affect the mind with pleasure; while those which exclude the existence of the object of love hinder that endeavour, and so affect the mind with pain. He, therefore, who conceives that the object of his love is destroyed will feel pain, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 20

He who conceives that the object of his hate is destroyed will feel pleasure.

Proof. The mind (Proposition 13 of this Part) endeavours to conceive those things which exclude the existence of whatever diminishes or checks the body's power of acting; that is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), it endeavours to conceive things which exclude the existence of what it hates. So the image of a thing which excludes the existence of what the mind hates helps that endeavour—in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), affects the mind with pleasure. Thus he who conceives that the object of his hate is destroyed will feel pleasure. Q.E.D.

Proposition 21

He who conceives that the object of his love is affected with pleasure or pain will himself be affected with pleasure or pain; and the emotion will be greater or less in the lover according as it is greater or less in the thing loved.

Proof. The images of things which posit the existence of the object of love (as we showed in Proposition 19 of this Part) help the mind's endeavour to conceive that object. But pleasure posits the existence of the thing feeling it, and the more so the greater the pleasure, since it is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) a transition to a greater perfection. So the image of pleasure in the object of love helps the lover's mental endeavour—that is, affects the lover with pleasure, and the more so the greater that emotion was in the object of love. That was our first point. Further, insofar as a thing is affected with pain it is to that extent destroyed, the extent being proportional to the pain (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note); therefore (Proposition 19 of this Part) he who conceives that the object of his love is affected with pain will himself be affected with pain, in proportion as that emotion is greater or less in the object of his love. Q.E.D.

Proposition 22

If we conceive that someone affects with pleasure an object of our love, we shall be affected with love towards him; if we conceive that he affects it with pain, we shall be affected with hatred towards him.

Proof. He who affects the object of our love with pleasure or pain affects us also with pleasure or pain—that is, if we conceive the loved object as affected with that pleasure or pain (Proposition 21 of this Part). But this pleasure or pain is supposed to come to us accompanied by the idea of an external cause; therefore (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), if we conceive that someone affects an object of our love with pleasure or pain, we shall be affected with love or hatred towards him. Q.E.D.

Note. Proposition 21 of this Part explains the nature of pity, which we may define as pain arising from another's hurt. What term to use for pleasure arising from another's good, I do not know.

We will call the love towards someone who benefits another approval, and the hatred towards someone who injures another indignation. And we should note further that we feel pity not only for a thing we have loved (as shown in Proposition 21 of this Part) but also for one we have hitherto regarded without any emotion, provided we judge it to resemble ourselves. So we bestow approval on anyone who has benefited something resembling ourselves, and are indignant with anyone who has injured it.

Proposition 23

He who conceives that an object of his hatred is affected with pain will feel pleasure; and if he thinks it is affected with pleasure, he will feel pain. Each of these emotions will be greater or less according as its contrary is greater or less in the object of hatred.

Proof. Insofar as an object of hatred is affected with pain it is destroyed, to an extent proportional to the pain (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note). Therefore he (Proposition 20 of this Part) who conceives that an object of his hatred is affected with pain will feel pleasure, to an extent proportional to the pain he conceives in that object. That was our first point. Again, pleasure posits the existence of the thing affected with it (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), in proportion as the pleasure is greater or less. So if anyone imagines that an object of his hatred is affected with pleasure, this conception (Proposition 13 of this Part) will hinder his own endeavour to persist; in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), the hater will be affected with pain. Q.E.D.

Note. This pleasure can scarcely be felt unmixed, and without some conflict of mind. For (as I am about to show in Proposition 27 of this Part), insofar as a man conceives that something like himself is affected with pain, he will be affected in the same way himself; and he will have the contrary emotion in contrary circumstances. But here we are considering hatred only.

Proposition 24

If we conceive that someone affects an object of our hate with pleasure, we shall feel hatred towards him too; if we conceive that he affects it with pain, we shall feel love towards him.

Proof. This proposition is proved in the same way as Proposition 22 of this Part, which see.

Note. These and similar emotions of hatred belong to envy, which accordingly is nothing but hatred insofar as it is regarded as disposing a man to rejoice in another's hurt and to grieve at another's good.

Proposition 25

We endeavour to affirm, of ourselves and of what we love, everything we conceive to affect ourselves or the loved object with pleasure; and we endeavour to deny everything we conceive to affect ourselves or the loved object with pain.

Proof. What we conceive to affect an object of our love with pleasure or pain affects us also with pleasure or pain (Proposition 21 of this Part). But the mind (Proposition 12 of this Part) endeavours as far as it can to conceive the things which affect us with pleasure—in other words (Part 2, Proposition 17, Corollary), it endeavours to regard them as present; and conversely (Proposition 13 of this Part) it endeavours to exclude the existence of the things which affect us with pain. Therefore we endeavour to affirm of ourselves, and of the loved object, whatever we conceive to affect ourselves or the loved object with pleasure. Q.E.D.

Proposition 26

We endeavour to affirm, of what we hate, everything we conceive to affect it with pain; and conversely to deny of it everything we conceive to affect it with pleasure.

Proof. This proposition follows from Proposition 23 of this Part as the previous one followed from Proposition 21 of this Part.

Note. We see from this that it can easily happen that a man thinks too highly of himself, or of an object he loves, and too meanly of an object he hates. This feeling, when a man thinks too highly of himself, is called pride, and is a kind of madness in which a man dreams with his eyes open, thinking he can do everything that falls within his imagination, and taking those things for real, and exulting in them, so long as he cannot conceive anything which excludes their existence and limits his own power of acting. Pride, then, is pleasure arising from a man's thinking too highly of himself. The pleasure arising from thinking too highly of another is called over-esteem; and the pleasure arising from thinking too little of a man is called disdain.

Proposition 27

By the very fact of conceiving that a thing like ourselves, which we have regarded with no emotion, is affected with some emotion, we are ourselves affected with a like emotion (affectus).

Proof. The images of things are modifications of the human body whose ideas represent external bodies to us as present (Part 2, Proposition 17); in other words (Part 2, Proposition 10), whose ideas involve the nature of our body and at the same time the nature of the external bodies as present. If, therefore, the nature of the external body is like the nature of our body, then the idea we form of that external body will involve a modification of our own body like the modification of the external body. Consequently, if we conceive someone like ourselves as affected by some emotion, this conception will express a modification of our body like that emotion. So by the very fact of conceiving a thing like ourselves to be affected with some emotion, we are affected with a like emotion ourselves. If, however, we hate that thing like ourselves, then to that extent we shall be affected by a contrary emotion, not a like one. Q.E.D.

Note 1. This imitation of the emotions, when it is referred to pain, is called compassion (compare Proposition 22 of this Part, Note); when it is referred to desire, it is called emulation, which is nothing but the desire of a thing engendered in us by our conceiving that others have the same desire.

Corollary 1. If we conceive that someone we have hitherto regarded with no emotion affects with pleasure something like ourselves, we shall be affected with love towards him. If, on the other hand, we conceive that he affects it with pain, we shall be affected with hatred towards him.

Proof. This is proved from the last proposition in the same way as Proposition 22 of this Part is proved from Proposition 21 of this Part.

Corollary 2. We cannot hate a thing we pity, because its misery affects us with pain.

Proof. If we could hate it for that reason, we should rejoice in its pain, which is contrary to the hypothesis.

Corollary 3. We seek to free from misery, as far as we can, a thing we pity.

Proof. What affects the object of our pity with pain affects us also with a like pain (by Proposition 26 of this Part). So we shall endeavour to recall everything which removes its existence, or destroys it (compare Proposition 13 of this Part); in other words (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note), we shall desire to destroy it, or shall be determined to destroy it. So we shall endeavour to free from misery a thing we pity. Q.E.D.

Note 2. This will, or appetite, for doing good, arising from pity for the thing we would benefit, is called benevolence, and is nothing but desire arising from compassion. As for love or hatred towards someone who has done good or harm to something we conceive to be like ourselves, see Proposition 22 of this Part, Note.

Proposition 28

We endeavour to bring about whatever we conceive to conduce to pleasure; and we endeavour to remove or destroy whatever we conceive to be truly opposed to it, or to conduce to pain.

Proof. We endeavour as far as we can to conceive what we imagine conduces to pleasure (Proposition 12 of this Part); in other words (Part 2, Proposition 17), we shall endeavour as far as we can to conceive it as present, or actually existing. But the endeavour of the mind, its power of thinking, is equal to and simultaneous with the endeavour of the body, its power of acting (this is clear from Part 2, Proposition 7, Corollary, and Part 2, Proposition 11, Corollary). So we make an absolute endeavour for its existence—in other words (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note), we desire it and strive for it. That was our first point. Again, if we conceive that something we believed to be a cause of pain—that is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), something we hate—is destroyed, we shall rejoice (Proposition 20 of this Part). So we shall endeavour (by the first part of this proof) to destroy it, or (Proposition 13 of this Part) to remove it from us, so that we may not regard it as present. That was our second point. Therefore whatever conduces to pleasure, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 29

We shall also endeavour to do whatever we conceive men to regard with pleasure, and shall shrink from doing what we conceive men to shrink from.

Footnote: By "men" in this and the following propositions, I mean men whom we regard without any particular emotion.

Proof. From imagining that men love or hate something, we shall love or hate the same thing (Proposition 27 of this Part); that is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), from that fact alone we shall feel pleasure or pain at the thing's presence. And so we shall endeavour to do whatever we conceive men to love or regard with pleasure, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. This endeavour to do a thing or leave it undone solely in order to please men we call ambition, especially when we try so eagerly to please the crowd that we do or leave undone certain things to our own or another's hurt; otherwise it is generally called kindliness. Further, I give the name of praise to the pleasure with which we conceive another's action by which he has tried to please us, and of blame to the pain with which we regard his action with aversion.

Proposition 30

If a man has done something which he conceives affects other men with pleasure, he will be affected with pleasure accompanied by the idea of himself as its cause; in other words, he will regard himself with pleasure. If he has done something which he conceives affects others with pain, he will regard himself with pain.

Proof. He who conceives that he affects others with pleasure or pain will by that very fact be affected with pleasure or pain himself (Proposition 27 of this Part). And since a man (Part 2, Proposition 19; Part 2, Proposition 23) is conscious of himself through the modifications by which he is determined to act, it follows that he who conceives that he affects others with pleasure will be affected with pleasure accompanied by the idea of himself as cause—in other words, he will regard himself with pleasure. And so, with the necessary changes, in the case of pain. Q.E.D.

Note. Since love (Proposition 13 of this Part) is pleasure accompanied by the idea of an external cause, and hatred is pain accompanied by the idea of an external cause, the pleasure and pain in question will be a kind of love and hatred. But since the terms love and hatred are used of external objects, we will use other names for the emotions now under discussion: pleasure accompanied by the idea of an external cause we will call honour, and the emotion contrary to it shame—I mean in cases where the pleasure or pain arises from a man's belief that he is being praised or blamed. Otherwise, pleasure accompanied by the idea of an external cause is called self-approval, and the pain contrary to it repentance. Again, since it may happen (Part 2, Proposition 17, Corollary) that the pleasure with which a man conceives that he affects others exists only in his own imagination, and since (Proposition 25 of this Part) everyone endeavours to conceive of himself whatever he conceives will affect him with pleasure, it may easily come about that a vain man is proud and imagines himself pleasing to everyone when in fact he is an annoyance to everyone.

Footnote: So Van Vloten and Bruder. The Dutch version and Camerer read, "an internal cause." "Honor" = Gloria.

Footnote: See previous footnote.

Proposition 31

If we conceive that someone loves, desires or hates a thing which we ourselves love, desire or hate, we shall on that account regard the thing with a more settled love, and so on. If, on the other hand, we think that someone shrinks from what we love, we shall waver.

Proof. From merely conceiving that someone loves a thing, we shall ourselves love that thing (Proposition 27 of this Part); but we are supposed to love it already, so there is a new cause of love by which our former emotion is fed, and we shall therefore love it more steadily. Again, from merely conceiving that someone shrinks from a thing, we shall ourselves shrink from it (Proposition 27 of this Part); and if we suppose that at the same time we love it, we shall love it and shrink from it at once—in other words, we shall waver (Proposition 17 of this Part, Note). Q.E.D.

Corollary. From this, and from Proposition 28 of this Part, it follows that everyone endeavours as far as he can to make others love what he loves and hate what he hates; as the poet says: "As lovers let us share every hope and every fear: ironhearted were he who should love what the other leaves."

Footnote: Ovid, "Amores," II. xix. 4,5. Spinoza transposes the verses. "Speremus pariter, pariter metuamus amantes; Ferreus est, si quis, quod sinit alter, amat."

	Speremus pariter, pariter metuamus amantes;
	Ferreus est, si quis, quod sinit alter, amat.

Note. This endeavour to make our own likes and dislikes meet with universal approval is really ambition (see Proposition 29 of this Part, Note). So we see that everyone by nature desires that the rest of mankind should live according to his own individual temper; and when such a desire is equally present in all, everyone stands in everyone else's way, and in wanting to be loved or praised by all, all become hateful to one another.

Proposition 32

If we conceive that someone takes delight in something which only one person can possess, we shall endeavour to bring it about that he does not get possession of it.

Proof. From merely conceiving that another person takes delight in a thing (Proposition 27 of this Part, Corollary), we shall ourselves love that thing and desire to take delight in it. But we supposed that our pleasure in it would be prevented by his delight in it; so we shall endeavour to prevent his possessing it (Proposition 28 of this Part). Q.E.D.

Note. We see, then, that men are generally so constituted that they pity those who fare badly and envy those who fare well, with a hatred proportional to their own love of the goods those others possess. Further, we see that from the same property of human nature which makes men merciful it also follows that they are envious and ambitious. And last, if we appeal to experience, we shall find that she entirely confirms what we have said, especially if we turn our attention to the first years of our life. We find that children, whose bodies are continually as it were in equilibrium, laugh or cry simply because they see others laughing or crying; they want at once to imitate whatever they see others doing, and to have for themselves whatever they conceive as delighting others—since the images of things are, as we have said, modifications of the human body, ways in which the human body is affected and disposed by external causes to act in this way or that.

Proposition 33

When we love a thing like ourselves, we endeavour as far as we can to make it love us in return.

Proof. What we love we endeavour as far as we can to conceive in preference to anything else (Proposition 12 of this Part). If the thing is like ourselves, we shall endeavour to affect it with pleasure in preference to anything else (Proposition 29 of this Part); in other words, we shall endeavour as far as we can to bring it about that the thing is affected with pleasure accompanied by the idea of ourselves—that is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), that it loves us in return. Q.E.D.

Proposition 34

The greater the emotion with which we conceive a loved object to be affected towards us, the greater will be our self-approval.

Proof. We endeavour (Proposition 33 of this Part), as far as we can, to make what we love love us in return; in other words, to make what we love be affected with pleasure accompanied by the idea of ourselves as cause. So in proportion as the loved object is affected with more pleasure because of us, our endeavour will be helped—that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), the greater will be our pleasure. But when we take pleasure in the fact that we affect something like ourselves with pleasure, we regard ourselves with pleasure (Proposition 30 of this Part). Therefore the greater the emotion with which we conceive a loved object to be affected, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 35

If anyone conceives that an object of his love is joining itself to another with closer bonds of friendship than he has himself attained, he will be affected with hatred towards the loved object and with envy towards his rival.

Proof. In proportion as a man thinks a loved object is well disposed towards him, so will be the strength of his self-approval (by Proposition 34 of this Part), that is (Proposition 30 of this Part, Note), of his pleasure. He will therefore (Proposition 28 of this Part) endeavour as far as he can to imagine the loved object as bound to him as closely as possible; and this endeavour, or desire, will be increased if he thinks someone else has a like desire (Proposition 31 of this Part). But this endeavour, or desire, is supposed to be checked by the image of the loved object together with the image of the man it has joined itself to; therefore (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) he will for that reason be affected with pain accompanied by the idea of the loved object as cause together with the image of his rival. That is, he will be (Proposition 13 of this Part) affected with hatred towards the loved object and towards his rival too (Proposition 15 of this Part, Corollary), whom he will envy for enjoying the beloved object. Q.E.D.

Note. This hatred towards an object of love, joined with envy, is called jealousy, which accordingly is nothing but a wavering of temper arising from love and hatred together, accompanied by the idea of a rival who is envied. Further, this hatred towards the object of love will be greater in proportion to the pleasure the jealous man used to derive from that object's returned love, and also in proportion to the feelings he had previously had towards his rival. If he had hated him, he will at once hate the object of his love, because he conceives it as affected with pleasure by someone he himself hates, and also because he is forced to associate the image of the one he loves with the image of the one he hates. This generally comes into play in the case of love for a woman; for a man who thinks that a woman he loves gives herself to another will feel pain not only because his own desire is checked, but also because, being forced to associate the image of the woman he loves with the private parts and the excretions of another, he shrinks from her.

We must add that a jealous man is not greeted by his beloved with the same glad face as before, and this too gives him pain as a lover, as I shall now show.

Proposition 36

He who remembers a thing in which he once took delight desires to possess it in the same circumstances as when he first took delight in it.

Proof. Everything a man has seen along with the object of his love will be to him accidentally a cause of pleasure (Proposition 15 of this Part); so he will desire to possess it together with the thing he took delight in—in other words, he will desire to possess the object of his love in the same circumstances as when he first took delight in it. Q.E.D.

Corollary. A lover will therefore feel pain if one of those attendant circumstances is missing.

Proof. Insofar as he finds a circumstance missing, he conceives something which excludes its existence; and since he is supposed to desire that thing or circumstance for love's sake (by Proposition 35 of this Part), he will, insofar as he conceives it to be missing, feel pain (Proposition 19 of this Part). Q.E.D.

Note. This pain, insofar as it has to do with the absence of the object of love, is called regret.

Proposition 37

Desire arising from pain or pleasure, hatred or love, is greater in proportion as the emotion is greater.

Proof. Pain diminishes or checks a man's power of acting (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note); in other words (Proposition 7 of this Part), it diminishes or checks the endeavour by which he endeavours to persist in his own being. So (Proposition 5 of this Part) it is contrary to that endeavour, and all the endeavours of a man affected with pain are directed to removing that pain. But (by the definition of pain) in proportion as the pain is greater, so is it necessarily opposed to a greater part of a man's power of acting; therefore the greater the pain, the greater the power of acting employed to remove it—that is, the greater the desire or appetite to remove it. Again, since pleasure (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) increases or helps a man's power of acting, it may easily be shown in the same way that a man affected with pleasure desires nothing but to keep it, and that his desire is proportional to the greatness of the pleasure.

And last, since hatred and love are themselves emotions of pain and pleasure, it follows in the same way that the endeavour, appetite or desire arising from hatred or love will be greater in proportion to the hatred or love. Q.E.D.

Proposition 38

If a man has begun to hate an object of his love, so that his love is entirely destroyed, he will, other causes being equal, regard it with more hatred than if he had never loved it, and his hatred will be proportional to the strength of his former love.

Proof. If a man begins to hate what he had loved, more of his appetites are checked than if he had never loved it. For love is a pleasure (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note) which a man endeavours as far as he can to make lasting (Proposition 28 of this Part); he does so by regarding the object of his love as present and by affecting it with pleasure as far as he can. This endeavour is greater in proportion as the love is greater, and so is the endeavour to make the beloved return his affection (Proposition 33 of this Part). Now these endeavours are checked by hatred towards the object of love (Proposition 13 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 23 of this Part); so the lover (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) will for this reason also be affected with pain, the more so in proportion as his love was greater. That is, besides the pain caused by hatred there is a pain caused by his having loved the object; and so the lover will regard the beloved with greater pain—in other words, will hate it more than if he had never loved it, and the more intensely in proportion as his former love was greater. Q.E.D.

Proposition 39

He who hates someone will endeavour to injure him, unless he fears a greater injury to himself as a result; and conversely he who loves someone will by the same law seek to benefit him.

Proof. To hate a man is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note) to conceive him as a cause of pain; so he who hates a man will endeavour to remove or destroy him. But if something more painful—a greater evil, that is—would come to the hater as a result, and if he thinks he can avoid that evil by not carrying out the injury he had planned against the object of his hate, then he will desire to refrain from inflicting it (Proposition 28 of this Part); and the strength of this endeavour (Proposition 37 of this Part) will be greater than his earlier endeavour to injure, and will therefore prevail over it, as we said. The second part of the proof proceeds in the same way. Therefore he who hates another, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. By good I mean here every kind of pleasure and everything that conduces to it, especially whatever satisfies our longings, of whatever kind. By evil I mean every kind of pain, especially whatever frustrates our longings. For I have shown (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note) that we never desire a thing because we judge it good; on the contrary, we judge a thing good because we desire it, and judge evil what we shrink from. So everyone, according to his own emotions, judges or estimates what is good, what is bad, what is better, what is worse, and last what is best and what is worst. A miser thinks abundance of money the best thing and want of money the worst; an ambitious man desires nothing so much as glory and fears nothing so much as shame; to an envious man nothing is more delightful than another's misfortune and nothing more painful than another's success. So every man, according to his emotions, judges a thing good or bad, useful or useless. The emotion which makes a man turn from what he wishes, or wish for what he turns from, is called timidity, which may accordingly be defined as the fear by which a man is led to avoid an evil he regards as coming by meeting a lesser evil (Proposition 28 of this Part). But if the evil he fears is shame, timidity becomes bashfulness. And last, if the desire to avoid a future evil is checked by the fear of another, so that the man does not know which to choose, fear becomes consternation, especially if both the evils feared are very great.

Proposition 40

He who conceives himself to be hated by another, and believes he has given him no cause for hatred, will hate that other in return.

Proof. He who conceives another as affected with hatred will thereupon be affected with hatred himself (Proposition 27 of this Part)—that is, with pain accompanied by the idea of an external cause. But by hypothesis he conceives no cause for this pain except the man who is his enemy; so from conceiving that he is hated by someone, he will be affected with pain accompanied by the idea of his enemy—in other words, he will hate his enemy in return. Q.E.D.

Note. He who thinks he has given just cause for hatred will (Proposition 30 of this Part, Note) be affected with shame; but this (Proposition 25 of this Part) rarely happens. This return of hatred may also arise from the hatred which follows an endeavour to injure the object of our hate (Proposition 39 of this Part). So he who conceives that he is hated by another will conceive his enemy as the cause of some evil or pain; and so will be affected with pain, or fear, accompanied by the idea of his enemy as cause—in other words, he will be affected with hatred towards his enemy, as I said above.

Corollary 1. He who conceives that one he loves hates him will be torn between hatred and love. For insofar as he conceives himself to be an object of hatred, he is determined to hate his enemy in return; but by hypothesis he nevertheless loves him. So he will be torn between hatred and love.

Corollary 2. If a man conceives that someone he has hitherto regarded without emotion has done him some injury out of hatred, he will at once seek to repay the injury in kind.

Proof. He who conceives that another hates him will (by Proposition 39 of this Part) hate his enemy in return, and (Proposition 26 of this Part) will endeavour to recall everything which can affect him with pain; and he will further endeavour to injure him (Proposition 39 of this Part). Now the first thing of this kind he conceives is the injury done to himself; so he will at once endeavour to repay it in kind. Q.E.D.

Note. The endeavour to injure one we hate is called anger; the endeavour to repay in kind an injury done to ourselves is called revenge.
