Proposition 41

If anyone conceives that he is loved by another, and believes he has given no cause for such love, he will love that other in return (compare Proposition 15 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 16 of this Part).

Proof. This proposition is proved in the same way as the one before it. See also the note added to it.

Note. If he believes he has given just cause for the love, he will take pride in it (Proposition 30 of this Part, Note); and this is what most often happens (Proposition 25 of this Part), whereas we said the contrary took place whenever a man conceives himself to be hated by another (see Proposition 41 of this Part). This returned love, and consequently the desire to benefit one who loves us (Proposition 39 of this Part) and who endeavours to benefit us, is called gratitude or thankfulness. From which it appears that men are far readier to take revenge than to return a benefit.

Corollary. He who imagines that he is loved by one he hates will be torn between hatred and love. This is proved in the same way as the first corollary of the previous proposition.

Note. If hatred is the stronger emotion, he will endeavour to injure the man who loves him; and this emotion is called cruelty, especially if the victim is believed to have given no ordinary cause for hatred.

Proposition 42

He who has done someone a kindness out of love or the hope of honour will feel pain if he sees the kindness received ungratefully.

Proof. When a man loves something like himself, he endeavours as far as he can to make it love him in return (Proposition 33 of this Part). So a man who does a kindness does it out of the desire he feels to be loved in return—that is (Proposition 34 of this Part), out of the hope of honour, or (Proposition 30 of this Part, Note) of pleasure. He will therefore endeavour as far as he can to conceive this cause of honour, or to regard it as actually existing. But by hypothesis he conceives something else which excludes the existence of that cause of honour; so he will feel pain at it (Proposition 19 of this Part). Q.E.D.

Proposition 43

Hatred is increased by being returned, and can on the other hand be destroyed by love.

Proof. He who conceives that an object of his hatred hates him in return will thereupon feel a new hatred, while the former hatred (by hypothesis) still remains (Proposition 40 of this Part). But if instead he conceives that the object of his hate loves him, he will to that extent (Proposition 38 of this Part) regard himself with pleasure, and (Proposition 29 of this Part) will endeavour to please the cause of that emotion—in other words, he will endeavour not to hate him (Proposition 41 of this Part) and not to affect him with pain. This endeavour (Proposition 37 of this Part) will be greater or less in proportion to the emotion it arises from; so if it is greater than the endeavour arising from hatred, by which he tries to affect with pain the thing he hates, it will get the better of it and drive the hatred from his mind. Q.E.D.

Proposition 44

Hatred completely conquered by love passes into love; and the love is then greater than if hatred had not gone before it.

Proof. The proof runs as in Proposition 38 of this Part. For a man who begins to love a thing he used to hate, or to regard with pain, feels pleasure by the very act of loving; and to this pleasure involved in love is added the pleasure arising from the help given to his endeavour to remove the pain involved in hatred (Proposition 37 of this Part), accompanied by the idea of the former object of hatred as its cause.

Note. Even so, no one will endeavour to hate a thing, or to be affected with pain, for the sake of enjoying this greater pleasure. That is, no one will wish to be injured in the hope of recovering from the injury, or long to be ill for the sake of getting well. For everyone will always endeavour to persist in his being and to keep off pain as far as he can. If the contrary were conceivable—if a man could desire to hate someone in order to love him the more afterwards—he would always desire to go on hating him. For the strength of the love is proportional to the strength of the hatred, so the man would want the hatred to grow greater and greater; and for the same reason he would want to grow more and more ill in order to take a greater pleasure in being restored to health. So he would always endeavour to be ill, which (Proposition 6 of this Part) is absurd.

Proposition 45

If a man conceives that someone like himself hates a thing like himself which he loves, he will hate that person.

Proof. The beloved object returns the hatred of the man who hates it (Proposition 40 of this Part). So the lover, in conceiving that someone hates the beloved object, conceives the beloved thing as affected with hatred—in other words (Proposition 13 of this Part), with pain. Consequently he is himself affected with pain accompanied by the idea of the one who hates the beloved thing as its cause; that is, he will hate the man who hates what he himself loves (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note). Q.E.D.

Proposition 46

If a man has been affected with pleasure or pain by someone of a class or nation different from his own, and if the pleasure or pain was accompanied by the idea of that stranger as its cause under the general heading of his class or nation, the man will feel love or hatred not only towards that individual but towards the whole class or nation he belongs to.

Proof. This is evident from Proposition 16 of this Part.

Proposition 47

The joy arising from the destruction or other injury of something we hate is never unmixed with a certain pain in ourselves.

Proof. This is evident from Proposition 27 of this Part. For insofar as we conceive a thing like ourselves to be affected with pain, we feel pain ourselves.

Note. This proposition can also be proved from the Corollary to Part 2, Proposition 17. Whenever we remember anything, even if it does not actually exist, we regard it only as present, and the body is affected in the same way. So insofar as the memory of the thing is strong, a man is determined to regard it with pain; and this determination, while the image of the thing lasts, is checked by the memory of other things which exclude that thing's existence, but is not destroyed. A man therefore feels pleasure only insofar as that determination is checked; and this is why the joy arising from an injury done to what we hate is repeated every time we remember the object of our hatred. For, as we have said, when the image of the thing is roused, it involves the thing's existence and so determines the man to regard it with the same pain as he used to when it did actually exist. But since he has joined to the image of the thing other images which exclude its existence, this determination to pain is at once checked, and the man rejoices afresh each time it happens. This is why men take pleasure in recalling past evils, and delight in telling of dangers they have escaped: when men conceive a danger, they conceive it as still to come and are determined to fear it, and this determination is checked afresh by the idea of the freedom that came to be associated with the idea of the danger when they escaped it. This makes them feel safe again, and so they rejoice again.

Proposition 48

Love or hatred towards, say, Peter is destroyed if the pleasure involved in the one, or the pain involved in the other, comes to be associated with the idea of another cause; and it will be diminished in proportion as we conceive Peter not to have been the sole cause of the emotion.

Proof. This proposition is evident from the mere definition of love and hatred (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note). For pleasure is called love towards Peter, and pain is called hatred towards Peter, simply insofar as Peter is regarded as the cause of the one emotion or the other. When this relation of cause is wholly or partly removed, the emotion towards Peter wholly or partly vanishes too. Q.E.D.

Proposition 49

Love or hatred towards a thing we conceive to be free must, other things being equal, be greater than towards a thing acting by necessity.

Proof. A thing we conceive as free must (Part 1, Definition 7) be perceived through itself, without anything else. So if we conceive it as the cause of pleasure or pain, we shall (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note) love it or hate it, and shall do so with the utmost love or hatred that can arise from the emotion in question. But if the thing that causes the emotion is conceived as acting by necessity, we shall (by Part 1, Definition 7) conceive it not as the sole cause but as one of the causes of the emotion, and our love or hatred towards it will therefore be less. Q.E.D.

Note. It follows that men, thinking themselves free, feel more love and hatred towards one another than towards anything else; and to this we must add the imitation of the emotions treated of in Proposition 27 of this Part, Proposition 34 of this Part, Proposition 40 of this Part and Proposition 43 of this Part.

Proposition 50

Anything whatever can accidentally be a cause of hope or fear.

Proof. This proposition is proved in the same way as Proposition 15 of this Part, which see, together with the note to Proposition 18 of this Part.

Note. Things which are accidentally the causes of hope or fear are called good or bad omens. And insofar as such omens are the cause of hope or fear, they are (by Proposition 18 of this Part, Note) causes of pleasure and pain as well; so to that extent we regard them with love or hatred, and endeavour either to invoke them as means to what we hope for, or to remove them as obstacles, or as causes of what we fear. It further follows, from Proposition 25 of this Part, that we are naturally so constituted that we believe readily what we hope for and with difficulty what we fear, and that we are apt to value such things above or below their true worth. This is where the superstitions come from which harass men everywhere. However, I do not think it worth pointing out here the waverings that spring from hope and fear; it follows from the definition of these emotions that there can be no hope without fear and no fear without hope, as I shall explain in the proper place. Further, insofar as we hope for or fear anything, we regard it with love or hatred; so anyone can apply to hope and fear for himself what we have said about love and hatred.

Proposition 51

Different men may be affected differently by the same object, and the same man may be affected differently at different times by the same object.

Proof. The human body is affected by external bodies in a great variety of ways (Part 2, Postulate 3). Two men may therefore be affected differently at the same time, and therefore (by Axiom 1, after Lemma 3, which follows Part 2, Proposition 13) may be affected differently by one and the same object. Further (by Part 2, Postulate 3), the human body can be affected sometimes in one way and sometimes in another; and consequently (by that same Axiom 1) it may be affected differently at different times by one and the same object. Q.E.D.

Note. We see, then, that it is possible for one man to love what another hates, and for one man to fear what another does not; and again, that one and the same man may love what he once hated, or be bold where he was once timid, and so on. And since everyone judges according to his own emotions what is good, what bad, what better and what worse (Proposition 39 of this Part, Note), it follows that men's judgments may vary as much as their emotions do. So when we compare one man with another, we distinguish them solely by the difference of their emotions, and call some intrepid, others timid, and others by some other name. I shall call a man intrepid, for instance, if he despises an evil I am used to fearing; and if I further take into account that in his desire to injure his enemies and benefit those he loves he is not held back by the fear of an evil which is enough to hold me back, I shall call him daring. Again, a man will seem timid to me if he fears an evil I am used to despising; and if I further take into account that his desire is held back by the fear of an evil which is not enough to hold me back, I shall say he is cowardly. And so everyone will pass judgment.

Footnote: This is possible, though the human mind is part of the divine intellect, as I have shown in Part 2, Proposition 13, Note.

Last, from this inconstancy in human judgment—since a man often judges things solely by his emotions, and since the things he believes cause pleasure or pain, and therefore tries to bring about or prevent, are often purely imaginary, quite apart from the uncertainty of things mentioned in Proposition 28 of this Part—we may readily conceive that a man may at one time be affected with pleasure and at another with pain, accompanied in each case by the idea of himself as cause. So we can easily understand what repentance and self-approval are. Repentance is pain accompanied by the idea of oneself as cause; self-approval is pleasure accompanied by the idea of oneself as cause. And these emotions are the most intense of all, because men believe themselves free (Proposition 49 of this Part).

Proposition 52

An object we have previously seen along with others, and which we do not conceive to have any property that is not common to many things, will not hold our attention as long as an object we conceive to have some property peculiar to itself.

Proof. As soon as we conceive an object we have seen along with others, we at once remember those others (Part 2, Proposition 18, Note), and so pass directly from contemplating the one object to contemplating another. And this is the case with an object we conceive to have no property that is not common to many, since we are then assuming that we see in it nothing we have not seen before along with other objects. But when we suppose we are conceiving something special in an object, something we have never seen before, we must say that while the mind regards that object it has nothing else in itself which it could fall to regarding instead; so it is determined to contemplate that object only. Therefore an object, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. This modification of the mind, or imagining of a particular thing insofar as it is alone in the mind, is called wonder. If it is excited by an object of fear, it is called consternation, because wonder at an evil keeps a man so absorbed in simply contemplating it that he has no power to think of anything else by which he might avoid it. If what we wonder at is a man's prudence, or industry, or anything of that sort, then, since we regard him as far surpassing ourselves in it, the wonder is called veneration; but if it is a man's anger or envy that we wonder at, the emotion is called horror. Again, if it is the prudence or industry of a man we love that we wonder at, our love will be the greater for it (Proposition 12 of this Part), and love joined to wonder or veneration is called devotion. We may conceive hatred, hope, confidence and the other emotions as associated with wonder in the same way, and we should thus be able to deduce more emotions than have names in ordinary speech—which shows that the names of the emotions have been given according to how the emotions ordinarily show themselves, rather than from any accurate knowledge of their nature.

The opposite of wonder is contempt, which generally arises like this. Because we see someone wondering at, loving or fearing a thing, or because a thing at first sight seems like things we ourselves wonder at, love or fear, we are (Proposition 15 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 27 of this Part) determined to wonder at, love or fear it. But if from its presence, or from contemplating it more accurately, we are forced to deny of it everything that could cause wonder, love or fear, then the mind, by the thing's very presence, remains determined to think of the qualities it does not have rather than of those it does—whereas normally the presence of an object would make the mind regard chiefly what is in it. As devotion springs from wonder at a thing we love, so derision springs from contempt for a thing we hate or fear, and scorn from contempt for folly, as veneration springs from wonder at prudence. And last, we can conceive love, hope, honour and the rest as associated with contempt, and can deduce from that still other emotions which have no recognised names to tell them apart.

Proposition 53

When the mind regards itself and its own power of acting, it feels pleasure; and that pleasure is greater in proportion as it conceives itself and its power of acting more distinctly.

Proof. A man does not know himself except through the modifications of his body and the ideas of them (Part 2, Proposition 19; Part 2, Proposition 23). So when the mind is able to contemplate itself, it is by that very fact supposed to pass to a greater perfection—that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), to feel pleasure; and the pleasure will be greater in proportion as it can conceive itself and its power of acting more distinctly. Q.E.D.

Corollary. This pleasure is fed more and more in proportion as a man conceives himself to be praised by others. For the more he conceives himself as praised, the more he will imagine them to be affected with pleasure accompanied by the idea of himself (Proposition 29 of this Part, Note); and so he is (Proposition 27 of this Part) himself affected with greater pleasure accompanied by the idea of himself. Q.E.D.

Proposition 54

The mind endeavours to conceive only those things which assert its power of acting.

Proof. The endeavour, or power, of the mind is its actual essence (Proposition 7 of this Part); and the essence of the mind obviously affirms only what the mind is and can do, not what it is not and cannot do. Therefore the mind endeavours to conceive only those things which assert, or affirm, its power of acting. Q.E.D.

Proposition 55

When the mind contemplates its own weakness, it feels pain.

Proof. The essence of the mind affirms only what the mind is, or can do; in other words, it is the mind's nature to conceive only such things as assert its power of acting (Proposition 54 of this Part). So when we say that the mind contemplates its own weakness, we are merely saying that while the mind is trying to conceive something which asserts its power of acting, it is checked in that endeavour—in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), it feels pain. Q.E.D.

Corollary. This pain is fed more and more if a man conceives that he is blamed by others; this may be proved in the same way as the corollary to Proposition 53 of this Part.

Note. This pain, accompanied by the idea of our own weakness, is called humility; the pleasure that springs from contemplating ourselves is called self-love, or self-approval. And since this feeling is renewed as often as a man contemplates his own virtues, or his own power of acting, it follows that everyone is fond of telling the story of his own exploits and displaying the strength of his body and mind—and that men are for this reason a trial to one another. It follows too that men are naturally envious (Proposition 24 of this Part, Note; Proposition 32 of this Part, Note), rejoicing in the shortcomings of their equals and feeling pain at their virtues. For whenever a man conceives his own actions, he is affected with pleasure (Proposition 53 of this Part) in proportion as those actions display more perfection and as he conceives them more distinctly—that is (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note), in proportion as he can tell them apart from other men's and regard them as something special. So a man takes most pleasure in contemplating himself when he contemplates some quality he denies to others. But if what he affirms of himself belongs to the idea of man, or of animals in general, he will not be nearly so pleased; and he will feel pain if he conceives his own actions to fall short of others'. This pain (Proposition 28 of this Part) he will endeavour to remove by putting a wrong construction on the actions of his equals, or by embellishing his own as far as he can.

It is plain, then, that men are naturally prone to hatred and envy, and that envy is fed by their upbringing. For parents are accustomed to spur their children to virtue solely by honour and envy. But perhaps some will hesitate to agree with what I have said, because we not seldom admire men's virtues and venerate those who have them. To remove such doubts, I add the following corollary.

Corollary. No one envies the virtue of anyone who is not his equal.

Proof. Envy is a kind of hatred (Proposition 24 of this Part, Note), or (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note) pain; that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), a modification by which a man's power of acting, or his endeavour towards acting, is checked. But a man does not endeavour, or desire, to do anything which cannot follow from his nature as it is; therefore he will not desire to have attributed to him any power of acting, or virtue, which belongs to another's nature and is foreign to his own. So his desire cannot be checked, nor can he be pained, by contemplating virtue in someone unlike himself; and consequently he cannot envy such a person. But he can envy his equal, who is supposed to have the same nature as himself. Q.E.D.

Note. So when, as we said in the note to Proposition 52 of this Part, we venerate a man out of wonder at his prudence or fortitude, we do so because we conceive those qualities as peculiar to him and not as common to our own nature. We therefore no more envy him for them than we envy trees for being tall or lions for being brave.

Proposition 56

There are as many kinds of pleasure, of pain, of desire, and of every emotion compounded of these (such as waverings of the mind) or derived from them (such as love, hatred, hope and fear), as there are kinds of objects by which we are affected.

Proof. Pleasure and pain, and consequently the emotions compounded of or derived from them, are passions, or passive states (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note). Now we are necessarily passive (Proposition 1 of this Part) insofar as we have inadequate ideas, and only insofar as we have such ideas are we passive (Proposition 3 of this Part); that is, we are necessarily passive (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note) only insofar as we conceive, or (Part 2, Proposition 17, Note) insofar as we are affected by an emotion which involves the nature of our own body and the nature of an external body. So the nature of every passive state must be explained in such a way that the nature of the object affecting us is expressed. The pleasure arising from, say, the object A involves the nature of A, and the pleasure arising from the object B involves the nature of B; so these two pleasures are by nature different, since the causes they arise from are by nature different. And so the pain arising from one object is by nature different from the pain arising from another, and likewise with love, hatred, hope, fear, wavering and the rest.

There are therefore necessarily as many kinds of pleasure, pain, love, hatred and so on as there are kinds of objects by which we are affected. Now desire is each man's essence, or nature, insofar as it is conceived as determined to a particular action by some given modification of itself (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note). So according as a man is affected through external causes by this or that kind of pleasure, pain, love, hatred and so on—in other words, according as his nature is disposed this way or that—his desire will be of one kind or another; and the nature of one desire must differ from the nature of another as widely as the emotions differ that each arose from. So there are as many kinds of desire as there are kinds of pleasure, pain, love and the rest; and consequently, by what has been shown, as many kinds of desire as there are kinds of objects by which we are affected. Q.E.D.

Note. Of the kinds of emotion, which by the last proposition must be very numerous, the chief are gluttony, drunkenness, lust, avarice and ambition. These are merely kinds of love or desire, displaying the nature of those emotions in ways that vary with the object they are concerned with. For by gluttony, drunkenness, lust, avarice and ambition we simply mean the immoderate love of feasting, of drinking, of sex, of riches and of fame. Furthermore, these emotions, insofar as we distinguish them from others merely by the objects they are concerned with, have no contraries. For temperance, sobriety and chastity, which we usually set against gluttony, drunkenness and lust, are not emotions or passive states at all, but indicate a power of the mind which moderates those emotions. I cannot explain the remaining kinds of emotion here, since they are as numerous as the kinds of objects; nor, if I could, would it be necessary. For our purpose—to determine the strength of the emotions and the mind's power over them—it is enough to have a general definition of each emotion. It is enough, I repeat, to understand the general properties of the emotions and of the mind, so as to determine the quality and extent of the mind's power in moderating and checking them. So although there is a great difference between one emotion of love, hatred or desire and another—between love felt towards children and love felt towards a wife, for instance—there is no need for us to take notice of such differences, or to track the nature and origin of the emotions any further.

Proposition 57

Any emotion of a given individual differs from the emotion of another individual only insofar as the essence of the one differs from the essence of the other.

Proof. This proposition is evident from Ax. i. (which see after Lemma 3, following Part 2, Proposition 13). Nevertheless, we will prove it from the nature of the three primary emotions.

All emotions belong to desire, pleasure or pain, as the definitions given above show. But desire is each man's nature, or essence (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note); so desire in one individual differs from desire in another only insofar as the nature, or essence, of the one differs from that of the other. Again, pleasure and pain are passive states, or passions, by which every man's power or endeavour to persist in his being is increased or diminished, helped or hindered (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note). But by the endeavour to persist in its being, insofar as it belongs to mind and body together, we mean appetite and desire (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note). So pleasure and pain are the same as desire, or appetite, insofar as external causes increase or diminish, help or hinder it—in other words, they are every man's nature. So the pleasure and pain felt by one man differ from the pleasure and pain felt by another only insofar as the nature, or essence, of the one differs from that of the other; and consequently any emotion of one individual only differs, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. It follows that the emotions of the animals called irrational—for after learning the origin of mind we cannot doubt that animals feel—differ from human emotions only to the extent that animal nature differs from human nature. Horse and man are alike carried away by the desire to breed; but the desire of the one is equine and the desire of the other human. And so the lusts and appetites of insects, fishes and birds must vary according to their several natures. So although each individual lives content and rejoices in the nature it has, the life in which each is content and rejoices is nothing but the idea, or soul, of that individual; and hence the joy of one differs in nature from the joy of another to the extent that the essence of one differs from the essence of the other. And last, it follows from the previous proposition that there is no small difference between the joy which moves, say, a drunkard and the joy possessed by a philosopher—which I mention here only in passing. So far I have treated of the emotions belonging to man insofar as he is passive. It remains to add a few words on those belonging to him insofar as he is active.

Proposition 58

Besides the pleasure and desire which are passive states, there are other emotions of pleasure and desire which belong to us insofar as we are active.

Proof. When the mind conceives itself and its own power of acting, it feels pleasure (Proposition 53 of this Part); and the mind necessarily contemplates itself when it conceives a true, or adequate, idea (Part 2, Proposition 43). But the mind does conceive certain adequate ideas (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2). Therefore it feels pleasure insofar as it conceives adequate ideas—that is, insofar as it is active (Proposition 1 of this Part). Again, the mind, both insofar as it has clear and distinct ideas and insofar as it has confused ones, endeavours to persist in its own being (Proposition 9 of this Part); and by such an endeavour we mean desire (by Proposition 57 of this Part). So desire also belongs to us insofar as we understand—that is (Proposition 1 of this Part), insofar as we are active. Q.E.D.

Proposition 59

Among all the emotions belonging to the mind as active, there are none that cannot be referred to pleasure or desire.

Proof. All emotions can be referred to desire, pleasure or pain, as the definitions already given show. Now by pain we mean that the mind's power of thinking is diminished or checked (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note); so insofar as the mind feels pain, its power of understanding—that is, of acting—is diminished or checked (Proposition 1 of this Part). Therefore no painful emotions can be attributed to the mind in virtue of its being active, but only emotions of pleasure and desire, which (by Proposition 58 of this Part) do belong to the mind in that condition. Q.E.D.

Note. All actions following from emotion which belong to the mind in virtue of its understanding I set down to strength of character (fortitudo), which I divide into courage (animositas) and high-mindedness (generositas). By courage I mean the desire by which every man strives to preserve his own being under the guidance of reason alone. By high-mindedness I mean the desire by which every man endeavours, under the guidance of reason alone, to help other men and to join them to himself in friendship. Actions which look solely to the good of the agent I therefore set down to courage, and those which aim at the good of others to high-mindedness. Temperance, sobriety and presence of mind in danger are kinds of courage; courtesy and mercy are kinds of high-mindedness.

I think I have now explained, and displayed through their first causes, the principal emotions and waverings of mind which arise from the combination of the three primary emotions—desire, pleasure and pain. It is evident from what I have said that we are driven about in many ways by external causes, and that like waves of the sea driven by contrary winds we are tossed to and fro, not knowing our outcome or our fate. But I have said that I have set out only the chief conflicting emotions, not all that might be given. For by proceeding in the same way we can easily show that love is united with repentance, with scorn, with shame, and so on. I think everyone will agree from what has been said that the emotions may be compounded with one another in so many ways, and that so many variations may arise from them, as to be beyond all counting. For my purpose, however, it is enough to have listed the most important; to reckon up the rest would be more curious than useful. It remains to remark, about love, that it very often happens that while we are enjoying a thing we longed for, the body acquires from the act of enjoyment a new disposition by which it is determined otherwise; other images of things are roused in it, and the mind begins to conceive and desire something fresh. For example, when we conceive something whose flavour generally delights us, we desire to enjoy it—that is, to eat it. But while we are enjoying it the stomach is filled and the body is otherwise disposed; and if, when the body is thus otherwise disposed, the image of the food that is present is stimulated, and consequently the endeavour or desire to eat it is stimulated too, the new disposition of the body will feel repugnance to that desire or attempt, and consequently the presence of the food we formerly longed for will become hateful. This revulsion of feeling is called satiety, or weariness. As for the rest, I have passed over the outward modifications of the body observable in the emotions—trembling, pallor, sobbing, laughter and the like—since these belong to the body only, with no reference to the mind. And last, the definitions of the emotions need supplementing on a few points; I will therefore repeat them, adding such observations as I think should be made here and there.
