Definitions of the Emotions

1. Desire is the actual essence of man, insofar as it is conceived as determined to a particular action by some given modification of itself.

Explanation. We said above, in the note to Proposition 9 of this Part, that desire is appetite together with the consciousness of it, and that appetite is the essence of man insofar as it is determined to act in ways that serve his own persistence. But in that same note I also remarked that, strictly speaking, I recognise no distinction between appetite and desire; for whether a man is conscious of his appetite or not, it remains one and the same appetite. So, to avoid the appearance of saying the same thing twice, I have refrained from explaining desire by appetite, and have taken care to define it in a way that brings under one head all those endeavours of human nature which we distinguish by the names appetite, will, desire and impulse. I might indeed have said that desire is the essence of man insofar as it is conceived as determined to a particular action; but from such a definition (compare Part 2, Proposition 23) it would not follow that the mind can be conscious of its desire or appetite. So, in order to imply the cause of that consciousness, it was necessary to add insofar as it is determined by some given modification, and so on. For by a modification of a man's essence we understand any disposition of that essence, whether inborn, or conceived under the attribute of thought alone, or under the attribute of extension alone, or referred to both attributes at once. By the term desire, then, I mean here all a man's endeavours, impulses, appetites and volitions, which vary with each man's disposition and are therefore not seldom opposed to one another, so that a man is drawn in different directions and does not know which way to turn.

2. Pleasure is a man's transition from a lesser to a greater perfection.

3. Pain is a man's transition from a greater to a lesser perfection.

Explanation. I say transition, for pleasure is not perfection itself. If a man were born with the perfection he passes to, he would possess it without the emotion of pleasure. This appears more clearly if we consider the contrary emotion, pain. No one can deny that pain consists in the transition to a lesser perfection and not in the lesser perfection itself, for a man cannot be pained insofar as he shares in perfection of any degree. Nor can we say that pain consists in the absence of a greater perfection, for absence is nothing, whereas the emotion of pain is an activity; and this activity can only be the activity of the transition from a greater to a lesser perfection—in other words, an activity by which a man's power of acting is lessened or checked (compare Proposition 11 of this Part, Note). I pass over the definitions of merriment, stimulation, melancholy and suffering, because these terms are generally used of the body and are merely kinds of pleasure or pain.

4. Wonder is the conceiving (imaginatio) of a thing at which the mind comes to a stand, because the particular idea in question has no connection with other ideas (compare Proposition 52 of this Part, Note).

Explanation. In the note to Part 2, Proposition 18 we showed why the mind passes at once from contemplating one thing to contemplating another: namely, because the images of the two things are so associated and arranged that one follows the other. Such association is impossible if the image of the thing is new, and the mind will then be at a stand in contemplating it until other causes determine it to think of something else.

So the conceiving of a new object, considered in itself, is of the same nature as any other conceiving; and this is why I do not count wonder among the emotions. Nor do I see why I should, since this arrest of the mind arises from no positive cause drawing it away from other objects, but merely from the absence of a cause to determine it to pass from contemplating one object to contemplating another.

I therefore recognise only three primitive, or primary, emotions (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note): pleasure, pain and desire. I have spoken of wonder simply because it is customary to give different names to certain emotions springing from the three primary ones when they are referred to objects we wonder at. The same reason leads me to add a definition of contempt.

5. Contempt is the conceiving of a thing which touches the mind so little that its presence leads the mind to imagine the qualities the thing does not have rather than those it does (compare Proposition 52 of this Part, Note).

The definitions of veneration and scorn I pass over here, since I am not aware of any emotions being named after them.

6. Love is pleasure accompanied by the idea of an external cause.

Explanation. This definition explains the essence of love clearly enough. The definition given by those who say that love is the lover's wish to unite himself to the loved object expresses a property of love but not its essence; and since those authors have not adequately grasped love's essence, they have been unable to form a true idea of its properties, so that their definition is on all hands admitted to be very obscure. It must be noted, however, that when I say it is a property of love that the lover should wish to unite himself to the beloved object, I do not mean by wish a consent, or a conclusion, or a free decision of the mind—for I have shown such things to be fictions in Part 2, Proposition 48—nor do I mean a desire to be united to the loved object when it is absent, or to remain in its presence when it is at hand, for love can be conceived without either of these desires. By wish I mean the contentment which is in the lover because of the presence of the beloved object, by which the lover's pleasure is strengthened, or at least maintained.

7. Hatred is pain accompanied by the idea of an external cause.

Explanation. These points are easily grasped after what has been said in the explanation of the previous definition (compare Proposition 13 of this Part, Note).

8. Inclination is pleasure accompanied by the idea of something which is accidentally a cause of pleasure.

9. Aversion is pain accompanied by the idea of something which is accidentally a cause of pain (compare Proposition 15 of this Part, Note).

10. Devotion is love towards someone we wonder at.

Explanation. Wonder (admiratio) arises, as we showed in Proposition 52 of this Part, from the novelty of a thing. So if it happens that we often conceive the object of our wonder, we shall cease to wonder at it; and so we see that the emotion of devotion readily degenerates into simple love.

11. Derision is pleasure arising from our conceiving that something we despise is present in a thing we hate.

Explanation. Insofar as we despise a thing we hate, we deny its existence (Proposition 52 of this Part, Note), and to that extent we rejoice (Proposition 20 of this Part). But since we are supposing that a man hates what he derides, it follows that the pleasure in question is not unmixed (compare Proposition 47 of this Part, Note).

12. Hope is an inconstant pleasure arising from the idea of something past or future whose outcome we to some extent doubt.

13. Fear is an inconstant pain arising from the idea of something past or future whose outcome we to some extent doubt (compare Proposition 18 of this Part, Note).

Explanation. It follows from these definitions that there is no hope unmixed with fear and no fear unmixed with hope. For he who lives in hope, and doubts the outcome of something, is supposed to conceive something which excludes that thing's future existence; so to that extent he feels pain (compare Proposition 19 of this Part), and consequently, while he lives in hope, he fears for the outcome. And conversely, he who fears—that is, doubts the outcome of something he hates—also conceives something which excludes that thing's existence; so to that extent he feels pleasure, and consequently to that extent hopes it will turn out as he wishes (Proposition 20 of this Part).

14. Confidence is pleasure arising from the idea of something past or future from which all cause of doubt has been removed.

15. Despair is pain arising from the idea of something past or future from which all cause of doubt has been removed.

Explanation. So confidence springs from hope, and despair from fear, when all cause for doubting the outcome of an event has been removed. This happens either because a man conceives something past or future as present and regards it so, or because he conceives other things which exclude the existence of the causes of his doubt. For although we can never be absolutely certain of the outcome of any particular event (Part 2, Proposition 31, Corollary), it may still happen that we feel no doubt about it; for we have shown that feeling no doubt about a thing is not the same as being certain of it (Part 2, Proposition 49, Note). So it may happen that we are affected with the same emotion of pleasure or pain about a thing past or future as about the conceiving of a thing present; this I have already shown in Proposition 18 of this Part, to which, with its note, I refer the reader.

16. Joy is pleasure accompanied by the idea of something past which has turned out beyond our hope.

17. Disappointment is pain accompanied by the idea of something past which has turned out contrary to our hope.

18. Pity is pain accompanied by the idea of an evil which has befallen someone else whom we conceive to be like ourselves (compare Proposition 22 of this Part, Note; Proposition 27 of this Part, Note).

Explanation. Between pity and compassion (misericordia) there seems to be no difference, unless perhaps that the first is used of a particular act and the second of a settled disposition.

19. Approval is love towards someone who has done good to another.

20. Indignation is hatred towards someone who has done evil to another.

Explanation. I am aware that these terms are used in senses rather different from those usually given them. But my purpose is to explain the nature of things, not the meaning of words; and I therefore use such terms as convey my meaning without any violent departure from their ordinary sense. One statement of my method will do. As for the cause of the emotions just named, see Proposition 27 of this Part, Corollary 1, and Proposition 22 of this Part, Note.

21. Partiality is thinking too highly of someone out of love for him.

22. Disparagement is thinking too meanly of someone because we hate him.

Explanation. Partiality, then, is an effect of love and disparagement an effect of hatred; so partiality may also be defined as love insofar as it leads a man to think too highly of a beloved object, and disparagement as hatred insofar as it leads a man to think too meanly of a hated object. Compare Proposition 26 of this Part, Note.

23. Envy is hatred insofar as it leads a man to be pained by another's good fortune and to rejoice in another's ill fortune.

Explanation. Envy is generally set against compassion, which, by doing some violence to the word, may therefore be defined thus:

24. Compassion (misericordia) is love insofar as it leads a man to feel pleasure at another's good fortune and pain at another's ill fortune.

Explanation. Concerning envy, see the notes to Proposition 24 of this Part and Proposition 32 of this Part. These emotions also arise from pleasure or pain accompanied by the idea of something external as their cause, either in itself or accidentally. I now pass on to other emotions which are accompanied by the idea of something within us as their cause.

25. Self-approval is pleasure arising from a man's contemplation of himself and of his own power of acting.

26. Humility is pain arising from a man's contemplation of his own weakness of body or mind.

Explanation. Self-approval is opposed to humility insofar as we mean by it the pleasure arising from contemplating our own power of acting; but insofar as we mean by it the pleasure accompanied by the idea of some action we believe we performed by the free decision of our mind, it is opposed to repentance, which we may define thus:

27. Repentance is pain accompanied by the idea of some action we believe we performed by the free decision of our mind.

Explanation. The causes of these emotions we have set out in Proposition 51 of this Part, Note, and in Proposition 53 of this Part, Proposition 54 of this Part and Proposition 55 of this Part, Note. As for the free decision of the mind, see Part 2, Proposition 35, Note. This is perhaps the place to point out that it is nothing to wonder at that all the actions commonly called wrong are followed by pain, and all those called right by pleasure. We can easily gather from what has been said that this depends in great measure on upbringing. Parents, by condemning the first kind of action and often scolding their children for it, and by urging and praising the second kind, have brought it about that the one is associated with pain and the other with pleasure. This is confirmed by experience. For custom and religion are not the same among all peoples: what some hold sacred others hold profane, and what some think honourable others think disgraceful. So each man, according to how he was brought up, either repents of a given action or glories in it.

28. Pride is thinking too highly of oneself out of self-love.

Explanation. Pride differs from partiality, then, in that the latter is used of an external object while pride is used of a man thinking too highly of himself. And as partiality is the effect of love, so pride is the effect, or property, of self-love, which may therefore be defined as love of self, or self-approval, insofar as it leads a man to think too highly of himself. To this emotion there is no contrary; for no one thinks too meanly of himself out of self-hatred. I say no one thinks too meanly of himself insofar as he conceives that he is incapable of doing this or that. For whatever a man imagines himself incapable of doing, he imagines it of necessity, and by that very idea he is so disposed that he really cannot do what he conceives he cannot do; for so long as he conceives that he cannot do it, he is not determined to do it, and so long as that is so, it is impossible for him to do it. However, if we consider matters that depend only on opinion, we shall find it conceivable that a man may think too meanly of himself. It may happen that a man, regarding his own weakness with sorrow, imagines that everyone despises him, while the rest of the world are thinking of nothing less. Again, a man may think too meanly of himself if he denies of himself in the present something in relation to a future time he is uncertain about—if he says, for instance, that he is unable to form any clear ideas, or that he can desire and do nothing but what is wicked and base. And we may also say that a man thinks too meanly of himself when we see him refusing, out of excessive fear of shame, to do things which others, his equals, venture. So we can set down as a contrary to pride an emotion I shall call self-abasement; for as pride springs from self-approval, so self-abasement springs from humility, and I define it accordingly:

29. Self-abasement is thinking too meanly of oneself by reason of pain.

Explanation. We are nevertheless generally accustomed to set pride against humility, but in doing so we attend more to the effect of either emotion than to its nature. We usually call proud the man who boasts too much (Proposition 30 of this Part, Note), who talks of nothing but his own virtues and other people's faults, who wants to come first, and who goes through life with a style and pomp that would suit men far above him in station. And we call humble the man who blushes too often, who confesses his faults, who sets out other men's virtues, and who walks with bent head and neglects his dress. However, these emotions, humility and self-abasement, are extremely rare, for human nature considered in itself strives against them as much as it can (see Proposition 13 of this Part; Proposition 54 of this Part). And so those who are believed to be the most self-abasing and humble are generally in fact the most ambitious and envious.

30. Honour is pleasure accompanied by the idea of some action of our own which we believe others praise.

Footnote: Gloria.

31. Shame is pain accompanied by the idea of some action of our own which we believe others blame.

Explanation. On this subject see the note to Proposition 30 of this Part. But we should note here the difference between shame and modesty. Shame is the pain that follows a deed we are ashamed of; modesty is the fear or dread of shame which keeps a man from committing a base action. Modesty is usually set against shamelessness, but shamelessness is not an emotion, as I shall show in due course; the names of the emotions, as I have remarked already, have to do with how they are exercised rather than with their nature.

I have now finished explaining the emotions arising from pleasure and pain. I therefore go on to treat of those I refer to desire.

32. Regret is the desire, or appetite, to possess something, kept alive by the memory of it and at the same time checked by the memory of other things which exclude its existence.

Explanation. When we remember a thing we are by that very fact, as I have said more than once, disposed to contemplate it with the same emotion as if it were present. But this disposition, or endeavour, is generally checked while we are awake by the images of things which exclude the existence of what we remember. So when we remember something that affected us with pleasure, we endeavour by that very fact to regard it with the same pleasure as though it were present, and this endeavour is at once checked by the memory of things which exclude its existence. Regret, then, is strictly speaking a pain opposed to the pleasure which arises from the absence of something we hate (compare Proposition 47 of this Part, Note). But since the name regret seems to refer to desire, I set this emotion down among those springing from desire.

33. Emulation is the desire of a thing engendered in us by our conceiving that others have the same desire.

Explanation. A man who runs away because he sees others running away, or who is afraid because he sees others afraid, or who, on seeing another burn his hand, draws back his own hand and moves his body as though his own were burnt—such a man can be said to imitate another's emotion, but not to emulate him. This is not because the causes of emulation and imitation are different, but because it has become customary to speak of emulation only in a man who imitates what we judge honourable, useful or pleasant. As for the cause of emulation, compare Proposition 27 of this Part, Note. Why this emotion is generally coupled with envy may be seen from Proposition 32 of this Part, Note.

34. Thankfulness, or gratitude, is the desire, or eagerness, springing from love, by which we endeavour to benefit someone who out of the same feeling of love has done us a kindness. Compare Proposition 39 of this Part, Note and Proposition 40 of this Part.

35. Benevolence is the desire to benefit someone we pity. Compare Proposition 27 of this Part, Note.

36. Anger is the desire by which hatred leads us to injure someone we hate. Proposition 39 of this Part.

37. Revenge is the desire by which mutual hatred leads us to injure someone who, out of the same feeling, has injured us (see Proposition 40 of this Part, Corollary 2, Note).

38. Cruelty, or savageness, is the desire by which a man is driven to injure someone he loves or pities.

Explanation. Against cruelty stands clemency, which is not a passive state of the mind but a power by which a man restrains his anger and his desire for revenge.

39. Timidity is the desire to avoid a greater evil we dread by undergoing a lesser one. Compare Proposition 39 of this Part, Note.

40. Daring is the desire by which a man is set on to do something dangerous which his equals are afraid to attempt.

41. Cowardice is attributed to a man whose desire is checked by the fear of a danger which his equals dare to face.

Explanation. Cowardice, then, is nothing but the fear of an evil which most men are not accustomed to fear; so I do not count it among the emotions springing from desire. I have chosen to explain it here nevertheless, because, so far as we look to the desire, it is truly the opposite of daring.

42. Consternation is attributed to a man whose desire to avoid an evil is checked by amazement at the evil he fears.

Explanation. Consternation is therefore a kind of cowardice. But since it arises from a double fear, it may be more conveniently defined as a fear which leaves a man so bewildered and wavering that he cannot remove the evil. I say bewildered insofar as we understand his desire to remove the evil to be checked by his amazement; I say wavering insofar as we understand that desire to be checked by the fear of another evil which torments him equally, so that he does not know which of the two to ward off. On this subject see Proposition 39 of this Part, Note, and Proposition 52 of this Part, Note. On cowardice and daring, see Proposition 51 of this Part, Note.

43. Courtesy, or deference (Humanitas seu modestia), is the desire to act in a way that pleases men and to refrain from what displeases them.

44. Ambition is the immoderate desire for honour.

Explanation. Ambition is the desire by which all the emotions (compare Proposition 27 of this Part; Proposition 31 of this Part) are fed and strengthened; and this is why it can hardly be overcome. For so long as a man is bound by any desire, he is at the same time necessarily bound by this one. "The best men," says Cicero, "are especially led by honour. Even philosophers, when they write a book condemning honour, sign their names to it," and so on.

45. Luxury is the excessive desire, or even love, of living sumptuously.

46. Intemperance is the excessive desire and love of drinking.

47. Avarice is the excessive desire and love of riches.

48. Lust is desire and love in the matter of sexual intercourse.

Explanation. Whether this desire is excessive or not, it is still called lust. These last five emotions (as I showed in Proposition 56 of this Part) have no contraries; for deference is a kind of ambition. Compare Proposition 29 of this Part, Note.

Again, I have already pointed out that temperance, sobriety and chastity indicate a power rather than a passivity of the mind. It may nevertheless happen that an avaricious, an ambitious or a timid man abstains from excess in eating, drinking or sex; yet avarice, ambition and fear are not the contraries of luxury, drunkenness and debauchery. For an avaricious man is often glad to gorge himself with food and drink at another man's expense. An ambitious man will restrain himself in nothing so long as he thinks his indulgences are secret, and if he lives among drunkards and debauchees he will, simply because he is ambitious, be the more prone to those vices. And last, a timid man does what he would rather not do: an avaricious man who throws his riches into the sea to avoid death remains avaricious all the same, and a lustful man who is downcast because he cannot follow his bent does not cease to be lustful on the ground of abstaining. In fact these emotions have less to do with the actual feasting and drinking than with the appetite and the love of them. So nothing can be set against these emotions but high-mindedness and courage, of which I shall speak presently.

The definitions of jealousy and the other waverings of the mind I pass over in silence, first because they arise from compounding the emotions already described, and second because many of them have no distinctive names, which shows that for practical purposes a general knowledge of them is enough. It is established, however, from the definitions of the emotions we have set out, that they all spring from desire, pleasure or pain—or rather that there is nothing besides these three, and that each is called by a variety of names according to its various relations and outward marks. If we now turn our attention to these primary emotions, and to what has been said about the nature of the mind, we shall be able to define the emotions as follows, insofar as they are referred to the mind only.

General Definition of the Emotions

Emotion, which is called a passive state of the soul, is a confused idea by which the mind affirms of its body, or of some part of it, a force for existence (existendi vis) greater or less than before, and by whose presence the mind is determined to think of one thing rather than another.

Explanation. I say, first, that an emotion, or passion of the soul, is a confused idea. For we have shown that the mind is passive only insofar as it has inadequate or confused ideas (Proposition 3 of this Part). I say, further, by which the mind affirms of its body, or of some part of it, a force for existence greater than before. For all the ideas we have of bodies indicate the actual disposition of our own body (Part 2, Proposition 16, Corollary 2) rather than the nature of an external body; and the idea which constitutes the form of an emotion must indicate, or express, the disposition of the body, or of some part of it, because its power of acting, or force for existence, is increased or diminished, helped or hindered. But it should be noted that when I speak of a greater or lesser force for existence than before, I do not mean that the mind compares the body's present disposition with its past one, but that the idea which constitutes the form of the emotion affirms something of the body which in fact involves more or less reality than before.

And since the essence of the mind consists in this (Part 2, Proposition 11; Part 2, Proposition 13), that it affirms the actual existence of its own body, and since by perfection we understand the very essence of a thing, it follows that the mind passes to a greater or lesser perfection when it comes to affirm of its own body, or of some part of it, something involving more or less reality than before.

So when I said above that the mind's power is increased or diminished, I meant only that the mind had formed of its own body, or of some part of it, an idea involving more or less reality than it had previously affirmed of its body. For the excellence of ideas, and the actual power of thinking, are measured by the excellence of the object. And last, I added by whose presence the mind is determined to think of one thing rather than another, so that besides the nature of pleasure and pain, which the first part of the definition explains, I might also express the nature of desire.
