Propositions 19 to 39

Proposition 19

Every man, by the laws of his nature, necessarily desires or shrinks from what he judges to be good or bad.

Proof. The knowledge of good and evil is (Proposition 8 of this Part) the emotion of pleasure or pain insofar as we are conscious of it; therefore every man necessarily desires what he thinks good and shrinks from what he thinks bad. Now this appetite is nothing but a man's nature, or essence (compare Part 3, Proposition 9, Note; Definition 1 of the Emotions). Therefore every man, by the laws of his nature alone, desires the one and shrinks from the other, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 20

The more a man endeavours, and is able, to seek what is useful to him—that is, to preserve his own being—the more he is endowed with virtue; and conversely, insofar as a man neglects to seek what is useful to him, that is, to preserve his own being, he is lacking in power.

Proof. Virtue is human power, which is defined solely by a man's essence (Definition 8 of this Part)—that is, solely by the endeavour a man makes to persist in his own being. So the more a man endeavours, and is able, to preserve his own being, the more he is endowed with virtue; and consequently (Part 3, Proposition 4; Part 3, Proposition 6), insofar as a man neglects to preserve his own being, he is lacking in power. Q.E.D.

Note. No one, then, neglects to seek his own good, or to preserve his own being, unless he is overcome by causes external and foreign to his nature. No one, I say, refuses food or kills himself from the necessity of his own nature; it is always under compulsion from external causes, and it may happen in many ways. A man kills himself under compulsion from another who twists his right hand, in which he happens to be holding a sword, and forces him to turn the blade against his own heart. Or he may be compelled, like Seneca, by a tyrant's command, to open his own veins—that is, to escape a greater evil by incurring a lesser. Or, last, hidden external causes may so disorder his imagination, and so affect his body, that the body takes on a nature contrary to its former one, a nature whose idea cannot exist in the mind (Part 3, Proposition 10). But that a man should endeavour, from the necessity of his own nature, to cease to exist is as impossible as that something should be made out of nothing, as anyone will see after a little reflection.

Proposition 21

No one can desire to be blessed, to act rightly and to live rightly without at the same time desiring to be, to act and to live—that is, actually to exist.

Proof. The proof of this proposition, or rather the proposition itself, is self-evident, and is also plain from the definition of desire. For the desire to live, to act and so on, blessedly or rightly, is (Definition 1 of the Emotions) the essence of man—that is (Part 3, Proposition 7), the endeavour everyone makes to preserve his own being. Therefore no one can desire, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 22

No virtue can be conceived as prior to this endeavour to preserve one's own being.

Proof. The endeavour for self-preservation is the essence of a thing (Part 3, Proposition 7); so if any virtue could be conceived as prior to it, the essence of a thing would have to be conceived as prior to itself, which is plainly absurd. Therefore no virtue, and so on. Q.E.D.

Corollary. The endeavour for self-preservation is the first and only foundation of virtue. For nothing can be conceived prior to this principle, and without it no virtue can be conceived at all.

Proposition 23

A man, insofar as he is determined to a particular action because he has inadequate ideas, cannot absolutely be said to act from virtue; he can only be so described insofar as he is determined to the action because he understands.

Proof. Insofar as a man is determined to an action through having inadequate ideas, he is passive (Part 3, Proposition 1); that is (Part 3, Definition 1; Part 3, Definition 3), he does something which cannot be perceived through his essence alone—that is (by Definition 8 of this Part), which does not follow from his virtue. But insofar as he is determined to an action because he understands, he is active; that is, he does something which is perceived through his essence alone, and which follows adequately from his virtue. Q.E.D.

Proposition 24

To act absolutely from virtue is in us the same as to act, to live, or to preserve one's being (these three mean the same thing) under the guidance of reason, on the basis of seeking what is useful to oneself.

Proof. To act absolutely from virtue is nothing but to act according to the laws of one's own nature. But we act only insofar as we understand (Part 3, Proposition 3). Therefore to act from virtue is in us nothing but to act, to live, or to preserve one's being under the guidance of reason, and that on the basis of seeking what is useful to us (Proposition 22 of this Part, Corollary). Q.E.D.

Proposition 25

No one endeavours to preserve his own being for the sake of anything else.

Proof. The endeavour by which each thing endeavours to persist in its being is defined solely by the essence of the thing itself (Part 3, Proposition 7); and from that alone, and not from the essence of anything else, it necessarily follows (Part 3, Proposition 6) that everyone endeavours to preserve his being. The proposition is also plain from Proposition 22 of this Part, Corollary; for if a man endeavoured to preserve his being for the sake of something else, that other thing would obviously be the foundation of virtue, which by the corollary just cited is absurd. Therefore no one, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 26

Whatever we endeavour under the guidance of reason is nothing but to understand; nor does the mind, insofar as it uses reason, judge anything useful to itself except what conduces to understanding.

Proof. The endeavour for self-preservation is nothing but the essence of the thing in question (Part 3, Proposition 7), which, insofar as it exists as it is, is conceived to have force for continuing in existence (Part 3, Proposition 6) and for doing whatever necessarily follows from its given nature (see Part 3, Proposition 9, Note). But the essence of reason is nothing but our mind insofar as it understands clearly and distinctly (see Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2). Therefore (Part 2, Proposition 40) whatever we endeavour under the guidance of reason is nothing but to understand. Again, since this endeavour of the mind, by which the mind, insofar as it reasons, endeavours to preserve its own being, is nothing but understanding, this endeavour at understanding is (Proposition 22 of this Part, Corollary) the first and only foundation of virtue; nor shall we endeavour to understand things for the sake of some further object (Proposition 25 of this Part). And on the other hand, the mind, insofar as it reasons, will not be able to conceive anything as good for itself except what conduces to understanding.

Proposition 27

We know nothing to be certainly good or evil except what really conduces to understanding, or what can hinder us from understanding.

Proof. The mind, insofar as it reasons, desires nothing beyond understanding, and judges nothing useful to itself except what conduces to understanding (by Proposition 26 of this Part). But the mind (Part 2, Proposition 41; Part 2, Proposition 43, Note) can have certainty about nothing except insofar as it has adequate ideas—that is (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note), insofar as it reasons. Therefore we know nothing to be good or evil except what really conduces, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 28

The mind's highest good is the knowledge of God, and the mind's highest virtue is to know God.

Proof. The mind is not capable of understanding anything higher than God—that is (Part 1, Definition 6), than a Being absolutely infinite, without which (Part 1, Proposition 15) nothing can either be or be conceived. Therefore (Proposition 26 of this Part; Proposition 27 of this Part) the mind's highest usefulness, or (Definition 1 of this Part) good, is the knowledge of God. Again, the mind is active only insofar as it understands, and only to that extent can it absolutely be said to act from virtue. The mind's absolute virtue is therefore to understand; and since, as we have shown, the highest thing the mind can understand is God, the highest virtue of the mind is to understand, or to know, God. Q.E.D.

Proposition 29

No individual thing whose nature is entirely different from our own can help or check our power of acting, and absolutely nothing can do us good or harm unless it has something in common with our nature.

Proof. The power of every individual thing, and consequently the power of a man, by which he exists and acts, can only be determined by another individual thing (Part 1, Proposition 28) whose nature (Part 2, Proposition 6) must be understood through the same attribute through which human nature is conceived. So our power of acting, however it is conceived, can be determined, and consequently helped or hindered, by the power of another individual thing which has something in common with us, but not by the power of anything whose nature is entirely different from our own. And since we call good or evil what is the cause of pleasure or pain (Proposition 8 of this Part)—that is (Part 3, Proposition 11, Note), what increases or diminishes, helps or hinders our power of acting—therefore what is entirely different from our nature can be neither good nor bad for us. Q.E.D.

Proposition 30

A thing cannot be bad for us through what it has in common with our nature; it is bad for us insofar as it is contrary to our nature.

Proof. We call a thing bad when it is the cause of pain (Proposition 8 of this Part)—that is (by the Definition, which see in Part 3, Proposition 11, Note), when it diminishes or checks our power of acting. So if anything were bad for us through what it has in common with our nature, it would be able to diminish or check the very thing it has in common with our nature, which (Part 3, Proposition 4) is absurd. Therefore nothing can be bad for us through what it has in common with us; but on the contrary, insofar as it is bad for us—that is, as we have just shown, insofar as it can diminish or check our power of acting—it is contrary to our nature. Q.E.D.

Proposition 31

Insofar as a thing agrees with our nature, it is necessarily good.

Proof. Insofar as a thing agrees with our nature, it cannot be bad for it; so it will necessarily be either good or indifferent. If we suppose it neither good nor bad, then nothing will follow from its nature (Definition 1 of this Part) which tends to preserve our nature—that is, by hypothesis, which tends to preserve the thing itself; and this (Part 3, Proposition 6) is absurd. Therefore, insofar as a thing agrees with our nature, it is necessarily good. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that the more a thing agrees with our nature, the more useful, or better, it is for us; and conversely, the more useful a thing is for us, the more it agrees with our nature. For insofar as it does not agree with our nature, it will necessarily be either different from it or contrary to it. If different, it can be neither good nor bad (Proposition 29 of this Part); if contrary, it will be contrary to what agrees with our nature—that is, contrary to what is good—in short, bad. Nothing, therefore, can be good except insofar as it agrees with our nature; and so a thing is useful in proportion as it agrees with our nature, and the other way round. Q.E.D.

Proposition 32

Insofar as men are subject to passion, they cannot in that respect be said to agree in nature.

Proof. Things said to agree in nature are understood to agree in power (Part 3, Proposition 7), not in lack of power, or negation, and consequently not in passion (Part 3, Proposition 3, Note). So men, insofar as they are subject to their passions, cannot be said to agree in nature. Q.E.D.

Note. This is also self-evident. If we say that white and black agree only in that neither is red, we are absolutely affirming that they agree in no respect at all. And if we say that a man and a stone agree only in that both are finite, lacking in power, not existing by the necessity of their own nature, and indefinitely surpassed by the power of external causes, we should certainly be affirming that a man and a stone are alike in no respect whatever. So things which agree only in a negation, or in what neither of them possesses, really agree in nothing.

Proposition 33

Men can differ in nature insofar as they are assailed by emotions which are passions, or passive states; and to that extent one and the same man is variable and inconstant.

Proof. The nature, or essence, of the emotions cannot be explained through our own essence, or nature, alone (Part 3, Definition 1; Part 3, Definition 2), but must be defined by the power—that is (Part 3, Proposition 7), by the nature—of external causes compared with our own. So it follows that there are as many kinds of each emotion as there are external objects by which we are affected (Part 3, Proposition 56); that men may be affected differently by one and the same object (Part 3, Proposition 51), and to that extent differ in nature; and last, that one and the same man may be affected differently towards the same object, and may therefore be variable and inconstant. Q.E.D.

Proposition 34

Insofar as men are assailed by emotions which are passions, they can be contrary to one another.

Proof. A man—Peter, say—can be the cause of Paul's feeling pain, because he has something like what Paul hates (Part 3, Proposition 16), or because he alone possesses something Paul also loves (Part 3, Proposition 32, Note), or for other causes (Part 3, Proposition 55, Note). It may therefore happen that Paul hates Peter (Definition 7 of the Emotions), and consequently it may easily happen that Peter hates Paul in return, and that each endeavours to injure the other (Part 3, Proposition 39)—that is (Proposition 30 of this Part), that they are contrary to one another. But the emotion of pain is always a passion, or passive state (Part 3, Proposition 59); so men, insofar as they are assailed by emotions which are passions, can be contrary to one another. Q.E.D.

Note. I said that Paul may hate Peter because he conceives that Peter possesses something Paul also loves; and from this it seems at first sight to follow that these two men, by both loving the same thing and so by the agreement of their natures, stand in one another's way—in which case Proposition 30 of this Part and Proposition 31 of this Part would be untrue. But if we give the matter unbiased attention we shall see that the discrepancy vanishes. For the two men are not in one another's way in virtue of the agreement of their natures—that is, by both loving the same thing—but in virtue of the one differing from the other. Insofar as each loves the same thing, the love of each is fed by it (Part 3, Proposition 31)—that is (Definition 6 of the Emotions), the pleasure of each is fed by it. So it is far from being the case that they are at odds because they both love the same thing and so far agree in nature. The cause of their opposition lies, as I said, solely in the fact that they are supposed to differ; for we suppose that Peter has the idea of the loved object as already in his possession, while Paul has the idea of it as lost. Hence the one man is affected with pleasure and the other with pain, and so they are at odds with one another. And we can easily show in the same way that all the other causes of hatred depend solely on differences between men's natures, and not on their agreement.

Proposition 35

Only insofar as men live under the guidance of reason do they always necessarily agree in nature.

Proof. Insofar as men are assailed by emotions which are passions, they can differ in nature (Proposition 33 of this Part) and be at odds with one another. But men are said to be active only insofar as they act under the guidance of reason (Part 3, Proposition 3); so whatever follows from human nature insofar as it is defined by reason must (Part 3, Definition 2) be understood through human nature alone as its proximate cause. And since every man by the laws of his nature desires what he judges good and endeavours to remove what he judges bad (Proposition 19 of this Part); and since what we judge good or bad in accordance with reason necessarily is good or bad (Part 2, Proposition 41); it follows that men, insofar as they live under the guidance of reason, necessarily do only such things as are necessarily good for human nature, and consequently for each individual man (Proposition 31 of this Part, Corollary)—in other words, such things as agree with each man's nature. Therefore men, insofar as they live under the guidance of reason, necessarily always live in harmony with one another. Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. There is no individual thing in nature more useful to a man than a man who lives under the guidance of reason. For the thing most useful to a man is what most agrees with his nature (Proposition 31 of this Part, Corollary), and that is obviously man. But a man acts absolutely according to the laws of his own nature when he lives under the guidance of reason (Part 3, Definition 2), and only to that extent is he always necessarily in agreement with the nature of another man (by Proposition 35 of this Part). Therefore among individual things nothing is more useful to a man than a man who lives under the guidance of reason. Q.E.D.

Corollary 2. The more each man seeks what is useful to him, the more useful men are to one another. For the more a man seeks what is useful to him and endeavours to preserve himself, the more he is endowed with virtue (Proposition 20 of this Part)—or, what comes to the same thing (Definition 8 of this Part), the more he is endowed with power to act according to the laws of his own nature, that is, to live under the guidance of reason. But men most agree in nature when they live under the guidance of reason (by Proposition 35 of this Part); therefore (by Corollary 1 above) men will be most useful to one another when each most seeks what is useful to him. Q.E.D.

Note. What we have just shown is confirmed by experience so plainly that it is in nearly everyone's mouth: "Man is to man a God." Yet it rarely happens that men live under the guidance of reason; things are so ordered among them that they are generally envious and troublesome to one another. Nevertheless they can hardly lead a solitary life, so that the definition of man as a social animal has met with general assent; and in fact men do get far more convenience than harm out of social life. So let satirists laugh their fill at human affairs, let theologians rail, and let misanthropes praise the life of untaught rusticity to the skies, heaping contempt on men and praise on beasts—when all is said, they will find that men can provide for their wants far more easily by mutual help, and that only by joining forces can they escape the dangers that beset them on every side. Not to mention how much more excellent, and more worth knowing, it is to study the actions of men than the actions of beasts. But I shall treat of this at greater length elsewhere.

Proposition 36

The highest good of those who follow virtue is common to all, and all can equally rejoice in it.

Proof. To act from virtue is to act under the guidance of reason (Proposition 24 of this Part), and whatever we endeavour to do under the guidance of reason is to understand (Proposition 26 of this Part). Therefore (Proposition 28 of this Part) the highest good of those who follow virtue is to know God—that is (Part 2, Proposition 47, Note), a good common to all, which all men can possess equally insofar as they are of the same nature. Q.E.D.

Note. Someone may ask what would follow if the highest good of those who follow virtue were not common to all. Would it not then follow, as above (Proposition 34 of this Part), that men living under the guidance of reason—that is (Proposition 35 of this Part), men insofar as they agree in nature—would be at odds with one another? To this I answer that it follows not accidentally but from the very nature of reason that man's highest good is common to all, since it is deduced from the very essence of man insofar as that is defined by reason, and since a man could neither be nor be conceived without the power of taking pleasure in this highest good. For it belongs to the essence of the human mind (Part 2, Proposition 47) to have an adequate knowledge of God's eternal and infinite essence.

Proposition 37

The good which every man who follows virtue desires for himself he will also desire for other men, and the more so the greater his knowledge of God.

Proof. Men, insofar as they live under the guidance of reason, are most useful to their fellow men (Proposition 35 of this Part, Corollary 1); therefore (Proposition 19 of this Part), under the guidance of reason we shall necessarily endeavour to bring it about that men live under the guidance of reason. But the good which every man, insofar as he is guided by reason—in other words, insofar as he follows virtue—desires for himself is to understand (Proposition 26 of this Part). So the good which each follower of virtue seeks for himself he will desire for others too. Again, desire, insofar as it is referred to the mind, is the very essence of the mind (Definition 1 of the Emotions); and the essence of the mind consists in knowledge (Part 2, Proposition 11), which involves the knowledge of God (Part 2, Proposition 47) and without which (Part 1, Proposition 15) it can neither be nor be conceived. Therefore, in proportion as the mind's essence involves a greater knowledge of God, so much the greater will be the follower of virtue's desire that other men should possess what he seeks as good for himself. Q.E.D.

Another Proof. The good which a man desires for himself and loves he will love the more constantly if he sees that others love it too (Part 3, Proposition 31); so he will endeavour to make others love it as well. And since the good in question is common to all, and all can therefore rejoice in it, he will endeavour, for the same reason, to bring it about that all should rejoice in it; and he will do so the more (Part 3, Proposition 37) in proportion as his own enjoyment of that good is greater.

Note 1. A man who, guided by emotion alone, endeavours to make others love what he loves and to make the rest of the world live according to his own fancy, acts by mere impulse and is therefore hateful—especially to those who take delight in something different, and who accordingly study, by the same impulse, to make men live as pleases them. And since the highest good men seek under the guidance of emotion is often such that only one person can possess it, those who love it are not consistent in their intentions: while they delight in singing its praises, they fear to be believed. But a man who endeavours to lead others by reason acts not by impulse but courteously and kindly, and his intention is always consistent. Again, whatever we desire and do of which we are the cause insofar as we have the idea of God, or know God, I set down to religion. The desire to do good which is engendered by a life according to reason I call piety. And the desire by which a man living according to reason is bound to join others to himself in friendship I call honour; by honourable I mean what is praised by men living according to reason, and by base what is contrary to the gaining of friendship. I have also shown in addition what the foundations of a state are; and the difference between true virtue and infirmity may readily be gathered from what I have said—namely, that true virtue is nothing but living under the guidance of reason, while infirmity is nothing but a man's allowing himself to be led by things outside himself, and to be determined by them to act as the general disposition of things requires rather than as his own nature, considered in itself alone, requires.

Footnote: Honestas

These are the matters I undertook to prove in Proposition 18 of this Part, from which it is plain that the law against slaughtering animals is founded on vain superstition and womanish pity rather than on sound reason. The rational search for what is useful to us further teaches us that we must join ourselves with our fellow men, but not with beasts, or with things whose nature is different from our own; we have the same right over them as they have over us. Indeed, since everyone's right is defined by his virtue, or power, men have far greater rights over beasts than beasts have over men. Still, I do not deny that beasts feel; what I deny is that we may not consider our own advantage and use them as we please, treating them in whatever way best suits us, since their nature is not like ours and their emotions are naturally different from human emotions (Part 3, Proposition 57, Note). It remains for me to explain what I mean by just and unjust, sin and merit. On these points see the following note.

Note 2. In the Appendix to Part One I undertook to explain praise and blame, merit and sin, justice and injustice.

Of praise and blame I have spoken in Part 3, Proposition 29, Note; the time has now come to treat of the rest. But first I must say a few words about man in the state of nature and in society.

Every man exists by sovereign natural right, and consequently by sovereign natural right performs the actions that follow from the necessity of his own nature. So by sovereign natural right every man judges what is good and what is bad, looks after his own advantage as his own disposition directs (Proposition 19 of this Part; Proposition 20 of this Part), avenges the wrongs done to him (Part 3, Proposition 40, Corollary 2), and endeavours to preserve what he loves and destroy what he hates (Part 3, Proposition 28). Now if men lived under the guidance of reason, everyone would keep this right of his without any injury to his neighbour (Proposition 35 of this Part, Corollary 1). But since they are subject to their emotions, which far surpass human power, or virtue (Proposition 6 of this Part), they are often drawn in different directions and are at odds with one another (Proposition 33 of this Part; Proposition 34 of this Part), while standing in need of mutual help (Proposition 35 of this Part, Note). So in order that men may live together in harmony and help one another, it is necessary that they give up their natural right and, for the sake of security, refrain from all actions that can injure their fellow men. How this end can be reached—so that men, who are necessarily subject to their emotions (Proposition 4 of this Part, Corollary), inconstant and various as they are, should be able to make one another secure and to feel mutual trust—is evident from Proposition 7 of this Part and Part 3, Proposition 39. It is shown there that an emotion can only be restrained by an emotion stronger than and contrary to itself, and that men refrain from inflicting injury through fear of incurring a greater injury themselves.

On this law a society can be established, so long as it keeps in its own hands the right, possessed by everyone, of avenging injury and of pronouncing on good and evil, and provided it also has the power to lay down a general rule of conduct and to pass laws sanctioned not by reason, which is powerless to restrain emotion, but by threats (Proposition 17 of this Part, Note). Such a society, established with laws and with the power of preserving itself, is called a state, and those who live under its protection are called citizens. We may readily see that in the state of nature there is nothing which by universal consent is pronounced good or bad; for in the state of nature everyone thinks solely of his own advantage and decides, according to his own disposition and with reference only to his own advantage, what is good and what bad, being bound by no law to anyone but himself.

In the state of nature, then, sin is inconceivable. It can only exist in a state where good and evil are pronounced on by common consent, and where everyone is bound to obey the authority of the state. Sin, therefore, is nothing but disobedience, and is punished by the right of the state alone. Obedience, on the other hand, is set down as merit, since a man is thought worthy of merit if he takes delight in the advantages a state provides.

Again, in the state of nature no one is by common consent master of anything, nor is there anything in nature which can be said to belong to one man rather than another: all things are common to all. So in the state of nature we can conceive no wish to render every man his own, or to deprive a man of what belongs to him; in other words, there is nothing in the state of nature answering to justice and injustice. Such ideas are only possible in a social state, when it is decreed by common consent what belongs to one man and what to another.

From all this it is evident that justice and injustice, sin and merit, are extrinsic notions, and not attributes which display the nature of the mind. But I have said enough.

Proposition 38

Whatever disposes the human body so as to make it capable of being affected in more ways, or of affecting external bodies in more ways, is useful to man, and the more so the more it makes the body capable of being affected, or of affecting other bodies, in more ways; and conversely, whatever makes the body less capable in this respect is harmful.

Proof. Whatever increases the capabilities of the body increases the mind's capacity for perception too (Part 2, Proposition 14); so whatever disposes the body in this way, and makes it capable, is necessarily good, or useful (Proposition 26 of this Part; Proposition 27 of this Part), and is so in proportion to the extent to which it can make the body capable. And conversely (Part 2, Proposition 14; Proposition 26 of this Part; Proposition 27 of this Part), it is harmful if it makes the body less capable in this respect. Q.E.D.

Proposition 39

Whatever preserves the proportion of motion and rest which the parts of the human body have to one another is good; and whatever brings about a change in that proportion is bad.

Proof. The human body needs many other bodies for its preservation (Part 2, Postulate 4). But what constitutes the specific character (forma) of a human body is that its parts communicate their several motions to one another in a certain fixed proportion (the Definition before Lemma 4, which follows Part 2, Proposition 13). Therefore whatever preserves the proportion between motion and rest which the parts of the human body have to one another preserves the specific character of the human body, and consequently makes the human body capable of being affected in many ways and of affecting external bodies in many ways; and so it is good (by Proposition 38 of this Part). And whatever brings about a change in that proportion makes the human body take on another specific character—in other words (see the Preface to this Part, towards the end, though the point is indeed self-evident), destroys it, so that it becomes wholly incapable of being affected in more ways; and so it is bad. Q.E.D.

Note. How far such causes can injure or help the mind will be explained in Part Five. But I would remark here that I consider a body to undergo death when the proportion of motion and rest which held among its several parts is changed. For I do not venture to deny that a human body, while keeping the circulation of the blood and the other properties in which the life of a body is thought to consist, may nonetheless be changed into another nature entirely different from its own. There is no reason compelling me to maintain that a body does not die unless it becomes a corpse; on the contrary, experience seems to point the other way. It sometimes happens that a man undergoes such changes that I should hardly call him the same man. I have heard tell of a Spanish poet who was seized with an illness, and though he recovered from it remained so forgetful of his past life that he would not believe the plays and tragedies he had written were his own; indeed he might have been taken for a grown-up child if he had forgotten his native language as well. And if this instance seems incredible, what shall we say of infants? A man of ripe age thinks their nature so unlike his own that he can only be persuaded he was ever an infant himself by the analogy of other men. However, I prefer to leave such questions undiscussed, in case I give the superstitious grounds for raising new ones.
