Propositions 66 to 73

Proposition 66

Under the guidance of reason we may seek a greater good in the future in preference to a lesser good in the present, and may seek a lesser evil in the present in preference to a greater evil in the future.

Footnote: "Maltim praesens minus prae majori futuro." (Van Vloten). Bruder reads: "Malum praesens minus, quod causa est faturi alicujus mali." The last word of the latter is an obvious misprint, and is corrected by the Dutch translator into "majoris boni." (Pollock, p. 268, note.)

Proof. If the mind could have adequate knowledge of things future, it would be affected towards what is future in the same way as towards what is present (Proposition 62 of this Part). So looking merely to reason, as in this proposition we are supposed to do, it makes no difference whether the greater good or evil is supposed present or future. Hence (Proposition 65 of this Part) we may seek a greater good in the future in preference to a lesser good in the present, and so on. Q.E.D.

Corollary. Under the guidance of reason we may seek a lesser evil in the present because it is the cause of a greater good in the future, and may shun a lesser good in the present because it is the cause of a greater evil in the future. This corollary stands to the foregoing proposition as the Corollary to Proposition 65 of this Part stands to Proposition 65 of this Part itself.

Note. If these statements are compared with what we have shown about the strength of the emotions, in this Part up to Proposition 18 of this Part, we shall readily see the difference between a man led solely by emotion, or opinion, and a man led by reason. The first, whether he will or no, performs actions of which he is entirely ignorant; the second is his own master, and performs only such actions as he knows to be of first importance in life, and therefore desires above all. So I call the first a slave and the second a free man, and it will be well to make a few observations about the free man's character and manner of life.

Proposition 67

A free man thinks of death least of all things, and his wisdom is a meditation not of death but of life.

Proof. A free man is one who lives under the guidance of reason, who is not led by fear (Proposition 63 of this Part) but directly desires what is good (Proposition 63 of this Part, Corollary)—in other words (Proposition 24 of this Part), who strives to act, to live and to preserve his being on the basis of seeking his own true advantage. Such a man thinks of nothing less than of death; his wisdom is a meditation of life. Q.E.D.

Proposition 68

If men were born free, they would form no conception of good and evil so long as they remained free.

Proof. I call a man free who is led by reason alone. So a man born free, who remains free, has only adequate ideas; and therefore (Proposition 64 of this Part, Corollary) he has no conception of evil, and consequently, good and evil being correlative, none of good either. Q.E.D.

Note. It is evident from Proposition 4 of this Part that the hypothesis of this proposition is false, and inconceivable, except insofar as we look solely to the nature of man, or rather to God—not insofar as God is infinite, but only insofar as he is the cause of man's existence.

This, and other things we have already proved, seem to have been signified by Moses in the story of the first man. For in that narrative no power of God is conceived except the power by which he created man, that is, the power by which he provided solely for man's advantage. It is said that God forbade man, being free, to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and that as soon as man ate of it he would fear death rather than desire to live. Further, it is written that when man had found a wife who agreed entirely with his nature, he knew that there could be nothing in nature more useful to him; but that after he came to believe the beasts were like himself, he at once began to imitate their emotions (Part 3, Proposition 27) and to lose his freedom. This freedom was afterwards recovered by the patriarchs, led by the spirit of Christ—that is, by the idea of God, on which alone it depends that a man can be free and can desire for others the good he desires for himself, as we showed above (Proposition 37 of this Part).

Proposition 69

The virtue of a free man is seen to be as great in avoiding dangers as in overcoming them.

Proof. An emotion can only be checked or removed by an emotion contrary to it and stronger in restraining emotion (Proposition 7 of this Part). But blind daring and fear are emotions which can be conceived as equally great (Proposition 5 of this Part; Proposition 3 of this Part); so no less virtue, or firmness, is needed to check daring than to check fear (Part 3, Proposition 59, Note). In other words (Definition 40 of the Emotions; Definition 41 of the Emotions), the free man shows as much virtue when he avoids dangers as when he strives to overcome them. Q.E.D.

Corollary. The free man is as brave in a timely retreat as in combat; that is, a free man shows equal courage, or presence of mind, whether he chooses to give battle or to withdraw.

Note. What courage (animositas) is, and what I mean by it, I explained in Part 3, Proposition 59, Note. By danger I mean anything which can give rise to any evil, such as pain, hatred, discord and the like.

Proposition 70

The free man who lives among the ignorant strives as far as he can to avoid accepting favours from them.

Proof. Everyone judges what is good according to his own disposition (Part 3, Proposition 39, Note); so an ignorant man who has done another a kindness puts his own value on it, and will feel pain if he sees the receiver valuing it less highly (Part 3, Proposition 42). But the free man desires only to join other men to himself in friendship (Proposition 37 of this Part)—not repaying their kindnesses with others reckoned to be of equal value, but guiding himself and others by the free decision of reason, and doing only what he knows to be of first importance. Therefore the free man, so as not to become hateful to the ignorant, or to follow their desires rather than reason, will endeavour as far as he can to avoid accepting their favours.

Note. I say as far as he can. For though men are ignorant, they are still men, and in case of need could give us human help, the most excellent thing there is. So it is often necessary to accept favours from them, and consequently to repay such favours in kind; and we must therefore be careful in declining them, in case we seem to despise those who offer them, or to be unwilling out of meanness to return them, and so give offence by the very act of trying to avoid giving it. In declining favours, then, we must look to what is useful and what is courteous.

Proposition 71

Only free men are thoroughly grateful to one another.

Proof. Only free men are thoroughly useful to one another, and joined among themselves by the closest bond of friendship (Proposition 35 of this Part, Corollary 1); only such men endeavour, with a mutual eagerness of love, to do one another good (Proposition 37 of this Part); and therefore only they are thoroughly grateful to one another. Q.E.D.

Note. The goodwill which men led by blind desire have for one another is generally a bargain, or a bait, rather than pure goodwill. Moreover, ingratitude is not an emotion; yet it is base, since it generally shows that a man is affected by excessive hatred, anger, pride or avarice. A man who through mere folly does not know how to return kindnesses is not ungrateful; and much less so is a man who is not won over by a courtesan's gifts to serve her lust, or by a thief's to conceal his thefts, or by anything of the sort. On the contrary, such a man shows a constant mind, since no gifts can corrupt him to his own or the general harm.

Proposition 72

The free man never acts deceitfully, but always in good faith.

Proof. Suppose it is asked what a man should do in a case where he could free himself from the danger of immediate death by breaking his word: would not his plan of self-preservation persuade him outright to deceive? The answer is that if reason persuaded him to act so, it would persuade all men to act likewise; and in that case reason would persuade men not to agree in good faith to unite their forces or to hold laws in common—that is, not to have any general laws at all, which is absurd.

Proposition 73

A man guided by reason is more free in a state, where he lives under a common system of law, than in solitude, where he obeys no one.

Proof. A man guided by reason does not obey out of fear (Proposition 63 of this Part); but insofar as he endeavours to preserve his being according to the dictates of reason—that is (Proposition 66 of this Part, Note), insofar as he endeavours to live in freedom—he desires to order his life for the common good (Proposition 37 of this Part), and consequently, as we showed in Proposition 37 of this Part, Note 2, to live according to the laws of his country. Therefore the free man, in order to enjoy greater freedom, desires to hold the common rights of citizenship. Q.E.D.

Note. These and similar observations about man's true freedom may be referred to strength of character—that is, to courage and nobility of mind (Part 3, Proposition 59, Note). I do not think it worth while to prove separately all the properties of strength, still less to show that a man who is strong hates no one, is angry with no one, envies no one, is indignant with no one, despises no one, and least of all things is proud. These propositions, and all that concern the true way of life and religion, are easily proved from Proposition 37 of this Part and Proposition 46 of this Part—namely, that hatred should be overcome with love, and that every man should desire for others the good he seeks for himself. And we may repeat what we noted in the note to Proposition 50 of this Part, and elsewhere: that the strong man has always first in his thoughts that all things follow from the necessity of the divine nature, so that whatever he judges harmful and evil, and whatever accordingly seems to him impious, horrible, unjust and base, takes on that appearance from his own disordered, fragmentary and confused view of the universe. So before all things he strives to conceive things as they really are, and to remove the hindrances to true knowledge—hatred, anger, envy, derision, pride and the like, which I have mentioned above. And so he endeavours, as we said before, as far as he can, to do good and to go on his way rejoicing. How far human virtue can reach such a condition, and what its powers may be, I shall prove in the following Part.
