Appendix

What I have said in this Part about the right way of life has not been arranged so as to be taken in at a glance, but has been set out piecemeal, as I thought each proposition could most readily be deduced from what came before it. I propose, therefore, to rearrange my remarks and bring them under leading heads.

1. All our endeavours, or desires, follow from the necessity of our nature in such a way that they can be understood either through it alone, as their proximate cause, or in virtue of our being a part of nature, which cannot be adequately conceived through itself without other individuals.

2. The desires which follow from our nature in such a way that they can be understood through it alone are those referred to the mind insofar as the mind is conceived as consisting of adequate ideas. The remaining desires are referred to the mind only insofar as it conceives things inadequately, and their force and increase are generally defined not by human power but by the power of things outside us. So the first are rightly called actions and the second passions; for the first always indicate our power, while the second show our weakness and our fragmentary knowledge.

3. Our actions—that is, the desires defined by a man's power, or reason—are always good; the rest may be either good or bad.

4. In life, then, it is before all things useful to perfect the understanding, or reason, as far as we can, and in this alone a man's highest happiness, or blessedness, consists. Indeed blessedness is nothing but the contentment of spirit which arises from the intuitive knowledge of God. And to perfect the understanding is nothing but to understand God, God's attributes, and the actions which follow from the necessity of his nature. So the ultimate aim of a man led by reason, his highest desire, by which he seeks to govern all the rest, is the one that brings him to an adequate conception of himself and of everything within the reach of his understanding.

5. Therefore without understanding there is no rational life; and things are good only insofar as they help a man to enjoy the life of the mind, which is defined by understanding. Conversely, whatever hinders a man from perfecting his reason and enjoying the rational life is alone called evil.

6. Since everything of which a man is the efficient cause is necessarily good, no evil can befall him except through external causes—namely, in virtue of his being a part of the whole of nature, whose laws human nature is compelled to obey and to conform to in almost infinite ways.

7. It is impossible that a man should not be a part of nature, or should not follow her general order. But if he finds himself among individuals whose nature agrees with his own, his power of acting will be helped and fed by them; whereas if he finds himself among those who agree with his nature very little, he will hardly be able to accommodate himself to them without undergoing a great change himself.

8. Whatever in nature we judge to be evil, or capable of injuring our capacity for existing and enjoying the rational life, we may endeavour to remove in whatever way seems safest to us; and conversely, whatever we judge good, or useful for preserving our being and enabling us to enjoy the rational life, we may take for our own use and employ as we think best. Everyone without exception may, by the sovereign right of nature, do whatever he thinks will further his own interest.

9. Nothing can agree more with the nature of a given thing than other individuals of the same species; therefore (compare Proposition 7 of this Part) there is nothing more useful to a man, for preserving his being and enjoying the rational life, than a fellow man who is led by reason. And since we know of nothing among individual things more excellent than a man led by reason, no one can better display the power of his skill and character than by so training men that they come at last to live under the rule of their own reason.

10. Insofar as men are moved by envy, or by any kind of hatred towards one another, they are at odds, and are to be feared in proportion as they are more powerful than their fellows.

11. Yet minds are conquered not by force but by love and high-mindedness.

12. It is before all things useful to men to join their ways of life, to bind themselves together with whatever bonds they think best fitted to gather them into one, and generally to do whatever serves to strengthen friendship.

13. But this needs skill and watchfulness. For men are various—since those who live under the guidance of reason are few—and are generally envious, and readier to take revenge than to feel compassion. So no small strength of character is needed to take every man as he is and to restrain oneself from imitating the emotions of others. But those who carp at mankind, who are more skilled in railing at vice than in instilling virtue, and who break men's characters rather than strengthen them, are harmful both to themselves and to others. So many, out of too great an impatience of spirit, or out of a misguided religious zeal, have preferred to live among beasts rather than among men—as boys and young men who cannot peaceably endure their parents' scolding will enlist as soldiers and choose the hardships of war and the despotism of discipline over the comforts of home and a father's advice, and will let any burden be laid on them so long as they can spite their parents.

14. So although men are generally governed in everything by their own appetites, their living together brings far more advantages than drawbacks. It is better, then, to bear patiently the wrongs they may do us, and to strive to promote whatever serves to bring about harmony and friendship.

15. The things which beget harmony are those which have to do with justice, fairness and honourable living. For men resent not only what is unjust or unfair but also what is thought disgraceful, and any slighting of the accepted customs of their society. And for winning love, those qualities are especially necessary which have to do with religion and piety (compare Proposition 37 of this Part, Note 1; Proposition 2 of this Part; Proposition 46 of this Part, Note; Proposition 73 of this Part, Note).

16. Harmony is also often the result of fear, but such harmony is insecure. Besides, fear arises from weakness of spirit and has nothing to do with the exercise of reason; and the same is true of compassion, though compassion seems to bear a certain likeness to piety.

17. Men are also won over by generosity, especially those who have not the means of buying what they need to live. But to give help to every poor man is far beyond the power and the advantage of any private person, whose wealth is wholly inadequate to meet such a call; and an individual man's resources of character are too limited for him to make all men his friends. So providing for the poor is a duty which falls on the state as a whole, and which looks only to the general advantage.

18. In accepting favours, and in returning gratitude, our duty must be wholly different (compare Proposition 70 of this Part, Note; Proposition 71 of this Part, Note).

19. Again, mercenary love—the lust of generation arising from bodily beauty—and in general every kind of love which has any cause but freedom of soul, readily passes into hatred; unless, what is worse, it is a kind of madness, in which case it promotes discord rather than harmony (compare Part 3, Proposition 31, Corollary).

20. As for marriage, it is certain that it agrees with reason if the desire for physical union is engendered not solely by bodily beauty but also by the desire to have children and to bring them up wisely, and if the love of both the man and the woman is caused not by bodily beauty alone but also by freedom of soul.

21. Furthermore, flattery begets harmony—but only by way of the vile fault of servility, or treachery. None are more readily caught by flattery than the proud, who wish to be first and are not.

22. In self-abasement there is a false show of piety and religion; and although self-abasement is the opposite of pride, a man who abases himself is very near akin to the proud (Proposition 57 of this Part, Note).

23. Shame too brings about harmony, but only in matters that cannot be hidden. And since shame is a kind of pain, it has nothing to do with the exercise of reason.

24. The remaining emotions of pain towards men are directly opposed to justice, fairness, honour, piety and religion; and although indignation seems to bear a certain likeness to fairness, life is lawless where every man may pass judgment on another's deeds and take it on himself to vindicate his own rights or another's.

25. Correctness of conduct (modestia)—the desire to please men which is determined by reason—belongs to piety (Proposition 37 of this Part, Note 1). But if it springs from emotion, it is ambition, the desire by which men, under a false cloak of piety, generally stir up discord and sedition. For a man who desires to help his fellows, in word or in deed, so that they may together enjoy the highest good, will before all things strive to win them over with love; not to draw them into admiration, so that a system may be called after his name, nor to give any cause for envy. And in conversation he will avoid talking of men's faults and will be careful to speak sparingly of human weakness, while dwelling at length on human virtue, or power, and on the way it may be perfected. So men will be stirred, not by fear or aversion, but only by the emotion of joy, to endeavour as far as they can to live under the guidance of reason.

26. Besides men, we know of no particular thing in nature whose mind we can take pleasure in, and which we can join to ourselves in friendship or any kind of fellowship. So a regard for our own advantage does not require us to preserve whatever else there is in nature besides man, but to preserve or destroy it according to its various uses, and to adapt it to our own use as best we can.

27. The advantage we get from things outside us—besides the experience and knowledge we acquire from observing them and from recombining their elements in different forms—is chiefly the preservation of the body. From this point of view, the most useful things are those which can feed and nourish the body so that all its parts may properly perform their functions; for the more the body is capable of being affected in a variety of ways, and of affecting external bodies in many ways, the more the mind is capable of thinking (Proposition 38 of this Part; Proposition 39 of this Part). But there seem to be very few things of this kind in nature, so for the proper nourishment of the body we must use many foods of different natures. For the human body is composed of a great many parts of different natures, which continually need varied nourishment, so that the whole body may be equally capable of everything that can follow from its own nature, and consequently so that the mind too may be equally capable of forming many perceptions.

28. Now for providing such nourishment the strength of each individual would hardly be enough if men did not help one another. But money has given us a token for everything; and so it is the idea of money that chiefly engrosses the mind of the multitude, which can hardly conceive any kind of pleasure that is not accompanied by the idea of money as its cause.

29. This is the fault only of those who seek money not out of poverty or to supply their necessary wants, but because they have learnt the arts of gain, by which they bring themselves to great splendour. They do feed their bodies, as custom requires, but sparingly, believing that they lose as much of their wealth as they spend on preserving their bodies. But those who know the true use of money, and who set the measure of wealth solely by their actual needs, live content with little.

30. Since, then, those things are good which help the various parts of the body to perform their functions, and since pleasure consists in an increase of, or help to, a man's power insofar as he is composed of mind and body, it follows that everything which brings pleasure is good. But since things do not act with the object of giving us pleasure, and their power of acting is not adjusted to suit our advantage, and since pleasure is generally referred to one part of the body more than to the rest, most emotions of pleasure—unless reason and watchfulness are at hand—and consequently the desires arising from them, may become excessive. We may add that emotion leads us to attend chiefly to what is agreeable in the present, and that we cannot estimate what is future with emotions equally vivid (Proposition 44 of this Part, Note; Proposition 60 of this Part, Note).

31. Superstition, on the other hand, seems to count as good everything that brings pain and as bad everything that brings pleasure. But as we said above (Proposition 45 of this Part, Note), none but the envious take delight in my weakness and my trouble. For the greater the pleasure we are affected with, the greater the perfection we pass to, and consequently the more we share in the divine nature; and no pleasure can ever be evil which is governed by a true regard for our own advantage. But conversely, a man who is led by fear and does good only to avoid evil is not guided by reason.

32. But human power is extremely limited and is infinitely surpassed by the power of external causes, so we have no absolute power of shaping the things outside us to our use. Nevertheless we shall bear with an equal mind everything that happens to us contrary to what our own advantage requires, so long as we are conscious that we have done our duty, and that the power we have was not enough to protect us completely, and so long as we remember that we are a part of the whole of nature and follow her order. If we understand this clearly and distinctly, that part of our nature which is defined by understanding—in other words, the better part of ourselves—will assuredly rest content in what befalls us, and will endeavour to persist in that contentment. For insofar as we are intelligent beings, we cannot desire anything but what is necessary, nor rest absolutely content in anything but what is true. So insofar as we understand these things rightly, the endeavour of the better part of ourselves is in harmony with the order of nature as a whole.
