Preface, Axioms, Propositions 1 to 20

Preface

At last I come to the remaining part of my Ethics, which concerns the way that leads to freedom. Here I shall treat of the power of reason, showing how far reason can control the emotions, and what mental freedom, or blessedness, is; and we shall then be able to see how much more powerful the wise man is than the ignorant one. It is no part of my plan to point out the method and the means by which the understanding may be perfected, nor to show how the body may be tended so as to be capable of performing its functions properly. The second belongs to medicine, the first to logic. Here, I repeat, I shall treat only of the power of the mind, or of reason, and shall chiefly show the extent and nature of its dominion over the emotions, for their control and moderation. That we do not have absolute dominion over them I have already shown.

The Stoics, however, thought the emotions depended absolutely on our will and that we could govern them absolutely; yet the protest of experience, not their own principles, forced them to confess that no small practice and effort is needed to control and moderate them. Someone tried to illustrate this, if I remember rightly, by the example of two dogs, one a house-dog and the other a hunting-dog: by long training the house-dog could be brought to hunt, and the hunting-dog to stop chasing hares.

Descartes inclines strongly to this opinion. He held that the soul, or mind, is specially united to a particular part of the brain, the pineal gland, by whose help the mind can feel all the movements set going in the body, and external objects too, and which the mind can move in various ways by a simple act of will. He asserted that this gland is so suspended in the middle of the brain that it can be moved by the slightest motion of the animal spirits; that it is suspended there in as many different ways as the animal spirits can strike against it; and that as many different marks are impressed on it as there are external objects driving the animal spirits towards it. From which it follows that if the will of the soul suspends the gland in a position in which it has already been suspended once before by the animal spirits driven one way or another, the gland in its turn reacts on those spirits, driving and determining them to the state they were in when the gland was in that position before. He further asserted that every act of the will is united by nature to a particular motion of the gland. Whenever anyone wishes to look at a distant object, for instance, the act of will makes the pupil of the eye dilate; whereas if the person had merely thought of dilating the pupil, the wish to dilate it would not have brought the result about, since the motion of the gland which drives the animal spirits towards the optic nerve in a way that dilates or contracts the pupil is joined by nature not to the wish to dilate or contract the pupil but to the wish to look at distant or very near objects. And last, he held that although every motion of that gland seems to have been united by nature to one particular thought out of all our thoughts from the very beginning of our life, it can nevertheless become associated with other thoughts through habit; and this he tries to prove in the Passions de l'âme, I.50. From which he concludes that there is no soul so weak that it cannot, under proper direction, acquire absolute power over its passions. For passions, as he defines them, are "perceptions, or feelings, or disturbances of the soul, which are referred to the soul as species, and which"—mark the expression—"are produced, preserved, and strengthened through some movement of the spirits" (Passions de l'âme, I.27). And since we can join any motion of the gland, and consequently of the spirits, to any act of will, the determination of the will depends entirely on our own powers. So if we determine our will with sure and firm decisions in the direction we wish our actions to take, and associate the motions of the passions we wish to acquire with those decisions, we shall acquire absolute dominion over our passions.

Such is the doctrine of this illustrious philosopher, so far as I gather it from his own words; and if it were less ingenious I could hardly believe it came from so great a man. Indeed I am lost in wonder that a philosopher who had firmly asserted that he would draw no conclusions which do not follow from self-evident premisses, and would affirm nothing he did not clearly and distinctly perceive, and who had so often taken the schoolmen to task for trying to explain obscurities by occult qualities, could hold a hypothesis beside which occult qualities are commonplace. What does he understand, I ask, by the union of the mind and the body? What clear and distinct conception has he of thought in the most intimate union with a particle of extended matter? I should really like him to explain this union through its proximate cause. But he had so distinct a conception of mind as distinct from body that he could assign no particular cause of the union between them, or of the mind itself, and was obliged to fall back on the cause of the whole universe, that is, on God.

Further, I should much like to know what degree of motion the mind can impart to this pineal gland, and with what force it can hold it suspended. For I do not know whether the gland can be moved more slowly or more quickly by the mind than by the animal spirits, or whether the motions of the passions which we have closely united with firm decisions cannot be disjoined from them again by physical causes—in which case it would follow that although the mind firmly intended to face a given danger, and had united the motions of boldness to that decision, yet at the sight of the danger the gland might be suspended in a way which would leave the mind unable to think of anything but running away. In truth, as there is no common standard between will and motion, so there is no comparison possible between the powers of the mind and the power, or strength, of the body; and consequently the strength of the one cannot in any way be measured by the strength of the other. We may add that no gland is to be found in the middle of the brain so placed that it can be set in motion so easily and in so many ways, and that not all the nerves reach as far as the cavities of the brain. And last, I pass over everything he says about the will and its freedom, since I have abundantly proved that his premisses are false.

Therefore, since the power of the mind, as I have shown above, is defined by the understanding alone, we shall determine the remedies against the emotions solely by the knowledge of the mind—remedies which I believe everyone has experienced, though without observing them accurately or seeing them distinctly—and from the same foundation we shall deduce everything that concerns the mind's blessedness.

Axioms

1. If two contrary actions are started in the same subject, a change must necessarily take place in both, or in one of the two, and must continue until they cease to be contrary.

2. The power of an effect is defined by the power of its cause, insofar as its essence is explained, or defined, by the essence of its cause.

(Part 3, Proposition 7)

Proposition 1

Just as thoughts and the ideas of things are arranged and associated in the mind, so are the modifications of the body, or the images of things, arranged and associated in exactly the same way in the body.

Proof. The order and connection of ideas is the same (Part 2, Proposition 7) as the order and connection of things, and conversely the order and connection of things is the same (Part 2, Proposition 6, Corollary; Part 2, Proposition 7) as the order and connection of ideas. So just as the order and connection of ideas in the mind takes place according to the order and association of the modifications of the body (Part 2, Proposition 18), so conversely (Part 3, Proposition 2) the order and connection of the modifications of the body takes place according to the way in which thoughts and the ideas of things are arranged and associated in the mind. Q.E.D.

Proposition 2

If we detach a disturbance of the spirit, or emotion, from the thought of an external cause and join it to other thoughts, then the love or hatred towards that external cause, and the waverings of spirit that arise from those emotions, will be destroyed.

Proof. What constitutes the form of love or hatred is pleasure or pain accompanied by the idea of an external cause (Definition 6 of the Emotions; Definition 7 of the Emotions). So when this cause is removed, the form of love or hatred is removed with it, and these emotions, and those arising from them, are destroyed. Q.E.D.

Proposition 3

An emotion which is a passion ceases to be a passion as soon as we form a clear and distinct idea of it.

Proof. An emotion which is a passion is a confused idea (by the general Definition of the Emotions). So if we form a clear and distinct idea of a given emotion, that idea will be distinguished from the emotion only in thought, insofar as the emotion is referred to the mind alone (Part 2, Proposition 21, Note). Therefore (Part 3, Proposition 3) the emotion will cease to be a passion. Q.E.D.

Corollary. An emotion therefore comes more under our control, and the mind is less passive towards it, the better we know it.

Proposition 4

There is no modification of the body of which we cannot form some clear and distinct conception.

Proof. Properties common to all things can only be conceived adequately (Part 2, Proposition 38); therefore (Part 2, Proposition 12, and Lemma 2, which follows Part 2, Proposition 13) there is no modification of the body of which we cannot form some clear and distinct conception. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that there is no emotion of which we cannot form some clear and distinct conception. For an emotion is the idea of a modification of the body (by the general Definition of the Emotions), and must therefore (by Proposition 4 of this Part) involve some clear and distinct conception.

Note. Since there is nothing from which some effect does not follow (Part 1, Proposition 36), and since we understand clearly and distinctly whatever follows from an idea which is adequate in us (Part 2, Proposition 40), it follows that everyone has the power of understanding himself and his emotions clearly and distinctly, if not absolutely then at least in part, and consequently of bringing it about that he is less subject to them. To reach this result, then, we must chiefly direct our efforts to acquiring, as far as we can, a clear and distinct knowledge of every emotion, so that the mind may through the emotion be determined to think of the things it clearly and distinctly perceives and rests fully content in; and so that the emotion itself may be separated from the thought of an external cause and associated with true thoughts. In this way not only will love, hatred and the rest be destroyed (Proposition 2 of this Part), but the appetites, or desires, which usually arise from such emotions will become incapable of being excessive (Part 4, Proposition 61). For it must be especially noted that the appetite through which a man is said to be active and the appetite through which he is said to be passive are one and the same. We have shown, for instance, that human nature is so constituted that everyone desires his fellow men to live as he does (Part 3, Proposition 31, Note); in a man who is not guided by reason this appetite is a passion called ambition, and does not differ much from pride, whereas in a man who lives by the dictates of reason it is an activity, or virtue, called piety (Part 4, Proposition 37, Note 1). In the same way all appetites, or desires, are passions only insofar as they spring from inadequate ideas, and the same results are credited to virtue when they are roused or generated by adequate ideas. For all the desires by which we are determined to a given action may arise from adequate ideas as much as from inadequate ones (Part 4, Proposition 59). And than this remedy for the emotions—to return to the point I started from—which consists in a true knowledge of them, no more excellent remedy within our power can be devised. For the mind has no power but that of thinking and of forming adequate ideas, as we showed above (Part 3, Proposition 3).

Proposition 5

An emotion towards a thing which we conceive simply, and not as necessary, or contingent, or possible, is, other things being equal, the greatest of all.

Proof. An emotion towards a thing we conceive to be free is greater than one towards a thing we conceive to be necessary (Part 3, Proposition 49), and consequently greater still than one towards what we conceive as possible or contingent (Part 4, Proposition 11). But to conceive a thing as free can be nothing but to conceive it simply, while we are ignorant of the causes by which it has been determined to act (Part 2, Proposition 35, Note). Therefore an emotion towards a thing we conceive simply is, other things being equal, greater than one we feel towards what is necessary, possible or contingent, and consequently is the greatest of all. Q.E.D.

Proposition 6

The mind has greater power over the emotions, and is less subject to them, insofar as it understands all things as necessary.

Proof. The mind understands all things to be necessary (Part 1, Proposition 29) and to be determined to exist and act by an infinite chain of causes. Therefore (by Proposition 5 of this Part) it so far brings it about that it is less subject to the emotions arising from those things, and (Part 3, Proposition 48) feels less emotion towards the things themselves. Q.E.D.

Note. The more this knowledge, that things are necessary, is applied to particular things, which we conceive more distinctly and vividly, the greater the mind's power over the emotions—as experience also bears witness. For we see that the pain arising from the loss of some good is eased as soon as the man who has lost it sees that it could not by any means have been kept. And we see too that no one pities an infant because it cannot speak, or walk, or reason, or because it passes so many years, as it were, unconscious; whereas if most people were born full-grown, and only one here and there an infant, everyone would pity the infants, because infancy would then be regarded not as a natural and necessary state but as a fault, or failing, in nature. And we may note several other instances of the same kind.

Proposition 7

Emotions which are roused by, or spring from, reason are, if we take account of time, stronger than those which have to do with particular objects we regard as absent.

Proof. We do not regard a thing as absent by reason of the emotion with which we conceive it, but by reason of the body being affected by another emotion which excludes that thing's existence (Part 2, Proposition 17). So the emotion referred to a thing we regard as absent is not of a kind to overcome the rest of a man's activity and power (Part 4, Proposition 6), but on the contrary is of a kind to be in some degree controlled by the emotions which exclude the existence of its external cause (Part 4, Proposition 9). But an emotion springing from reason is necessarily referred to the common properties of things (see Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2), which we always regard as present—for there can be nothing to exclude their present existence—and which we always conceive in the same way (Part 2, Proposition 38). So an emotion of this kind always stays the same; and consequently (Axiom 1 of this Part) emotions contrary to it, which are not kept going by their external causes, will have to adapt themselves to it more and more until they are no longer contrary to it. To that extent the emotion springing from reason is the more powerful. Q.E.D.

Proposition 8

An emotion is stronger in proportion to the number of simultaneous causes which rouse it.

Proof. Many simultaneous causes are more powerful than a few (Part 3, Proposition 7); therefore (Part 4, Proposition 5), the more simultaneous causes rouse an emotion, the stronger it becomes. Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition is also evident from Axiom 2 of this Part.

Proposition 9

An emotion which has many and various causes, which the mind regards as simultaneous with the emotion itself, is less harmful; we are less subject to it, and less affected towards each of its causes, than we should be by a different and equally powerful emotion having fewer causes, or a single one.

Proof. An emotion is bad, or harmful, only insofar as it hinders the mind from thinking (Part 4, Proposition 26; Part 4, Proposition 27). So an emotion which determines the mind to contemplate several things at once is less harmful than an equally powerful emotion which so engrosses the mind in contemplating a few objects, or one, that it cannot think of anything else. That was our first point. Again, since the mind's essence—in other words, its power (Part 3, Proposition 7)—consists solely in thought (Part 2, Proposition 11), the mind is less passive towards an emotion which makes it think of several things at once than towards an equally strong emotion which keeps it engrossed in contemplating a few objects, or one. That was our second point. And last, this emotion (Part 3, Proposition 48), insofar as it has several causes, is less powerful in respect of each of them. Q.E.D.

Proposition 10

So long as we are not assailed by emotions contrary to our nature, we have the power of arranging and associating the modifications of our body according to the order of the intellect.

Proof. The emotions contrary to our nature—that is (Part 4, Proposition 30), the bad ones—are bad insofar as they hinder the mind from understanding (Part 4, Proposition 27). So long, therefore, as we are not assailed by emotions contrary to our nature, the mind's power of endeavouring to understand things (Part 4, Proposition 26) is not hindered, and so it is able to form clear and distinct ideas and to deduce them one from another (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2; Part 2, Proposition 47, Note). Consequently we have in such cases the power of arranging and associating the modifications of the body according to the order of the intellect. Q.E.D.

Note. By this power of rightly arranging and associating the modifications of the body we can keep ourselves from being easily affected by bad emotions. For (Proposition 7 of this Part) a greater force is needed to control the emotions when they are arranged and associated according to the order of the intellect than when they are uncertain and unsettled. The best we can do, then, so long as we do not have a perfect knowledge of our emotions, is to frame a rule of right conduct, or fixed practical precepts, to commit it to memory, and to apply it at once to the particular circumstances that meet us in life, so that our imagination may be thoroughly filled with it and it may always be ready to hand. For instance, we laid down among the rules of life (Part 4, Proposition 46, Note) that hatred should be overcome with love, or high-mindedness, and not repaid with hatred in return. Now for this precept of reason to be always ready to hand when we need it, we should often think over the wrongs men commonly commit, and consider how and by what means they may best be warded off by high-mindedness; and so we shall associate the idea of a wrong with the idea of this precept, which will then always be at hand when a wrong is done to us (Part 2, Proposition 18). And if we also keep in readiness the idea of our true advantage, and of the good which follows from mutual friendship and common fellowship, and if we remember that complete contentment is the result of the right way of life (Part 4, Proposition 52), and that men, no less than everything else, act by the necessity of their nature—then, I say, the wrong, and the hatred which commonly arises from it, will take up a very small part of our imagination and will easily be overcome. Or if the anger springing from a grievous wrong is not easily overcome, it will nevertheless be overcome, though not without a struggle, far sooner than if we had not reflected on the matter beforehand—as is evident from Proposition 6 of this Part, Proposition 7 of this Part and Proposition 8 of this Part. In the same way we should reflect on courage as a means of overcoming fear: the ordinary dangers of life should often be brought to mind and imagined, together with the means by which presence of mind and strength of character can avoid and overcome them.

But we must note that in arranging our thoughts and ideas we should always keep in view what is good in every individual thing (Part 4, Proposition 63, Corollary; Part 3, Proposition 59), so that we may always be determined to act by an emotion of pleasure. If a man sees, for instance, that he pursues honour too keenly, let him think of its right use, of the end for which it should be pursued, and of the means of attaining it. Let him not think of its misuse, and its emptiness, and the fickleness of mankind, and the like—which no man thinks of except from a sickness of disposition. It is with thoughts like these that the most ambitious torment themselves most, when they despair of gaining the distinctions they hanker after, and in venting their anger would like to appear wise. So it is certain that those who cry out loudest against the misuse of honour and the vanity of the world are the very men who covet it most greedily. This is not peculiar to the ambitious but is common to all who are ill used by fortune and weak in spirit. A poor man who is miserly will talk endlessly about the misuse of wealth and the vices of the rich, and by doing so merely torments himself and shows the world that he cannot bear his own poverty, nor other people's riches either. And so too those who have been ill received by a woman they love think of nothing but the inconstancy and treachery and other stock faults of women—all of which they forget the moment their sweetheart takes them into favour again. So a man who wishes to govern his emotions and appetites by the love of freedom alone will strive as far as he can to gain a knowledge of the virtues and their causes, and to fill his spirit with the joy that arises from truly knowing them. He will not wish to dwell on men's faults, or to carp at his fellows, or to revel in a false show of freedom. And whoever diligently observes and practises these precepts—which are not difficult—will in a short time be able, for the most part, to direct his actions by the commands of reason.

Footnote: Continuo. Rendered "constantly" by Mr. Pollock on the ground that the classical meaning of the word does not suit the context. I venture to think, however, that a tolerable sense may be obtained without doing violence to Spinoza's scholarship.

Proposition 11

The more objects a mental image is referred to, the more frequent it is, or the more often vivid, and the more it occupies the mind.

Proof. The more objects a mental image, or an emotion, is referred to, the more causes there are by which it can be roused and fed, all of which (by hypothesis) the mind contemplates at once along with the emotion. So the emotion is the more frequent, or is more often in full vigour, and (Proposition 8 of this Part) occupies the mind the more. Q.E.D.

Proposition 12

The mental images of things are more easily associated with images referred to things we clearly and distinctly understand than with others.

Proof. The things we clearly and distinctly understand are either the common properties of things or deductions from them (see Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2), and are consequently (by Proposition 11 of this Part) more often roused in us. So it may more readily happen that we contemplate other things along with these than along with something else, and consequently (Part 2, Proposition 18) that the images of those things are more often associated with the images of these than with the images of something else. Q.E.D.

Proposition 13

A mental image is more often vivid the more other images it is associated with.

Proof. The more other images an image is associated with, the more causes there are (Part 2, Proposition 18) by which it can be roused. Q.E.D.

Proposition 14

The mind can bring it about that all the modifications of the body, or images of things, are referred to the idea of God.

Proof. There is no modification of the body of which the mind cannot form some clear and distinct conception (Proposition 4 of this Part); so it can bring it about that they are all referred to the idea of God (Part 1, Proposition 15). Q.E.D.

Proposition 15

He who clearly and distinctly understands himself and his emotions loves God, and the more so the more he understands himself and his emotions.

Proof. He who clearly and distinctly understands himself and his emotions feels pleasure (Part 3, Proposition 53), and this pleasure is (by Proposition 14 of this Part) accompanied by the idea of God. Therefore (Definition 6 of the Emotions) such a man loves God, and for the same reason loves him the more the more he understands himself and his emotions. Q.E.D.

Proposition 16

This love towards God must hold the chief place in the mind.

Proof. For this love is associated with all the modifications of the body (Proposition 14 of this Part) and is fed by them all (Proposition 15 of this Part); therefore (Proposition 11 of this Part) it must hold the chief place in the mind. Q.E.D.

Proposition 17

God is without passions, and is not affected by any emotion of pleasure or pain.

Proof. All ideas, insofar as they are referred to God, are true (Part 2, Proposition 32)—that is (Part 2, Definition 4), adequate; and therefore (by the general Definition of the Emotions) God is without passions. Again, God cannot pass to a greater or a lesser perfection (Part 1, Proposition 20, Corollary 2); therefore (by Definition 2 of the Emotions; Definition 3 of the Emotions) he is not affected by any emotion of pleasure or pain.

Corollary. Strictly speaking, God neither loves nor hates anyone. For God (by Proposition 17 of this Part) is not affected by any emotion of pleasure or pain, and consequently (Definition 6 of the Emotions; Definition 7 of the Emotions) neither loves nor hates anyone.

Proposition 18

No one can hate God.

Proof. The idea of God which is in us is adequate and perfect (Part 2, Proposition 46; Part 2, Proposition 47); so insofar as we contemplate God we are active (Part 3, Proposition 3), and consequently (Part 3, Proposition 59) there can be no pain accompanied by the idea of God—in other words (Definition 7 of the Emotions), no one can hate God. Q.E.D.

Corollary. Love towards God cannot be turned into hatred.

Note. It may be objected that since we understand God as the cause of all things, we are for that very reason regarding God as the cause of pain. But I answer that insofar as we understand the causes of pain, pain to that extent (Proposition 3 of this Part) ceases to be a passion—that is, it ceases to be pain (Part 3, Proposition 59). So insofar as we understand God to be the cause of pain, we to that extent feel pleasure.

Proposition 19

He who loves God cannot endeavour that God should love him in return.

Proof. If a man endeavoured that, he would be desiring (Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary) that God, whom he loves, should not be God, and consequently would be desiring to feel pain (Part 3, Proposition 19), which is absurd (Part 3, Proposition 28). Therefore he who loves God, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 20

This love towards God cannot be spoiled by the emotion of envy or of jealousy; on the contrary, it is fed the more the more men we conceive to be joined to God by the same bond of love.

Proof. This love towards God is the highest good we can seek under the guidance of reason (Part 4, Proposition 28); it is common to all men (Part 4, Proposition 36); and we desire that all should rejoice in it (Part 4, Proposition 37). Therefore (Definition 23 of the Emotions) it cannot be spoiled by the emotion of envy, nor by the emotion of jealousy (Proposition 18 of this Part; Part 3, Proposition 35, Note); but on the contrary must be fed the more, the more men we conceive to rejoice in it. Q.E.D.

Note. We can show in the same way that there is no emotion directly contrary to this love by which it could be destroyed. So we may conclude that this love towards God is the most constant of all the emotions, and that insofar as it is referred to the body it cannot be destroyed unless the body is destroyed too. What its nature is insofar as it is referred to the mind alone, we shall inquire presently.

I have now gone through all the remedies against the emotions—all that the mind, considered in itself alone, can do against them. From which it appears that the mind's power over the emotions consists:

1. In the actual knowledge of the emotions (Proposition 4 of this Part, Note).

2. In its separating the emotions from the thought of an external cause, which we conceive confusedly (Proposition 2 of this Part; Proposition 4 of this Part, Note).

3. In the fact that, in respect of time, the emotions referred to things we distinctly understand surpass those referred to what we conceive confusedly and in a fragmentary way (Proposition 7 of this Part).

4. In the number of causes by which the modifications are fed that have to do with the common properties of things, or with God (Proposition 9 of this Part; Proposition 11 of this Part).

Footnote: Affectiones. Camerer reads affectus—emotions.

5. And last, in the order in which the mind can arrange and associate its own emotions one with another (Proposition 10 of this Part, Note; Proposition 12 of this Part; Proposition 13 of this Part; Proposition 14 of this Part).

But so that this power of the mind over the emotions may be better understood, it should be specially noted that we call emotions strong when we compare one man's emotion with another's and see that one man is more troubled than another by the same emotion, or when we compare the various emotions of the same man and find that he is more affected, or stirred, by one than by another. For the strength of every emotion is defined by a comparison of our own power with the power of an external cause. Now the power of the mind is defined by knowledge alone, and its weakness, or passivity, by the privation of knowledge alone. It follows, then, that the most passive mind is the one whose greatest part is made up of inadequate ideas, so that it may be characterised more readily by its passive states than by its activities; while the most active mind is the one whose greatest part is made up of adequate ideas, so that although it may contain as many inadequate ideas as the first, it can still be more easily characterised by the ideas that belong to human virtue than by those that tell of human weakness. Again, it must be noted that unhealthiness of spirit, and misfortunes, can generally be traced to an excessive love for something subject to many changes, which we can never become masters of. For no one is anxious or worried about anything unless he loves it, and wrongs, suspicions and enmities arise only in regard to things no one can really be master of.

We may thus readily conceive the power that clear and distinct knowledge has over the emotions, and especially that third kind of knowledge (Part 2, Proposition 47, Note) which is founded on the actual knowledge of God. If it does not absolutely destroy them insofar as they are passions (Proposition 3 of this Part; Proposition 4 of this Part, Note), it at any rate makes them occupy a very small part of the mind (Proposition 14 of this Part). And further, it begets a love towards a thing unchangeable and eternal (Proposition 15 of this Part), which we may really come into possession of (Part 2, Proposition 45), and which cannot be defiled with the faults inherent in ordinary love, but may grow from strength to strength, and may take up the greater part of the mind and penetrate it deeply.

And now I have finished with everything that concerns this present life. For, as I said at the beginning of this note, I have briefly described all the remedies against the emotions; and anyone may readily have seen this for himself, if he has attended to what has been advanced in this note, and to the definitions of the mind and its emotions, and lastly, to Part 3, Proposition 1 and Part 3, Proposition 3. It is now time, therefore, to pass on to what concerns the duration of the mind, without relation to the body.
