Proposition 21

The mind can imagine nothing, and can remember nothing past, except while the body endures.

Proof. The mind does not express the actual existence of its body, nor does it imagine the modifications of the body as actual, except while the body endures (Part 2, Proposition 8, Corollary); and consequently (Part 2, Proposition 26) it does not imagine any body as actually existing except while its own body endures. So it cannot imagine anything (Part 2, Proposition 17, Note), or remember things past, except while the body endures (see Part 2, Proposition 18, Note). Q.E.D.

Proposition 22

Nevertheless there is necessarily in God an idea which expresses the essence of this or that human body under the form of eternity.

Proof. God is the cause not only of the existence of this or that human body but of its essence too (Part 1, Proposition 25). That essence must therefore be conceived through the very essence of God (Part 1, Axiom 4), and be so conceived by a certain eternal necessity (Part 1, Proposition 16); and this conception must necessarily exist in God (Part 2, Proposition 3). Q.E.D.

Proposition 23

The human mind cannot be absolutely destroyed with the body; something of it remains which is eternal.

Proof. There is necessarily in God a concept, or idea, which expresses the essence of the human body (Proposition 22 of this Part), and which is therefore necessarily something belonging to the essence of the human mind (Part 2, Proposition 13). But we have not assigned to the human mind any duration definable by time, except insofar as it expresses the actual existence of the body, which is explained through duration and can be defined by time—that is (Part 2, Proposition 8, Corollary), we assign it duration only while the body endures. Yet there is nevertheless something which is conceived by a certain eternal necessity through the very essence of God (Proposition 22 of this Part); and this something, which belongs to the essence of the mind, will necessarily be eternal. Q.E.D.

Note. This idea, which expresses the essence of the body under the form of eternity, is, as we have said, a certain mode of thinking which belongs to the essence of the mind and is necessarily eternal. Yet it is not possible for us to remember that we existed before our body, since our body can bear no trace of such an existence, and since eternity cannot be defined in terms of time or have any relation to time. But, notwithstanding, we feel and know that we are eternal. For the mind feels the things it conceives by understanding no less than the things it remembers; the eyes of the mind, by which it sees and observes things, are proofs. So although we do not remember that we existed before the body, we feel that our mind, insofar as it involves the essence of the body under the form of eternity, is eternal, and that its existence therefore cannot be defined in terms of time or explained through duration. Our mind can be said to endure, and its existence can be defined by a fixed time, only insofar as it involves the actual existence of the body; and only to that extent has it the power of determining the existence of things by time and conceiving them under the head of duration.

Proposition 24

The more we understand particular things, the more we understand God.

Proof. This is evident from Part 1, Proposition 25, Corollary.

Proposition 25

The highest endeavour of the mind, and its highest virtue, is to understand things by the third kind of knowledge.

Proof. The third kind of knowledge proceeds from an adequate idea of certain attributes of God to an adequate knowledge of the essence of things (see Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2); and the more we understand things in this way, the better we understand God (by Proposition 24 of this Part). Therefore (Part 4, Proposition 28) the highest virtue of the mind—that is (Part 4, Definition 8), its power, or nature, or (Part 3, Proposition 7) its highest endeavour—is to understand things by the third kind of knowledge. Q.E.D.

Proposition 26

The more capable the mind is of understanding things by the third kind of knowledge, the more it desires to understand things by that kind.

Proof. This is evident. For insofar as we conceive the mind to be capable of conceiving things by this kind of knowledge, we conceive it to that extent as determined so to conceive them; and consequently (Definition 1 of the Emotions) the mind desires to do so in proportion as it is more capable of it. Q.E.D.

Proposition 27

From this third kind of knowledge arises the highest contentment of mind there can be.

Proof. The highest virtue of the mind is to know God (Part 4, Proposition 28), or to understand things by the third kind of knowledge (Proposition 25 of this Part); and this virtue is the greater the more the mind knows things by that kind of knowledge (Proposition 24 of this Part). So a man who knows things by this kind of knowledge passes to the summit of human perfection, and is therefore (Definition 2 of the Emotions) affected with the highest pleasure, accompanied by the idea of himself and of his own virtue. Thus (Definition 25 of the Emotions) from this kind of knowledge arises the highest contentment there can be. Q.E.D.

Proposition 28

The endeavour, or desire, to know things by the third kind of knowledge cannot arise from the first kind, but from the second.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident. For whatever we understand clearly and distinctly, we understand either through itself or through something conceived through itself. That is, ideas which are clear and distinct in us, or which are referred to the third kind of knowledge (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2), cannot follow from ideas that are fragmentary and confused and belong to the first kind, but must follow from adequate ideas, that is, from ideas of the second and third kinds. Therefore (Definition 1 of the Emotions) the desire to know things by the third kind of knowledge cannot arise from the first kind, but from the second. Q.E.D.

Proposition 29

Whatever the mind understands under the form of eternity, it understands not by conceiving the present actual existence of the body, but by conceiving the essence of the body under the form of eternity.

Proof. Insofar as the mind conceives the present existence of its body, it conceives to that extent a duration which can be determined by time, and only to that extent has it the power of conceiving things in relation to time (Proposition 21 of this Part; Part 2, Proposition 26). But eternity cannot be explained in terms of duration (Part 1, Definition 8, Explanation). So to that extent the mind has not the power of conceiving things under the form of eternity. It does have that power, however, because it is of the nature of reason to conceive things under the form of eternity (Part 2, Proposition 44, Corollary 2), and because it is of the nature of the mind to conceive the essence of the body under the form of eternity (Proposition 23 of this Part); and besides these two there is nothing belonging to the essence of the mind (Part 2, Proposition 13). Therefore this power of conceiving things under the form of eternity belongs to the mind only in virtue of its conceiving the essence of the body under the form of eternity. Q.E.D.

Note. We conceive things as actual in two ways: either as existing in relation to a given time and place, or as contained in God and following from the necessity of the divine nature. Whatever we conceive in this second way as true, or real, we conceive under the form of eternity, and its ideas involve the eternal and infinite essence of God, as we showed in Part 2, Proposition 45, Note, which see.

Proposition 30

Our mind, insofar as it knows itself and the body under the form of eternity, necessarily has to that extent a knowledge of God, and knows that it is in God and is conceived through God.

Proof. Eternity is the very essence of God, insofar as that essence involves necessary existence (Part 1, Definition 8). So to conceive things under the form of eternity is to conceive them insofar as they are conceived through the essence of God as real beings, or insofar as they involve existence through the essence of God. Therefore our mind, insofar as it conceives itself and the body under the form of eternity, necessarily has to that extent a knowledge of God, and knows, and so on. Q.E.D.

Proposition 31

The third kind of knowledge depends on the mind as its formal cause, insofar as the mind is itself eternal.

Proof. The mind conceives nothing under the form of eternity except insofar as it conceives its own body under the form of eternity (Proposition 29 of this Part)—that is, except insofar as it is itself eternal (Proposition 21 of this Part; Proposition 23 of this Part). Therefore (by Proposition 30 of this Part), insofar as it is eternal, it has the knowledge of God, which is necessarily adequate (Part 2, Proposition 46); and so the mind, insofar as it is eternal, is capable of knowing everything that can follow from this given knowledge of God (Part 2, Proposition 40)—in other words, of knowing things by the third kind of knowledge (see Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2), of which accordingly the mind (Part 3, Definition 1), insofar as it is eternal, is the adequate, or formal, cause. Q.E.D.

Note. The more powerful a man is in this kind of knowledge, then, the more fully conscious he is of himself and of God—in other words, the more perfect and blessed he is, as will appear more clearly in what follows. But we must note here that although we are already certain that the mind is eternal insofar as it conceives things under the form of eternity, yet, so that what we wish to show may be more easily explained and better understood, we shall consider the mind as though it had just begun to exist and to understand things under the form of eternity, as indeed we have done so far. We may do this without any danger of error, so long as we are careful to draw no conclusion unless our premisses are plain.

Proposition 32

Whatever we understand by the third kind of knowledge we take delight in, and our delight is accompanied by the idea of God as its cause.

Proof. From this kind of knowledge arises the highest contentment of mind there can be, that is (Definition 25 of the Emotions), pleasure; and this contentment is accompanied by the idea of the mind itself (Proposition 27 of this Part), and consequently (Proposition 30 of this Part) by the idea of God as its cause too. Q.E.D.

Corollary. From the third kind of knowledge there necessarily arises the intellectual love of God. From this kind of knowledge arises pleasure accompanied by the idea of God as its cause—that is (Definition 6 of the Emotions), the love of God; not insofar as we imagine him as present (Proposition 29 of this Part), but insofar as we understand him to be eternal. This is what I call the intellectual love of God.

Proposition 33

The intellectual love of God which arises from the third kind of knowledge is eternal.

Proof. The third kind of knowledge is eternal (Proposition 31 of this Part; Part 1, Axiom 3); therefore (by Part 1, Axiom 3) the love which arises from it is also necessarily eternal. Q.E.D.

Note. Although this love towards God has (by Proposition 33 of this Part) no beginning, it nevertheless has all the perfections of love, just as if it had arisen as we supposed in Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary. There is no difference here, except that the mind possesses as eternal the very perfections we imagined accruing to it, and that they are accompanied by the idea of God as their eternal cause. If pleasure consists in the transition to a greater perfection, then blessedness must certainly consist in the mind's being endowed with perfection itself.

Proposition 34

The mind is subject to the emotions which belong to the passions only while the body endures.

Proof. Imagining is the idea by which the mind contemplates a thing as present (Part 2, Proposition 17, Note), and this idea indicates the present disposition of the human body rather than the nature of the external thing (Part 2, Proposition 16, Corollary 2). So an emotion (see the general Definition of the Emotions) is an act of imagining, insofar as it indicates the present disposition of the body; and therefore (Proposition 21 of this Part) the mind is subject to the emotions belonging to the passions only while the body endures. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that no love is eternal except intellectual love.

Note. If we look at men's common opinion, we shall see that they are indeed conscious of the eternity of their mind, but that they confuse eternity with duration, and ascribe it to the imagination, or the memory, which they believe remains after death.

Proposition 35

God loves himself with an infinite intellectual love.

Proof. God is absolutely infinite (Part 1, Definition 6); that is (Part 2, Definition 6), the nature of God rejoices in infinite perfection, and such rejoicing is (Part 2, Proposition 3) accompanied by the idea of himself—that is (Part 1, Proposition 11; Part 1, Definition 1), by the idea of his own cause. And this is what we have (in Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary) described as intellectual love.

Proposition 36

The mind's intellectual love towards God is that very love of God by which God loves himself—not insofar as he is infinite, but insofar as he can be explained through the essence of the human mind regarded under the form of eternity. In other words, the mind's intellectual love towards God is part of the infinite love with which God loves himself.

Proof. This love of the mind must be referred to the mind's activities (Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary; Part 3, Proposition 3); it is indeed itself an activity by which the mind regards itself, accompanied by the idea of God as cause (Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary)—that is (Part 1, Proposition 25, Corollary; Part 2, Proposition 11, Corollary), an activity by which God, insofar as he can be explained through the human mind, regards himself accompanied by the idea of himself. Therefore (by Proposition 35 of this Part) this love of the mind is part of the infinite love with which God loves himself. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that God, insofar as he loves himself, loves men; and consequently that God's love towards men and the mind's intellectual love towards God are one and the same.

Note. From this we clearly understand what our salvation, or blessedness, or freedom consists in: namely, in a constant and eternal love towards God, or in God's love towards men. This love, or blessedness, is called Glory in the Bible, and not undeservedly. For whether it is referred to God or to the mind, it may rightly be called contentment of spirit, which (Definition 25 of the Emotions; Definition 30 of the Emotions) is not really distinct from glory. Insofar as it is referred to God, it is (Proposition 35 of this Part) pleasure, if we may still use that word, accompanied by the idea of itself; and insofar as it is referred to the mind, it is the same (Proposition 27 of this Part).

Again, since the essence of our mind consists solely in knowledge, whose beginning and foundation is God (Part 1, Proposition 15; Part 2, Proposition 47, Note), it becomes clear to us how and in what way our mind follows from the divine nature as to its essence and existence, and constantly depends on God. I have thought it worth calling attention to this here in order to show by an example how potent is the knowledge of particular things which I have called intuitive, or of the third kind (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2), and how much more powerful it is than the universal knowledge I have called knowledge of the second kind. For although in Part One I showed in general terms that all things—and consequently the human mind too—depend on God as to their essence and existence, that demonstration, legitimate and beyond doubt as it is, does not affect our mind as strongly as when the same conclusion is drawn from the actual essence of some particular thing which we say depends on God.

Proposition 37

There is nothing in nature which is contrary to this intellectual love, or which can take it away.

Proof. This intellectual love follows necessarily from the nature of the mind, insofar as the mind is regarded through the nature of God as an eternal truth (Proposition 33 of this Part; Proposition 29 of this Part). So if there were anything contrary to this love, it would be contrary to what is true; and consequently whatever could take this love away would make what is true false, which is plainly absurd. Therefore there is nothing in nature which, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. The Axiom of Part Four has to do with particular things insofar as they are regarded in relation to a given time and place; of this, I think, no one can doubt.

Proposition 38

The more things the mind understands by the second and third kinds of knowledge, the less it is subject to the emotions which are evil, and the less it fears death.

Proof. The mind's essence consists in knowledge (Part 2, Proposition 11); so the more things the mind understands by the second and third kinds of knowledge, the greater will be the part of it that endures (Proposition 29 of this Part; Proposition 23 of this Part), and consequently (by Proposition 37 of this Part) the greater the part of it untouched by the emotions which are contrary to our nature—in other words, evil (Part 4, Proposition 30). So the more things the mind understands by the second and third kinds of knowledge, the greater the part of it that remains unimpaired, and consequently the less it is subject to the emotions, and so on. Q.E.D.

Note. From this we understand the point I touched on in Part 4, Proposition 39, Note, and promised to explain in this Part: namely, that death is the less harmful the greater the mind's clear and distinct knowledge, and consequently the more the mind loves God. And since from the third kind of knowledge arises the highest contentment there can be (Proposition 27 of this Part), it follows that the human mind can come to be of such a nature that the part of it which we have shown perishes with the body (Proposition 21 of this Part) is of little importance compared with the part which endures. But I shall treat of this at greater length shortly.

Proposition 39

He who has a body capable of a great many things has a mind of which the greatest part is eternal.

Proof. A man who has a body capable of a great many things is least troubled by the emotions which are evil (Part 4, Proposition 38)—that is (Part 4, Proposition 30), by the emotions contrary to our nature. He therefore (Proposition 10 of this Part) has the power of arranging and associating the modifications of the body according to the order of the intellect, and consequently of bringing it about that all the modifications of the body are referred to the idea of God. From this it will come about that (Proposition 15 of this Part) he is affected with love towards God, which (Proposition 16 of this Part) must occupy, or constitute, the chief part of his mind. Therefore (Proposition 33 of this Part) such a man will have a mind of which the chief part is eternal. Q.E.D.

Note. Since human bodies are capable of a great many things, there is no doubt that they may be of such a nature as to belong to minds which have a great knowledge of themselves and of God, and of which the greatest, or chief, part is eternal, so that they scarcely fear death. But to understand this more clearly we must recall that we live in a state of perpetual change, and that as we change for the better or the worse we are called happy or unhappy.

A man who passes from being an infant, or a child, to being a corpse is called unhappy; whereas it is counted happiness to have lived through the whole span of life with a sound mind in a sound body. And in reality a man who, like an infant or a child, has a body capable of very few things, and depending for the most part on external causes, has a mind which, considered in itself alone, is scarcely conscious of itself, or of God, or of things; whereas a man who has a body capable of a great many things has a mind which, considered in itself alone, is highly conscious of itself, of God and of things. In this life, therefore, we endeavour above all that the body of a child, so far as its nature allows and helps, may be changed into something capable of a great many things and belonging to a mind highly conscious of itself, of God and of things; and we desire so to change it that what belongs to its imagination and memory becomes insignificant beside its intellect, as I said in the note to the last proposition.

Proposition 40

The more perfection each thing has, the more active it is and the less passive; and conversely, the more active it is, the more perfect.

Proof. The more perfect a thing is, the more reality it has (Part 2, Definition 6), and consequently (Part 3, Proposition 3, Note) the more active and the less passive it is. This demonstration may be reversed, and so proves that the more active a thing is, the more perfect it is. Q.E.D.

Corollary. It follows that the part of the mind which endures, great or small, is more perfect than the rest. For the eternal part of the mind (Proposition 23 of this Part; Proposition 29 of this Part) is the understanding, through which alone we are said to be active (Part 3, Proposition 3); while the part we have shown to perish is the imagination (Proposition 21 of this Part), through which alone we are said to be passive (Part 3, Proposition 3, and the general Definition of the Emotions). Therefore the first, great or small, is more perfect than the second. Q.E.D.

Note. Such are the doctrines I meant to set out concerning the mind insofar as it is regarded without relation to the body. From them, and from Part 1, Proposition 21 and other places, it is plain that our mind, insofar as it understands, is an eternal mode of thinking, determined by another eternal mode of thinking, and that one by a third, and so on to infinity; so that all of them taken together at once constitute the eternal and infinite intellect of God.

Proposition 41

Even if we did not know that our mind is eternal, we should still hold piety and religion, and generally everything we showed in Part Four to belong to courage and high-mindedness, to be of first importance.

Proof. The first and only foundation of virtue, the rule of right living, is (Part 4, Proposition 22, Corollary; Part 4, Proposition 24) seeking one's own true advantage. Now in determining what reason prescribes as useful, we took no account of the mind's eternity, which has only become known to us in this Fifth Part. So although we were then ignorant that the mind is eternal, we nevertheless held that the qualities belonging to courage and high-mindedness are of first importance. Therefore, even if we were still ignorant of this doctrine, we should still put those precepts of reason first. Q.E.D.

Note. The general belief of most people seems to be different. They seem to believe that they are free insofar as they may obey their appetites, and that they give up their rights insofar as they are bound to live according to the commandments of the divine law. So they believe that piety and religion, and generally everything belonging to firmness of mind, are burdens which they hope to lay aside after death, receiving the reward of their bondage—that is, of their piety and religion. And it is not only by this hope but chiefly by the fear of being horribly punished after death that they are led to live according to the divine commandments, so far as their feeble and infirm spirit will carry them.

If men did not have this hope and this fear, but believed that the mind perishes with the body and that no hope of a longer life remains for the wretches worn out with the burden of piety, they would go back to their own inclinations, governing everything by their appetites and preferring to obey fortune rather than themselves. This seems to me no less absurd than if a man, because he does not believe he can sustain his body for ever on wholesome food, should choose to cram himself with poisons and deadly fare; or if, because he sees that the mind is not eternal or immortal, he should prefer to be out of his mind altogether and to live without the use of reason. Such ideas are too absurd to be worth refuting.

Proposition 42

Blessedness is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself; nor do we rejoice in it because we control our lusts—on the contrary, it is because we rejoice in it that we are able to control our lusts.

Proof. Blessedness consists in love towards God (Proposition 36 of this Part, Note), and this love springs from the third kind of knowledge (Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary). So this love (Part 3, Proposition 3; Part 3, Proposition 59) must be referred to the mind insofar as the mind is active; and therefore (Part 4, Definition 8) it is virtue itself. That was our first point. Again, the more the mind rejoices in this divine love, or blessedness, the more it understands (Proposition 32 of this Part)—that is (Proposition 3 of this Part, Corollary), the more power it has over the emotions, and (Proposition 38 of this Part) the less it is subject to the emotions which are evil. So the more the mind rejoices in this divine love, or blessedness, the more power it has to control its lusts. And since human power in controlling the emotions consists solely in the understanding, it follows that no one rejoices in blessedness because he has controlled his lusts; on the contrary, his power of controlling his lusts arises from blessedness itself. Q.E.D.

Note. I have now completed everything I wished to set out concerning the mind's power over the emotions and the mind's freedom. From it we can see how strong the wise man is, and how far he surpasses the ignorant man who is driven only by his appetites. For the ignorant man is not only distracted in various ways by external causes, never gaining true contentment of spirit, but lives besides as though unaware of himself, and of God, and of things; and as soon as he ceases to be acted upon, he ceases to be at all.

The wise man, on the other hand, insofar as he is considered as such, is scarcely disturbed in spirit at all; being conscious, by a certain eternal necessity, of himself, and of God, and of things, he never ceases to be, and always possesses true contentment of spirit.

If the way I have pointed out as leading to this result seems extremely hard, it can nevertheless be found. And hard it must be, since it is so seldom found. How could it be, if salvation lay ready to hand and could be found without great labour, that almost everyone should neglect it? But all things excellent are as difficult as they are rare.
