Introduction

When my publisher, Louis Tannen, my editor, Ralph Read, and I met to consider putting *The Tarbell Course in Magic* in book form, it was our idea to reprint the Course as it was originally written, but in a more convenient form for the library. Then we decided on a rearrangement of material, an occasional change and addition here and there.

But when the news came out that the Tarbell Course was coming out in book form, magicians began offering us their original material for the new course. It was such good material that we could not resist using it. With the publishing of Volume 1, this material increased.

In the revision of the Course there were many things to consider so as to be of real value to the beginner, the amateur, the semi-professional and the experienced professional.

In America there seems to be a constant cry for something new. “What’s new? Show us a new trick.” Then when they see a new effect they lose interest and want something different. That is the great tendency of the modern amateur who wants something to entertain himself rather than to stop and learn a mystery so well that he can present it in the proper manner and stick with it long enough to make it really good magic.

David Devant, the famous English magician, once asked an amateur how many tricks he knew and the reply was, “I know over a thousand tricks in magic.” Then David Devant said, “And with all my professional experience, all I know is *eight.*” But Devant knew how to present those eight tricks under any kind of circumstances and he knew the art and science of magic frontwards and backwards in order to make masterpieces of those eight.

Of course, I know, and include in my own programs, many times eight tricks . . . and I, too, like to add “something new” in step with the times. We therefore give you a great many new tricks in each volume of the Course, but we also give you those basic, standard effects that are vital to your education as a magician. Those fundamental principles form an important part of your training and will be reflected in your work as you advance from year to year.

And always remember that some of the greatest tricks in the world are the most aged. We utilize the old ideas and principles but give them a modern touch in presentation, or patter, and thus create “new” tricks. Often when asked to “Show us something new,” I have deliberately done an old one with a new twist to it, and have fooled the boys who were not up on the fundamentals.

Quite a number of mystery workers have asked me from time to time just how to make certain “Double Paper Cones” that I used in my act. Then I began to ask magicians what they knew about such cones and discovered that the subject was little understood by magicians generally. Very few realized that such a simple device formed an important part of the programs of such professionals as Blackstone and Dante.

So I came to the conclusion that I would write a lesson about double paper effects and add this fundamental information to your store of knowledge. You will find it in this volume.

And thus the new *Tarbell Course in Magic* is undergoing many changes and additions in tune with today. Much of the old original Course will be retained, but rearranged. If you own an old Course, hold on to it, as you will enjoy going over the old arrangement, as an early student.

This Course is written for you, to help you. I try to figure out the knowledge you should have, to make you more successful—to give you an efficient workable background. Even though we do not do a great many of the tricks as yet, we need from an educational standpoint to know the methods employed, for they add to our basic knowledge and greatly aid our progress.

I want to thank all those who have contributed their own material to this Course, for they, like myself, are learning that “To give is to receive,” and that “To teach is to learn.”

Some come in with a pet magic trick and hestitate to give it to me for the Course because it plays too great a part in their programs. But they finally give up their secret and are surprised to find that they go away with several other tricks they did not know before.

As John Scarne, that wizard with the cards, said, “I gave Tarbell one of my pet mysteries and he gave me six improvements.”

Yes, we grow by helping each other grow. As the ancient Magi said, “Good thought, good word, good deed.”

[Figure aaa: Harlan Tarbell's signature in flowing cursive script, written below the end of the introduction.]

[Figure aab: A cartoon rabbit in a black dress suit with a bow tie, standing upright and holding out a paper cone with a checked cloth hanging from its mouth.]

[Figure aac: A cartoon rabbit in a black dress suit standing upright, holding a playing card in one hand and a pair of ribbons or paper strips hanging from both hands.]
