Lesson 20: How to Please Your Audience

The modern magician is fundamentally an entertainer, and to be a successful entertainer he must please his audience.

The magician is somewhat like a mirror on the stage reflecting back to his audience the things they want to see and hear.

The style and method of presentation are as important as the magic and mysteries. Imagination, originality, human nature, timing, humor, sincerity, good taste, showmanship, personality, proper speech, proper dress and timeliness all play their part.

Imagination

When Aladdin rubbed his lamp—things happened! It is the business of the magician to make things happen, and to happen in an unexpected, interesting way.

We are all children from five to one hundred and five years of age. Like children, we seek an escape in the land of fairy tales and illusion. People want phenomena and miracles. Instinctively one wishes for a magic wand to bring forth one’s fondest desires.

People rush to the movies and to the theatre, because they want to be entertained in an unreal world, a world of fancy. They want to live in their imaginations for a while and forget their own individual lives with their problems and hardships. They find the theatre a retreat where they can withdraw from their own everyday lives.

Artists, writers, producers and actors strive to take people out of themselves. On the screen, on the stage, on the radio, they bring a new world to us. In the theatrical world much is illusion. Behind the curtain line is much different than in front of it. We laugh and cry at situations that take on the power of reality. We feel happy all over when the lovers fall into each other’s arms and apparently live happily ever after. Painted scenery becomes a King’s castle, a living room, a bed room, a garden or a street. *We Want to Believe.*

All this is a great factor in the explanation of the magician’s power. He deals with the unreal. His art is so far removed from everyday life that the spell he casts over his audience is tremendous. His is a world of fancy. His illusion looks like reality. And that is what the public wants.

The public is interested in mystery and the supernatural. This accounts for the great interest in mystery detective stories in books and on the radio as well as the screen. People pay for mystery. The magician will be popular if he will bring mystery—mystery that appeals to the imagination.

Imagination has built cities where rolling prairies and farm lands were before. Imagination has brought forth a modern civilization with its electric power, lights, radio, automobiles, railroads and aeroplanes. The imagination of man changed an ox cart into a buggy, into an automobile and into an aeroplane.

The ordinary, plus imagination, makes the extraordinary. A man with imagination takes two or three common ingredients selling at fifteen cents per pound and combines them into a product selling for two dollars per pound.

Note the simple articles out of which magic is made—a coin, a handkerchief, a ball, a piece of paper or a piece of rope. Each in themselves is just a common article to the general public. But the magician adds imagination to them and they in return perform the unexpected.

Ten cents worth of clothesline plus imagination may be turned into a hundred dollar program or even a five hundred dollar program. Audiences have been held spellbound by my own series of rope mysteries. With a simple piece of clothesline three feet long I have entertained an audience for over fifteen minutes.

Frakson takes a few cigarettes and builds a beautiful act. Cardini adds imagination to cards, billiard balls and cigarettes and becomes a headliner.

On the dealers’ shelves lie dozens of articles waiting for the man with imagination to make headline features. The simple thumb tip, originally designed to switch a torn strip of tissue paper for a whole strip, had very limited sales, but began to sell into the thousands when it was used to vanish cigarettes, salt, water, etc. Even mind readers applied it to their mental effects.

Imagination is limited to no one. We all have it.

Originality

Be yourself—do not be an echo. Be a person and not a parrot. Don’t be an imitator, a borrower, a beggar or a plagiarist.

In all the world there is no one exactly like you. No one can see from your eyes or hear with your ears. No one has had your exact experiences.

The tendency is for the average person to imitate. He sees a performer feature something and then wants to go out and duplicate it. He gets out his notebook and tries to copy the patter word by word. He imitates the performer’s gestures, when perhaps these words, those gestures and that mystery are not adapted to his particular personality and he therefore looks ludicrous and out of place.

We all loved Will Rogers. He was a unique character—a distinctive individual. In his homely Oklahoman way he could say things that most of us would not dare to say. His heart was right and folks trusted him.

But imagine anyone trying to imitate Will and getting away with it in public! The imitation would fall flat. Will was himself. He imitated no one. He was just Will Rogers and people loved his naturalness.

Just so, the world wants you to be yourself.

Alexander Herrmann, a Frenchman, wore a large mustache and goatee. They were well suited to him, enhanced his appearance and gave him individuality during the era in which he lived. Many thought Herrmann’s success lay in his mustache and goatee, so great was the craze to wear mustaches and goatees even though they made their wearers appear ridiculous. Even false ones were pasted on. Sometimes big black ones which did not match the hair or complexion.

The mustache is becoming to some people if properly trimmed and in keeping with the individual. Laurant, Blackstone and Cardini wear small mustaches with effect.

Instead of imitating others—it is better to have them imitate you. A parrot may be taught to say the Declaration of Independence but it is still a parrot. Let us be artists and not parrots.

A parrot can put on an opera hat, monocle, dress suit and a cape, but he isn’t Cardini. The parrot forgets that Cardini is an Englishman and his particular dress is suitable to the Englishman.

Thousands may copy the painting Mona Lisa, but they are only copies. It is the original that has the value. Originality brings freshness of thought. It is like the coming of springtime.

I discovered years ago that people wanted me to be as natural as Will Rogers. They liked my natural way of working, my natural style of humor and my sincerity. People looked upon me as a friend to whom they could come with their problems. They looked upon me not only as a magician but as a mystic who understood life’s problems.

Imitation has its good points in the beginning until we master a trick or a sleight, but soon we must do it in our own way, the way we can do it best and most naturally.

Your success comes from your real self—your true inner self.

Human Nature

When Robert-Houdin came under the guidance of Torrini, during Houdin’s early years, Torrini told him that the first thing to learn in becoming a magician was human nature. Success comes from our ability to please and handle people. Our success is greatly measured by the reactions of the audience and of those with whom we deal.

People are busy with many things, so why should they give up their time to come and see you? What can you offer that is more important than the things they are doing and even pay a substantial fee to see you?

People are primarily interested in themselves and in their individual wants. A man is interested in what he wants, not what you want. He is interested in you as long as you can help supply his wants. As Elbert Hubbard once said, “Love the things that I love and I will love you, but hate the things that I love and you are crazy.”

Man’s selfishness arose in an effort to survive. But a man’s selfishness is unpopular with other people. You might say “I want so-and-so. I demand so-and-so.” And others would say “So what! Who cares?” People shy away from our self-centered desires and yet want us to cater to their own self-centered cravings.

And yet people will favor your desires if they see benefit, profit and a gain for themselves. So we have to take partly at least, our self-centered desires and interpret them into an expression of what others want and want so badly they are willing to pay for it. So instead of saying “Here’s what I want,” you say “Here’s what you want.” You talk *you* instead of *I.* Andrew Carnegie once said that he made his money by making money for *others.*

My father’s cousin, Gage Tarbell, was one of the greatest insurance men that ever lived. At one time his office sold more insurance per year than seven insurance companies put together. He changed *death* insurance into *life* insurance. He showed men how their weekly or monthly earnings could still continue after their deaths. He showed men how to take care of their families in advance; to take care of a wife and each of the children. He looked after college educations, saw that money was distributed in proper amounts, showed people how to protect families against financial sharks. He made it possible for a man to put aside small amounts each month to accomplish his desires. People with whom he did business became his friends, because he himself was a friend and because he fathered and assumed the responsibility of the things they were trying to straighten out, and perhaps didn’t know how to straighten out.

Today program chairmen, managers, theatre owners, club presidents, etc., have their problems and they are seeking the things that will help best to meet their needs in the easiest way possible.

Instead of *selling* things to people—we help them to *buy*. Few people want to be sold, or want to talk to salesmen but they do like to talk to service men. Everybody likes to buy things.

And most people want something for nothing. They want much for little. Each wants to be a king or queen with others waiting upon them. Bargains, premiums, free offers, all cater to the human desire to get something for nothing.

The law of inertia is something to cope with. People dislike climbing stairs. They like to trade on the shady side of the street. They like to follow the crowd. They want a whole lot for little effort.

There is also a class of people that believe that the more expensive a thing is, the better it is. That an article brought from foreign climes is better than the article at home. “Distance lends enchantment.” They would pay $500 for a show quicker than $10. But they expect $500 worth of entertainment.

What hurts the magic profession is the incompetent performer who steps out of a $10 class into a $500 class and still gives a $10 show. How many times have I heard program chairmen say “We had a magician, paid him $150 or $200, and was he terrible! We never want another magician.” That performer stepped out of his class. He took money for something he could not deliver. He took money under false pretenses. He did not give value. He hurt his profession and made it difficult for a competent magician to follow. One of the hardest problems that the competent professional magician has is the competition of the fellow who steps out of his class into a field or plane that he does not understand. One poor performer, in order to get a temporary hundred dollars, can ruin thousands of dollars worth of business for others.

There is one rule on the road to success that is well to remember, *always give more than what you are paid for.* Woe unto the man who gives less.

I am often reminded of a story that my friend Guy Marchand tells. Marchand has taught thousands of people how to turn their abilities into cash. A candy store was failing and Marchand was called in to analyze the situation. It didn’t take him long to detect the reason.

A man came into the store to buy a pound of chocolate candy. The saleslady took a scoop and put about two pounds of candy onto the scale. Then she began unloading and taking away. Finally she reached up and took out a couple of pieces in order to make the scales balance. She gave the man a full pound of candy but she lost a customer. When the man went out he turned to Marchand and said “This is a h—l of a place. They take everything away from you here.”

But Marchand made the candy store a successful business. How? When a customer comes in to buy a pound of candy the girl puts only one-half a pound on the scales at first. Then she turns to the customer and says “Have you ever tried one of our butter creams?” And she hands him a butter cream.

Then little by little she adds candy to the scale and finally she throws an extra one in for good measure. She puts the candy into a good looking box, well wrapped, and hands it to the customer. “You will love these candies—they are so fresh.” She put an extra chocolate nougat on the box as she delivered it.

She gave the customer one pound of candy and two extra pieces. But the customer was as happy as though she had given him two pounds. The two extra pieces were the best kind of advertising and cheaper than newspaper space.

Yes, the man went away happy and would come back again for that store gave him something. You must give in order to get. Today the Marchand system is popular with the better candy stores over the country.

Here are a few fundamental things I want you to remember about people: 90% are interested in physical improvement.

8% are interested in mental improvement.

2% are interested in spiritual improvement.

People want:

Health

Wealth

Love

Adventure

Entertainment

People want miracles. People judge their gods by the miracles that they perform.

As modern day magical entertainers we help to supply the craving for miracles in a harmless, inspiring and entertaining way.

Elbert Hubbard used to tell me, “I love magicians because they are honest men. They tell you they are going to fool you and then proceed to do it. In fact their pay is governed by their ability to puzzle. But no matter what happens at the magic show—when you get home you still have your watch, your pocketbook and your appendix. And that is more than I can say for some of my non-magician acquaintances.”

So let grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, children and relations come to see us, enjoy our seeming miracles and go away entertained and pleased. We have transported them to a new world for a while. Human nature craves the magical.

Timing

The whole universe runs on law and order. There is a proper place and time for everything. In order to get contrasts, life gives us the law of opposites—positive and negative, light and dark, heat and cold, up and down, in and out, big and little, expansion and limitation, hard and soft, heavy and light, bright and dull, male and female, laughter and sorrow and the kinetic and the static.

There is a time for planting and a time for harvesting. Spring, summer, fall and winter have their timing. The earth goes around the sun on an exact schedule and astronomers worry if their calculations are a minute off.

Nature gives great variety and is constantly adding new touches to keep us from fatiguing. Even the most brilliant sunset would become tiresome if held too long. The human nervous system will stand about so much. It is hard to hold human interest for any great length of time.

Timing is superimportant to the magician and his control of the audience. He is there to please the audience and to fit in with the rhythm of their desires.

I have seen big expensive shows flop because of poor timing and I have seen one single entertainer a greater success than a $150,000 production, because of his timing.

Amateur magicians are usually so anxious to entertain themselves with their own stuff, that many do not hesitate to want to do an hour, or a full evening, show on a bill which has five to nine other acts.

In vaudeville, acts are given a certain time and they are supposed to run that exact time. If the act is given eight minutes, it is supposed to go on and get off in eight minutes and not ten minutes or fifteen minutes. Every bill is set to run just so many minutes as a whole and each act is a definite part in making the complete program.

So always remember, “How do I fit into the whole scheme of things? Who wants a full meal on top of a Christmas dinner?” There is a proper time for humor, a proper time for mystery, a proper time for tears and a proper time for everything that enters into the making of a great show.

On the stage a second seems like a minute and a minute like an hour, sometimes. Music is often necessary to keep you in proper timing, or properly timed patter and action to take the place of music.

Blessed are the dependable people who do things right, have respect for an 8:30 P.M. curtain and respect for the feelings of the audience who paid to come in to have a good time.

Not too much—not too little. As a great French chef said “It must have that definite touch.”

Humor

Humor is the saving grace of the gods. Philosophy without humor would be tragic. Humor is a part of happiness. It is the balance wheel to sanity. It is one of the highest faculties in the human brain. Pity the world without humor, comedy and laughter. And God bless those who have taught the world to laugh and have changed tragedy to comedy by the proper perspective of thought.

Hannen Swaffer, noted English columnist, said when the Egyptian (Magic) Hall, of London, was torn down, “We not only miss the passing of the magician at Egyptian Hall with his mysteries, but we miss his humor, for humor is as much a part of the successful magician’s show as are his magical mysteries.” Yes, a magician without humor would be like a Christmas without Santa Claus.

Humor with the magician is not telling a joke about Pat and Mike, but is greatly dependent upon situations, proper timing and interesting slants. The heart must be right and ready to enter into the fun. Humor leaves everyone feeling fine and happier. To play a joke on someone, to embarrass someone, is not humor, in fact it is apt to result in resentment.

Sometimes the puzzling climax or surprise in a mystery produces humor because it was so unexpected and was presented in such a wholesome interesting manner.

When I brought out “Eyeless Vision” as a stage program, I little realized its entertainment value. My original idea was to show the amazing things a man could do with his eyes sealed and bandaged. I would perform something startling and awe inspiring and expect the audience to nod their heads in educational appreciativeness, but instead they would break out into uproarious laughter. The most serious moments sometimes produced the greatest laughter. And I wondered what was the matter.

So I asked questions of members of my audiences. “Why did you laugh when I told a lady that her husband’s middle name was Melvin?” I asked.

“Yes,” he would say, “but you should have seen the look on the woman’s face when you told her that. Man, that was a sight to look upon.”

So I found people were laughing at the others’ reactions (the result of proper timing), and the amazing things I would do which seemed so impossible.

Once a lady came up with a postage stamp pasted on her forehead to test me. Instead of saying “This is a lady with a postage stamp on her forehead,” I said, “Well, here is a lady who is not afraid of the mail (male). She believes in going places. Stamps on a lady should be cancelled with kisses.”

“Eyeless Vision,” which started out to be a serious act, turned out to be one of the most laughable and entertaining acts on my program.

It is well to study the methods of the great humorists of the world.

Sincerity

Years ago when I wanted to find the audience’s reactions I had friends mingle with the audience after the program to hear comments. They came back with the report that people like me because I was sincere and they felt they could trust me even if I talked on subjects that seemed almost unbelievable.

Audiences respect an artist who is sincere in his work. For the moment the magician must make illusion seem like truth and he, too, must believe that the thing really happens.

If a coin is apparently thrown into the left hand, but is really retained in the right hand, the performer must picture it in the left hand. It is difficult to get the beginner in magic to live the illusion in his consciousness so the audience will also live it.

There is more to telepathy and mental control than the average magical student realizes, and by the way, never say “mental telepathy,” as all telepathy is mental, and the word mental in this connection is not only unnecessary but is bad form.

Good Taste

There is a proper time and place for everything but a thing which might be a hit at one time may not be at another.

Elbert Hubbard once told me that if I wanted to be a success before audiences I must tell audiences what they already knew then they would say “My, but he is a smart man, he thinks just as we do.” There is a lot in what Hubbard said. People have their opinions and ideas as to what they think is right and proper. We are there to entertain, to gain good will and not to rub people’s fur in the wrong direction.

We can use a picture of Lincoln in the North but it is not adapted to the South. A thing that one portion of the country may love and respect, another section might look at with scorn.

Let us fit into the place where we are showing and yet be a bit above so as to gain respect.

Some time ago we had one of our magical conventions at Battle Creek, Michigan. Mr. Kellogg, a kindly religious man who loves magic, let us use the beautiful Kellogg Auditorium there for our programs. Early on the first program one performer came out and began telling “off colored” stories along with his tricks. Immediately there was a feeling of letdown and resentment in the audience, and Mr. Kellogg, disappointed, got up and left the auditorium.

Here is something I said in Volume I, but I repeat it because I want every magician to remember it as long as he lives. A magician is supposed to be a person who is on a plane higher than the average person and is supposed to have a bit of supernatural power to do things ordinary folks cannot do. In days gone by people came to the magician for health, wealth, love and to find a way out of difficulties. In the field of entertainment, people will come to see the magician who would never think of going to the theatre or other places of entertainment. But they feel the magician presents “clean” entertainment and everyone can attend from the youngster to grandpa and grandma. We must never disappoint an audience, and never must the magician come down from his pedestal of respect.

Our work does not end with the stage. Sometimes our greatest effort is off the stage. When we are entertained by others we must learn to fit into that degree of society and be respected. People should be glad to have us with them. Table manners, the things we talk about, our intelligent reactions, our desire to be of service, are very important.

How you live offstage is especially important when you are dealing with committees. It is so easy to be considerate, to be kindly, to be courteous and to be appreciative.

We are living in a fast-changing world so let us keep our programs up-to-date and not be out-moded. As styles change we must change. Let us use good taste in tune with the times.

Keeping Up with the Times

The character of magic, like that of everything else in life, has altered with the changing world. At one time a great deal of cumbersome apparatus was used—many trick cases, trunks, automata and long table drapes. The magician, too, was encumbered with voluminous robes.

Robert-Houdin, founder of the modern school of legerdemain, did away with the gaudy, clumsy paraphernalia of his predecessors. Smaller effects and sleight of hand came into its own. Houdin wore a dress suit and adapted his program to the society of his day.

So great was the impression of Houdin’s life on young Eric Weiss, who worshipped Houdin and wanted to be like him, that he called himself Houdini, which means “like Houdin.”

I have said so many times that the greatest magic consists in making the common, uncommon, and the ordinary, extraordinary, for we start with something people already know and then step it up into a magical surprise or seeming impossibility.

At the time Houdini became successful in Europe with his handcuff escapes, T. Nelson Downs was a “King of Coins” in the magical world, and Howard Thurston was astonishing audiences with his card manipulations. These three magicians had many imitators, as they opened up new fields in the profession.

The simplification of paraphernalia has made the art of magic even more astonishing by reason of its apparent impromptu nature and naturalness. The important thing in modern magic is not elaborateness, but novelty, surprise, something spontaneous and effective.

As the years go by changes come. We must adapt ourselves to these new conditions. Only recently have we had automobiles, aeroplanes and radios. A miracle yesterday may be scientific fact today.

Proper Speech

Too few people realize the power of words. Words can act as alarm clocks or sleeping potions. They can make or break you. Words make wars, make peace, sway audiences, sell goods, make laws and help folks to become attracted to us or repelled from us. Words pack dynamite.

For years publicity and advertising men have realized the power of words. One heading on an ad may bring in 16 replies and another heading in the same size ad bring in 1600 answers. Many a sales failure has been turned into success by proper wording.

Some time ago a soap firm made a mistake with a batch of soap and got in a bit too much caustic. The result was that customers complained of a smarting sensation on their skins. There was not enough caustic to injure, but it seemed unpleasant. A bright advertising man saved the day by advertising “The soap with the delightful tingle,” “Awaken your skin,” etc. Look at the power of “Food that is shot from guns,” “It floats,” “Sizzling steaks.”

Hen’s eggs, cow’s butter, sparkling mountain water, Texas tomatoes, have greater selling power than just eggs, butter, water, tomatoes.

To express yourself effectively, words are important. Study your language well and its proper use. Imagine if Thurston had come out on the stage and said “Dese, dem and dose.” People expect a magician to be educated in the magic of words and phraseology as well as his mysteries.

Study your patter and speech. Make your words mean something and master their delivery. Study the effectiveness of Abraham Lincoln’s words. People look to great men and women to say the right thing.

One great fault of amateur magicians is to say “This is an ordinary deck of cards;” “This is a common ordinary piece of rope.” Leave out the words, *common* and *ordinary*. The audience should be allowed naturally to think that objects are all right. Another thing, you do not have to pass many things for examination. Never say “Please examine this.” Why examine it? Take it for granted. If an object has to be given to a spectator, just give it to him to hold. Be natural.

A few words have quieted mobs. A few words have elected presidents and a few words have defeated presidents. Study how you can make each mystery more effective in word presentation. Study your opening and your closing words. Read good books.

Elbert Hubbard was an inspiration to me in the use of words. I advise each of my students to read Elbert Hubbard’s “Little Journeys Into the Homes of the Great.”

Pantomime

Many magicians perform without saying an audible word. They belong to a class of artists who depend on pantomime. Now, pantomime is more than just doing something without words. It is a form of silent expression to put over an idea with movement, feeling, expressions, emotions, actions.

Pantomimic expression can be just as effective as speech, but obviously, must be carefully designed, timed and delivered to attain the desired result.

Proper Dress

There is appropriate dress for every occasion. An artist is supposed to be properly dressed, since clothes act as a silent salesman. Here good taste plays its part—color, harmony, proper fit and appropriate style.

Once a dress suit was just a dress suit. I can still recall certain “magical” dealers advertising second-hand dress suits by mere chest sizes. Suits passed from one to another. Today the dress suit is a piece of art and styled to the individual artist.

If you appear in full dress or tuxedo go to an authority who can advise on its proper style and cut, also the vest, shoes, collar, tie, shirt, socks, buttons, etc. There are theatrical tailors and haberdashers who make a specialty of artists’ clothing.

Sometimes modern formal morning or afternoon dress is appropriate. With some the regular business suit is best. Will Rogers was a type who looked best informally. In any case, the garments must look well on the performer—well fitted and properly pressed.

Sometimes the sport suit is best and gives greatest snap. A young man can wear things an older man cannot. Yet there are older people who look well in sports clothing and college boy styles.

Costumes are appropriate where one plays a character. Here is a chance for art and a good costumer. Winston Freer, who dresses in Hindu style, has a well designed snappy outfit that shows youth, adventure, spirit, action, and as though he might be an Aladdin from the Arabian Nights. His turban is small and not ill fitting and cumbersome such as some magicians have worn.

Magicians Should Be Artists

Dress, stage appearance—all are important. Composition, arrangement, color, quantity should be carefully studied. This is an age of modern arrangement and color.

See how the modern city show window has changed from the window of years ago. Windows are pictures in themselves. Note the difference between the beautifully styled windows of Marshall Field or Lord and Taylor, and the ten cent stores. One is a study in beauty, the other a mass of articles.

Dress your act. Do not clutter up the stage. Have a place for everything and study proper values.

At one time colors were just red, yellow, green, blue, purple, black and white. But today we have lovely tones of color, harmony of arrangement. Instead of red we speak also of geranium, vermilion, carmine, maroon, rose, etc.

Munsell gave us many ideas in proper color harmony and use of proper tones. Art stores can supply you with books and charts on colors.

Be careful of your blacks and reds. These should only be used in small amounts. Black, unless polished, is a dead color, while red is very powerful and very stimulating.

When I studied oil painting, I was not allowed red or black on my palette. My red was rose madder. To gain an impression of black on the picture I mixed rose madder with dark blue. It gave a darkness, a certain depth of brilliance that black itself could not give. Black gave a “dead” effect.

If a bright red, such as vermilion, was used, it was only in a small amount to accent something—a spot or two. This was also true of black. I am speaking of colored paintings and not of black and white pictures such as washes, pen and inks, silhouettes, etc.

Some colors, appropriate in themselves, are inharmonious when placed beside certain other colors, yet can be made more beautiful and effective when combined with certain others.

Red, because of its vitality, warmth and stimulation, can be seen a long way. That is why red lights are used for danger signals on street crossings, etc.

Yellow gives light, mentality and clearness of vision. Blue gives spirituality, coolness and quiet.

Green is a combination between yellow and blue. It is a protective color. It has strength and will power.

Violet is a dual color. It suggests birth and royalty, depending on how used. Ultra violet is a powerful healing agent. The violet tones are healing. A dark shade of violet combined with black has to be used with care as it looks too depressing. Violet is pleasing when used with the yellow tones.

White is a combination of all colors, while black is an absence of color. All life expresses itself in color. Anything that lives, vibrates, and anything that vibrates has color.

Use color to accent the particular part of the trick that you are selling. Let us say you are performing the trick where a square block drops through two tubes. A piece of plate glass is between the two tubes. Apparently the wooden block penetrates the glass. The important thing to see is the block of wood. So we can paint this some shade of red for brightness.

Now suppose we also painted the tubes red. The tubes would show up but the block would only be secondary. But if the tubes are painted in a subdued color in light grey blues and greens the red block would stand out in powerful contrast.

Too often have magical dealers elaborately painted up tubes and the non-essentials. For years in the egg bag trick, red egg bags have been supplied—brilliant red egg bags. It is the egg that must be accented, not the bag. Some day the dealers will get wise and make the egg bag in a pleasing subdued color to contrast with the whiteness of the egg.

When the amateur buys a piece of magical apparatus he wants to see plenty of gaudy color as a rule, or have it highly nickel plated. As Al Baker used to say “Nickel plated thumb tips will sell better than flesh colored ones, for the beginner wants something to look at and to show his friends.” But the thumb tip is supposed to be a hidden piece of apparatus. It is the ob-ject to be seen that must have the greatest visibility.

There are times when brilliant silver and gold cloths heighten an effect. This is particularly true in the production of brightly colored flowers or variegated colored plumes, etc.

Levante heightened the effect of plumes that changed color through a tube, by making the tube of a brilliant silver cloth—a cloth with the metallic brilliance of nickel plate.

In using flash—just be careful that the color heightens the effect with which it is used and does not lessen. If you are not artistically inclined, have an artist help you.

Always remember—*you are not selling boxes, curtains, gaudy tables and apparatus, but you are selling mystery!* Design artistically to increase the mystery.

There is a great difference between something artistically beautiful and in good taste, and something gaudy and artificial looking.

Make things pleasing to the eye for the eye is trained to register 22 times more speedily than the other senses. But at the same time do not neglect hearing, feeling, taste and smell.

Personality and Magnetism

People love those who are alive and magnetic and stand out from the crowd. The truly great artist has to radiate and hold audiences by his magnetic attraction.

To stand on our own, poised and controlled, without fear or favor, is a powerful asset. We do our work efficiently without worrying about what someone is going to think, say or do. We love our work and we are happy in it.

Let us stand out as individuals guided by our own faith in ourselves. As our success becomes greater our faith increases. Let us be of good cheer. Let us have strength of purpose. Magnetism, health and wholeness of body and mind go hand in hand.

Gloomy thoughts, irritability, complaining, gossiping, indigestion, fears and criticism are not conducive to magnetism. Such things are non-magnetic. Anything that lowers vitality lowers magnetism.

Few people realize the energy that a magician uses up on the stage. That is why it is necessary to restore the energy with sufficient sleep, exercise, good food, fresh air, sunshine and a poised mind.

Make-Up

This is a study in itself for each individual. On the stage or under the bright lights of a cabaret floor show, proper make-up removes natural paleness under the lights and enhances a performer’s appearance.

Where red, white and blue border and foot lights are used there is not as much need for make-up as there is under white lights. The red in the lights helps to color the skin.

For straight make-up you should get a basic make-up color adapted to blonde, red hair or brunette. This also applies to powder and rouge.

Leaning toward the brunette side I use Max Factor’s 7-A grease paint which comes in tubes. I dab a bit here and there upon my face and then, slightly wetting my hands in water, smooth the paint over my skin.

Then I apply Warnesson’s Electric Rouge on cheeks and lips. I use barely enough to give a warmth in color. The eyebrows are darkened a bit with a black or brown eyebrow pencil. Also around eye lashes. Then I powder with Stein’s Face Powder No. 5 (Brunette Powder).

The thing to get in make-up is an ideality in healthy naturalness. Do not over make-up as it looks too artificial. It is well to study your particular make-up under a make-up artist—someone who understands make-up for the stage and cabaret floor.

Make-up is used simply to improve your appearance, and the more natural, the more becoming to your personality, the better.

For character parts special make-up should be used to fit the character.

Showmanship

Showmanship is that thing which makes a common thing uncommon, an ordinary thing extraordinary and gives an ant hill a mountain of interest. It means the ability to put romance, mystery, surprise, suspense, interest and emotional feeling into your performance.

Showmanship puts breath into a lump of clay and makes it a living thing.

To become a Master of Showmanship you must be inspired with the spirit of being a magician and to love the thing you are doing. Your interest will help to awaken an audience’s interest. Your enthusiasm and interest awaken magnetism within you, and attract people to you.

About the deadest looking place is a theatre stage when there is no show going on. Yet see what happens when lights come on, the scene is set and the actors perform. Audiences sit inspired under the radiation of the theatrical showmanship.

Take your example from the playwright and producer. They put into plays the same principle of showmanship which you must use. They create interest in the audience, arouse their emotions, and build up each lesser effect to a greater one until they reach a climax.

The showman makes a masterpiece of a commonplace trick. He clothes it properly, he studies its presentation, he makes it timely, he learns to sell it to an audience so as to stir up interest and suspense.

The showman is one who is not satisfied with a few simple pieces of wood, metal, glass and paper, but puts them together and gives us a radio.

In everyday life we find many, many instances of showmanship. The salesman who understands showmanship is the one most likely to get the orders. He knows just what to say and how to say it, what to do and how to do it. Note how advertising men display articles that they sell. A commonplace article is presented in such an attractive form that people want to buy it.

Let us take a common article like a can of baked beans. To the ordinary mind baked beans are just baked beans, but not so to the advertising man. He will win wars on beans, save starving nations, build strong bodies. I remember years ago when Van Camp started to advertise their canned baked beans nationally. “Cooked for 24 hours to make them digestible.” What housewife could cook her beans 24 hours? “We use luscious Texas tomatoes in our beans.” Sounds good, those Texas tomatoes.

They sold beans and gave their competitors a run for their money. Now the truth is that most baked bean canners cook their beans about 24 hours and use Texas tomatoes. But it took Van Camp’s advertising man to tell the people about it and so definitely that people got the idea that Van Camp were exclusive in doing so.

In 1924 I was lecturing in Tampa, Florida. One evening as I was sitting in the lobby of De Soto Hotel I noticed a very dejected looking man sitting near me. I struck up a conversation and found he was a condensed milk salesman. He had come down to Florida to sell a certain brand of condensed milk, but he couldn’t sell it in competition with other brands, so he was broke, and was trying some way to move his family up North again.

“What’s the matter! You can’t sell your milk? It is a standard brand and well known,” I said.

“Yes,” he replied, “but our milk does not pour evenly. The fatty globules separate from the main body of the milk, and at one time the milk is too thick in the pouring and another time too thin. Other companies process their milk so as to keep the fatty globules in suspension and the milk is uniform in every part of the can.”

“Why doesn’t your company do the same thing?”

“Because our president isn’t modern enough. He thinks our method is better for nourishment.”

Now here was a salesman who had plenty of money and sales in his lap but he didn’t know it. He believed the negative thoughts of buyers. He forgot the psychology of women who buy milk. So I took him up to my room, got out a sheet of cardboard and my show card colors and started in on a poster to sell his milk.

“Look here,” I said, “what, is almost every woman interested in when she buys milk? Is it the potassium, calcium or chemistry of the milk, or is she primarily interested in one thing? How much cream does it have? She judges the value of the milk by the amount and thickness of the cream. Would she be happy to see her morning bottle of milk all of one consistency, without any cream demarkation? She would not. She radiates when she sees the rich cream on top of the milk.”

So, on the poster I drew a bottle of milk with the cream on top of the milk and beside it a cross section of a can of this man’s milk product. Across the top of the poster I put these headlines:

(BLANK’S) MILK IS GOOD MILK. EVEN THE CREAM RISES IN THE CANS.

Then in smaller letters I told the housewife if she wanted to use the cream to just pour it out from the top of the can and if she wanted whole milk to merely shake the can as she would a bottle of milk. Needless to say, the salesman was happy—he sold plenty of milk. I happened to be a showman—he was not. But he responded to showmanship.

I could write a book on the salesmen to whom I taught showmanship and who became successful while I was on this lecture tour through Florida.

Showmanship is greatly dependent on the perspective in which we see things. Do you remember the story of the three men who were cutting stone? When each was asked what he was doing, one said, “I am cutting stone.”

Another said, “I am earning five dollars per day.”

But the third man answered, “I am building a cathedral.”

The third man was a showman at heart. So remember we are not just doing tricks, earning so much money, but we are building a “cathedral” of magic.

What magical showmanship can do was brought home to me forcibly when a party of twelve magicians including myself went to see the play “The Charlatan” in which Frederic Tiden was playing the leading role of Cagliostro, the magician. We sat delighted at the magic and illusions that he presented from time to time in the play. When he produced a rosebush from a seed which he planted into a bit of sand in a clear glass flower-pot, we were completely mystified. Here truly was a great magician whom we had hitherto missed. After the show we went backstage, met Tiden and invited him out to dinner. The Cagliostro on the stage and the Tiden off the stage were like two different individuals. In the play he was rather large, dignified, elderly, well poised and masterful. Off stage he was smaller, thinner—just Tiden.

As is customary at dinners some of the boys perform a few mysteries. This was no exception. When Tiden was called on to perform he said, “Why boys, I’m no magician. I do not do tricks. You have me all wrong. I am just an actor.”

“Oh no,” we said, “you are a magician. Didn’t we see the wonderful magic you performed in the theatre this afternoon. You had us gasping, even at the rosebush growth. Where did you get the flowers from?”

He leaned back and laughed. “Do you mean to say those simple tricks fooled you?”

Then Tiden gave us an excellent talk. He said as he had been chosen to play the part of the noted magician, Cagliostro, he determined to make himself feel like a great magician and act the part. He studied what he thought a man like Cagliostro would do today and what he would do in the emergencies which the play brought forth. The play revolved around a man who claimed to be Cagliostro and through his magical power had never died but was over four hundred years old. Tiden’s showmanship succeeded so well that a great magician lived and breathed before an audience’s eyes.

He decided that things could be produced and vanished from places which an audience would least suspect. In this instance the man who appeared most innocent of helping him was the villain, a lawyer who tried to expose Cagliostro and prove him to be a faker. So Tiden thought his best helper and assistant would be this disturbing lawyer, a skeptic who sought every way possible to undo the magician. In the eyes of the audience this lawyer and the magician were bitter enemies. In reality it was the lawyer who helped create the illusions. When the lawyer lifted up the paper cone from the flower pot to see that there was no trickery, he put the flowers into the cone himself in readiness for the production a moment later. And Tiden, the actor, in his mastery of showmanship put his effects over as though he were the greatest magician in the world.

Showmanship of Individual Magicians

It is interesting to note the varied forms of showmanship that prominent magicians, past and present, have incorporated into their programs.

Who could forget the showmanship of Chevalier Pinetti, one of the first great stage magicians who became famous during the latter part of the eighteenth century. His elaborate stage paraphernalia, his publicity and his four beautiful white horses and elegant carriage made him a prominent personage. So famous did this Italian conjurer become, that when he drove down the street even the soldiers presented arms and the drums beat. In Prussia he drew so much attention that Frederick the Great, himself, could not compete, so Frederick issued an order that commanded Pinetti to leave Berlin within twenty-four hours. As Frederick said “Berlin is not large enough to hold two reigning sovereigns—the King of Prussia and the King of Conjurers.”

Katterfeldo, the Conjurer with the Black Cat, was a picturesque figure in the literature of magic. He claimed to be aided, like the wizards and witches of old, by a familiar spirit in the form of a black cat which appeared at his performances. From time to time during a program he pretended to consult with the cat.

Torrini, whose real name was Count Edmond de Grisy, was a clever magician of early days. He tutored Robert-Houdin in magic. He was quick to take advantage of situations and was a very keen student of human nature and showmanship. His background of medicine, for he was a physician, helped him in his programs. He saved Houdin’s life once when young Robert had eaten tainted food.

Torrini was requested to perform before Pope Pius VII of Rome. Here was a chance to use real showmanship but what could he do to create a sensation before the Pope?

On the day before his show he was in the shop of a prominent watchmaker, when a man came in to ask if Cardinal ........’s watch was repaired. The watchmaker replied that it would not be ready until evening and that he personally would take it to the Cardinal.

Torrini asked the watchmaker about the watch. He was told that it was valued at more than ten thousand francs and was made by the noted Breguet. However, only two days before, a young man had offered for a thousand francs a similar watch, made by the same artist.

Instantly a scheme ran through Torrini’s mind to perform an amazing piece of magic. He, had the watchmaker buy the duplicate watch and engrave the Cardinal’s coat of arms on it so it would be a replica of the Cardinal’s watch. Held together it was difficult to tell which was which.

The next day at the pontifical palace, a most distinguished audience greated Torrini. But let Henry Ridgely Evans, whose “History of Conjuring and Magic” should be read by every magician, describe the occasion:

“The Pope sat on a raised dais; near him were the Cardinals in their brilliant robes of crimson.

“After performing a series of magical feats, de Grisy (Torrini) came to his *pièce de resistance.* The difficulty was to obtain the loan of the Cardinal’s watch, and that without asking him directly for it. To succeed, the conjurer had recourse to a ruse. At his request several watches were offered him, but he returned them as not suited to the experiment.

“‘I desire a timepiece that will be easily identified. I should prefer one of rather large size,’ remarked de Grisy.

“‘Cardinal ........,’ said His Holiness, ‘oblige me by lending your watch to M. de Grisy.’ “With great reluctance the Cardinal handed his precious chronometer to the conjurer. It seems he set great value on its exaggerated size, alleging with a considerable show of reason, that works acted better in a larger case.

“In order to prove the solidity and excellence of the chronometer, de Grisy let it fall to the ground. A cry of alarm arose on all sides. The Cardinal, pale with rage, bounded from his chair exclaiming; ‘This is a sorry jest, sir!’

“‘Do not be alarmed,’ said de Grisy, ‘the watch will escape scatheless from many trials.’ He handed the broken timepiece to the Cardinal.

“‘Do you recognize this as your watch?’”

The prelate gazed anxiously at the coat-of-arms engraved inside of the case, and replied, with a profound sigh:

“‘Yes, that is my watch.’

“‘You are certain of it?’

“‘Quite certain! But I seriously doubt your power to restore it.’

“‘We shall see!’ exclaimed the conjurer.

“De Grisy’s assistant now brought in a brass mortar and pestle. The watch was cast into the mortar and pounded to atoms. Some magic powder was poured into the receptacle and a torch applied, whereupon there was a detonation, followed by a cloud of smoke. The spectators were invited to examine the ingot of gold—all that remained of the precious chronometer. Pius VII peered curiously into the mortar. De Grisy, seizing the opportunity, adroitly popped the duplicate timepiece into a pocket of the Pope’s robe. At the proper moment he pretended to pass the ingot into the Pontiff’s pocket, which resulted in the discovery of the Cardinal’s watch, made whole again. The clever feat of escamotage created a great sensation in Rome, and drew crowds to de Grisy’s performance.”

At the end of the nineteenth century when magicians were repeating King Solomon’s statement, “There is nothing new under the sun,” and a weary public yawned, there suddenly sprung up a clever Frenchman by the name of Buatier de Kolta. De Kolta said, “There is something new under the sun,” and proceeded to prove it to enthusiastic audiences.

De Kolta brought forth unique principles in magic which are popular with magicians today. It was de Kolta who introduced the Vanishing Bird Cage, the Multiplying Billiard Balls, the Soup Plate and Handkerchiefs, Flowers From a Paper Cone, the Handkerchief Pull, Decanters and Flying Handkerchiefs, Production of a Large Flag on a Staff, the Vanishing Lady and many others. Together with Maskelyne he introduced Black Art Illusions.

Great showmen take advantage of situations. In 1798, Robertson, a Belgian optician and illusionist, created a sensation in Paris by presenting odd phantasmagoria in an abandoned church, near the Place Vendome. Tombs and mortuary tablets surrounded this ancient place of worship. It was a gruesome spot for a spectral exhibition.

The inside of the chapel was shrouded in black. A brazier filled with burning coals was placed on an altar in the center of the place. A sepulchral lamp emitted a ghastly flame above.

After a lecture on witches, sorcery, spirits and ghosts the lamp was extinguished and various essences were thrown upon the fires causing clouds of smoke to arise.

In the smoke Robertson appeared to evoke the spirit forms of Rousseau, Robespierre, Danton, Marat, Mirabeau, Voltaire. The phantom of Robespierre seemed to come out of a tomb. Suddenly there was a flash of lightning and there appeared a skeleton with a scythe. It grew to large proportions and then disappeared.

Most people possessing a magic lantern would simply throw the pictures on a cloth screen, but not Robertson. He was too much of a showman. He produced his pictures on a screen of white smoke and his pictures became phantoms. That’s the power of an imaginative mind.

It was showmanship that helped to make Alexander Herrmann one of the greatest magicians in the history of magic. He was quick to take advantage of situations. Both on and off the stage he was a magician to his very fingertips. He would buy apples and find five dollar bills in the apples. He found twenty dollar gold pieces in eggs in Chinatown which caused a Chinese merchant to break up all his eggs looking for money. Strange! but he found a twenty dollar gold piece in the last egg, to pay him for his eggs.

Herrmann had the appearance of Mephisto. He was skilled in magic with people all around him, a remarkable exponent of close-up magic and unexpected situations. In society, while playing cards, he might suddenly hand a lady opponent her slipper over the table, for he had secretly secured it under the table without her knowledge.

Adelaide Herrmann, his wife, was a remarkable assistant, wife and helpmate. She not only added great beauty to his theatrical appearances, but she could play up to publicity stunts. Madame Herrmann and I used to talk and laugh by the hour about some of the funny experiences she had. She enjoyed telling about the time she attended a society affair with a tame mouse on a gold chain, which she carried on her shoulder and bosom.

Harry Kellar was another great showman. He had an amazing knowledge of human nature and was equal to emergencies. He traveled the world over among all kinds of people. In February, 1875, Kellar was received by the commanding officer at Punta Arenas, situated almost at the extreme southern point of South America. The commandant was anxious to impress the natives with the power of the civilized white man. He induced Kellar to bring his wonders to the half-naked savages.

Kellar told them he could burn the earth, if he so desired, and to prove it he would set the ground on fire. While Kellar had been entertaining with other tricks, his assistant had mixed some sugar and chlorate of potash in equal parts and filled a hole in the sand with it without attracting attention. At the proper time Kellar brought out a small bottle containing sulphuric acid. Into this he dipped the end of his wand. Then waving it above his head he shouted, “Burn, O Earth!” He thrust the wet end of the wand into the sugar-potash mixture in the sand, which resulted instantly in a column of flame, white and dazzling, which shot into the air. The amazed natives went screaming into the hills.

On a steamer going from Panama to Callao, in South America, Kellar took advantage of an odd situation. People are interested in how a magician can foretell events. In Kellar’s book “Magician’s Tour” the following story is told:

“A magician should always and everlastingly be wide awake in order to amount to anything, and Kellar is very much so. He soon learned that the steamer would stop at midnight in order that the officers might take soundings. There was a large number of well-to-do Peruvians and Chilanos on board, but they were ignorant of how a magician foretells events, and on this ignorance my master decided to play. He spoke Spanish like a native, and he soon appeared among the passengers and in words of portentous weight declared that at midnight, sharp, the vessel would stop! Some of the Spaniards laughed at him, while others appeared impressed by his earnest manner. All remained on watch, however, as though they were seeing an old year out, and when, on the stroke of twelve the engines stopped, consternation was pictured on many a face, and every passenger on the steamship believed they had a veritable wonder worker and prophet among them. It was instantly noised about the ship that this was the man whose marvelous acts had made him a sulphurous hero in Mexico. During the remainder of the trip he was an object of awe to the passengers, and when they landed at Callao, his fame was at once spread throughout the city. It was a rare stroke of business on the conjurer’s part. The people of Callao and surrounding country were soon talking about him with as much interest as though he had been made a new President.”

Famous in the Kellar show in its latter days was the “Levitation of Princess Karnac.” Kellar brought this illusion to heights it had never previously attained. In Kellar’s hands the mystery seemed like a miracle. A girl, apparently hypnotized and placed on a couch, arose high in the air. The couch was removed leaving a bare stage. Kellar passed a hoop over the girl to show no connection. She was suspended in the center of the stage away from everything. It was a grand piece of showmanship. Something that stage magicians in their fondest dreams never thought possible.

Harry Houdini was a supershowman. His name still lives in the public mind even though he passed on in 1926. Houdini was the man who people thought “could escape from anything.” “No jail, no chain, no straight jacket, no safe could hold Houdini.” Houdini attempted the unusual, the sensational. He would jump off bridges into the waters below while heavily manacled and rise to the surface, free of handcuffs and chains.

He was tied to the large wheel of a railroad engine and escaped while the engine was in motion. He escaped from jail cells and bank safes. He shook hands with Death many times only to make his escape.

He gained much publicity through his exposure of fake spirit mediums. He disliked fakers who preyed on the public and robbed innocent people of their money under false pretenses.

Houdini in his desire to lift magic upon a high plane and to set an example to boys and girls, would not smoke or drink intoxicating liquors. Houdini had an ideal. He never forgot the youth of the world. Houdini sitting in his dressing room on his cot said to me, “Tarbell, I will never do anything that I would not want the youth of America to do. I never want it said that any boy or girl went wrong because they could say, ‘Well, Houdini did that.’ Every magician owes it to the youth of the world to live a life that youth can follow with success. Youth loves adventure, the unusual, the exciting, and that is what I try to give to the world, but in a constructive manner.”

Kings, Queens, Potentates the world over welcomed Houdini. Ministers preached about him from their pulpits, and the public looked to him to produce the unusual. Houdini vanished an elephant at the New York Hippodrome. Audiences expected Houdini to vanish an elephant as easily as some magicians would a rabbit. Regardless of how he got rid of the elephant, people do not remember the stage set-up but they do remember that he vanished an elephant.

Years ago William E. Robinson was stage manager and mechanic for Alexander Herrmann. When Herrmann died, he became stage manager to Leon Herrmann for several seasons. Not satisfied with this he started out as a magician himself but with little success. Then Ching Ling Foo came to America from China with an interesting array of Chinese, and drew great crowds to the theatre. Robinson, fascinated by Foo’s performance decided to put on a similar show disguised as a Chinaman. He hired a Chinese acrobat, and, accompanied by his wife, he opened at the Empire Theatre in London. He not only presented some of Foo’s best tricks but added many of his own original ones. His success was instant. The theatre public of London went wild over Chung Ling Soo, for this is the name Robinson took. Money flowed in. Few people knew that Chung Ling Soo was an American and not a Chinese. So clever was his make-up and his impersonation of a Chinaman that he even granted newspaper interviews through a Chinese interpreter (his acrobat). His lodgings were fitted up in Chinese fashion with silken draperies, and dimly lighted Chinese lanterns. Under the smell of incense he drank tea and gave his opinion on oriental troubles to newspaper reporters. His wife’s make-up was equally clever.

Chung Ling Soo had a flare for the elaborate and the magnificent. A parlor trick would be turned into an elaborate stage presentation. The old broken plate ordinarily restored in a simple frame, became restored in a radiant sun whose golden rays extended many feet outward. The Miser’s Dream of catching money in a hat became a shower of coins on the stage with great bills six feet long dropping from the flies, with a curtain of giant coins for a background. The smoke trick usually performed with a saucer and a glass tumbler, was performed with a great magnificent glass vase about three feet high. Smoke blown from a cigarette several feet away mysteriously appeared in the vase. He shot an arrow with a ribbon attached through his girl assistant. He allowed assistants from the audience to load marked bullets in guns and fire at him. He caught the bullets in his teeth or on a plate. He believed in spectacular magic and he amassed a fortune in the music halls and theatres of Great Britain.

Howard Thurston, a student of the Evangelist, Dwight L. Moody, was trained for the ministry. This training as a minister gave power over his audiences. Even when he performed his famous rising cards he struck the pose of Evangelist Moody and one could hear the tone of Moody in his voice as he said “Up, up, up!”

Thurston first came into real prominence by his novel card act. He featured front and back hand palming with cards, interesting vanishes and productions. There was soon a furor in magic to imitate Thurston’s card act. After a trip around the world he finally took over the Kellar show.

Audiences loved Thurston as they looked upon him as a “National Institution.” Thurston took advantage of his ministerial training in his magical showmanship. He also incorporated his world experiences.

Dante (Herr Jansen) brings to his audiences the travelled magician who successfully visited the countries of the world. Dante is an excellent illusion builder with original ideas. His natural touches in the back stage sketches he has written himself are truly unusual mysteries. People like Dante when he is just himself, when he relaxes, kidding about this and that and making his audience feel perfectly at home with him.

Levante, has the appearance, the youth, the vitality, the dignity, the grace of a successful movie star. He also has a delightful stage personality. To these personal qualifications, however, he adds distinctive dress in his immaculate white dress suit, and remarkable showmanship in the original effects he presents. His work is clean cut and he adds those niceties that you would expect from a gentleman magician. You expect the extraordinary from Levante and he does not disappoint.

Blackstone, is Blackstone. He enjoys his work and others enjoy it with him. He presents elaborate illusions from flower and silk productions that cover a stage, to a vanishing horse. He can make a borrowed handkerchief dance on the stage with the interest of a great illusion. He has an interesting way of telling stories to children who come upon his stage. When he sets a little girl on his lap and tells her about Santa Claus, his eyes fairly sparkle and the youngster expects anything to happen.

Nicola became world famous through his travels in the Orient. He had a grand illusion show, that was presented in masterly style—probably the greatest number of large spectacular effects ever combined in one show.

Al Baker is a natural born humorist and belongs to a school that Mark Twain, Strickland Gillilan and Bill Bye made famous. Al’s quick sense of humor makes him equal to almost any occasion. His magic is natural. Things happen in a natural way. He believes in simplicity, yet carefully worked details. Al creates his own methods and mysteries. He is never satisfied with the ordinary presentations. He employs natural effective methods that he can sell to an audience in a friendly way. His cake in the hat is a masterpiece. The world owes much to Al’s original methods.

Joe Dunninger knows the value of showmanship and uses it. He leans to mental effects and psychic “phenomena.” He believes in the type of material that leading magazines and newspapers over the country will write about. He keeps himself before the public eye. He has a very original mind that can take a simple effect and build it up to dramatic proportions. He sells his effects convincingly.

David Bamberg is of the seventh generation of Bambergs, all magicians. He is the son of Theo Bamberg, whose Chinese act under the stage name of Okito, was something to remember. Okito had a very original mind.

David loved the Chinese style and the possibilities of Chinese magic and so built one of the most beautiful magic shows in the world. He took the name Fu Manchu and has been a great success artistically and financially. It is said that there are over 300 Oriental costumes in the Fu Manchu show.

David’s showmanship brings to the world original Chinese magic presented in an elaborate manner. Excepting a two-month tour including New York City and a half-dozen eastern cities a few years ago, he plays chiefly throughout South America and Mexico with great success.

“Think-a-Drink” Hoffman, is an interesting study in individual showmanship. He was a big hit with Shubert’s Broadway success “The Streets of Paris.” He has played the finest theatres and night clubs in America at high fees.

Hoffman’s rise to fame is inspiring. Hoffman was going along in an ordinary manner doing cards, billiard balls, ropes and a “drink act.” He was fairly successful but not in keeping with his true ability. I suggested that he specialize on his feature act which was the “drink act”— pouring any drink called for from a pitcher of water. By specializing I saw a chance to make him a big time Shubert act.

I began to study Hoffman, his individuality, and his interests. Where did he differ from anyone else and what were his strong saleable points? He had studied drink making in the Hawaiian Islands and was an expert in concocting unusual drinks. He had an unusual knack of drink mixing and a keen sense of flavors. To simply pour water containing grain alcohol into glasses containing various liquor essences, as is common in magic, was not good enough for Hoffman. He had better ideas so as to get natural flavors, even to fine wines.

I saw in Hoffman a natural set-up for the Shuberts so worked on the act with that idea in view. As the appeal of the old act was along lines that were *passé*, I wanted to step up the act into a new mental and physical plane. By raising the plane I hoped to develop a type of act that would not be easy for imitators to follow. Anything to be truly successful must have a spiritual, mental and physical background. It is the law of life. It must be in tune with the times.

The psychology of Hoffman’s act is thus analyzed: Everything has speeded up except the art of drink making, and why not speed that up by merely pouring water into a glass and if you want wine—merely think wine—and you have wine, for the water in the glass has changed to wine. Or if you think an ice cream soda—it becomes an ice cream soda. In other words you *think a drink!*

So the name “Think-a-Drink” was the logical answer.

The psychology of instant drink making through apparent mental action is in keeping with the times. Besides people want miracle action.

So important was the *think a drink* idea that “Think-a-Drink” became a part of his stage name and was registered in the patent office.

In watching audience reactions, it was discovered that while hard liquors were mystifying yet it was the soft drinks that got the laughs. This was because of the contrasts. Every drink is timed, every drink has been studied in its presentation, from the psychological reactions of audiences. After a year of testing in a theatrical unit, it was offered to the Shuberts for their Broadway presentation. It became a hit of Broadway. “Think-a-Drink” Hoffman is one of the headliners of the theatre and club. His is one act that people discuss for a long time afterward.

Cardini (Richard Pitchford) rose to fame through individual showmanship. His act has been copied and recopied. He introduced a new era in a manipulative act. There is an interesting psychology back of Cardini’s act. While his manipulation is faultless yet its big effect lies in the fact that *things happen when he is looking in the opposite direction* and he is as much surprised as the audience at the mysterious things that are happening. Instead of saying to an audience “let me show you some clever manipulations in magic” the magic happens seemingly unknown to him. That is what makes the act so funny and gets so many laughs.

We must never forget that Cardini is English and can perform in a way that is natural to his English personality. The Continental artist trains himself in pantomime. He can wear English style clothes, top hat and dress suit tailored in English fashion. He was born for it. Cardini is Cardini and far above his imitators.

Frakson comes from a family of magicians of Spain. His father and mother were travelling magicians, and all of his ten brothers and sisters were successful magicians. Frakson has a Continental style that is dashing and typically Frakson. His quick movements, his marvelous misdirection and finished manipulation—his “Si-si-si—come little one” as he produces a lighted cigarette from nowhere is ideally adapted to his temperament. He is very original.

Ade Duval, at one time, was doing a magic show with a partner in Chautauqua and Lyceum. I finally convinced Ade, by practically making him lose his job with the Redpath Bureau, that his big time forte was to specialize in *Silks and Colors.* A rhapsody in colored silk, set to music, was the thing he should work for. So he put an act together basing it around an elaborate phantom tube production and toured vaudeville. But I said, “Ade, you will never be a real success until you go to Europe and absorb the Continental style and technique which comes from playing European audiences.” Duval went to Europe and again I was right.

Jack Gwynne said that too many people call themselves “the greatest magician in the world” so he bills himself as “the second greatest magician”—with no competitors. Jack must have an act that *shines.* Highly polished chromium, nickel plate, glass, silk and color play a great part in his act. Even in paper tearing, enameled paper is more effective than the dullness of newspaper.

I could write several volumes on the showmanship of individual magicians, dozens of them who have made their mark because of their ability to be “different.”

Your Interest in Magic

Regardless of what others do, each of us has himself to consider. Some of us want to be professionals, others semi-professionals, while others want to perform just as amateurs for the love of the work and the entertainment that they can give their friends. Some are salesmen and want to please their customers. Some study magic for the educational value. Some to overcome shyness so they can stand unafraid before an audience. Business men have said they have become better speakers at the directors’ and sales meetings because of their magic. Doctors say that magic takes their minds off their cases for a while and affords relaxation. People who were wall flowers become socially entertaining because of magic.

Some want only a few tricks, others want many.

In studying any subject we must become acquainted with the fundamentals, and know it from the ground up. After we are acquainted with fundamentals we can individualize.

There is no special patter that will fit everyone. In this course I can only give patter that hits a medium trend, and suggests a style of presentation. Your own mind will add and subtract here and there as you go into action and present your mysteries before an audience.

You will combine effects to get new ideas. In the musical world we have eight white keys and five black ones in the scale, but every day new pieces of music are coming out, new tunes, new melodies. Or old melodies are revamped and modernized or brought into a different rhythm.

So with magic, we bring out new effects, new slants, new entertainment, new combinations, new forms of interest.

Be yourself and do those things that best fit your own individuality. But whatever you do, do with the skill of a master, and a love in the doing.

[Figure aad: A cartoon rabbit in a tuxedo and tail coat stands upright holding a card or placard in one paw, with a long ribbon or streamer in the other.]

[Figure aae: A cartoon rabbit in a tuxedo and tail coat stands upright, holding a large paper cone or horn in both paws, with a spotted silk handkerchief hanging from its mouth.]
