Lesson 21: Magic with Wands

The magic wand has played an important part in magical mysteries throughout the ages. Used as a solid stick it has acted as a means of misdirection for vanishing, appearing and exchanging articles when lifted from or placed upon the table or place of concealment. Held in the hand, it helped to conceal a palmed object.

Magicians throughout the world have brought forth many interesting types of wands. I have a wand made of the vertebrae from an Antarctic whale. Discs of bone are fastened together with an iron rod running through them. I have a Chinese wand made of bamboo.

The commonest type of wand for practical purposes is about 14 inches long and one-half inch in diameter. Usually the body of the wand is black in color with nickeled or chromium tips about one and three-quarters inches in length. Sometimes the tips are painted white or other colors and Catalin wands in various color combinations have found favor with some performers. Wands can be modernized by painting the body between the tips dark blue, brown, white, ivory, or other colors.

Unless otherwise specified, the wand 14 inches long by one-half inch diameter, the tips one and three-quarters inches long, will be used in the various effects described in this lesson.

From time to time, various mechanical and specially prepared wands have come into the field of magic and excellent effects have been made possible by their use.

Some of the wand effects described in this lesson are not at all difficult to construct but others are best purchased from the various magic dealers.

The “P-L” Vanishing Wand

This is a good effect with which to open a program. It is fast, easy to do and effective. This type of wand gets its name from the maker, the Petrie-Lewis Co. and is sold by all dealers.

Effect

The performer, after tapping his wand on the table to show that it is solid, wraps it in a piece of paper and gives it to a spectator to hold. Magician then takes the wrapped wand and tears the paper to pieces. The wand has vanished . . . magician reaches into his inside coat pocket and produces the wand therefrom.

Paraphernalia

1—A P-L Vanishing Wand. This consists of a black paper shell or tube with a white colored wooden plug fitting into each end, Fig. 1. Because of the solid ends on the ends of the paper shell, the wand can be freely tapped on the table and shown to be apparently solid. Even if dropped on the table it appears to be a regular wand.

2—Wand shells for succeeding performances.

3—A solid wooden wand to match the vanishing wand. (The P-L Vanishing Wand outfit consists of the vanishing wand, solid wand to match and extra black paper shells; nickeled or white tips.)

4—A piece of paper, such as newspaper, about 17 inches square. A paper napkin or Oriental paper may be used.

[Figure aaf: Fig. 1. — Two long wands shown slanting upward: one a complete wand with tips, the other drawn as a black paper shell with a separate white plug lying at its lower end.]

[Figure aag: Fig. 2. — A hand raps the wooden end of the wand on the edge of a table, with a dotted arrow showing the downward tap.]

[Figure aah: Fig. 3. — A square sheet of paper stood on one corner, with the wand lying along its upper edge, ready to be rolled up diagonally from that corner.]

To Prepare

Vanishing wand and paper are on table. The solid wand is in your inside coat pocket. Push the upper end of wand well back against shoulder. Some performers like wand on left side, the lower end of wand going into the lower left vest pocket.

To Perform

Pick up the vanishing wand . . . “*There is power in a wand. A Hindu magician said so. Imagine that we were in India and I would rap my ebony wand with its white tips on the table three times. . . .*”

Rap wand on table three times. This is to show that wand is solid without saying so. Be sure to rap the wooden end on table, Fig. 2. Pick up piece of paper from table.

“. . . *Then wrap it into a piece of paper in the manner of the Ancient Order of Hindu Mystics.*”

Wrap wand in paper. Start at one corner and roll the wand up diagonally across the paper. This keeps the wand in sight until it is completely wrapped, Fig. 3.

“*Twist the ends and give it to a gentleman to hold.*”

Twist the ends of the paper about each end of the vanishing wand, Fig. 4.

Give wrapped wand to spectator and have him hold wand vertically with one hand at the wooden end at top and the other hand at wooden end at bottom, Fig. 5.

“*You feel the stick. Then I would take the wand and tear up the paper . . .*”

Take wrapped wand, tear the paper in half, tearing through the paper shell as well. Place the two halves together and tear them through again.

“. . . *and show that the wand had supernaturally vanished. Perhaps not supernaturally because the truth is that I really sneaked it under my coat.*”

[Figure aai: Fig. 4. — A long wand wrapped in paper, slanting upward, with the paper twisted at both ends.]

[Figure aaj: Fig. 5. — A seated spectator in a suit holds the wrapped wand upright, one hand at the top end and the other at the bottom end.]

[Figure aak: Fig. 6. — The performer in a suit coat reaches with his left hand across to his right coat pocket, drawing out the regular wand.]

Remove regular wand from right coat pocket with left hand, Fig. 6. Place torn pieces of paper, with remains of vanishing wand inside, aside so no one can examine them.

The vanishing wand is effective even in a magic act that is dependent on vision instead of patter. In this case do not give to a spectator to hold.

Suggestions

The principle of the vanishing and reproduction of a wand permits of many variations.

For quick action the performer wraps wand in paper after showing it to be solid and tears it up immediately without giving it to an assistant to hold.

An interesting way to reproduce the wand is to get an opaque flower vase and place it on the table. Make a little slit in one end of the wand into which insert the end of a piece of thread. Knot the free end of thread so that it will not pull out.

Drop wand, prepared end downward, into the vase. Vase should be tall enough to cover wand when it is inside. Now run thread over to back of table and tie to a tack or staple.

Pick up vase in left hand and bring it forward. The tightening of the thread will cause the wand to rise out of the vase. Grasp wand with right hand before it topples over. It will pull away from thread easily. Figs. 7, 8, 9.

[Figure aal: Fig. 7. — An upright tube or vase with a knot marked at its top, a slit in the end of the wand, and a thread running away diagonally from the slit.]

[Figure aam: Fig. 8. — A round-bellied vase with the wand standing up inside it and a thread running diagonally up and away from the wand's top, labelled thread.]

[Figure aan: Fig. 9. — The wand rises out of the round vase as a hand holds the vase and the thread is pulled taut up and to the left.]

If an assistant is available, run the free end of the thread out to him in the wings offstage. You need not touch the vase, then, but have him cause the wand to rise by pulling the thread.

The Wandering Wand and Envelopes

Effect

Two long envelopes are shown empty. A magic wand is placed in one, yet it mysteriously disappears and is found in the other envelope.

Paraphernalia

1—A solid wand and a paper shell to match, Fig. 1. The shell is of such size that the solid wand will easily slip out and yet it fits fairly snugly around wand.

[Figure aao: Fig. 1. — A solid wand lying beside the paper shell, two long slanting rods with labels pointing to the solid wand and the paper shell.]

The shell can be easily made by wrapping a piece of paper around the wand and pasting the outer edge. The paper can be painted or lacquered the same color as wand. A black wand with white tips is suggested, for ease in making.

2—Two paper envelopes about two inches longer than length of wand, Fig. 2. The average wand is about 14 inches long. Envelope should be about three inches wide. A bright colored paper is suggested.

[Figure aap: Fig. 2. — Two long flat paper envelopes lying slanted side by side, the upper one marked A and the lower one marked B, each open at the lower end.]

To Prepare

Wand is placed in paper shell. To the audience, the wand looks unprepared. Place on table near the two envelopes.

Secret and Patter

*“This is a Chinese mystery with a wand and two envelopes.”*

Pick up wand (with shell) in right hand, and SHELL rap on table to show it is a solid wand. Pick up envelope A with left hand. Open the end of envelope with wand (and shell) and show the envelope to be empty. *“An empty envelope.”*

Hold envelope upright, Fig. 3, and allow the solid wand to slip quietly and secretly out of the paper shell. This is done with shell sticking halfway out of envelope. Place envelope with wand against some object so as to be in full view. Pick up envelope B with left hand.

[Figure aaq: Fig. 3. — Upright paper envelope with a paper shell sticking halfway out of its top; a hand grips the shell, and the solid wand slips out of the shell, labelled paper shell and solid wand.]

*“Same kind of an envelope.”*

Squeeze a bit to open so it can be casually shown empty.

*“According to the ancient Chinese if this wooden wand is placed in this envelope, it will suddenly disappear.”*

Place paper shell inside of envelope B, and close down the flap.

As you say the above words, roll up envelope from bottom and make a small roll of entire envelope. The paper shell will flatten and allow this. In this way you can use the envelope again. Or, if desired, envelope can be torn in half and then into a number of pieces as the paper shell tears with envelope.

Put the remains of envelope B aside on table. Pick up envelope A and, reaching inside, produce the wand.

*“And appear in this other envelope. Strange people these Chinese.”*

Note

The Wandering Wand and Envelopes is an excellent mystery to work in pantomime, eliminating all patter. The effect is very puzzling when properly performed as it seems you use only a solid wooden wand and the two empty envelopes.

Wand from Pocketbook

A novel way of producing a wand, which makes a good opening number. This is adapted to either the regular wand or the P-L vanishing wand.

Effect

Performer shows a small pocketbook to be empty. He then suddenly draws out his wand from the inside of the pocketbook. The wand is struck on the table to show that it is solid.

Paraphernalia

1—A small pocketbook, such as is used to carry small change, with a clasp at top. About two or three inches is a good size.

2—A duplicate pocketbook, in case you want to pass it out for examination.

3—Your regular wand or the special vanishing wand.

Secret

To Prepare

Cut an inch or even two-inch slit in the bottom of pocketbook, through which the wand can be easily drawn. Make edges of slit smooth. You can easily determine the best size opening by testing for easy passage of the wand, Fig. 1.

[Figure aar: Fig. 1. — A small round-cornered pocketbook with a clasp at top; an arrow points to the one-inch slit in the bottom of the purse.]

[Figure aas: Fig. 2. — A forearm and open hand seen from the back, with the wand shown by dotted lines up inside the sleeve, one end resting at the base of the second finger.]

[Figure aat: Fig. 3. — A smiling man in a suit holds the pocketbook in both hands in front of his chest, concealing the slit at the bottom with his fingers.]

Place prepared pocketbook in right coat pocket or other pocket easily reached by right hand. If you want to show pocketbook after production of wand, place unprepared duplicate in left trousers pocket.

Insert wand up left sleeve, letting one end rest at base of second finger, Fig. 2.

Wand may be dropped down farther to facilitate working at times. Forearm can be raised and lowered with back of hand to audience, and wand will not be discovered. Avoid any stiff movements.

To Perform

Remove prepared pocketbook and show freely. Conceal slit at bottom with fingers, Fig. 3.

Place pocketbook in left hand with bottom of purse against end of wand. Squeeze sides of purse a little. This will open slit and allow wand to be inserted. Open pocketbook with right hand and reach in with thumb and first two fingers. Grasp end of wand and pull it through pocketbook, Fig. 4. The effect is that you actually pull the whole length of the wand from the inside of the purse. The illusion to the audience is perfect, Fig. 5.

Have a table at your left. Turn to left so that right side is toward audience. Strike wand on table to show that it is solid. As you do this, reach into left trousers pocket with left hand as it is now screened. Leave prepared purse there and remove unprepared purse. Turn to face audience again and pass out purse for examination.

[Figure aau: Fig. 4. — A hand seen from the side grips the end of the wand where it emerges from the pocketbook, drawing it through the opening.]

When performing on the stage and using this production for an opening number, you do not take the time to give out the pocketbook for examination, but in club, or parlor work, it is a very satisfactory conclusion to the effect.

[Figure aav: Fig. 5. — A smiling man in a suit holds the pocketbook at his chest in his left hand and draws the long wand out with his right hand.]

Note

Some prefer to have a round hole cut on one side of pocketbook near the bottom. The cut side is towards you in left hand, and this side is opened and bent down so the wand slips right up through that side. The front side conceals the secret opening.

Cigar from Pocketbook

This is one of Ed Reno’s favorite effects, especially as an impromptu stunt off stage and at close quarters.

Effect

Performer reaches into his pocket and brings out a small pocketbook. He opens it, reaches in, and brings out a large cigar, many times larger than the purse. He then passes the purse out for examination.

Paraphernalia

1—A small purse, about an inch and a quarter wide.

2—A duplicate purse.

3—A good-sized cigar.

Secret

To Prepare

Slit bottom of purse as you did in preceding effect to allow enough room for cigar to be drawn through. Insert cigar in slit. Put both purses in left trousers pocket. Have cigar extending upward in pocket, Fig. 6.

To Perform

Reach into pocket with left hand and grasp prepared purse. Cigar automatically comes into inside of hand. Keep back of hand to audience to conceal cigar, Fig. 7.

[Figure aaw: Fig. 6. — A large cigar standing upright in the opening of a small round purse, which is drawn with dotted lines to show the slit at the bottom.]

With right hand open purse, reach in, and bring out cigar. Close purse and hand cigar to a spectator. As you do this, turn right side to audience. You can then exchange purses by placing hand in left trousers pocket. Pass out as unprepared purse for examination.

Reno varies this occasionally by producing a large jackknife with open blade, or if seated at the table, he produces a table knife from the little purse.

[Figure aax: Fig. 7. — A hand seen from behind holds the purse between thumb and fingers, with the cigar lying along the inside of the hand, hidden from the audience.]

Wand from Card Case

This effect is a good opening for tricks with cards.

Effect

Performer picks up deck of cards in case, opens case, removes cards, and places them on table. Then he reaches into card case again and brings out his wand.

Paraphernalia

1—A deck of cards in the cardboard case.

2—A wand.

Secret

To Prepare

Remove cards from case, and in bottom of case cut a hole about an inch long and the width of the bottom, Fig. 8.

Have wand up left sleeve with end resting against middle finger of left hand. Keep back of hand to audience. Have deck of cards in case on table at your right or in right coat pocket.

To Perform

Pick up deck of cards and show freely but be careful to conceal hole in bottom of case. Place case in left hand and open flap with right, removing the cards. Place cards on table at right side, and as you do so, get end of wand inserted in hole in case, Fig. 9. Reach into case with right hand and draw out the wand, Fig. 10.

[Figure aay: Fig. 8. — A tilted card case with a decorated face; an arrow points to the opening cut in its bottom edge.]

[Figure aaz: Fig. 9. — A hand holds the card case upright while the end of the wand is pushed up through the hole in the case's bottom.]

[Figure aba: Fig. 10. — A smiling man in a suit holds the card case in his left hand and draws the wand out of it with his right.]

Toss case on table in an apparently careless manner, but be careful to get it in such position as not to expose hole in bottom.

Simplex Handkerchief Producing Wand

This is a simple method of introducing a silk handkerchief into a tube or roll of paper.

Effect

A piece of paper is freely shown and rolled into a tube. A wand is pushed through it to further show that tube is empty. Yet upon unrolling the paper a silk handkerchief is found inside.

Paraphernalia

1—A hollow metal wand with open ends, 14 inches long and a half inch in diameter, Fig. 1.

[Figure abb: Fig. 1. — A long slender hollow metal wand seen from the side, with open ends and slightly narrowed tips.]

2—A silk handkerchief 13 inches square. A pin is run through center of silk and bent over.

3—A sheet of heavy paper or book cover 12 X 14 inches.

To Prepare

With a long wire or slender stick push center of prepared handkerchief into B end of hollow wand. Allow bent pin to catch on A edge of wand, Fig. 2. Thus prepared the wand can be freely handled, but the ends of wand must be kept away from audience. Hand holds wand at end B. Paper and prepared wand are lying on table.

[Figure abc: Fig. 2. — The hollow wand with its two ends marked A and B, showing the handkerchief pin caught on the edge at end A.]

To Perform

Pick up sheet of paper, show it freely and roll it up into tube about an inch and a half in diameter, and 12 inches in length.

Pick up wand at end B and run it through paper tube, Fig. 3.

[Figure abd: Fig. 3. — A paper tube held at an angle in one hand, with the wand being run through it by the other hand, wand tip showing at the top.]

[Figure abe: Fig. 4. — The wand pulled out of the paper tube, with the handkerchief streaming from the upper edge of the tube, drawn as a dark shape inside it.]

As you pull wand out of paper catch the end of bent pin on upper edge of paper. This pulls handkerchief out of the wand, as wand is pulled downward, Fig. 4. Wand is placed under left arm or placed aside on table.

[Figure abf: Fig. 5. — A slanted paper tube with the silk handkerchief pushed down inside it, shown as a dark shape visible through the open side.]

[Figure abg: Fig. 6. — The paper unrolled and held open by both hands, showing the silk handkerchief lying in the middle of the sheet.]

Secretly, the end of bent pin is freed from the edge of the paper tube and handkerchief pushed down a bit into the tube, Fig. 5. Paper is unrolled showing silk handkerchief inside, Fig. 6.

Note

If a larger silk is desired increase the size of wand and paper.

An effective mystery can be built by placing a rubber band around the tube with silk secretly introduced, and placing tube on table. A duplicate silk handkerchief is vanished and discovered inside the tube of paper.

Vanishing Handkerchief Wand

When first introduced, the magical profession quickly approved this method of vanishing a silk handkerchief and it is still quite popular.

Effect

A sheet of paper is formed into a cornucopia. A silk handkerchief is pushed into the paper with a magic wand. Upon unrolling the paper the handkerchief has vanished.

Paraphernalia

1—The special Vanishing Handkerchief Wand which consists of a hollow metal tube with one end closed, and a metal rod which slips in and out of the tube. This rod has a wooden plug on one end which when pushed into tube grips slightly so that the rod will not slip out of its own accord. On the end of the wooden plug is a nickeled metal disc slightly larger in diameter than wooden plug or metal tube. On other end is a rubber or cloth tip. Study Figs. 1, 2 and 3.

[Figure abh: Fig. 1. — The complete wand drawn as a long thin tube lying flat, end A at the left with the wooden plug and end B at the right.]

[Figure abi: Fig. 2. — The hollow metal tube alone, shown as a long dark cylinder with one closed end and an open mouth at the left.]

[Figure abj: Fig. 3. — The metal rod alone, a thin straight line with the wooden plug and nickeled disc at the left end and a small tip at the right.]

2—A 13-inch silk handkerchief.

3—A sheet of paper about 14 inches square.

Preparation

Wand lies on table with rod inside. Nearby are handkerchief and paper.

To Perform

Pick up paper and form into a cornucopia. Place wand inside with end A downward, Fig. 4, as though you are helping to form a better paper cone. Grasp the end of rod through paper with left hand. Remove the wand with the right hand leaving the inner rod in cone, Fig. 5.

[Figure abk: Fig. 4. — A paper cornucopia held in one hand with the wand pushed inside it, end A downward, while the other hand grips the paper and rod.]

[Figure abl: Fig. 5. — The empty paper cone standing slanted, with the inner rod left lying inside it along one edge.]

Place silk handkerchief in cone so that the center of the silk covers the tip of the rod, Fig. 6.

[Figure abm: Fig. 6. — A paper cone with the silk handkerchief laid in it, the center of the silk covering the tip of the rod at the cone's point.]

Place open end of wand against the silk just over the tip on the rod. Push down with the wand over the rod with the result that handkerchief is pushed into the wand, Fig. 7. Continue pushing downward until the silk is completely in the wand and plug of rod is firmly in place. Remove wand and place aside.

[Figure abn: Fig. 7. — The wand pushed down over the rod inside the paper cone, carrying the handkerchief into the wand as the silk disappears from the cone.]

At the proper moment open paper and show that the silk has vanished. The whole action is clean cut, leaving no trace of trickery—empty paper, empty hands, and an innocent looking wand which has been forgotten by this time.

If a larger handkerchief is used it can be folded over into about a quarter of its regular size before placing it on end of rod in paper cone.

The Rising Wand

An interesting effect to work as a surprise bit.

Effect

Performer holds wand vertically in his hand by the upper end. Wand rises, gliding upwards through the hand until the lower end comes into the hand.

[Figure abo: Fig. 1. — A long slender hollow metal wand seen from the side, with narrowed tips at both ends.]

[Figure abp: Fig. 2. — A thin tube drawn in outline with a small disc at each end, showing the rising wand with the elastic cord passing through it.]

Paraphernalia

1—A Rising Wand, which consists of a hollow metal tube through which passes a piece of heavy black elastic cord. On each end of cord is an eyelet attached to a metal disc slightly larger than the diameter of the wand. The discs form the ends of the wand, Figs. 1 and 2.

To Perform

Pick up wand and hold in left hand with one end against the base of second and third fingers of right hand, Fig. 3. Push wand through opening between the second and third fingers so that metal disc is at rear. Bring wand forward again bringing the two fingers tightly on wand so that disc is held at back of fingers. Bring right hand up along wand to end A at the top, Fig. 4. The elastic cord is behind the wand so audience cannot see it.

[Figure abq: Fig. 3. — A wand lying slanted across the left hand with end A at upper left, its other end held at the base of the second and third fingers of the right hand.]

[Figure abr: Fig. 4. — The wand held upright with end A at the top and the right hand gripping it near the top; a label marks the rubber cord running behind the wand.]

Gradually release the grip of first finger and thumb of right hand on the wand and wand will slowly rise, Fig. 5. This can be repeated. Finally, the right hand comes to the bottom end of wand so that the disc goes back in place on the end.

[Figure abs: Fig. 5. — The wand held upright with end A at the top, the right hand now gripping it near the bottom, so the wand has risen through the hand.]

Practice well so as to make the moves natural and indetectable.

Sure-Grip Magnetized Wand

Articles that seemingly cling to the finger tips have an effect quite magical and are pleasing interludes.

Effect

Performer places his wand against the palm of his hand and wand clings to hand as though magnetized. Finally performer throws a handkerchief over the wand, but this does not keep wand from clinging to the hand.

Paraphernalia

1—A black wand with nickeled tips.

2—A special device from which to suspend the wand. This consists of a piece of metal painted black which clips over the wand, Fig. 1. To the center of the clip is soldered a black pin about three-fourths of an inch long.

[Figure abt: Fig. 1. — The black metal clip seen from the side, a shallow curved piece with a short pin soldered upright at its center.]

3—A dark colored silk handkerchief. In emergency a pocket handkerchief will do.

To Perform

Hold the metal clip in right hand with pin between the second and third fingers, Fig. 2. Clip is easily held by pressing the fingers together. Audience does not know of this clip as this is always a hidden piece of apparatus.

[Figure abu: Fig. 2. — An open right hand seen from the front with the small metal clip hidden between the second and third fingers, its pin between the fingers.]

Pick up wand and place against opening of clip. Back of right hand is to audience. With right thumb press wand into the clip, Fig. 3.

[Figure abv: Fig. 3. — The wand seen from the side with the small black clip fastened at its middle, a short pin sticking up from the clip.]

Turn and show front of hand to audience with wand clinging to it, Fig. 4.

Clip can be slipped onto various parts of the wand and wand held in a variety of positions. Hand can be held palm downward with wand clinging to the underside of the hand.

[Figure abw: Fig. 4. — An open hand seen from the front with the wand slanting across the palm, clinging to it, with no support visible.]

[Figure abx: Fig. 5. — A dark silk handkerchief thrown over the wand so both ends stick out, with a hand gripping the handkerchief from above.]

Remove hand keeping pin hidden on side of wand away from audience.

Pick up handkerchief and throw over the wand so the latter’s ends protrude, Fig. 5. Bring right hand down upon wand and turn pin up so it can be grasped through the handkerchief by second and third fingers of right hand. Left hand is removed from wand so it clings to right hand only. Remove handkerchief, taking clip with it underneath the handkerchief.

Tarbell’s Magnetized Wand

This is an effect that I brought out in my “teens” using not only a wand but sometimes using a light weight cane, or a bamboo stick.

Effect

Performer places his wand against his hand to which it adheres in various positions. While clinging to both hands he rolls hands around each other without losing the wand. It adheres just the same.

Paraphernalia

1—A black wand with nickeled tips. A fine black silk thread is tied to each end of the wand where the black body joins the nickeled tips, Fig. 1. When thread is pulled away from wand at center, distance should be about 4¾ inches. Length of thread depends upon size of performer’s hands. A bit of experimenting will determine the correct length for most effective working. Audience, of course, is not supposed to know of the thread.

[Figure aby: Fig. 1. — The wand drawn across the top with a black silk thread tied from each end hanging in a V; a label marks the thread and the distance of four and three-quarters inches.]

To Perform

Hold wand with both hands as in Fig. 2. Thread falls downward in a loop, behind the thumbs.

[Figure abz: Fig. 2. — Both hands hold the wand horizontally with thumbs behind it, and the thread hangs below in a loop.]

*“This is a study in magnetism. Some say wand magnetism. Some say personal magnetism, or advanced magnetism, or mental magnetism, while others say just magnetism, or the power of mind over matter.”*

Bring thumbs up through the loop of thread, Fig. 3. Pull thumbs outward until thread is taut and wand clings to thumbs, Fig. 4, fingers being separated from thumbs as far as possible.

[Figure aca: Fig. 3. — Both hands hold the wand horizontally, the thumbs brought up through the loop of thread.]

[Figure acb: Fig. 4. — Both hands pull the thumbs outward so the thread is taut and the wand clings to the thumbs; ends A and B marked.]

Bring end B of wand down on palm of right hand, release the left hand, and raise the right thumb so thread is taut and the wand is suspended as in Fig. 5.

[Figure acc: Fig. 5. — The wand slanting from end A at left to end B at right, hanging from the right thumb by the taut thread.]

Grasp end A with left hand and slide right hand along the wand until it is in the position as shown in Fig. 6.

[Figure acd: Fig. 6. — The right hand slid along the wand with end A at left and end B at right, the wand suspended by the thread.]

Bring wand into position as in Fig. 7.

Grasp end A with left hand and place tip of first finger of right hand against end of wand. Release left hand so wand is suspended, Fig. 8.

[Figure ace: Fig. 7. — The wand held upright, end B at the top gripped by the left hand and end A at the bottom, with the right forefinger touching the wand.]

[Figure acf: Fig. 8. — The wand lying slantwise against the edge of a hand and wrist, end B at the left and end A at the lower right, suspended.]

[Figure acg: Fig. 9. — The wand slanting upward, held at its lower end by the left hand while the right thumb draws back under the loop of thread.]

[Figure ach: Fig. 10. — The wand nearly upright with the fingers of the right hand under the loop of thread and resting on it, and the left hand gripping below.]

Again grasp A of wand with left hand and draw thumb of right hand back under loop of thread, Fig. 9. Allow the fingers of right hand to come under loop of thread and rest on wand, Fig. 10.

Bring right hand back up to end B so that hand is at right angles with the wand. Take left hand away. Wand is suspended against edge of hand, Fig. 11.

[Figure aci: Fig. 11. — The wand hanging upright against the edge of the right hand, held at right angles to it, suspended without support.]

[Figure acj: Fig. 12. — The wand slanting upward with the left fingertips placed on it under the loop of thread, and the right hand lower down.]

[Figure ack: Fig. 13. — The wand upright, revolving end over end, with one hand at the top and the other at the bottom and arrows showing the turning motion.]

[Figure acl: Fig. 14. — The wand upright after the revolution, the right hand at the top and the left hand at the bottom, with an arrow showing the turning motion.]

Bring left hand up and place finger tips on wand under loop of thread at end A, Fig. 12.

Now bring right hand down and left hand up, the wand revolving, end over end, with wand still adhering to hands, Fig. 13.

Completing the revolution, bring right hand up to top and left hand to bottom, Fig. 14.

Perform this rotary motion a number of times, the wand still adhering to the hands.

Finally grasp wand in right hand, remove left hand, and bring end of wand down against palm of left hand smartly as a flourish.

Edwards’ Magnetic Wand

This idea was brought out by W. G. Edwards, Canadian magician, and publisher of Edwards’ Monthly. I used it in my programs with good success as a means of picking up certain things in an interesting and mysterious manner.

Effect

Performer touches the tip of his wand to a silk lying on the table. Upon raising wand the silk adheres to the tip of wand. Even rubber sponge balls can be lifted up by touching with wand. Three cards can be freely selected and shuffled back in the deck, yet upon touching tip of wand to the top edge of deck a selected card adheres to the wand and it is readily lifted out of the deck. This is repeated with the remaining two cards.

Paraphernalia

1—The special Magnetic Wand. This consists of a hollow metal wand with a hole running through it to hold a freely moving metal rod. One end of the rod is attached to a nickel plated wand tip. A metal spring is around the rod and rests inside the metal wand tip. On the other end of rod is a nickel plated disc which acts as the A end of the wand. By pushing the spring end B, the rod is pushed out and there is a space between the disc and end A of wand. This disc end acts as a pincers. When opened and placed on a silk handkerchief and then allowed to close again the handkerchief is held securely nipped and can be easily raised. Figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4 show the construction of this wand.

[Figure acm: Fig. 1. — The hollow metal wand seen from the side, with a short band at each end, drawn as a long narrow tube.]

[Figure acn: Fig. 2. — The wand with end A at the left and the spring end B at the right, shown as a long shaded rod.]

[Figure aco: Fig. 3. — The wand with the rod pushed out by the spring end B, leaving a gap between the disc at end A and the wand.]

[Figure acp: Fig. 4. — A cutaway of the wand tip showing the metal spring coiled around the rod inside the hollow tube.]

To Perform

Pick up the wand and hold as in Fig. 5, the spring end B in the right hand and the left hand supporting the wand near the center or near end A. Push right palm against end B while left hand grips wand. This forces the disc at end A out a bit as in Fig. 3. Grip wand tightly with first finger and thumb of right hand so as to keep spring in place. Remove left hand. With right hand reach over with wand and nip the silk. When open disc is placed on silk and allowed to close a bit of silk is easily nipped. Move silk over to the desired spot or bring up to left hand. Silk is easily released by pushing slightly on end B again.

[Figure acq: Fig. 5. — A hand holding the wand by the spring end B while a silk handkerchief hangs from end A, which is held in the other hand.]

Practice will show how easily and how speedily a silk handkerchief can be mysteriously lifted from the table. Handkerchief is taken in left hand from wand. You can pick up silk after silk, one at a time.

In performing tricks with sponge balls it is interesting to see you reach over for a ball with tip of wand and have it adhere. Just simply press end A against the ball, opening disc and nipping ball. This can be done quite nonchalantly.

Magnetic Rising Cards (Tarbell Routine)

This is an effective use of the Edwards’ Magnetic Wand. Three cards freely elected by audience are returned to the deck, well shuffled, and brought out of the deck again by touching the tip of wand to the top edge of the deck.

Paraphernalia

1—A magnetic wand.

2—A deck of cards.

3—A duplicate deck of cards which is cut about a thirty-second of an inch shorter than a regular deck. These are called *short cards.* A *short card* deck can be supplied by your magic dealer.

4—A piece of cardboard 2¾ × 4¼ inches.

To Prepare

From the *short card* deck remove the following cards in order:

Ace of Hearts

Two of Spades

Three of Diamonds

Four of Clubs

Five of Hearts

Six of Spades

Seven of Diamonds

Eight of Clubs

Nine of Hearts

Ten of Spades

Jack of Diamonds

Queen of Clubs

King of Hearts

Place these cards on ‘‘top” of the deck, the Ace of Hearts being at the “top.”

On the “bottom” of the deck place the piece of cardboard.

Place deck with cardboard in left trousers pocket, the cardboard against the body. The Ace of Hearts is on the side away from your body.

Have the regular deck and magnetic wand on table.

To Perform

Have three cards freely selected from the regular deck of cards. Give remaining cards to a spectator to shuffle thoroughly. Take back the deck and place in the left trousers pocket, back of cards towards audience. The “top” card of this packet is against the cardboard in pocket. The cardboard acts as a wall between the two decks so they can be easily separated.

*“Three cards have been freely selected from a deck of cards and the remaining cards thoroughly shuffled. These shuffled cards I have placed in my pocket. Much has been said during the past few years about extrasensory perception. Let me try an experiment.”*

To one of spectators who has a selected card, you say,

*“You have selected a card. For instance, if you selected the Eight of Spades I could not reach into my pocket and take out another Eight of Spades. I could take out a Spade card to represent the suit, and an Eight spot of another suit. Let me try something on that order. Name the suit of your card. A Diamond?”*

Reach into your pocket and count down from the top to the third card, the Three of Diamonds.

*“Here is the Three of Diamonds.”*

Remove the Three of Diamonds from the pocket and show to audience. To name the card before removing it from the pocket adds to the mystery.

*“I have produced the suit of your card, now tell the number. Five?”*

Reach into your pocket and count down to the Five of Hearts. Remember in counting that you have removed the Three of Diamonds.

*“Here is the Five of Hearts.”* Remove it and show.

*“Pardon me. I know what the lady over there is thinking. What would have happened if an Ace had been selected. Then I would have produced an Ace. Perhaps the Ace of Hearts.*

Remove Ace of Hearts and show.

*“Name any number. A Queen? The Queen is quite a number.”*

Reach into pocket and count down to the Jack, Queen and King and lift all three out of the deck.

*“All right, how about the Queen of Clubs.”* Remove all three cards from the pocket and show.

*“Not only a Queen but the Jack of Diamonds and the King of Hearts to escort her.”*

Remove the balance of the *short card* deck above the cardboard and show.

*“All from a shuffled deck of cards. Now return the three cards to the deck.”*

Let them be returned one at a time as deck is fanned. Cards go into different places. Push cards into deck and square the deck. Cards can be thoroughly shuffled as the regular cards are longer than the *short card* deck and protrude just barely enough so they can be easily located by their length.

Strike an end of deck on table so as to even cards on bottom edge causing the three selected cards to project at the top. Deck is held in left hand.

Pick up the magnetic wand from the table. The spring end B is in the right hand, against the palm of hand. Bring end A against the base of left thumb. Push with right hand so as to open disc.

Bring tip A of wand over one of the projecting selected cards and nip it by the edge. Release of spring completes the grip.

[Figure acr: Fig. 6. — The wand, with end A at its tip, nips the top edge of a projecting card, the Six of Spades, as it is pulled up out of the deck.]

Raise the wand pulling card out of deck, Fig. 6.

*“The Six of Spades. Who had the Six of Spades? You, sir? It is said that this wand has magnetic qualities.”*

Remove the card from the wand and place on rear of the deck. Nip another of the cards and raise it out of the deck.

*“The Five of Diamonds. That is your card, sir.”* Place card on rear of deck.

*“Now madam concentrate on your card.”* Nip remaining selected card and pull up out of deck. *“The King of Clubs.”* Place card on rear of deck.

The pocket exchange of decks as described in this routine can be used in other tricks where it is necessary to switch decks in a natural way.

[Figure acs: Fig. 7. — The original Edwards' wand drawn as a plain rod, nickel plated all over, with end A at the left and end B at the right.]

Note

The original Edwards’ Magnetic Wand was nickel plated all over as in Fig. 7.

An Emergency Magnetic Wand

In this simple method an adhesive substance is placed on the tip of a regular wand. There is a Scotch Transparent Tape that has adhesive on both sides and can be fastened to tip of wand and cut out to fit the tip. If this adhesive end is brought against one of the long cards, the card can be easily raised.

Regular Scotch Tape or adhesive tape could be glued onto tip of wand. Or various adhesives sold by the magical stores could be used such as conjurer’s wax, adhesive levitators placed on the hands which enable objects to stick to the fingers and hands, or other adhesives being introduced from time to time.

The short deck may have to be cut a bit shorter to enable you to get enough space for a good grip with the wand tip on the edge of selected cards.

The Penetrative Wand

This wand was designed for comedy effects, a few of which are described, but your imagination will suggest many more.

Effect

Performer holds wand up against a spectator and apparently pushes it into his body. An end of the wand is placed in a boy’s mouth and he apparently swallows the wand. Placed up against a boy’s head, performer says he wants to see if boy’s head is solid or not. The wand apparently is pushed back and forth in the boy’s head, etc.

Paraphernalia

1—A Penetrative Wand. This consists of a regular wand with an extra nickeled tip which fits over one of the tips on the wand. This extra tip is open at both ends and can be caused to slide up and down the wand. See Figs. 1, 2 and 3.

[Figure act: Fig. 1. — A regular wand drawn as a long dark rod with a nickeled tip at each end.]

[Figure acu: Fig. 2. — The extra nickeled tip alone, a short open-ended sleeve that fits over one tip of the wand.]

[Figure acv: Fig. 3. — The wand with the extra tip slid along the rod away from the end, an arrow showing the direction it moves.]

To Perform

The extra tip is covering the tip on one end of wand. Pick up wand with right hand so that this extra tip end is held in right hand. Your right side is towards the audience. The opposite end of wand is pushed up against an object and that end is covered by left hand. The right hand slides the extra tip down on the wand, the upper end of the wand being hidden by hand and wrist. The effect is that the wand is pushed directly into the object, Fig. 4.

[Figure acw: Fig. 4. — The wand seems to pass straight into an upright surface, held in the right hand at one end with the left hand cupped over the other end against the surface.]

Practice before a mirror will show the perfect deception created by this illusion. To withdraw the wand, slide the extra tip back to the end of wand and remove the left hand from the other end.

By sliding the extra tip back and forth a funny effect is produced.

Comedy Effect with Boy

This comedy test to determine a boy assistant’s capabilities will be welcomed. The magician has a good time, the boy has a good time, and the audience has a good time.

To Perform

A boy is asked to come up out of the audience onto the stage and take a seat facing the audience.

*“Have a chair my son. . . . I had a boy come up on the stage some time ago and he was so fat I had to give him two chairs. But I see that you watch your calories. Now in order to test your efficiency as an assistant, do you mind if I make a test to determine the hemoglobin of the hobgoblins by way of the parenthesis?”*

*“Oh, you do mind.* *Then we shall make the test.* *It will be mind over matter.* *I take it for granted that you are acquainted with Einstein and know the value of SBK 39 V 234892 divided by the square root of LT 634 X as associated with the relativity of the incoming and outgoing planatorial and equilateral influences.* *We will first begin with the skull to determine the relative solidarity of the bone-arium.”*

Your right side is towards audience. You pick up wand and, placing it against the right side of boy’s head, apparently push it back and forth in the head. Finally remove wand.

*“And now for an ear test to see whether things go in one ear and out the other.”*

Apparently push wand in and out of the boy’s right ear three times. Remove the wand.

*“Now open your mouth.”*

Place end of wand up against boy’s open mouth and slide the movable tip down as far as possible to give the effect of pushing the wand down into the stomach. Bring the sliding tip back as though removing wand.

*“I am glad to see that you do not have an epiglottis of the spasmodic pharyngeal possibilities.”*

*“How is your chest measure, or do you have a measure? Say ‘Ah.’ ”*

Place wand up against right side of boy’s chest. Apparently push wand into his chest.

*“Have you ever thought of being a human pincushion?”*

Move wand to and fro, then remove it.

*“But I trust, my boy, that you’ll never be sitting on pins and needles.”*

You are now ready to use boy to help with whatever magic you desire.

“Card in the Egg” Wand

An effective piece of apparatus for a fine mystery.

Effect

A card is selected by a spectator from a deck of cards. The card is torn into eight pieces and one piece kept by the spectator. Performer vanishes the remaining pieces. He picks up an egg and taps it with his wand, then reaches inside the egg and removes a card which has been rolled up. Upon unrolling the card it is seen to be the same card that spectator selected a moment before. A corner is missing. Upon taking corner spectator has kept and placing it against the card, the corner fits.

Paraphernalia

1—A “Card in Egg” Wand, which is a mechanical wand so designed as to introduce a card into an unprepared egg while breaking the egg shell.

The wand is a hollow metal tube closed at one end only, Fig. 1.

There is a wooden stick or plunger inside wand tube, Fig. 2. This plunger is capable of being slid back and forth by means of a pin which projects through a slot, Fig. 3. The slot makes a right angle turn at each end into which the pin can be pushed to temporarily lock. The pin has a head so as to be easily controlled. When the pin is in lower slot D, the plunger is in position as shown in Fig. 2. When the pin is in upper slot C the end of the plunger is flush with the end A of wand. The end of plunger has a nickeled metal head to match the nickeled tip of the wand.

[Figure acx: Fig. 1. — The Card in Egg wand, a hollow metal tube closed at one end, drawn as a long rod with a nickeled tip at each end.]

[Figure acy: Fig. 2. — The wand with the wooden plunger inside, marked with end A, end B, the pin and the space for the card at end A.]

[Figure acz: Fig. 3. — The slot in the wand with a pin in it, end C at the top and end D at the bottom, each turning at a right angle.]

There is enough space in end A of wand when pin is in D slot to insert a folded card whose length is two and a half inches. There should be an eighth of an inch allowance for card to be pushed down a bit from the end, Fig. 5.

[Figure ada: Fig. 5. — A cutaway of the wand end showing the rolled card in the space in front of the plunger.]

[Figure adb: Fig. 6. — The plunger pushed forward to the end of the wand tube, forcing the card out of the tip.]

Now if you will push the pin forward with thumb the card

is easily forced out of the wand, Fig. 6.

The “Card in Egg” wand can be purchased from a dealer in magical apparatus.

Note: Russell Walsh adapted this same wand principle to a fountain pen which also is a handy piece of apparatus.

2—A deck of cards, plus a duplicate of the card to be forced.

3—An egg. Also a plate or a glass goblet.

4—Apparatus to vanish pieces of a torn card. There are a variety of ways to vanish these pieces. In Lesson 14 (Volume 1) the torn card handkerchief method is described. This handkerchief has pieces of a torn card sewed in a pocket at one corner of handkerchief. In placing the torn pieces of selected card into center of handkerchief, these pieces are palmed and the pieces in the corner of handkerchief are substituted. Spectator, thinking he is holding original torn pieces, is in reality holding those sewed in handkerchief.

Another method is the double paper square as described in the “Double Paper Mysteries” lesson in this volume.

5—Handkerchief or small towel.

Preparation

Let us say that the card to be forced is the Ten of Hearts. Place the Ten of Hearts on top of the deck in readiness to be forced.

A square corner is torn off the duplicate Ten of Hearts and placed in the right trousers pocket. The card, minus the corner, is rolled up and inserted in the end of the “Card in Egg” wand which is then placed on your table.

The egg is placed on a plate, or in a glass goblet, so as to be in full view of the audience.

To Perform

Force the Ten of Hearts on a spectator.

*“Tear the card in half, place the two pieces together and tear again. Put these pieces together and tear again.”*

Spectator tears card into eight pieces. As he does this you casually stand with your right hand in right trousers pocket and finger palm the torn corner. Remove hand with corner of card. Place deck in pocket.

*“Give me the torn pieces.”*

Take the torn pieces in you left hand. With right hand start sorting the pieces leaving the palmed torn piece on top.

*“Here is a corner of the card.”* Hold up the palmed corner.

*“The Ten of Hearts, I believe, is your card. I will have you keep a corner as a souvenir.”*

Give the corner to the spectator who selected the card. Vanish the remaining pieces of torn card.

With the left hand pick up the egg from the plate on the table. Pick up the wand in the right hand in such a way that right thumb rests on the pin and the card end is away from body but not turned towards the audience.

Tap the end of the egg with wand as in Fig. 7, breaking the shell and allowing tip of wand to be slightly inserted into egg. Push the pin forward with thumb which forces the card out of the wand into the egg. Remove the wand and place it under left arm, or on table. This requires but a moment’s time and should be as natural as though you just tapped the egg with tip of wand in order to easily break the shell. The forcing of the card into the egg takes but a second.

[Figure adc: Fig. 7. — A hand holds the wand upright and taps its tip against the end of an egg held in the other hand.]

[Figure add: Fig. 8. — One hand holds the egg with its shell broken at the top while the other hand reaches in and draws out the rolled card.]

Reach into the egg and remove the card, Fig. 8. Place egg aside on plate or back in the goblet. Unfold the card.

*“Strange what will happen if there is an egg around. The Ten of Hearts. I believe this is your card, sir. But a corner is missing. Let me have the corner you are holding. . . . It just fits. It’s egg-stra-ordinary!”*

Place the card and corner aside on plate or in goblet and wipe your hands on a handkerchief or small towel.

Note: If desired, you could have three or four eggs on a plate and let a spectator select one and hold it, even before you have a card selected by another spectator.

Rising Ring on Wand

This principle has been adapted to numerous magical effects both large and small.

Effect

A finger ring is placed upon a wand. It mysteriously rises and falls at performer’s will. When the wand is brought to an approximately horizontal position the ring travels back and forth along the wand.

Paraphernalia

1—A “Ring Rising” Wand. This consists of a regular black wand with nickeled tips, and a special extra tip which fits fairly snugly over one of the tips on the wand, Figs. 1 and 2.

In the end of the special tip is a hole through which a fine black silk thread is threaded and a knot made on the end of thread on the inside, Fig. 1.

[Figure ade: Fig. 1. — The special extra tip with a fine thread passing through a hole in its end, knotted on the inside, with the thread trailing down the side, labelled thread.]

Fig. 2 shows a cross section of the extra tip, with thread, placed on the wand.

[Figure adf: Fig. 2. — Cross section of the extra tip placed on the wand, showing the thread running from the knot inside the tip out through the end and down alongside.]

2—A finger ring. A wedding ring type is best.

Preparation

With the tip threaded as in Fig. 1, attach the other end of thread to the rear of your table, or over the table top to a leg underneath, or to some object on table. The length of the thread will have to be determined by test. You should be able to hold the wand, with extra tip attached, in front of the table.

If you are using wand for something else beforehand have the extra tip on table behind a silk or some object. Or, you may carry the tip and part of the thread in your vest pocket, the other end of the thread being attached to your top vest button.

To Perform

You can borrow a ring or use one of your own. A wedding ring such as is sold in the ten cent store is all right.

Secretly place the extra tip on the end of wand, Fig. 2. Hold the bottom of wand with right hand and slip the ring over the extra tip (and thread) on wand so the ring will drop down on the hand. Just as though a ring were just dropped on an unprepared wand.

*“It is said in the Temples of Bengal that strange properties are given to a wedding ring and it becomes almost endowed with understanding and life, just as this ring placed upon my wand begins to creep upwards defying the laws of gravity.”*

By moving the wand slightly forwards the tension of the thread pulls the ring upwards, Fig. 3. If the ring does not rise easily while the wand is held vertically, tilt it a bit as in Fig. 4.

[Figure adg: Fig. 3. — A wand held vertically with the ring part way up it, the thread running off down to the right at a slant, labelled thread.]

[Figure adh: Fig. 4. — A hand holds the bottom of the wand tilted to the right, the ring near its upper end, with the thread slanting down to the right.]

*“Or it may go down again, come to a stop—and then go up again.”*

Movements of your right hand control the actions of the ring. This can be continued a few times then the ring is allowed to creep up wand until it falls off the top. You catch the ring in your left hand, and if borrowed. return it to owner.

*“If it were not your ring I could hardly believe it.”*

Variation

In this case the wand is held almost horizontal as in Fig. 5. A hand is on each end of the wand. The right end is slightly higher than the left end. Ring slides back and forth stopping or starting on command.

[Figure adi: Fig. 5. — The wand held almost horizontal, a hand at each end, the right end slightly higher, the ring near the left hand and the thread slanting down to the right.]

[Figure adj: Fig. 6. — The wand tipped steeply upward to the right between two hands, the ring near the upper end, the thread running down to the right.]

When the ring is in position as in Fig. 6, the right end of wand is tipped enough to allow the ring to travel down the wand by its own weight.

The ring on wand can be used for fortune telling effects, telling a person’s age, answering questions, etc.

Ireland’s Growing Wand

This is a novel opening experiment, or can be used for a comedy touch during a program, if desired.

Effect

Performer shows a small wand not much larger than a match. He says that this is too small for his purpose so causes it to enlarge to a wand about five inches long and a half inch in thickness. This then increases in size to a foot in length and an inch thick. This large wand has enough “power” to aid in the mystery that is to be performed.

[Figure adk: Fig. 1. — The small wand, about the size of a match but thicker, drawn upright with a ribbed end and its figure label beside it.]

[Figure adl: Fig. 2. — The five-inch wand, a narrow rod with a hollow ring-shaped mouth at its lower end, drawn upright above its figure label.]

[Figure adm: Fig. 3. — The large twelve-inch wand drawn upright and dark, its lower end hollow and open, with the word opening and an arrow pointing to that end.]

Paraphernalia

1—A small wand about the size of a match but thicker, Fig. 1.

2—A wand five inches long and a half inch thick, Fig. 2.

3—A wand 12 inches long and one inch thick, Fig. 3.

Wands Nos. 2 and 3 are each hollowed out and open at one end so that No. 1 slips into No. 2, and No. 2 slips into No. 3. In other words, when nested, they appear to be a single wand.

To Prepare

The large No. 3 wand, open end upwards, is inserted under left side of coat with lower end of wand in the left vest pocket.

Wand No. 2 is palmed in left hand, Fig. 4.

[Figure adn: Fig. 4. — A left hand with the five-inch wand palmed against the fingers, the right hand pointing a finger above it.]

Wand No. 1 can be on table or in right-hand pocket.

Secret and Patter

*“Many people wonder where a magician gets his magic power. The wand is important.”*

Pick up small wand and show it in right hand.

*“But the importance is in not only having a wand, but in having one big enough to have enough power. This size is for little tricks.”*

Secretly push the small wand into No. 2 held in left hand. Open left hand and show the larger wand. The wand has apparently grown in size.

*“But this size is better for larger mysteries.”*

As you show wand No. 2 in right hand the left hand grasps left lapel of coat. The fingers underneath grasp the large wand and move it to the edge of coat, Fig. 5. Left hand, holding end of large wand, moves down to position as shown in Fig. 6.

[Figure ado: Fig. 5. — A man in a jacket, the left hand at his lapel with fingers underneath, drawing the large wand toward the edge of the coat; the other hand holds a small wand.]

[Figure adp: Fig. 6. — The same man, the left hand lowered across the front of the coat holding the end of the large wand, the right hand holding wand No. 2 upright.]

[Figure adq: Fig. 7. — The same man pulling the large wand out of the left hand and holding it slanted across his body in the right hand.]

*“Of course if there is a super-mystery . . . one needs a super-wand!”*

Push wand No. 2 into the opening in the end of the large wand. Then pull out the large wand from left hand, Fig. 7, and hold it in your right hand.

Frank Kelly Vanishing Wand Routine

This is an interesting routine for the vanish and appearance of a magician’s wand.

Effect

Magician wraps his wand in a sheet of paper and gives to spectator to hold. Upon tearing the paper, wand is found to have vanished, and is finally discovered hanging on the spectator’s back.

Paraphernalia

1—A Petrie-Lewis Vanishing Wand, consisting of paper shell and two wooden plugs.

2—A regular wand to match.

3—A metal clip to which is soldered a pin. This clip snaps on wand and is easy to remove, Fig. 1.

[Figure adr: Fig. 1. — A long thin wand seen from the side with the metal clip snapped on its middle, the soldered pin pointing up, labelled clip with pin.]

4—A sheet of paper. This square of paper should be large enough to hide wand behind and also large enough when wand is wrapped that ends can be twisted.

To Prepare

Paper is on table with P-L Vanishing Wand underneath rear edge so it can be easily lifted as in Fig. 2. Solid wand is also on table.

To Perform

Pick up regular wand and have a man from audience come up on stage. Have him stand at your right side. Hold up wand to him with your left hand but your hand covers the clip. Have spectator feel of wand without exposing the clip.

[Figure ads: Fig. 2. — A sheet of paper standing upright with a hand gripping its top rear edge, lifting the concealed vanishing wand that lies hidden behind that edge.]

[Figure adt: Fig. 3. — A man seen from behind in front of a sheet of paper, one arm bent behind him, the wand hooked by its pin on the back of his coat and hanging down.]

*“Do you mind, sir, if I test your senses? Touch this, sir. Your sense of feeling tells you it is a magic wand. If I rap it on the table there is no doubt about it.”*

Rap wand on table with right hand. Pick up paper on table with left hand, the hand on rear edge of paper also picks up Vanishing Wand concealed underneath it, Fig. 2. Take care that man standing near you does not see this concealed wand.

Bring regular wand behind paper as though to wrap it up. But in reality, behind cover of paper, you bring wand down behind you and hook wand on your coat by means of the pin on clip, Fig. 3. Bring right hand immediately up to other wand behind paper. Turn paper around showing the wand. Come up to man assisting, as you say, *“Now, sir, if I were to wrap this wand in paper would that interfere with your sense of feeling?”*

As you talk to him, under cover of paper held in front, slip wand from behind your coat to his back, Fig. 4. Hook it onto his coat. Bring right hand up behind paper, and wrap wand in it, Fig. 5. Twist ends as in Fig. 6.

[Figure adu: Fig. 4. — Two men, one seen from behind; the performer slips the wand onto the back of the other man's coat with his hand, the wand hanging down his back.]

[Figure adv: Fig. 5. — The sheet of paper held up as a diamond shape, the wand wrapped in its top edge with the two ends sticking out at either side.]

[Figure adw: Fig. 6. — The paper-wrapped wand lying slanted from lower left to upper right, the paper twisted into a point at each end.]

*“Hold this end of the wand with your right hand and this end with your left. Your feelings tell you that there is no doubt but what you are holding a wand, for you can feel it through the paper. And yet”* ..... (Tear paper into two pieces and then into four.) *“I have a feeling that the wand has gone a stealing! Turn away from the audience a moment.”*

Man turns his back to audience revealing the wand hanging on his coat. *“But alas! Alack! The wand’s come back!”*

[Figure adx: A cartoon rabbit in a dinner jacket and bow tie, standing upright, holding an egg in one raised hand and a polka-dot bag in the other.]
