Lesson 22: Double Paper Mysteries

Years ago I remember Herr Jansen (Dante) folding up a piece of paper into a cone, or cornucopia, placing a borrowed handkerchief in it, and upon unwrapping the paper, the handkerchief had vanished. With the magicians of days gone by this style of vanish was understood, but today I find too few magical performers versed in the proper construction and technique with double paper cones.

So I am presenting effective methods which you should study carefully. The beauty lies not only in the easily obtained clean-cut mystery but methods that are inexpensive to make.

When Dante came back from Europe to America he still performed with the paper cone. Three candles were taken from a holder on the table and wrapped in tissue paper. Three different colored silks were placed in the paper cone only to vanish therefrom, the paper being unrolled and shown both sides. Upon the tissue paper being torn in half the three silks were discovered inside. This mystery was done in pantomime with well chosen musical accompaniment. I could see Dante do this effect dozens of times with pleasure. The timing, and little touches, are a joy to watch.

Superba Paper Cone for Handkerchief Vanish

Effect

A square sheet of paper is shown both sides and folded up into a cone. A handkerchief is placed inside, and the top of cone folded over. Upon opening the paper the handkerchief has vanished. Paper is shown freely on both sides.

Construction

To construct this double paper cone you can use newspaper, manila wrapping paper, or colored book cover paper. I prefer the latter. Your printer can fix you up, or some good paper house can supply you. You need a fairly good weight paper. Size of paper will vary with the needs.

I suggest a square from 14 to 15 inches in size. You will need two squares the same size. Place these two squares evenly together and fold diagonally so that corner A comes on corner B, Fig. 1. Make a crease along diagonal line DC. Open paper again and then fold corner A over within a quarter of an inch from line DC, Fig. 2. This folding is done so as to make it easier to paste properly.

[Figure ady: Fig. 1. — A square sheet with corners lettered A, B, C and D, a shaded triangular strip running from corner D up to corner C marking the open, unpasted area.]

[Figure adz: Fig. 2. — The square with corner A folded over near diagonal line DC, giving a shaded triangle at the top, corners G, C, D and B lettered.]

[Figure aea: Fig. 3. — The folded paper as a long narrow triangle, with a shaded section near the top and the letter B at the folded corner.]

With rubber cement or a non-wrinkling paste, the two papers must be pasted together as in Fig. 1. The white space in illustration represents the pasted areas and the gray area is the open, unpasted area. The gray area becomes a pocket which is open at the top.

When thoroughly dry fold corner A over towards line DC, Fig. 2. Then fold corner G over towards B. B in turn is folded back over G, Fig. 3. This makes a flat paper cone. Open up the top and you will find two compartments with a wall of paper between the two. Let H represent this wall, Fig. 4. By pushing H to right you can easily insert fingers and open cone as in Fig. 5, with E compartment open. Anything going into this compartment goes between the two pasted sheets of paper. If H is pushed to left, compartment F is open.

[Figure aeb: Fig. 4. — The flat paper cone seen from the side, its open top showing a shaded interior with the wall of paper lettered H inside it.]

[Figure aec: Fig. 5. — The cone with its top opened by the fingers, a shaded oval opening lettered E, the wall H to one side and compartment F marked below it.]

[Figure aed: Fig. 6. — The flattened cone with corner C folded down, showing the creased flap lettered C lying across its upper part.]

Flatten paper cone and fold down corner C, Fig. 6. By folding corner C over in this manner you can naturally and indetectably have paper come back to position as in Fig. 3 so that either compartment can be opened.

To Perform

Paper is folded and lying on table. Pick up and hold as in Fig. 7, corner C towards the audience. Your right side is towards audience and you hold paper at left.

Open paper, Fig. 8. The opening is at the top and away from audience. Bring right hand up and left hand down and show opposite side of paper, Fig. 9. Always keep opening away from the audience. Fold paper again, but leave corner C upright, Fig. 3.

[Figure aee: Fig. 7. — Two hands holding the folded paper cone, a long narrow triangle with a crease line along its upper edge, corner C pointing toward the audience.]

[Figure aef: Fig. 8. — The paper opened out as a square, lettered A and C at corners with the word opening and an arrow at the top, held between two hands, with dotted fold lines.]

Insert thumb into compartment E. (Opening is towards you during this action.) Open up compartment. Place silk handkerchief or handkerchiefs in compartment E, Fig. 10. Push way down into cone. Fold over corner C, Fig. 7. Open paper as in Fig. 8 and show that the handkerchiefs have vanished. Show opposite side of paper, Fig. 9. Fold up paper again and put aside.

[Figure aeg: Fig. 9. — The opened square seen from the opposite side, held between two hands, with corners lettered B, C and A, dotted fold lines, and the word opening at the top.]

[Figure aeh: Fig. 10. — The folded cone held in one hand with a silk handkerchief pushed into its open top, part of the silk showing above the rim.]

Note

The double paper cone can be used to produce one, two or three silks.

The Ghostly Silk

This is a modification of Ralph Read’s “Ghostly Silk” designed for comedy.

Effect

Performer shows a square of paper which he folds into a cone. Into this he drops a silk handkerchief which he says will disappear. He makes a sudden motion into his pocket with the silk and brings out hand empty. Audience knows that performer has slipped the handkerchief into his pocket. However, he turns pocket inside out and shows it contains no handkerchief. He then casually reaches into the cone and removes the silk. He pushes silk back into paper again and while trying to misdirect audience holds cone far out with outstretched arm to the right near the wings of the stage. A hand reaches out and reaching into cone jerks the handkerchief backstage.

Performer reaches into the cone and removes the handkerchief showing it has not gone.

This time he again places silk in the cone and upon opening paper shows it has vanished. Silk is produced from a formerly empty glass tumbler on the table.

Paraphernalia

1—A double paper cone for vanishing handkerchief. Suggest a bright colored one in contrast to white silk.

2—Four white silk handkerchiefs of the same size. A 13 or 15-inch silk answers the purpose.

3—A glass tumbler, with a transparent celluloid insert, and a cover, Fig. 1.

[Figure aei: Fig. 1. — Three parts side by side: a glass tumbler, a smaller celluloid insert that fits inside it, and a tall ribbed cover, each labelled glass, celluloid insert and cover.]

[Figure aej: Fig. 2. — The glass with the insert and two silk handkerchiefs inside, the cover fitted over the whole thing.]

[Figure aek: Fig. 3. — A hand lifts the celluloid insert with the silk in it out of the glass, and the empty glass stands below; the figure number is lettered beside the glass.]

The celluloid insert fits within the glass and yet is loose enough to easily slip in and out. Into this insert, a silk handkerchief is placed. On top of the first one, another silk handkerchief is placed. Cover fits over glass and insert, Fig. 2.

By reaching into the top of the cover with first two fingers inside and thumb outside, it is easy to pick up insert and carry it away with the cover, Fig. 3. By putting cover over glass again, the insert goes back into glass. When insert is in the glass it is invisible to audience as it is clear and blends into the glass itself. Magic dealers can supply this equipment.

To Prepare

Have two silk handkerchiefs in the celluloid insert which is in the glass and covered by the cover.

Two silks, one on top of the other, are in the inner pocket of the double paper cone (Compartment E). Cone, so prepared, lies on table.

To Perform

“*This is a story of a ghost. This is a haunted house.*”

Lift up cover together with insert inside and show glass empty by picking glass up and replacing.

“*Ghosts who live in glass houses should dress in the light—they might be seen in the dark.*”

Place the cover back over the glass so that insert comes back into glass.

Pick up the paper cone and open it. Pocket opening is held away from audience. Show both sides of paper.

“*Did you ever try to catch a ghost, or to wrap one up in a piece of paper?*” Fold paper back to flat cone.

Look over into the top of the cover. Open your eyes wide. Reach into top of cover and remove the upper silk handkerchief. Be careful that insert does not pull up. You can put cone under arm and hold insert in place with left forefinger as right hand reaches in and draws out a white silk.

“*A ghost.*”

Holding the ghostly silk in one hand, use the other hand to lift up cover together with insert and one handkerchief inside so as to show glass empty. Cover does not have to clear the glass. Replace.

Hold cone in left hand so that secret pocket (Compartment E) is open. The visible silk is in right hand.

“*This is a ghostly silk. Where it comes from nobody knows and where it goes to nobody knows.*”

Place the silk into the cone and suddenly take it out and put into the right hand trousers pocket so the whole audience can see it go into the pocket. Quickly putting it into the pocket gives the audience notice that you are trying to get rid of the handkerchief.

Bring the right hand back to the paper cone and start to fold over the top. By this time there is a commotion in the audience about putting the silk into your pocket.

“*You say I put the handkerchief in my pocket?*”

Take the cone in right hand and with left hand reach into left pocket and show it empty. Put pocket back in place.

“*Nothing in my pocket.*”

By this time people are saying, “The other pocket.”

Turn with your back to the audience and take out left pocket again.

“*Nothing in this other pocket.*”

Finally transfer the cone back to left hand and with right hand reach into right pocket, push silk into upper inner corner of pocket and turn the pocket out and show empty.

“*And nothing in this pocket. As I was saying, I put a ghost in this paper.*”

Reach into the inner pocket of cone and take out one of the white silks. Replace in cone.

Edge over towards right side of stage with cone in right hand and held away from body with opening of cone towards the right wings.

“*Now I want you to notice my left hand.*”

Make movements with left hand held away from body at left side as the right arm reaches out as far as possible allowing opening of cone to come within a couple of feet of the wings. A stage hand or assistant reaches out from behind wing and, reaching into the cone, draws silk out and pulls it back of wing out of sight. Gradually come nearer center of stage again, moving left hand and bringing the cone in front of the body.

The audience has seen the handkerchief taken from cone and starts a commotion again. Look at them.

“*Pardon me.*” (Reach into cone and remove the silk from inner pocket.) “*No it hasn’t gone yet.*”

Replace the silk in the inner pocket of cone and fold down the corner.

“*Would you really like to see a ghost disappear?*”

Open up the paper and show that silk has vanished. Follow the technique of exhibiting and handling the cone as described in the preceding effect, “Superba Paper Cone.” Fold paper and put on table.

“*But this ghost didn’t really disappear.*”

Lift up the cover and place on table revealing the silk in the glass.

“*It’s back in its haunted house.*”

Variations

In case it is impractical to have someone back stage to reach into cone and remove silk, another idea is to have a black silk cord elastic stretched out from wings and held to the table by a clip tied on end of elastic.

At desired time unhook the clip from table and attach to handkerchief in cone. Let loose and silk flies back into wings. This is good for a comedian.

Another method is to have an elastic arranged as a pull, attached to left side of trousers with a safety pin and running around the back, under coat and out at right through a small ring, sewed to trousers just behind and above right trousers pocket. To end of elastic is tied a clip. When silk is placed in cone reach under coat and get clip and clip it onto handkerchief. Let it fly back under coat so audience can see it go.

Puffing Rice in a Cone

This is an interesting variation using a double paper cone.

Effect

Performer shows a square of paper on both sides and folds into a cone. He shows some rice in a dish. He reaches in and drops a handful into the paper cone. Upon shaking cone, the puffed rice bounces out and is poured out in a glass dish or on a plate.

Paraphernalia

1—A double paper cone.

2—Package of puffed rice.

3—A glass dish of uncooked rice.

4—A tray or dish in which to pour the puffed rice.

To Prepare

Put as much puffed rice in the inner pocket of cone as it will comfortably hold without bulge in paper being noticeable. Puffed rice should be spread out. Place folded paper on table, opening away from audience, or the corner can be folded back. Dish of uncooked rice is on table.

Pick up paper cone and unfold, showing it on both sides and making it into a cone.

Open up inner pocket. Reach into dish and take up handful of rice. Open hand and allow it to go back into the dish to show that it is raw rice. Pick up a small handful and drop it into cone on top of the puffed rice.

[Figure ael: Fig. 1. — A hand holds a paper cone tilted mouth-down and shakes it, and puffed rice streams from it in a curving line onto a plate below.]

Shake cone, Fig. 1, allowing the puffed rice to come out gradually onto tray or plate. The small grains of raw rice will filter down through the puffed rice so the latter will pour out first. Should a few grains of the raw rice come out with the puffed rice, they will not be noticed, but even if seen, they will pass as having failed to puff. This shaking motion can be done as though rice were really puffing. Cone can be hit on palm of left hand to shake out a bunch of puffed rice.

After all of the rice has been poured out, open paper and show both sides.

Note

This may be varied by popping corn in paper cone. Popped corn should not be buttered or salted. Just plain popped corn.

The Two-Way Paper Cone

I designed this type of paper cone some time ago so as to have two compartments hidden in cone for vanishes, productions, color changes, changing of articles, and mysteries where double space was necessary.

To Construct

[Figure aem: Fig. 1. — A square of paper with corners lettered A, B, C and D. A shaded triangle with its parts marked E and H lies inside it, along the diagonal from D to C.]

Take two squares of newspaper, manila wrapping paper, or a not too heavy book cover paper, about 14 or 15 inches square, and paste together with rubber cement or a non-wrinkling paste, Fig. 1. The white area shows parts that are pasted together. The gray area shows the pocket space. Be sure there is a pasted line between DC so as to separate the two pockets.

Fold over corner A within a quarter of an inch of diagonal line DC, Fig. 2. Fold corner G over on to pocket H, and then fold corner B back over G, Fig. 3. Fold corner C down over B.

Fig. 4 shows paper cone opened up with its compartments.

[Figure aen: Fig. 2. — The square with corners D, B, C and G after corner A is folded over close to the diagonal DC, leaving shaded pocket areas.]

[Figure aeo: Fig. 3. — A narrow folded triangle with corners C at the top and D at the left, showing corner B folded back over G.]

[Figure aep: Fig. 4. — The finished cone opened up to show its compartments, with the two pockets lettered E and H and other points lettered B and F.]

To Perform

The actions of handling are similar to the regular double paper cone already described. Be sure the openings of pockets are away from the audience.

Suggested Uses

1—Vanishing Handkerchiefs

The double pocket space allows for the vanish of more handkerchiefs because of double distribution.

2—Production of Silks

Both pockets can be loaded for production.

3—Color Change of Silks

Let us say you want to change three white silks into three red ones, or assorted colors. Place the three colored silks in pocket H. Paper is shown both sides, then folded up, pocket E opened and the three white silks placed into that pocket. Fold over the top of cone, open again and remove the colored silks from pocket H. Open the paper and show both sides.

4—The Knotted and Unknotted Silks

Have spectators tie knots in the center of three silk handkerchiefs. Drop these into pocket E one at a time, fold top of cone over then open again and remove duplicate unknotted silks from pocket H.

5—Sympathetic Silks

By using two Two-Way Paper Cones you can easily do the Sympathetic Silks in which knots tied between three silks pass to unknotted silks in the other paper cone, and vice versa.

6—Cut and Restored Handkerchief

Place a white pocket handkerchief in pocket H of paper cone. Show paper both sides and fold into the cone. Borrow a handkerchief as near as possible like the one you have concealed. Place spectator’s handkerchief in pocket E, and seemingly take it out again. In reality you remove the duplicate handkerchief from pocket H.

Cut the center out of this handkerchief with the scissors, leaving a large hole, Figs. 5–6.

“*I just happened to think of a new style in connection with handkerchiefs. This is particularly fitting to ladies who have trouble in carrying handkerchiefs around. Now with a handkerchief of this type you can wear it on your arm.*”

[Figure aeq: Fig. 5. — A hand grips a handkerchief with the cloth bunched and hanging down, one end held up, showing it worn on the arm.]

[Figure aer: Fig. 6. — A square handkerchief with a small, irregular hole cut in its center.]

[Figure aes: Fig. 7. — A square handkerchief with a much larger, irregular hole cut in its center.]

Put hand through hole and let handkerchief rest on your arm near the elbow, then remove it.

“*Looks quite modern. Of course if the hole were made bigger . . . .*” (Cut hole larger, Fig. 7). “*You could put your head through it and wear it as a neck piece.*”

Put head through the hole and let rest on your shoulders, then remove it. “*I am afraid the gentleman does not think much of my ability as a designer particularly with his handkerchief.*”

Put the handkerchief and pieces into pocket H. Fold corner C over cone. Open again and, opening pocket E, remove the handkerchief, now fully restored.

“*But all’s well that ends well.*”

*Variation:* An extra strip of white cloth about three inches wide and six feet long could be rolled up zig-zag into a flat parcel and also secreted in pocket H. After the pieces have been returned to pocket H, say magic words of some kind and, when the cloth is removed, the handkerchief appears to have become one long strip. Return the strip and take out restored handkerchief from pocket E.

Cut and restored effects offer some interesting combinations for the magician with imagination.

7—Torn and Restored Tissue Paper

Instead of a handkerchief a square of tissue can be used and torn up into various pieces, and changed to various shapes and finally restored.

If two pieces of tissue, contrasting in color, were used, these could be torn up and restored with various things such as rabbits, doves, etc., on the other sheet, and finally brought back to normal.

Tissue paper can be turned into confetti, or long tissue chains, or spring flowers.

Spring flowers that fold flat and spring open, being made of tissue paper with silk leaves, can be purchased from your magic dealer. Torn tissue paper into spring flowers is very pretty. The flowers can fall into a dish, or on the table.

8—Cards and Ribbon

This novel effect consists in dropping a dozen or so playing cards into the cone, followed by a strip of brightly colored ribbon about three quarters of an inch wide and four feet long. Upon pulling out the ribbon the cards are found to be all threaded upon the ribbon, Fig. 8.

[Figure aet: Fig. 8. — Three playing cards threaded flat one above another on a ribbon that passes through slits in each card, with the ribbon ends running above and below.]

Beforehand thread a dozen or so duplicate cards on a ribbon and secrete in compartment H. Show a number of playing cards, dropping them streamline fashion into the cone pocket E. Add the strip of ribbon. All that remains to do is to pull out the threaded combination in pocket H. Show the paper both sides.

9—Paper Linking Rings

These paper rings should be about one-half inch wide and eight inches in diameter, Fig. 9. They should be of various colors for contrast. Have six separate rings and six duplicate ones linked together, Fig. 10.

[Figure aeu: Fig. 9. — A single paper ring seen at an angle, a narrow band forming an oval loop.]

[Figure aev: Fig. 10. — A chain of linked paper rings running diagonally up the page, the lowest rings trailing into loose strands at the bottom.]

The linked rings are concealed in pocket H. Place in pocket so that when the end ring is pulled up, the chain follows in order.

Show paper both sides. Fold into a cone. Drop the single rings in pocket E one at a time in the color order of the linked ones.

Remove the chain and show the paper both sides again.

10—Patriotic Silks

Three silks, red, white, and blue, respectively, can be changed into an American flag.

11—Twentieth Century Silks

The effect of tying two silks together and having a vanished third one come between the two has been popular in various forms and methods for some years.

The string of three silks, tied by diagonal corners, is in pocket H. Pick up two silks, duplicates of the end silks of the string in H. Tie these two together at diagonal corners and place into pocket E. Fold corner C.

Vanish the third silk. Open the cone and whip out the three silks tied together.

Variation

Another pretty effect is the reverse of the preceding one. Have two white silks with a brightly colored silk tied in between, placed into cone. A duplicate colored silk is produced from some place. Two duplicate white silks, tied by diagonal corners, are removed, and paper shown empty.

Royal Paper Cone

This simple method can be used as a vanish or production. Made up in rather small size, say six inches square, it is valuable in vanishing a card that has been torn into a number of pieces.

To Construct

Cut out a piece of newspaper in the shape of Fig. 1. Put a line of non-wrinkling paste along the edge DE and fold the triangle of paper along DB into position as in Fig. 2. Press down the pasted edge to form the pocket.

[Figure aew: Fig. 1. — A square of paper with corners A and C at the top, D and B on a dashed line below, and a triangular flap extending down to point E.]

[Figure aex: Fig. 2. — A square with corners A, C, D, B and E, the lower right triangle shaded to show the folded and pasted pocket.]

When dry, fold B over on line DE, Fig. 3. Fold over corner A as in Fig. 4. Open up pocket H. It is into this pocket that torn pieces of cards or other articles are dropped.

[Figure aey: Fig. 3. — A square with corners A, C, D and E, with a shaded triangle B-D-E folded over inside it.]

[Figure aez: Fig. 4. — The paper folded into a narrow cone shape, with corner A folded over and a small shaded patch near the upper right.]

[Figure afa: Fig. 5. — The folded cone with pocket H opened, showing a shaded pocket opening with letters F, H and A marked near the top.]

To Perform

Take care to keep opening EB away from the audience. Paper can be lying on table folded or unfolded. When paper is folded and the pocket H is opened, Fig. 5, it is easy to vanish torn pieces of card or other similar articles.

Century Card Vanishing Paper

This is designed to vanish easily one or a few playing cards.

To Construct

Paste together two eight-inch squares of newspaper with rubber cement or a non-wrinkling paste, Fig. 1. To make pasting easier first fold both papers across one way and then across the other way. This divides it into four areas. All squares are covered with paste with exception of one at upper left side—gray area in illustration. Left side only of that square is pasted along the edge to form a pocket with opening at top.

[Figure afb: Fig. 1. — A square divided into four areas lettered A, D, C and B, the upper left area shaded, marked Opening at top and Edge Pasted along its left side.]

[Figure afc: Fig. 2. — The paper folded once into a long rectangle with corners C and B, seen edge-on at the top.]

[Figure afd: Fig. 3. — The paper folded again into a small square with corner D, thickness shown along the top and left edges.]

When dry, fold CB up against AD, Fig. 2. Then fold again, Fig. 3. Open again. This folding is done so as to make proper creases for quick folding.

A slot about an eighth of an inch is cut out of the front paper at opening of pocket. This is so that the rear paper can be pulled back easily in opening the pocket.

To Perform

Unfold the paper with opening at top as in Fig. 1. Show paper both sides. Fold paper again as in Fig. 3.

Bring playing card or cards up to opening of paper and by pushing back the rear paper a trifle, the pocket easily opens. Slotted paper in front allows this. Drop card or cards into the pocket.

Open paper and show that cards have vanished. Show paper both sides.

Acme Coin Vanishing Paper

This is a mysterious method of vanishing or producing a half dollar or other coin.

To Construct

Cut out a piece of newspaper (use the news column) 5¼ × 7 inches,

Fig. 1. Fold up lower quarter of paper at line CB which makes a square piece of paper.

Fold in thirds both ways so as to get creases, Fig. 2. With some rubber cement or non-wrinkling paste fasten the lower left-hand and right-hand squares to paper proper. This makes a square pocket with opening at the top. A half dollar will easily slip into this pocket.

[Figure afe: Fig. 1. — A tall rectangle of paper with corners lettered A, D, E, F and a dashed fold line C B across the lower quarter, marking the part folded up to make a square.]

[Figure aff: Fig. 2. — The paper folded in thirds both ways with dotted creases; the lower middle square is shaded as the pocket, with its opening marked along the line E F.]

To get proper creases for quick folding, fold paper as in Figs. 3, 4 and 5. Open again.

[Figure afg: Fig. 3. — A flat folded strip of paper with corners A, D, C, B, dotted crease lines and a shaded square pocket at the lower middle.]

[Figure afh: Fig. 4. — A long narrow folded strip of paper with two dotted crease lines, shown after the second fold.]

[Figure afi: Fig. 5. — A small folded square packet of paper, the paper folded down to its final size.]

[Figure afj: Fig. 6. — Rear view of the paper held in the left hand, while the right hand slips the half dollar into the pocket behind the paper.]

To Perform

Open paper and freely show both sides. Hold paper in left hand as in Fig. 6. The slot side is away from audience. Show half dollar in right hand and bring it to center of paper, really slipping it into the pocket, Fig. 6. Coin being behind paper, audience cannot see this move. When coin is hidden in pocket, fold left side over, and then the right side and other sides as in Fig. 5.

The coin has apparently vanished when you open paper again in position of Fig. 2. Opening of pocket is upright. Freely show both sides of the paper.

To Appear a Coin

Coin is in the secret pocket. Paper is shown both sides. Left hand grasps pocket and holds with opening down. Hand also presses enough on coin to keep it from slipping out of pocket.

Right hand comes up and, with thumb underneath opening of pocket, allows the coin to gradually slide out to center of paper, Fig. 7. Paper is now folded over the coin. When paper is opened the coin is found inside.

[Figure afk: Fig. 7. — Rear view: the left hand holds the paper by its pocket while the right thumb, beneath the pocket opening, lets the coin slide out toward the center.]

Transposition of Coins

If desired you can use two papers. A coin that disappears from one apparently appears in the other. This, of course, requires two half dollars.

Modern Coin Vanishing Paper

In this method of coin vanish the performer has control of the coin as it leaves the paper and can be reproduced elsewhere. This method is for performers who like clean-cut movements.

To Construct

A 5¼-inch square of paper is used. Fold it into thirds each way. Cut out another piece of paper 1¾ × 5¼ inches, and fold this in thirds. Put non-wrinkling paste on outer left and right thirds and paste to the square of paper, Fig. 1. This leaves an open slot, open at both ends, in the center of the lower third. A coin placed in one end would slide through. This is the *rear* of the paper.

[Figure afl: Fig. 1. — Rear of the paper, corners A, D, E, F, B, C, folded in thirds; the lower side thirds are marked pasted and the shaded center slot is marked opening at both ends.]

Turn paper over and on front paper cut out a slot in lower opening as in Fig. 2. This is done so that if the edge of a coin were pushed against rear paper the paper cut away would allow pocket to open easily.

[Figure afm: Fig. 2. — Front of the paper folded in thirds with dotted creases and a slot cut in the lower center opening, labelled slot and front.]

[Figure afn: Fig. 3. — The paper with its bottom third brought up, a shaded square at the lower center showing the pocket, with dotted crease lines.]

[Figure afo: Fig. 4. — A long narrow folded strip of paper with dotted creases and corners lettered A and D.]

[Figure afp: Fig. 5. — A small folded square packet of paper, the final fold of the paper.]

Bring the bottom third of paper up as in Fig. 3. Fold as in Figs. 4 and 5. Open again as proper creases have been made.

To Perform

Show paper freely in left hand and half dollar in the right. Bring bottom third of paper up as in Fig. 6. Show coin and place in center, really pushing edge via slot up against paper, thus opening the pocket and sliding coin into the pocket where it is held in place by the left hand. To all appearances the audience sees you just place the coin in center of paper. Fig. 6 is view as audience sees it.

[Figure afq: Fig. 6. — The paper with its bottom third brought up, held in the left hand while the right hand pushes the coin edge against the slot, as the audience sees it.]

[Figure afr: Fig. 7. — The right hand holds the folded paper while the left hand takes the upper part, letting the coin slide out into the right hand.]

Fold top third of paper down and, the other edges over, Fig. 5.

Transfer the paper to the right hand and hold by fingers and thumb. Take hold of upper part of paper with left hand allowing coin to slide out into right hand, Fig. 7.

You can tear the paper to pieces, burn, or just open and show both sides freely.

Coin Through the Saucer

Here is a trick employing the “Modern Coin Vanishing Paper” described in the preceding page.

Effect

A half dollar is borrowed and marked. It is wrapped in a five-inch square of paper and placed in a saucer. The saucer in turn is placed on top of a glass tumbler. The paper is lighted and, as paper burns, the half dollar is seen to visibly fall through the saucer into the glass. It is the same coin and is given back to the spectator for identification.

Paraphernalia

1—The “Modern Coin Vanishing Paper.”

2—Small pellet of conjurer’s wax.

3—A saucer.

4—A glass tumbler.

5—A small box of matches.

To Prepare

Place a small pellet of wax, that has been “worked soft,” on the bottom of the saucer at center, Fig. 1. Saucer should have a high enough ridge around the bottom so that a small pellet of wax will not stick to the table when the saucer rests thereon.

[Figure afs: Fig. 1. — A saucer seen from above and slightly to the side, with a small dot of wax at the center of its bottom, labelled wax.]

Tumbler, paper and matches are near-by.

To Perform

Borrow a half dollar and have it marked for future identification.

*“One evening at a dinner party I accidentally tipped over a tea cup and spilled tea upon the table cloth.* *I explained to the guests that the tea on the table was not just the result of a turned over tea cup but that owing to the heat of the tea, the cup leaked.* *China is quite porous, as can be proven under the microscope.* *Naturally such a story was hard to believe by unscientific minds, so I had to prove that what I said was true.* *So I borrowed a half dollar, had it marked, and wrapped it in a small piece of paper.”*

Wrap half dollar in the square of paper and secretly let coin slip out into the right hand.

*“I placed the folded piece of paper with coin inside, on a saucer.”*

Pick up saucer with left hand and show top of saucer to audience, so there is no doubt but what the saucer is just a saucer. Place paper onto saucer leaving coin in right hand. Right hand comes up under bottom of saucer, Fig. 2, bringing coin up against pellet of wax to which the coin adheres on the bottom of the saucer.

[Figure aft: Fig. 2. — A saucer held in the left hand with the folded paper lying on top while the right hand comes up under the bottom of the saucer.]

[Figure afu: Fig. 3. — The saucer with the folded paper on it, resting on top of a glass tumbler.]

[Figure afv: Fig. 4. — The paper burning on the saucer above the tumbler, with the half dollar falling through the glass below.]

*“Then placed the saucer on top of a glass tumbler.”*

Pick up tumbler with left hand, show freely and place it back on the table. Place the saucer on top of the tumbler taking care not to expose half dollar adhering to bottom of the saucer, Fig. 3. Get one of the matches and ignite the paper.

*“And ignited the paper so as to create heat and expand the molecules in the china. Then, lo and behold!”*

Heat of burning paper melts the wax, causing the half dollar to fall into the glass, Fig. 4.

*“The half dollar fell right through the saucer and into the glass.”*

Remove saucer and set aside. Pick up glass with right hand and tilt so as the coin slides into your waiting left fingers which secretly remove any wax that may be on coin. Give spectator his half dollar.

*“It is your coin, is it not? The mark is correct. Thank you. Now the lesson we should all learn is, ‘Never doubt a magician.’ ”*

[Figure afw: A cartoon rabbit in a tailcoat standing upright and holding a sheet of paper in one hand and a strip of paper in the other, as if showing a paper trick.]
