Lesson 25: Sleight of Hand with Cards

Card manipulation plays an important part in the program of the advanced card conjurer. You can be a good magician without these sleights, but I am sure you will want to add them to your repertoire so that you can use them from time to time. To be an expert card manipulator is, of course, a great accomplishment, and if it is your desire to become one, this lesson will prove invaluable to you.

To become an expert in sleight of hand with cards requires:

First: A careful analysis of the sleights.

Second: *Practice.*

You cannot hope to become an expert card manipulator over night, nor in a week. The muscles of your hands must be trained gradually. At first your fingers will feel stiff and clumsy; but each time you practice, the moves become easier, more natural, and finally you find yourself doing them gracefully and well. It will give you keen pleasure to see the wonderful progress you make each time you practice these sleights.

Some performers having very dry hands use a weak solution of glycerine or some good skin lotion on their hands just before doing manipulative work. You will find that it will help you, too.

All the sleights taught to you in this lesson are done with unprepared cards. Many of the sleights are not tricks in themselves, but are used in conjunction with tricks. They are all an important part of your magical education whether you perfect yourself in them or not.

Note

*With the cards all facing in the same direction, the “top” card of the deck is back outwards; the “bottom” card is face outwards.*

Back and Front Hand Palming

Effect

Performer takes a card or several cards between his thumb and fingers. With a slight wave of the hand, cards disappear. Magician turns his hand over and shows that they are not on the back. He continues to show back and front of hand empty, then suddenly produces the cards at his finger tips.

To Perform

Start with a single card. After you have become proficient with one, try two, three, and as many as you can handle. Turn left side towards audience. Hold right hand out from body. Place a card in right hand between thumb and finger tips. Fig. 1.

[Figure amr: Fig. 1. — The right hand holds a playing card between thumb and finger tips, card face toward the viewer.]

Bring first finger over upper edge of card and little finger over lower edge, Fig. 2.

[Figure ams: Fig. 2. — The first finger lies over the upper edge of the card and the little finger over its lower edge.]

Curl second and third fingers under back of card and release thumb from card, Fig. 3.

[Figure amt: Fig. 3. — The second and third fingers curl under the back of the card while the thumb is released from it.]

Straighten second and third fingers and card is brought automatically to back of hand, Fig. 4.

[Figure amu: Fig. 4. — The hand with fingers straightened, the card now brought behind the hand and out of sight, seen from the audience side.]

Fig. 5 shows view away from audience. Card is held on back of hand, clipped between first and second fingers and between third and fourth fingers at about the first joints.

[Figure amv: Fig. 5. — View of the back of the hand away from the audience, with the card clipped between the first and second fingers and between the third and fourth fingers.]

To bring card back to front of hand, curl fingers in towards palm and place thumb on front of card, Fig. 6.

[Figure amw: Fig. 6. — The fingers curl in toward the palm and the thumb is placed on the front of the card to bring it back to the front.]

Hold card securely gripped and move fourth and first fingers along the edges almost up to the outer corners, Fig. 7.

[Figure amx: Fig. 7. — The card gripped in the hand with the fourth and first fingers moved along its edges almost up to the outer corners.]

Straighten second and third fingers and with tips of these fingers push card down well into palm of hand, Fig. 8.

[Figure amy: Fig. 8. — The right hand seen from the back with the card pushed down into the palm by the tips of the second and third fingers.]

Fig. 9 shows how card is held in palm. It is pressed against base of thumb and is clipped at outer corners between first and second, and between third and fourth fingers.

[Figure amz: Fig. 9. — The card held in the palm, pressed against the base of the thumb and clipped at its outer corners between the fingers.]

To get card from this position to back of hand again, push up on card with base of thumb, Fig. 10.

[Figure ana: Fig. 10. — The base of the thumb pushes up on the card to move it from the palm toward the back of the hand.]

Curl fingers inward towards palm, keeping fourth and first fingers well over the card. Fig. 11.

[Figure anb: Fig. 11. — The fingers curl inward toward the palm, with fourth and first fingers held well over the card.]

Straighten hand out and card is pivoted to back of hand again, Fig. 12.

[Figure anc: Fig. 12. — A man in a suit, in profile, with his right arm held out and the hand straightened, the card now pivoted to the back of the hand.]

*Practice the moves up to here until you have them mastered before you go further. When you can get the card from front to back of hand and back again easily, then continue with the next step.*

Now, you must learn how to turn your hand in Back and Front Hand Palming to show it empty. The card must be concealed as you turn your hand, and this is the way you do it. You have turned the card over onto the back of your hand, and you show empty palm, Fig. 13.

[Figure and: Fig. 13. — An open empty palm shown with the fingers spread and thumb out, the card hidden on the back of the hand.]

Turn hand towards the front, bending fingers slightly in towards palm, Fig. 14. Continue turning hand. As it comes to position shown in Fig. 15, card comes into horizontal position and is thus screened from audience.

[Figure ane: Fig. 14. — The hand turned toward the front with the fingers bent slightly in toward the palm.]

Fig. 16 shows how card is held as hand turns. Audience does not see card at all as back of hand is towards them as in Fig. 15.

[Figure anf: Fig. 15. — The hand turned farther, seen at the position where the card lies horizontal and is screened from the audience.]

Grasp card with thumb, push it down into palm with second and third fingers and clip edges between fingers as taught to you in Figs. 6, 7, 8 and 9.

[Figure ang: Fig. 16. — Side view showing the horizontal position of the card, with the card flat beneath the curled fingers as the hand turns.]

When card is in position with fingers straight, hold hand out with back towards audience. You have now shown front and back of hand with nothing apparently concealed, Fig. 17.

[Figure anh: Fig. 17. — The hand held out with fingers straight and the back toward the audience, apparently empty.]

To bring the card to back of hand again, reverse the movements. Turn hand upward and backward while you get card to back of hand again as taught to you in Figs. 10, 11 and 12. When turning hand to show palm empty, start with Fig. 17 and work back to Fig. 13. You may continue this back and front palming two or three times. Study your *angles of visibility* very carefully so as not to expose the card.

To Produce Card

Have card on back of hand and palm towards audience. Curl fingers inward as in Fig. 3. Grasp card between tip of second finger and thumb.

[Figure ani: Fig. 18. — A playing card, five of diamonds, held upright in the hand between the tip of the second finger and thumb as it is produced.]

Release bottom corner of card from little finger and allow card to spring up. Place first finger at rear of card also and produce as shown in Fig. 18.

When you have mastered your lesson this far and your mirror shows you that you are getting along well, begin to practice back and front hand palming with more cards. First use two, then three, four, and five cards as you progress.

It is a pretty effect to start with a fan of five cards in right hand. Square them up with that one hand by pushing up with your little finger and down with first finger, Fig. 19.

[Figure anj: Fig. 19. — A fan of five cards held in the right hand beside the same hand with the cards squared up, pushed together by the little finger and first finger.]

When the cards are all squared up, back palm them as one card and show palm of hand empty. Then turn the hand and front palm the cards as one and show back of hand empty. Continue this two or three times.

To Produce Cards in a Fan

Have the cards on back of hand and palm towards audience. Follow method for producing one card, as taught above. When cards are at finger tips, move thumb upward and fingers downward and the cards will fan.

*Remember, that most sleights are done rather quickly.* Study and analyze them slowly, but keep practicing them faster and faster as you master them. You will find that after you know the movements, it is easier to do them fast. There is a certain speed necessary for graceful movements, yet do not overdo it.

Simplified Back and Front Hand Palm

This is a favorite method of Paul Fox, a clever manipulator. It eliminates a number of movements and thus simplifies matters. You must watch *angles of visibility* carefully in this method.

To Perform

Back palm card and show palm as in Fig. 13. Turn the hand in the usual manner shown in Figs. 14, 15 and 16. Instead of straightening fingers, however, go only as far as Fig. 15. Audience sees part of back of hand and believes that magician has shown all of back of hand.

Then turn the palm of hand to audience again, concealing card on back of hand. This method is really nothing but a series of movements in which you open and close hand as you turn it.

This effect is very pleasing when Mr. Fox shows his hand empty and suddenly produces a fan of a dozen cards.

Production of Cards One at a Time from Back of Hand

Method 1

A number of cards, say five, are back palmed on right hand and palm of hand is shown empty. Curl fingers inward and place thumb on corner of cards, Fig. 20.

[Figure ank: Fig. 20. — The right hand seen from the back with the fingers curled inward and the thumb on the corner of the back-palmed cards.]

Push the outer card upward a little with thumb and release lower corner from little finger, Fig. 21.

[Figure anl: Fig. 21. — The outer card pushed upward a little by the thumb, its lower corner released from the little finger.]

Hold the cards securely by pressing thumb down on second finger. Raise first finger and put it back of top card, Fig. 22.

[Figure anm: Fig. 22. — The cards held by the thumb pressed on the second finger, with the first finger raised and placed behind the top card.]

Push first finger down to lower corner of outer card. Straighten fingers out, bringing remaining four cards on back of hand again. The produced card is exposed between thumb and first finger, Fig. 23.

Drop that card to table or floor, then produce two more cards in the same manner. Before producing the last two, show both sides of hand empty and suddenly bring out the fourth card, then the fifth. Many conjurers bring the hand to position shown in Fig. 15 as they produce each card and then to position in Fig. 23.

This production requires artistic presentation. Practice until you can make the cards appear at your finger tips as though you suddenly plucked them from the air.

[Figure ann: Fig. 23. — The produced card, five of diamonds, shown upright between thumb and first finger above the straightened hand.]

Method 2

The effect is similar to that produced by Method 1, but the mode of operation is different. Hand is in position as in Fig. 13, with cards on back. Curve the fingers in and place thumb on outer card. Push down the card with thumb until it is free of first finger, Fig. 24.

[Figure ano: Fig. 24. — The right hand with the thumb pushing the outer card down until it is clear of the first finger; lettered below, pull card away with thumb clear of index finger.]

Bring index finger back of outer card, Fig. 25.

[Figure anp: Fig. 25. — The index finger brought behind the outer card, shown from the side and lettered, position of first finger as seen from above.]

Push index finger between outer card and remaining four cards. Grip outer card between thumb and back of first joint of index finger, Fig. 26.

[Figure anq: Fig. 26. — The index finger pushed between the outer card and the other four, gripping the outer card against the thumb.]

Release lower corner of outer card from little finger, Fig. 27.

[Figure anr: Fig. 27. — The outer card, an ace of spades, held up with its lower corner released from the little finger.]

Straighten fingers. The four cards are concealed again on back of hand and the produced card is shown between thumb and forefinger of right hand, Fig. 28.

[Figure ans: Fig. 28. — The produced card, an ace of hearts, shown upright between thumb and forefinger of the right hand, the other cards hidden behind the hand.]

Production of Cards One at a Time from Front of Hand

In this production the back of hand is shown to audience. Palm several cards, say five, in regular fashion. Corner AC is gripped right in the ball of the forefinger, Fig. 29.

[Figure ant: Fig. 29. — A hand with several cards palmed, the corner marked AC gripped in the ball of the forefinger.]

Place thumb on top card about half an inch from the corner AC. Push the outer card upward diagonally about an inch or so, Fig. 30.

[Figure anu: Fig. 30. — A hand holds a fan of cards with the thumb on the top card near the corner while the outer card is pushed up diagonally.]

Raise first finger and place it in front of corner AC, Fig. 31.

[Figure anv: Fig. 31. — The first finger is raised in front of the card corner while the thumb holds the cards, the outer card angled diagonally.]

Grip the corner of card between first and second fingers and pull card to a horizontal position. Put thumb under card, Fig. 32. With the aid of the thumb, push the card into position shown in Fig. 33.

[Figure anw: Fig. 32. — The corner of a card is gripped between first and second fingers and pulled to a horizontal position, with the thumb beneath it.]

[Figure anx: Fig. 33. — The card, shown with its back pattern, stands upright above the hand, pushed into position by the thumb while other cards stay palmed.]

Fig. 34 shows how the production looks to audience. Card appears suddenly at finger tips as though it came out of the air.

[Figure any: Fig. 34. — A man in a suit, seen from the side, holds out one card at his fingertips as it appears to the audience.]

Note

The angle of visibility is very important in this production. Hold your hand at a 45-degree angle in relation to your body. You can then conceal the palmed cards well as you produce them, one at a time, even if the fingers widen a bit during movements, Fig. 35.

[Figure anz: Fig. 35. — A hand holds a card upright at its fingertips, with a dotted line marking the 45-degree angle of the hand to the body.]

Just before making the production, it is easy for you to palm off the cards from the deck. After you have produced these, palm a few more and continue the production if you desire. This production was a favorite of the late Howard Thurston, one of the foremost magicians of his day.

[Figure aoa: Fig. 36. — A stand for holding cards: an upright pole on a round base with clips holding five cards one above another.]

To Vanish Cards One at a Time and Reproduce Them

A special stand for holding cards comes in handy for this effect. If you want to have one, secure a stand used for display purposes in show windows and have clips soldered on to it, Fig. 36.

[Figure aob: Fig. 37. — A hand holds a fan of five cards spread towards the right, the other hand reaching to take the top card.]

It is not necessary to have the stand, however. Start with a fan of cards in your left hand—say, five cards. Cards are fanned towards the right so that it will be easy to remove each one. If desired an assistant can hold the cards, Fig. 37.

[Figure aoc: Fig. 38. — The right hand takes the second card from the fan, holding it in position beside the first card.]

Take the first card with right hand and with a slight tossing motion upward, vanish it on back of right hand. Then take the next card in position shown in Fig. 38. Hold it even with first card in preparation for vanishing it also by back palming. Notice the position of thumb, Fig. 39.

[Figure aod: Fig. 39. — The right hand holds two cards even with each other, the position of the thumb shown, ready for back palming.]

Curl the fingers inward. Get the two cards together and back palm them both, thus vanishing the second card, Fig. 40. Now by back and front palming the two cards together, show both sides of right hand empty.

[Figure aoe: Fig. 40. — The fingers are curled inward as the two cards are brought together for back palming.]

Vanish the remaining cards in the same way. It is not necessary to show both sides of hand after each vanish, but show them occasionally to convince the audience that you have nothing concealed.

To reproduce the cards, use either method for producing cards one at a time, taught to you above. As the cards are produced, place the first three in the left hand in a fan.

Produce the fourth card, and as you place it in the fan in left hand, curl the fingers of right hand inward and place the fifth card in a horizontal position behind the other four cards. Fig. 41 shows view towards audience.

[Figure aof: Fig. 41. — View towards the audience: four cards fanned in the left hand with the fifth card, shown by dotted lines, hidden horizontally behind them.]

Concealed card is held in place by second finger of left hand as the right hand is immediately brought away from the left. Fig. 42 shows view away from audience.

[Figure aog: Fig. 42. — Rear view of the left hand holding the fanned cards, the concealed card held behind the fan by the second finger.]

As you bring right hand away from left, keep fingers close together. Show back and front of hand as though you were back and front palming a card. Keep thumb tight against hand to make it conspicuous. With the back of hand towards audience, push thumb far up into palm of hand and suddenly open fingers. It looks as though you were concealing something in the palm of hand.

Close the fingers again and quickly turn hand to expose palm, keeping thumb tight against first fingers as though holding something. Open fingers wide apart, one at a time, and finally the thumb. Now quickly show both sides of hand with fingers spread apart—the hand is empty!

Bring the right hand down to the left. Starting with the upper card, count the cards with thumb of right hand pointing to them while the fingers are back of the cards. As you count, *four*—back palm the concealed card in right hand, Fig. 43.

Grasp the fourth card between thumb and fingers of right hand and throw it aside. Then throw the other three cards aside, one at a time, tossing them up into the air. Show the left hand empty.

Back and front palm remaining card in right hand to show right hand empty. Then suddenly produce fifth card at finger tips and toss it into the air also.

[Figure aoh: Fig. 43. — The right hand back palms the concealed card while the left hand holds the fanned cards, seen as the performer counts four.]

This routine of manipulation may be varied. Some magicians prefer using six cards instead of five and placing two cards behind the fan instead of one.

Flash Card Production

This effect is most often used to blend in with other effects. It is very effective as a special opening for another trick in which a few cards are needed. Another excellent use for it is as a finish for the production of selected cards, duplicates of which have been forced.

Cardini uses it to produce a beautiful effect after having produced several fans of cards from the empty hand. He then picks up hoops and paper and, pushing his hand through, produces still another fan. Cardini’s trained skillful fingers can produce many cards at once. Do the effect well with a few cards rather than bungle it with many cards.

Effect

Performer shows two wooden embroidery hoops. He places a sheet of tissue paper between them and pushes one hoop down over the other, forming a sort of tambourine. He then shows both sides of tambourine and his empty right hand. Suddenly he plunges his right hand through the paper and hoops, tearing the paper. Just as his hand appears through the paper a fan of cards is seen at his finger tips.

Paraphernalia

1—A few cards.

2—Small wire clip such as is used to hold papers together.

3—A pair of wooden embroidery hoops, large enough for your hand to go through easily, about 8½ inches in diameter.

4—A sheet of colored tissue paper, about 14½ × 20½ inches.

To Prepare

Take five cards and place them securely about halfway into the clip, Fig. 7.

[Figure aoi: Fig. 7. — A wire paper clip shown alone beside a playing card, back out, with a second clip fastened over the top edge of the card.]

Sew the top of wire clip inside of right side of your coat. Position of clip should be far enough up from lower edge of coat to have cards about three-quarters of an inch from the bottom of coat when it hangs naturally, Fig. 8.

[Figure aoj: Fig. 8. — A man in a coat opens the right side to show the clip sewn inside, with the cards hanging below; label reads cards concealed under coat.]

Fig. 9 also shows position of cards under coat. They should be far enough from front edge of coat to enable you to reach them easily by curling your fingers up under your coat when your right arm is dropped naturally at your side. Cards face outward, Fig. 9. Have the two separated embroidery hoops on the sheet of tissue paper on table.

[Figure aok: Fig. 9. — A man stands in profile with his right arm dropped, a label marking the position of the cards under the coat near the lower edge.]

To Perform

Pick up the smaller hoop and sheet of tissue paper. Show paper, both sides, and place it over the hoop. Pick up the larger hoop and press it down over the paper and other hoop to make a tambourine, Figs. 10 and 11.

[Figure aol: Fig. 10. — Two separated wooden embroidery hoops, one slightly larger than the other, shown at an angle.]

[Figure aom: Fig. 11. — The finished tambourine: tissue paper crumpled around the outer hoop with the inner hoop pressed down over it, seen from above.]

Do this away from the table and stand in a position to enable your audience to see clearly what you are doing. They must see that there is no trickery in this tambourine.

Hold the tambourine with left hand. Outside of tambourine is towards audience. Right hand is held naturally at right side against the concealed cards under coat, Fig. 12.

[Figure aon: Fig. 12. — A man holds the tambourine of paper and hoops in front of him with his left hand, his right hand hanging at his side against the coat.]

Turn the tambourine over to show inside. The turning movement is made downward so that the hoops come on a level with your right hand beside coat, Fig. 13.

[Figure aoo: Fig. 13. — The man turns the tambourine over downward, a dotted arrow showing the movement, until the hoops are level with his right hand beside the coat.]

As soon as the right hand is well screened by the paper, reach under coat and quickly remove the five cards, Fig. 14.

[Figure aop: Fig. 14. — The right hand, screened by the paper, reaches under the coat to remove the cards; only the hand and coat edge are shown.]

Hand is drawn away with cards held as in Fig. 15. After you have taken the cards from under coat, back palm them. Turn towards right a little so that your left side is towards audience. Bring hoop up so that outside is towards audience again. Hold hoop as in Fig. 19. Right hand is pulled behind it so that audience can see hand momentarily.

[Figure aoq: Fig. 15. — The hand drawn away from the coat holding five cards, their faces outward, between the fingers.]

[Figure aor: Fig. 19. — A man in profile holds the hoop up with the left hand while the right hand behind it shows the cards on the back of the hand.]

Then push the right hand suddenly through the hoops, tearing the paper. The moment your hand is through the paper, bring the cards quickly from the back to the front of your hand by the reverse process so that they are again held as in Fig. 15. Grip cards with tips of fingers at the back and suddenly move your thumb upward. This move causes the cards to fan, Fig. 20.

[Figure aos: Fig. 20. — A man in a suit holds up his right hand, torn paper around the wrist, with a fan of cards spread at his finger tips.]

The effect must be that the fan appeared at your finger tips right out of the paper. It will take practice on your part to perfect this production. You must bring the cards to the front of your hand and fan them in a flash.

The effect is very startling when this fan of cards suddenly appears at the tips of your fingers. You can understand how any slowness or fumbling in producing the cards would completely spoil the experiment. Practice then until you have it perfected to a nicety before you perform it before an audience.

As you acquire skill in this card production, add more cards to the number you produce.

Producing Fans of Cards

It was Cardini and Frakson who made the American magician conscious of the routines of producing fans of cards from the air, instead of a single card, and tossing the fans aside into a hat, a bowl, an umbrella, or some receptacle. Acts have been built around these beautiful sleights.

Effect

Performer shows his right hand empty front and back. Yet reaching out he suddenly produces a fan of cards in his hand. These he drops into a hat, or some receptacle. Again and again he produces fans of cards which he successively tosses away.

Paraphernalia

1—A deck of soft playing cards. The softer and more flexible the card the better. The cheaper cards are usually best for this purpose. For easy fanning, some performers rub each card with a special fanning powder that dealers sell. Some use a bit of talcum powder in emergency.

2—A receptacle into which the cards are tossed.

To Perform

You have already been told how to front and back palm cards. Practice will allow you to palm a greater quantity of cards and in the production of fans you will have to palm as many cards as you can, on the back of your hand, Fig. 1.

Palm of right hand is towards audience. Turn hand over and show the back by bringing cards to front of hand. Then reverse to show palm empty, cards going to back of hand.

[Figure aot: Fig. 1. — The right hand with its palm towards the audience, fingers spread, a small bundle of cards palmed against the back of the hand.]

[Figure aou: Fig. 2. — The cards brought forward in the right hand, held flat against the palm side with the thumb above them.]

[Figure aov: Fig. 3. — The thumb brought down on the cards to fan them out into a wide spread held in the right hand.]

Bring cards forward as in Fig. 2. Bring the thumb down on the cards so the thumb can fan them out, Fig. 3.

Bring the right first finger in between cards and down behind three or four cards, Fig. 4. This figure shows rear view away from audience.

[Figure aow: Fig. 4. — Rear view away from the audience: the right first finger goes between the cards and down behind three or four of them in the fan.]

[Figure aox: Fig. 5. — A hand holds the fan together; arrows and labels mark the cards to be tossed away and the balance of cards to be back palmed.]

[Figure aoy: Fig. 6. — A top hat with three or four cards falling into it from the right hand, whose open palm appears empty above.]

Bring balance of fanned cards together, Fig. 5.

Throw the three or four cards into the hat or receptacle, at the same time back palming the balance of the fan. To the audience, you have apparently tossed all of the fanned cards into the hat or receptacle, Fig. 6. Show hands front and back again. Produce cards in a fan, separate a few cards and toss these few into the hat and back palm the balance. Continue this until you have thrown away all the cards.

Note

Some performers carry an extra load palmed in the left hand. When cards have been finished in right hand, the right hand comes down and back palms the extra cards in the left hand. Left side of body is towards the audience.

An extra load of cards can be carried on right side of body under coat in a clip, so these can be easily gotten at when right hand drops to the side of body. Performer stands with left side towards audience.

The effect of catching fans of cards is beautiful and is well worth mastering if you decide to become a card manipulator.

Color Changes with Cards

The effect produced in a Color Change is this: The face of the “bottom” card on the deck is shown. The hand is passed over the card and it suddenly changes to an entirely different card. You are given a number of methods. Select the one or two you like best.

The Phantom Pip

Effect

Performer shows a Three of Spades on “bottom” of deck. He reaches up with right hand and apparently removes the center pip, leaving the Two of Spades. He snaps the invisible pip into the air and shows right hand empty. Then he reaches into the air again, gets the invisible pip and puts it on the Two of Spades—and behold, the Two changes back to the Three of Spades again!

To Perform

Place the Two of Spades on the “top” of the deck and the Three of Spades on the “bottom.”

Hold deck in left hand with Three of Spades facing audience. Have your right side slightly turned towards the audience, Fig. 44.

[Figure aoz: Fig. 44. — A man in a suit stands with his right side turned slightly towards the audience, holding a deck of cards out in his left hand.]

*“A very peculiar thing about the Three of Spades is that if you pass your hand over it in this direction, nothing happens to the card.”*

Pass the right hand across the deck from right to left. When the hand gets to position shown in Fig. 45, push the rear card, the Two of Spades, forward into the right hand so that it can be grasped between thumb and second joint of little finger. Fig. 46 shows the way the card is held in the right hand. Fig. 46A is the view from above as you see card in hand.

[Figure apa: Fig. 45. — The right hand passes over the deck, the thumb above and fingers behind it, at the position where the rear card is pushed forward into the hand.]

Fig. 47 shows the way the left hand pushes the card into the right hand where only the two upper corners are gripped between right fingers.

The right hand must pass the deck in a continuous motion while it picks up the card. There must be no hesitation. Continue moving right hand to the left about 12 inches, raising it to show the Three of Spades again.

[Figure apb: Fig. 46. — The right hand held palm up with the card lying across it, seen from the front as the card is held between thumb and little finger.]

[Figure apc: Fig. 46A. — The same card seen from above, as the performer sees it in his right hand, held upright between thumb and little finger.]

*“But if you run your hand over the card in this direction.”*

Bring the right hand back across the deck and, without stopping the movement, place the Two of Spades over the Three. The moment the card is in place, pretend to pick off the center pip of the Three spot. Remove right hand and show that the center pip has been taken off and a Two spot is there instead of a Three. Toss the invisible pip into the air.

[Figure apd: Fig. 47. — The left hand pushes the card into the right hand, where only the two upper corners are gripped between the right fingers.]

*“You can pick off one of the pips!”*

With the right forefinger point to the place where pip was and push the card up about a quarter of an inch to get a jog at the top, Fig. 48.

[Figure ape: Fig. 48. — The right forefinger pushes the card up about a quarter inch, leaving a jog at the top; a label points to the jogged front card.]

Reach up into the air and pretend to catch the pip. Bring the hand down over pack. Press down on the jogged end of the Two of Spades. This forces the card into the right hand where it is palmed. Fig. 49 shows view from above as you see hands, but not as the audience sees them.

[Figure apf: Fig. 49. — View from above of the hands: the card is forced against the right hand and palmed, with a pivot point and edge A marked by arrows.]

Bring right hand away to show the Three spot. The pip has apparently reappeared. As you bring the right hand toward your body, curve the fingers inward until edge A can be held by thumb, Fig. 50.

[Figure apg: Fig. 50. — The right hand curved inward, its thumb holding edge A of the palmed card as the hand moves toward the body.]

Then bring the right hand up to the deck to point with your fingers to the center pip of the Three spot, Fig. 51.

[Figure aph: Fig. 51. — The right hand held up to the deck, fingers pointing at the center pip while the thumb still holds the palmed card.]

Release edge A from thumb. This causes the card to spring up behind deck. Hold it in place with the rest of the cards in left hand, Fig. 52.

[Figure api: Fig. 52. — The palmed card shoots up in behind the pack, held in place by the left hand with the rest of the cards.]

Remove the right hand from deck and show it empty. A good natural move is to snap the card into place under cover of transferring deck from left to right hand.

This last move of causing a palmed card to spring up behind the deck was given to me by Paul Fox whom I mentioned earlier in this lesson. In his hands it is a beautiful piece of deception. It may be used in effects when you want to add one or more palmed cards to the back of the deck while the front is exposed.

Back Hand Color Change

Effect

The “bottom,” or face, card on deck changes to a different value and color. This is another effect of Paul Fox.

To Perform

Turn your left side towards the audience. Hold deck in left hand with backs of cards toward rear. Place left little finger under “top” card in readiness for palming. Curve fingers of right hand and place them against lower edge of card, Fig. 53.

[Figure apj: Fig. 53. — Left hand holds the deck while the curved fingers of the right hand rest against the lower edge of the card.]

Grip one edge of the “top” card between first and second fingers and other edge between third and fourth fingers in readiness for back palming. Straighten fingers and back palm the card. Place deck in right hand to show face card to the audience, Fig. 54.

[Figure apk: Fig. 54. — The right hand holds the deck with the face card toward the audience, the top card already back palmed behind the hand.]

The back palming must be done in an instant as you pass the deck from the left to the right hand.

Bring the left hand up past the deck to the right about twelve inches away. Do not cover cards. Move right hand up to left. Under cover of left hand, turn right hand enough to get back-palmed card into left palm, Fig. 55.

[Figure apl: Fig. 55. — Under cover of the left hand, the right hand turns so the back-palmed card passes into the left palm.]

Bring the deck back to original position facing audience. Bring the left hand with palmed card back towards the left and over the deck, Fig. 56. The small diagram shows the movement of the left hand to the right over the deck and nothing happens to the exposed card.

[Figure apm: Fig. 56. — The left hand with the palmed card moves over the deck, with a small diagram of a performer showing the hand moving to the right.]

Now the left hand is brought back to the left and the palmed card is placed over card on the deck. The moment the card is in place, open fingers wide and continue motion of left hand to the left, Fig. 57.

[Figure apn: Fig. 57. — The left hand moves to the left with fingers spread wide open, the palmed card now placed on the deck.]

The effect is that the color change came about with your fingers wide open. To the audience it appears that you merely moved right hand past left hand and card changed. This illusion is produced when you move right hand up to left hand. (See Fig. 55.)

Open Finger Color Change

Effect

This is a fine color change as the deck is in view all the time except for a moment when hand covers it once. Immediately the fingers open wide, revealing the color change.

To Perform

Hold deck in left hand. Right side is turned toward audience and left arm is extended about 18 inches from body. Face of “bottom” card of deck is exposed to audience, Fig. 58.

[Figure apo: Fig. 58. — The left hand holds the deck up with the face card, a Two of Diamonds, exposed to the audience.]

Bring right hand over to left to take deck. Grasp deck with thumb at bottom and first two fingers of right hand at top, Fig. 59.

[Figure app: Fig. 59. — The right hand comes over to the left hand, thumb at the bottom and first two fingers at the top of the deck, taking hold of it.]

The moment you grasp deck with right hand, push the “top” or rear card down with left fingers into right hand until upper corner is gripped between third and fourth fingers and opposite corner at base of thumb.

[Figure apq: Fig. 60. — View toward the audience: the back of the right hand screens the card being pushed out by the left fingers, shown with dotted lines.]

Fig. 60 shows view towards audience with back of right hand screening completely the card being pushed out. Fig. 61 shows view away from audience with concealed card pushed into right hand. The moment card is adjusted, deck is held in right hand and left hand is shown empty, Fig. 62.

[Figure apr: Fig. 61. — View away from the audience: the concealed card is pushed into the right hand, which holds the deck with its back showing.]

[Figure aps: Fig. 62. — The right hand holds the deck face out while the empty left hand is shown open above it.]

Transfer the deck back to left hand, cards still facing audience. Release grip from thumb on concealed card in right hand and let it fall into horizontal position gripped between third and fourth fingers. Fig. 63 is view from above as you see hands.

[Figure apt: Fig. 63. — View from above as you see the hands: the left hand holds the deck while the right hand holds the concealed card horizontally between its fingers.]

Hold right hand about six inches below deck to show the front card on deck. Bring the right hand up to deck and place concealed card on it, Fig. 64.

[Figure apu: Fig. 64. — The right hand, held below the deck and then brought up, places the concealed card against the front of the deck held in the left hand.]

Place right hand over deck, immediately opening the fingers wide so that audience can see sudden change of card through the fingers, Fig. 65. Remove right hand and show color change.

[Figure apv: Fig. 65. — The right hand held over the deck with its fingers spread wide open, so the card can be seen through the gaps.]

Slap Change

Effect

Face card of deck is slapped with right hand and when hand is removed, card is found to have changed to another. The striking of the cards adds smartness to this effect.

To Perform

Hold deck as in Fig. 58. Show right hand empty, then grasp deck at top and bottom, Fig. 66.

[Figure apw: Fig. 66. — The right hand grasps the deck at top and bottom, with the Two of Diamonds showing on the face.]

[Figure apx: Fig. 67. — View toward the audience: the card is pushed into the right palm, concealed behind the right hand as it holds the deck.]

With tips of left second and third fingers, push the “top” card into right palm. Fig. 67 shows view towards audience with card concealed in right palm. Fig. 68 shows rear view away from audience, with concealed card palmed in right hand.

[Figure apy: Fig. 68. — Rear view away from the audience: the right hand holds the deck with the concealed card palmed behind it, the left fingers below.]

Separate the hands and bring the right hand back in front of the left in preparation for slapping the deck, Fig. 69.

[Figure apz: Fig. 69. — The right hand, with the palmed card, brought back in front of the left hand holding the deck, ready to slap it. Dotted lines show the movement.]

Slap the right hand down smartly on the deck, leaving the palmed card on the deck, Fig. 70. Remove right hand and show that card has changed.

[Figure aqa: Fig. 70. — The right hand slapped flat down over the deck, leaving the palmed card on the deck.]

Note

This experiment is often begun by holding deck as in Fig. 66. The deck is then placed in left hand, and during this movement, “top” card is slid into right palm.

This change may be used in producing selected cards. Three or four cards are selected by spectators and returned to deck. These are brought to “top” of deck by the Simplified Pass. Each one is then in turn palmed in right hand, as taught to you above, and produced on the face of the pack by the Slap Change method.

Push Up Color Change

Effect

This is similar to the change produced in the Phantom Pip.

To Perform

Hold cards as in Fig. 71. With tip of left forefinger push rear card outward. Cards and hands are held horizontally. This view is from above as you see hands.

[Figure aqb: Fig. 71. — Cards and hands held horizontally, seen from above, with the rear card of the deck about to be pushed outward by the left forefinger.]

With aid of right hand and left forefinger, get rear card up into palm of right hand, where it is palmed in regular fashion, Fig. 72.

[Figure aqc: Fig. 72. — The right hand and left forefinger work the rear card up into the right palm, where it is palmed in regular fashion.]

Bring right hand back across deck again, placing palmed card on front of deck. Remove hand and show change.

Thumb Steal Color Change

To Perform

Hold deck in regular manner in left hand, faces of cards towards audience. Bring right hand up to deck, placing fingers in front of it and thumb behind it, Fig. 73.

[Figure aqd: Fig. 73. — The right hand brought up to the deck held in the left hand, fingers in front of the deck and thumb behind it.]

Press against the rear card with right thumb and draw the hand away, bringing card with it, gripped in crotch of thumb, Fig. 74.

[Figure aqe: Fig. 74. — The right hand draws away from the deck, bringing the rear card with it gripped in the crotch of the thumb.]

Cover front card on deck with right hand, leaving concealed card on it. Then remove hand and show change of front card. Several cards can be slipped from the back by using the left finger tip (and fingernail) to push them off cleanly, and into the right thumb crotch. The cards are produced in a fan from various parts of body, or may all be deposited on face of deck to make a color change.

Double Card Change

Effect

In this experiment, two cards change instead of one.

To Perform

Split the deck about in half and pull down the outer section. Push up face card of rear section a little, Fig. 75.

[Figure aqf: Fig. 75. — The deck split in half, the outer section pulled down and the face card of the rear section pushed up a little.]

Pass the right hand over upper section of deck. Push the rear card forward with left forefinger until you can grasp it between thumb and little finger of right hand. Bring hand with palmed card down in front of face card of upper section and grasp that card in similar manner. The two cards are now palmed in right hand, Fig. 76.

[Figure aqg: Fig. 76. — The right hand passes over the upper section of the deck, with two cards now palmed in it between thumb and little finger.]

As the right hand passes back over the deck again, place the two palmed cards on lower section of deck. Remove right hand and show it empty. Call attention to the double change on the deck, Fig. 77. You may work this in pantomime or use this patter:

[Figure aqh: Fig. 77. — The left hand holds the deck with its front card changed, two changed cards showing on the face of the lower section.]

*“If you pass your hand over the deck once, nothing happens.”*

Palm off the rear card, then show that cards are still the same.

*“But if you pass your hand over them twice, one card changes.”*

Palm off face card of upper section, together with the rear card. Then show that one card has changed.

*“However, the third time over, changes the bottom card as well.”*

Place cards over front card of lower section and show change.

Slip Up Color Change

Credit for this is due to Charles Leedy, a fellow magician.

To Perform

Deck is cut in two parts, one held in each hand. Keeping the hands close together, drop the part in the right hand enough so that the audience can see the front card of left hand section, Fig. 78.

[Figure aqi: Fig. 78. — The deck cut in two packets, one in each hand, the right hand packet dropped so the front card of the left hand section shows.]

Pull the right hand packet upward against left hand one. As you do so, curve the left fingers, press tightly against “bottom” card of right hand section, and separate it from the rest of section, Fig. 79.

[Figure aqj: Fig. 79. — The right hand packet pulled up against the left hand one while the left fingers curve and press against the bottom card, marked A.]

Remove right hand packet and allow “bottom” card to spring up against front of left hand section. Bring the right hand up high above left hand to show change of front card of left hand section, Fig. 80.

[Figure aqk: Fig. 80. — The right hand packet raised high above the left hand while the released bottom card springs up against the front of the left hand section.]

Top Card Change

This is very important in card work as the sleight has many uses. You may show front card of deck and suddenly cause it to change. You may locate a selected card by causing the front card to change into it, etc.

Method 1

Have a card selected, remembered and returned to the middle of deck. Bring card to “top” of deck with the Simplified Pass.

Riffle the front edge of deck with right finger tips, and as cards fall, have spectator tell you where to stop. When he says “Stop,” you remove card at that point and show it. This is card A. Hold it between first and second fingers of right hand. Hold deck in left hand down at about your waistline. Push the selected card B on “top” of deck over to the right about half an inch, Fig. 81.

[Figure aql: Fig. 81. — A performer in a bow tie holds card A up in his right hand, the deck in the left, with selected card B overlapping the deck by half an inch.]

Have spectator who selected card stand a little in front of you at your right and another spectator in the same position at your left.

Show card A to spectator at right.

*“Is this the card you selected, sir? No?”*

Turn to spectator at left. As you do so, bring card A up to left hand. Quickly place it between first and second fingers of left hand, and at the same time grasp card B between thumb and first finger of right hand, Figs. 82 and 83.

[Figure aqm: Fig. 82. — The hands seen from above, card A being placed between the first and second fingers of the left hand while the right hand grasps card B.]

[Figure aqn: Fig. 83. — Close view of the same move, hands held horizontally, card B gripped between thumb and first finger of the right hand, card A in the left.]

Leave card A in left hand and remove card B in right hand. Immediately move left hand to left, pointing forefinger to spectator and thus releasing card A, which now comes together with rest of pack. Hold B in right hand so that face is not exposed, Fig. 84.

[Figure aqo: Fig. 84. — The performer holds card B in the right hand with its face hidden, the left hand pointing forefinger while card A rejoins the pack.]

You must not look at your hands in making this change and the audience will not suspect anything. They believe that you still hold card A in your right hand. Say to spectator at left:

*“Would you know the gentleman’s card if you saw it?”* Then to spectator at right: *“By the way, what was the card you selected?”*

Spectator names card. *“Blow on this indifferent card.”*

Have spectator blow on card B, then turn it over and show it to be selected card. *“I thought so!”*

Method 2

This change is done without the spectators on each side of you, otherwise it is similar to Method 1.

Hold card card up in right hand. You must look straight at audience, not at hands, Fig. 85.

[Figure aqp: Fig. 85. — A performer in a bow tie looks straight at the audience, holding card A up in his right hand with card B in the left hand below.]

Bring card A down to the pack, make the change, and bring card B above or below the pack about twelve inches. You must make some kind of a gesture while you make the change.

Method 3

This is used when it is necessary to get card A to the top of the deck instead of the bottom.

Hold up card A between thumb and forefinger in right hand. Push card B to the right a little on deck. Fig. 86 is a view away from audience as you see cards.

[Figure aqq: Fig. 86. — View away from the audience: card A held up between thumb and forefinger of the right hand, with card B pushed a little to the right on the deck.]

Bring card A down to the deck. Grasp B between first and second fingers of right hand, and place thumb of left hand over A, Fig. 87.

[Figure aqr: Fig. 87. — Card A brought down to the deck, card B gripped between first and second fingers of the right hand and the left thumb over A.]

Separate the hands, drawing B away in right and leaving A on top of pack—and the change is made, Fig. 88.

[Figure aqs: Fig. 88. — The hands separate, the left hand holding the deck with card A on top, the right hand drawing card B away.]

This is a good change to use when turning body from left to right. First show A to people at left, then turn to right and show that card has changed.

Method 4

A good method for top card change. Hold up card A in right hand with thumb at bottom and first two fingers at top. Hold deck in left hand with B pushed over to right, Fig. 89.

[Figure aqt: Fig. 89. — Card A held up in the right hand, thumb at the bottom and two fingers at the top, with card B pushed over to the right on the deck in the left hand.]

Bring A down on pack and grasp B between thumb and second finger of right hand, Fig. 90. Draw right hand away with card B, and the change is made, Fig. 91.

[Figure aqu: Fig. 90. — Card A brought down on the pack while the right thumb and second finger grasp card B, both cards in front of the deck.]

[Figure aqv: Fig. 91. — The right hand draws card B away from the deck, leaving card A on the deck held in the left hand. The change is made.]

This is a good change to use while turning body slightly from left to right. Make the change as right hand passes over the deck.

Important

Study these changes carefully. Watch your angles of visibility and naturalness of gestures. Make the changes under cover of larger natural moves, such as turning body slightly or passing hand back and forth over the deck. Speak to a spectator during the change and keep your eyes on him, not on hands, for misdirection. It will pay you to perfect these changes for they are the basis for some good card magic.

Modern Card Change

This is a good method for indetectably changing one card to another.

To Perform

Get selected card to “top” of deck. Do the Double Card Lift, showing face of second card from “top” as “top” card. Place the two cards on bottom of deck so that they extend a little to the right. Hold deck in left hand with cards facing audience. Fig. 101 is view as you see cards. Fig. 102 shows how cards are held towards audience. Thumb is at rear and fingers in front of deck.

[Figure aqw: Fig. 101. — View as you see the cards: the left hand holds the deck with two cards extending a little to the right at the bottom.]

[Figure aqx: Fig. 102. — The cards as held towards the audience, with the thumb at the rear and the fingers in front of the deck, face cards showing.]

Turn cards so that audience can see the backs. Place right thumb back of second or selected card and fingers in front of the first card at bottom of deck, Fig. 103.

[Figure aqy: Fig. 103. — A left hand holds the deck face down while the right thumb and fingers take hold of the second card behind and the first card in front at the bottom of the deck.]

Remove the second card with right hand and at the same time, push the first card back with left fingers, squarely onto the deck. Fig. 104 shows this move from underneath. The first card is square upon the deck and second card is about to be removed in right hand.

[Figure aqz: Fig. 104. — Rear view from underneath: the left fingers push the first card square onto the deck while the right hand begins to remove the second card.]

Separate the hands. Right hand carries card to the right side with back of it still to audience. Audience believes it to be the first card which they saw. Turn card over and show it to be the selected one. Be careful not to expose first card at “bottom” of deck in left hand.

Single Hand Card Change

This change is performed with one hand.

[Figure ara: Fig. 105. — The right palm holds two cards as one, lower corner in the crotch of the thumb, with an arrow and the label two cards held as one.]

To Perform

Lift two cards from “top” of deck and show as one. Hold in right palm with lower corner in crotch of thumb, Fig. 105. Turn hand over, and as you do so, curl in your fingers, Fig. 106.

[Figure arb: Fig. 106. — The right hand turned over with fingers curled in, a card edge showing beneath the palm.]

Straighten fingers out again, forcing top card out to tips of fingers and second card back into palm of hand where it is thumb palmed, Fig. 107.

[Figure arc: Fig. 107. — The right hand with fingers straightened, pushing the top card out to the fingertips while a dotted outline shows the second card thumb palmed.]

Force top card out onto table. Bring right hand quickly back to deck in left hand and place concealed card on “top” of deck. Card on table is shown to have changed.

This move may be made to appear natural by throwing card to table with right hand and merely finishing the movement by bringing right hand back to deck.

[Figure ard: Fig. 92. — A left hand holds the deck with fingers curved upward, pressing the cards against the base of the thumb; a label reads cards press hard against palm.]

Bottom Dealing

This requires practice, but when you have it mastered, you have a big trick up your sleeve. The method I teach you here is that used by Cardini. He does it so perfectly that the closest eye cannot detect that he is dealing from the “bottom” instead of the “top” of the deck.

[Figure are: Fig. 93. — The left hand holding the deck with the top card moved over to the right by the thumb.]

Effect

Performer deals off indifferent cards from “top” of deck and they suddenly change into selected cards (because of Bottom Dealing). Magician causes a selected card to appear at any number in the deck which spectator chooses. Spectator then chooses any place in the deck and magician deals off an Ace, apparently from that place, but in reality from the “bottom” of the deck.

[Figure arf: Fig. 94. — View from above: the right thumb at the corner of the top card and the right first finger under the bottom card of the deck held in the left hand.]

Method 1 (Bottom Dealing)

Hold deck in left hand, backs of cards up. Curve fingers upward and press cards firmly against base of thumb, Fig. 92. Move “top” card over to the right with thumb, Fig. 93.

[Figure arg: Fig. 95. — View from underneath showing the finger positions of the right hand on the deck held in the left hand, with a card face visible.]

Place right thumb at corner of “top” card and first finger of right hand under “bottom” card of deck in left hand. Fig. 94 shows view from above. Fig. 95 shows view from underneath to make finger positions clear to you.

Pull out “bottom” card, holding it between thumb and first finger of right hand. Card comes straight out from deck. At the same time, draw the “top” card back onto deck with left thumb, Fig. 96.

[Figure arh: Fig. 96. — The right thumb and first finger pull the bottom card straight out of the deck while the left thumb draws the top card back onto it.]

“Bottom” card may be removed diagonally instead of straight if desired. Fig. 97 shows method of doing this. “Top” card is shown already squared up on deck by left thumb.

[Figure ari: Fig. 97. — The left hand holds the deck with the top card squared by the thumb while the right hand draws the bottom card out diagonally.]

When Cardini deals from the “bottom,” as he pulls card away in right hand, he throws left hand with a turn to the left and snaps card down on the table with the right. He deals as fast from the “bottom” as he does from the “top.”

Study your motions so that there is no apparent difference between regular dealing and “bottom” dealing. Practice well the art of sliding “top” card back and forth easily with left thumb.

Method 2 (Bottom Dealing)

This is a popular method among magicians today. It should be practiced until the ease of execution and timing are as natural as straight dealing. In performing be careful that deck is held rather lightly. The tendency of the beginner is to hold the deck too tightly. A half deck is best to practice with at the start.

Hold deck in left hand, backs up, as in Fig. 1. The tip of the first finger is on right outer index corner of the deck, while the base of the thumb rests on diagonally opposite left inner index corner. Imagine a diagonal line between these two corners because that is where the main grip and pressure come. The second, third and fourth fingers press against the right edge of deck; the tips of the fingers are just about even with the “top” of the deck. The third and fourth fingers help to grip cards in place against the base of thumb. The tip of thumb is on the “top” card. Deck is held horizontally.

[Figure arj: Fig. 1. — The left hand holds the deck face down in the grip described, thumb on the top card, while the right hand's card is shown dotted at the side.]

[Figure ark: Fig. 2. — The left hand holds the deck horizontally with its thumb pushing the top card over about three-quarters of an inch to the right.]

Push the top card over about three-quarters of an inch with the left thumb, Fig. 2. You reach over with the right hand apparently to take this “top” card but in reality the tip of the right second finger goes beneath the “bottom” card and presses up on the right index corner. The tip of the right first finger rests on the first joint of the left first finger. The right thumb tip rests upon the top of deck at corner, Figs. 3 and 4. Fig. 4 is a view from underneath. Some performers like to have tip of thumb against the edge of the deck.

[Figure arl: Fig. 3. — The left hand holds the deck face down while the right second finger goes beneath the bottom card and the right thumb rests on the top corner.]

[Figure arm: Fig. 4. — View from underneath of the same grip, showing the right second finger pressing up on the bottom card at the index corner.]

The right second finger *snaps* the “bottom” card out, and the right thumb tip comes into position on top of corner of that card while the right first finger pushes down firmly on the second finger, Fig. 5. To allow free passage of the “bottom” card, the second, third and fourth fingers of the left hand straighten out horizontally for a moment. The tip of left first finger, base of thumb, and thumb itself have enough grip on deck to allow free movement of the left second, third and fourth fingers.

[Figure arn: Fig. 5. — The right second finger snaps the bottom card out from the deck held in the left hand, with the right thumb on its corner and the right first finger pressing down.]

[Figure aro: Fig. 6. — The bottom card drawn away to the right in the right hand, while the left hand holds the rest of the deck with the thumb on the top card.]

As “bottom” card is drawn away, Fig. 6, the left thumb moves “top” card back to original position on the deck.

Some performers do not move “top” card. Some just move thumb across card as though in dealing. The left hand with deck is merely moved towards the right hand where right hand takes out the “bottom” card.

Method 3 (Bottom Dealing)

This modification of Method 2 is used by Audley Walsh successfully.

The deck is held in the left hand, backs up, as described in Method 2. Fig. 1 shows position.

The “top” card is pushed off a bit with left thumb, Fig. 2. The right hand comes up apparently to take card but when right thumb goes on top of card the right second finger goes under “bottom” card and rests lightly against the right index corner. The right first finger comes against outer first joint of left index finger.

[Figure arp: Fig. 1. — The left hand holds the deck face down in the Method 2 grip, seen from above, with the thumb on the top card.]

[Figure arq: Fig. 2. — The left thumb pushes the top card off a bit while the right hand reaches in, its thumb on the top card and second finger under the bottom card.]

The right second finger *snaps* “bottom” card out, where it is held between the *first* and *second* fingers and drawn away as in Fig. 4. The left thumb, in the meantime, is moving “top” card of deck back into original position.

[Figure arr: Fig. 3. — The right second finger snaps the bottom card out from the deck held in the left hand, the right thumb pressing on top of its corner.]

[Figure ars: Fig. 4. — The bottom card drawn away between the right first and second fingers, while the left hand holds the rest of the deck.]

The second, third and fourth fingers of left hand momentarily straighten out horizontally to allow “bottom” card to pass and then curl up again on the edge of the deck.

Second Dealing

This is a handy sleight for apparently dealing the “top” card off the deck but in reality dealing the second card.

Effect

Performer deals cards from the “top” of deck, apparently, but really holds back the “top” card as long as he desires and deals out the second card from “top.”

Let us say that a spectator selects a card and it is returned to the deck and brought to the “top.” Spectator is asked to name any number between one and fifteen. Suppose he says “Eight.” You can deal seconds for seven cards and then drop off the selected card from the “top” of deck as the eighth card.

The second deal has a variety of uses.

Method 1 (Second Dealing)

This is the method that Cardini uses.

Hold deck in left hand, backs up, as in Fig. 98. First finger is at outer narrow edge of deck, the second, third and fourth fingers are at the right side curled up with tips about level with “top” of deck. Thumb is on “top” card.

[Figure art: Fig. 98. — The left hand holds the deck face down, backs up, with the thumb lying on the top card and the fingers curled up the right side.]

[Figure aru: Fig. 98A. — A second view of the left hand holding the deck face down, first finger at the outer narrow edge and fingers curled at the right side.]

Thumb moves back to left edge of deck and tip pushes “top” card and second card to the right, Figs. 98A and 99. The deck slightly fans as this is done but does not interfere with dealing. Bring right hand up to deck and place right thumb on “top” card and the first and second fingers beneath the second card, Fig. 99.

[Figure arv: Fig. 99. — The left thumb has pushed the top and second cards to the right so the deck fans slightly, and the right thumb and fingers come to take the second card.]

[Figure arw: Fig. 100. — The left thumb has drawn the top card back onto the deck, leaving the second card held by the right thumb and first two fingers.]

Draw the left thumb with “top” card back to its original position on deck. This leaves the second card in right hand held by right thumb and first two fingers, Fig. 100.

Snap the card down on the table. As the card leaves the deck, the left hand is moved a little to the left.

Dealing must be done in a natural manner. You must develop a sensitive touch and proper timing.

Method 2 (Second Dealing)

This method is liked by many magicians. It takes practice but when mastered is very effective.

Deck is held in left hand, backs up, as in Fig. 1. Inner side of thumb tip rests on outer narrow edge of “top” card at about center. Fingers of hand are curled up on right side of deck with tips of fingers just about on a level with the “top” card.

The right hand fans the cards a bit as in Fig. 2. This bevels the cards enough so that inner edge of left thumb tip can slide off two cards as one, Fig. 3. The two cards are not just pushed to right but describe an arc with base of thumb helping to keep cards in control.

[Figure arx: Fig. 1. — The left hand holds the deck face down, backs up, with the thumb tip on the outer narrow edge of the top card and the fingers curled up the right side.]

[Figure ary: Fig. 2. — The cards fanned a bit, seen from above, so that the edges of the top cards are beveled.]

[Figure arz: Fig. 3. — The inner edge of the left thumb tip slides two cards off to the right as one, with the base of the thumb controlling them.]

Right hand comes up and, with thumb on top of right index corner of the two cards, right second finger tip beneath the corner and the first finger pressing firmly on the second finger, Fig. 4, the second, or lower, card of the two is slipped out and thrown on table. In the meantime the left thumb has brought the “top” card back to its original position, Fig. 5.

[Figure asa: Fig. 4. — The right thumb on the corner of the two cards, the second finger beneath and the first finger pressing on it, about to slip out the lower card.]

[Figure asb: Fig. 5. — The right hand throws out the lower card while the left thumb has brought the top card back onto the deck.]

The cards should be held in the same position whether dealing straight off the “top,” or dealing seconds, and the timing should be perfect.

Cards are held rather lightly with just enough pressure by edge of left thumb tip (just under inner corner of nail, as marked X in Fig. 1) on edge of bevelled cards to allow two cards to slide.

Method 3 (Second Dealing)

This is known as the Strike Method of Second Dealing because the right thumb lightly strikes the back of the card in dealing it off the deck. It is a popular method with many magicians.

Cards are held in left hand, backs up, as in Fig. 1. Left first finger is held against outer narrow edge of the deck. The second, third and fourth fingers are curled up on the right side of deck, tips of fingers being on a level just below “top” card. The thumb is on the upper half of “top” card.

[Figure asc: Fig. 1. — The left hand holds the deck face down, backs up, first finger at the outer edge, other fingers curled up the right side, thumb on the upper half of the top card.]

[Figure asd: Fig. 2. — The left thumb has slid the top card off to the right in an arc, the base of the thumb pivoting at the lower index corner.]

[Figure ase: Fig. 3. — The right thumb, parallel to the top card, lightly strikes the exposed second card as the right hand comes up.]

The thumb slides off the “top” card about a half to three-quarters of an inch in an arc to the right. The base of thumb acts as a pivot for lower index corner of card, Fig. 2.

The right hand comes up in pretense of taking the “top” card with right thumb parallel to card and lightly strikes the second card which is exposed, Fig. 3. This pushes card out of deck diagonally, Fig. 4, and right first finger comes underneath the right index corner. Card is gripped between thumb and first finger and drawn quickly out of the deck.

[Figure asf: Fig. 4. — The struck card pushed out of the deck diagonally, with the right first finger coming underneath its index corner.]

[Figure asg: Fig. 5. — The right hand draws the dealt card away while the left thumb moves the top card square on the deck.]

The left thumb moves the “top” card back so it is square on the deck, Fig. 5.

The same movements in dealing seconds should be used in regular dealing with the exception, of course, that in regular dealing the “top” card comes off.

Some performers deal seconds by only a slight arc movement of the “top” card. It is amazing how little exposure of the edge and top of second card is necessary for some card artists to strike out the second card.

In dealing, the outer narrow edge of deck is raised a bit as the card is struck out, and the deck is tipped so that its right edge slants downward.

Method 4 (Second Dealing)

This is a method that Joe Berg uses and is for those who like a novelty style of dealing with a snap of the card as cards are dealt. This method is a modification of the second deal used by Cardini.

Hold deck, backs ups, in left hand, as in Fig. 1. First finger at upper narrow edge of deck, other fingers curled around right edge and thumb on “top” card.

[Figure ash: Fig. 1. — The left hand holds the deck face down, backs up, first finger at the upper narrow edge, other fingers curled around the right edge, thumb on the top card.]

[Figure asi: Fig. 2. — The left thumb brought back to the left edge of the deck, seen from above.]

[Figure asj: Fig. 3. — The left thumb pushes the two top cards to the right so the deck fans out slightly.]

Bring the thumb back to the left edge of deck, Fig. 2, and push to right the two “top” cards, Fig. 3. Deck will fan out slightly but this is all right.

Bring the right hand up over the “top” cards as in Fig. 4, the left thumb sliding “top” card back, leaving the second card held by the second finger and thumb of right hand which slides the card off the deck, Fig. 5. Deck is held horizontal as this is done.

[Figure ask: Fig. 4. — The right hand comes up over the top cards while the left thumb slides the top card back, leaving the second card held by the right second finger and thumb.]

[Figure asl: Fig. 5. — The right second finger and thumb slide the second card off the deck.]

[Figure asm: Fig. 6. — The dealt card bent in the right hand, the right first finger against its far narrow end so it is held between thumb and first finger.]

Card is now bent with right first finger coming up against opposite narrow end of card so it can be held between thumb and first finger, Fig. 6.

The second finger snaps its end of card, which gives a loud snapping sound and the card comes into position as in Fig. 7. Card is thrown on the table.

[Figure asn: Fig. 7. — The right hand holds the snapped card, face toward the viewer, in position just before it is thrown on the table.]

Each card that is dealt from the “top” in regular straight dealing is removed and snapped in this manner, so when you want to deal a second you do so with same timing and style.

Method 5 (Second Dealing)

Another Snap Ending

Card is removed from deck and card is bent as in Fig. 8. The first and second fingers grip outer narrow end of card, with thumb on opposite end of card. Snap the end loose with thumb which gives a snapping sound, and by straightening the fingers, the card is thrown into position as in Fig. 9. Card is dropped on the table.

[Figure aso: Fig. 8. — The card bent in the right hand, the fingers gripping its outer narrow end with the thumb on the opposite end, ready to snap loose.]

[Figure asp: Fig. 9. — The card thrown into position by the straightened fingers of the right hand after the thumb snaps its end loose.]

[Figure asq: Fig. 10. — The deck held in the left hand while the right hand grasps its edges between first finger and thumb, a dotted line showing the bottom card sliding to the right.]

Dealing Bottoms

To deal the “bottom” card by this method, hold the deck in left hand as in Fig. 10. Right hand grasps edges between first finger and thumb, which allows first and second fingers of left hand to slide the “bottom” card to the right, which is grasped between second finger and thumb of right hand and drawn away from the deck. Magicians will recognize this move as a modification of a move used in color changing a card by passing the “bottom” card to the “top.”

194 THE TARBELL COURSE IN MAGIC ## The Ribbon Drop

Effect

A pretty card flourish in which cards drop quickly and evenly from right hand down to left, held about twelve inches below. The even dropping gives the effect of a ribbon. Use new cards to get the best results.

[Figure asr: Fig. 108. — A hand seen from the side holds a curved pack of cards between thumb and second finger, the cards spread slightly apart.]

To Perform

Turn left side to audience. Hold cards in right hand as shown in Fig. 108. The grip comes between thumb and second finger, and the other fingers assist lightly in holding cards. Push second finger and thumb inward a little so that pack is curved and cards spread slightly apart.

[Figure ass: Fig. 109. — The right hand holds the curved pack at about a 45-degree angle, the faces of the cards turned toward the audience.]

Turn right hand to horizontal position, holding it at about a 45-degree angle, Fig. 109.

Hold left hand twelve to eighteen inches below right. Gradually release pressure on cards with thumb and second finger. Allow the cards to fall evenly in a ribbon effect into left hand. Cards face audience, Fig. 110. It takes practice to master this flourish, but when perfected, it is pretty.

[Figure ast: Fig. 110. — A tall, even column of cards falls in a ribbon from the right hand above into the open left hand below.]

The Cascade

Effect

This is similar to The Ribbon Drop but the cards are curved and fall in a cascade.

To Perform

Hold cards in the same way as you do for The Ribbon Drop, but press down harder on the cards to get a greater curve in them, Fig. 111.

[Figure asu: Fig. 111. — The right hand holds the cards pressed into a deep curve, the thumb at the near edge, ready for The Cascade.]

Release pressure on the cards with the thumb

only, and draw thumb back over edges of cards a little. This causes the cards to spurt one after another rapidly into left hand. Control of the cards is with the thumb. Cards fall with faces downward and edges to audience, Fig. 112.

[Figure asv: Fig. 112. — Cards spurt in a curved stream from the right hand down to the left hand below, lettered "Control release of cards with thumb."]

Another method of Cascading cards is to force the cards across from right to left hand horizontally, Fig. 113. By making a turn of your body from left to right during the action, the impression of great distance between the hands is created.

[Figure asw: Fig. 113. — A man in a bow tie holds his hands wide apart, with a spread of cards forced horizontally from the right hand across to the left.]

Production of Cards from the Mouth

Effect

This is a comedy flourish. Magician reaches up with his hand and apparently takes many cards from his mouth, or from a boy’s mouth.

To Perform

Palm off from the deck a dozen cards, or as many as you can conveniently palm, in your right hand. It is preferable to palm them with faces of cards against hand. To do this, hold deck in left hand immediately in front of you with faces of cards towards you and backs towards audience. Place right hand over deck. Turn towards the left, and as you do so, get left little finger under a dozen or so cards. With the aid of little finger, palm the cards in right hand.

Place cards up against mouth with back of hand to audience, being careful to conceal cards. Push top of cards up into mouth about an inch, Fig. 1.

[Figure asx: Fig. 1. — A man faces the audience with his right hand held against his mouth, the back of the hand outward, hiding the cards pushed in.]

Draw right hand aside and place left hand on cards also. Immediately start pulling cards down in ribbon fashion, allowing them to fall one by one to the floor. As you pull cards down with fingers of both hands, you create the illusion of actually pulling the cards out of your mouth, Fig. 2.

[Figure asy: Fig. 2. — A man pulls a ribbon of cards downward out of his mouth with both hands, the cards falling one by one in a column.]

If you do this with a boy, have him face audience. Stand behind him, and under cover of his body, palm your cards. Reach your arms around his neck, place cards up into his mouth a little way, and immediately start pulling cards down, Fig. 3.

[Figure asz: Fig. 3. — A man stands behind a boy facing the audience, his arms around the boy's neck, pulling a ribbon of cards down out of the boy's mouth.]

Cascade Production from Boy’s Nose

Effect

Another comedy flourish in which the performer places his hand on boy’s nose and a stream of cards cascades down.

To Perform

Stand behind boy and palm off half the deck in right hand. Hold cards as you were taught to do for The Cascade in this lesson.

Step around to the right of boy, place your right hand up to his nose, and cascade the cards downward, allowing them to spurt to the floor. Tilt your hand a little to get proper angle for a good waterfall or cascade of the cards. This stream of cards, apparently coming from the boy’s nose, always get a laugh, Fig. 4.

[Figure ata: Fig. 4. — The performer's right hand is held at a boy's nose while a stream of curved cards spurts downward toward the floor in a cascade.]

The One-Handed Cut

Another flourish with cards in which the pack is cut, and the cut completed, while held in one hand.

To Perform

Hold pack between fingers and thumb, backs of cards up, Fig. 114.

[Figure atb: Fig. 114. — A hand holds the pack between fingers and thumb with the backs of the cards upward.]

Allow about half of the pack to drop into palm, making sections A and B, Fig. 115.

[Figure atc: Fig. 115. — The pack has dropped half into the palm, making two sections lettered A at the top and B below.]

With tips of first finger and little finger, push against the outer edge of B, raising it up under A, Fig. 116.

[Figure atd: Fig. 116. — A hand holds the pack with section A above and section B being pushed up under it by the tips of the first and little fingers.]

Continue pushing B until it has passed the inner edge of A, and A drops down towards palm, Fig. 117.

[Figure ate: Fig. 117. — Section B has passed the inner edge of A, and A drops down toward the palm of the hand.]

The moment B is free from A, transfer first finger to A to control it and lower it evenly, Fig. 118.

[Figure atf: Fig. 118. — The first finger has moved to section A to control it and lower it evenly, while section B is free above.]

When A has dropped into position, let B fall on top of it and the cut is completed, Fig. 119.

[Figure atg: Fig. 119. — Section A has dropped into position and section B has fallen on top, completing the cut in one hand.]

Practice this cut with both hands. Then try holding half of deck in each hand and cutting them simultaneously. In this method of cutting the result is the same as in the Regular Pass.

This lesson has covered some interesting and valuable card sleights. With a little ingenuity on your part, you can work them into many tricks. You can introduce flourishes, productions, and vanishes of cards here and there for variety. A number of methods for doing the same thing are taught so that you may pick out the method which is easiest for you. Practice and perfect the methods which suit you best.

[Figure ath: A rabbit in evening dress, standing upright, holds up an egg in one paw and a spotted bag in the other, a vignette on an otherwise blank page.]
