Lesson 27: Rising Cards

I do not know who first performed the rising of a card from the pack. but whoever he was, he certainly had a brilliant idea. It has stood the test of many, many years and many, many audiences and proved to be of real magical value.

The late Howard Thurston made the rising card effect one of the feature tricks of his show for many years. Other magicians the world over, wherever playing cards are used, have put rising card tricks in their programs.

There have been numerous methods used in accomplishing the effect— some very simple to perform, others very complicated. Many performers have exercised their ingenuity on rising card problems so that interesting variations of the effect have been brought forth. Some of these require apparatus which costs hundreds of dollars.

In presenting various rising card methods to you in this course, the idea has been constantly before me to give you those methods which are practical, which require only a medium amount of skill and yet are excellent in effect, and, above all, to present them to you in such manner as to enable you to make up the apparatus easily and with almost no cost.

Varying conditions under which you perform require different methods of working and it is well to be prepared for any occasion. However, you will, no doubt, favor one of the methods over the others and find greater delight in performing the effect by this method. If experience teaches you that you are most successful in presenting a certain method, you can then make that your feature rising card effect.

Cardini’s Rising Cards

This effect was shown to me by Cardini. It is worked on the elaboration of an old principle in card magic which has been sold in crude form in circuses, carnivals, dime museums, street corners, etc. It has commonly been called the “Jumping Card.” In the crude method a rubber band was fastened to two cards in a deck and another card was placed between them, forcing down the rubber band. The card was held in place with the fingers. When it was released, the rubber band contracted and forced the card out of the deck, causing it to jump up into the air.

This method of Cardini’s is worked out to a nicety and is excellent for presentation in club, parlor or stage work.

Effect

Five cards are selected by spectators, remembered, and returned to the deck. Magician holds deck in left hand. At his command the selected cards rise one at a time out of the deck, until at the end the last two cards rise together. This gives the performer an opportunity to get in some comedy patter. After the cards have risen, the deck may be given to spectators for examination.

Paraphernalia

1—A deck of cards.

2—Two specially prepared cards.

To Prepare

Take an elastic band, about Size 18 as manufactured by Eberhard Faber and sold at any book or stationery store. Cut off one end of the rubber band. Be sure to use fresh rubbers and test them to see that they do not break easily.

Take the King of Clubs and the Queen of Diamonds from an extra deck. Cut a small hole in the upper part of each card. Through the hole in the King push one end of the rubber band. Pull it through until about an inch and a half of band from hole to curve in band is left on face side of card, Fig. 1.

[Figure auj: Fig. 1. — The face of the King of Clubs with the rubber band pushed through a hole near the top edge, a wire staple marked across the band.]

[Figure auk: Fig. 2. — The face of the King with the rubber band, about one and a half inches long, stapled across near the top; the staple and rubber band are labelled.]

[Figure aul: Fig. 3. — The two cards edge-on, side by side, with the rubber band hanging in a V between them and its ends stapled to the cards.]

Fig. 2 shows arrangement of rubber band on face of King. Now with a wire stapling machine, such as is used in offices to fasten papers together, clamp a staple across the rubber so that it fastens it securely on both sides of card.

Now take the Queen and push the other end of rubber band through hole in this card from the back through to the front. King and Queen should face in same direction and should not face each other. Treat the rubber band similarly as you did on the King.

Fig. 3 shows how the two cards look with rubber band hanging down between them and the ends stapled to the cards.

Experimentation will teach you how tight and how long you will want the rubber band to get the proper rising of the cards. I have found the most satisfactory length of the band to be about two and a quarter inches when it is held straight out between the cards, Fig. 4.

[Figure aum: Fig. 4. — Two upright lines labelled King and Queen, joined across the top by the rubber band, with a measurement of two and a quarter inches marked over it.]

To complete the band arrangement, cut the extra length of the bands from the two ends, allowing about a quarter of an inch to hang down beyond staples. You cut these ends from the back of the King and the face of the Queen.

If a wire stapling machine is not handy for your use, push the band through the King in the same manner as described above and sew it to the King with needle and thread. Then spread glue over the back of the card and on the rubber band and place another card over it. The two cards should be carefully glued together as one.

Now take any indifferent card and push the rubber band through it as you did with the Queen in arrangement above. Sew a band to this card. Spread glue well over the face of it and over the end of rubber band. Place the Queen on this card, facing outward. Press cards together well to look like one card with band securely held.

The resulting arrangement looks just like that described above and shown in Fig. 3.

Have prepared cards in center of deck, stapled ends nearest you. On “top” of deck place a duplicate King of Clubs and Queen of Diamonds.

To Perform

Insert little finger of left hand under the Queen of the prepared cards. Perform the pass, thus bringing the King and Queen from “top” of deck to the center and the faked King and Queen to the bottom of deck. Make the jog in preparation for forcing.

Force the King of Clubs on one spectator and the Queen of Diamonds on another. Allow three more spectators free choice of a card each.

Perform the pass again, bringing the prepared King and Queen on the “bottom” to the center of deck. Reverse deck so that stapled ends are towards audience. Cover end of cards with right fingers to prevent audience from seeing the space between prepared cards.

Collect cards one at a time in reverse order from which they were selected, that is, the last one first and the King and Queen last. As you collect each card, you return it to the deck in this manner:

Hold deck with A end upward, cards facing audience. Take card from spectator with right hand and place it in deck, between the two prepared cards, Fig. 5.

[Figure aun: Fig. 5. — The left hand holds the deck upright, cards facing out, while the right hand slides a selected card in between the two prepared cards at the top.]

[Figure auo: Fig. 6. — The right fingers push the selected card down into the deck held in the left hand, forcing the rubber band down around the card's lower edge.]

Push the card down with right fingers. This, of course, forces the rubber band down between the two prepared cards and around and under the bottom edge of the selected card, Fig. 6.

Collect the next card and place it in deck on top of card just placed there. You will have no difficulty in finding this place in the deck. Then collect the third selected card and place on top of second, and finally collect the Queen and the King and place them on top of the other selected cards. All five selected cards are now between the two prepared cards, Fig. 7.

[Figure aup: Fig. 7. — The left hand grips the deck with the forefinger over the top edge, beside a side view of the two prepared cards with the five selected cards between them.]

[Figure auq: Fig. 8. — The deck held upright in the left hand with the little finger at the bottom, one card rising out of the top of the pack.]

Hold pack of cards firmly gripped in left hand with forefinger over top edge to keep selected cards from being pushed out.

*“Some time ago I discovered something peculiar about the relationship between cards and people. It seems that when a card is held for a few moments by a spectator, it absorbs a certain magnetism which causes it either to get lighter or to separate itself from the others by the power of friction. For instance, here is one rising now and separating itself from the others.”*

Hold deck as in Fig. 8. Have little finger at bottom of deck to keep cards under influence of rubber band from coming out at bottom. Grip deck on one side with thumb and on the other side with fingers of left hand.

Gradually release your pressure on deck. This causes the rubber band to force the selected cards upward. Allow all five selected cards to rise as one card. As cards are held squarely with faces towards audience, spectators are not aware that there are really five cards before them rising out of the deck instead of one.

Permit cards to rise just a little beyond half their length. Now study this move carefully, in which you remove the front card without letting the audience suspect that there are other cards behind it.

Grasp upper edge of front card with first finger and thumb of right hand. Place left forefinger on upper edge of four cards in rear. Pull top edge of first card forward a little and pull it up with right hand. As you do this push the rear cards down into deck with left forefinger. Be sure little finger of left hand holds bottom of deck securely, Figs. 9 and 10.

[Figure aur: Fig. 9. — The right thumb and first finger grasp the upper edge of the front card as it is drawn up from the rising cards held in the left hand.]

[Figure aus: Fig. 10. — The front card is pulled up with the right hand while an arrow shows the left forefinger pushing the rear cards down into the deck.]

[Figure aut: Fig. 11. — The left hand holds the deck with the King rising first above the others, shown beside a side view of the two prepared cards and the rubber band.]

As you remove the card from deck, call it by name: *“The Three of Clubs”* (or whatever card it may be).

Drop card on table or place it on front of deck.

Release pressure of fingers again and let the next card rise with the other three behind it. Remove the front card and push down the rear three as before. Call the card, say *“The Ace of Spades.”*

Allow next card to rise with the other two behind it. Remove this card and force other two back into deck. Name the card, *“The Ten of Hearts.”*

Now reverse the deck. Release pressure again. The selected King and Queen, now under the rubber band, push up the prepared King and Queen and cause them to rise from the deck. With a little practice you can cause the King to rise first by releasing pressure on that card first, Fig. 11.

*“Ah, the King!”* Then the Queen rises also.

“*And the Queen! Either he is hiding behind the Queen’s skirts or else she will not let him go out alone.*”

Remove the King and Queen, holding the right thumb over staple and rubber band. Fan the cards a little and show them to the audience, Fig. 12. Place these prepared cards on front of deck and then fan the whole deck in right hand.

[Figure auu: Fig. 12. — The right hand fans the King and Queen of clubs, held with the thumb over the staple and rubber band, to show them to the audience.]

If you wish to continue using the deck after this effect, lay the selected cards on the table as they rise. Then when the King and Queen are out, the deck can be handled freely and can even be given to spectators to examine as the apparatus is gone.

Note

There are a number of interesting ways to handle the Queen and King. You can control their rising by means of the first fingers of either hand, allowing one to rise and pushing the other down and vice versa. This gives you an opportunity for comedy patter to put your effect across with a bang. You may let the Queen rise about an inch and then allow the King to shoot up behind it. The King can always be kept down until ready by means of the left forefinger.

Be prepared with patter no matter how they rise. If King comes up and Queen does not, reach in and pull out Queen, and removing both cards from deck say, “*Ah, running away from the Queen, eh?*”

Rising Deck from Card Case

A quick novelty that is effective.

Effect

Performer picks up card case full of cards, opens the flap and deck rises out of the box.

Paraphernalia

A prepared card case which has a strip of card pasted across the back. This can be part of another card case to match the one on which it is glued, Fig. 1, gray area.

[Figure auv: Fig. 1. — A card case seen at a slant with the flap up; a gray area marks the extra strip of card glued across its back, and a thread runs diagonally away from it.]

[Figure auw: Fig. 2. — Front view of the card case with the black thread passing over the extra card and running down diagonally to the side.]

[Figure aux: Fig. 3. — The card case with the deck of cards standing inside it, faces toward the front, and the thread running over the top edge.]

[Figure auy: Fig. 4. — The left hand slants the card case forward; the thread tightens and pulls the cards up out of the case.]

A black silk thread is passed through upper part of case via a needle and a substantial knot tied on end of thread in front of case to keep thread from pulling through. Thread passes directly over the extra card on case, Fig. 2. End is tied to thumb tack on rear of table, around a book, or even table leg.

Place deck of cards in the case, face of cards towards front, Fig. 3. Insert the flap and place case on table.

To Perform

Pick up card case and hold in left hand. You are standing with table at your left side. Open flap of card case. Slanting the card case with upper part forward, bring the case forward which tightens thread and pulls cards out of case, Fig. 4, from which they are finally removed by right hand.

The slanting of the card case eases up the rising of cards and enables the case to stand greater tension of the thread. If desired, the case can be picked up with right hand.

A Pack Full of Pep

This method of doing this attention-getting stunt is the invention of Louis Tannen whose penchant is to simplify and make practical any trick that has too many complications.

Effect

The performer takes a pack of cards in its case, from his pocket, or from the table. Upon opening the end flap, the entire pack rises majestically from the case as though by magic. That’s all there is to it, but it adds a surprising episode preliminary to use of the pack in some trick.

Paraphernalia

1—A regular pack and the usual case it comes in.

2—An extra card case, duplicate of the other one.

3—A thin rubber band—length to be determined by test.

4—Two small thin pieces of tin, or other metal, about ⅜ inch long by ⅛ inch wide.

5—Some good paste or glue.

To Prepare

Remove the pack from its case. About one-fourth of an inch below the top (open) edge of the back of the card case, make a small hole. Right opposite that hole, make another hole in the front of the case. The rubber band is run through both holes so the loop ends of the rubber band project on both the back and front of the case, the main body of the band extending across the narrow width of the card case, Fig. 1.

[Figure auz: Fig. 1. — An upright card case with the rubber band run through holes near the top, its loop ends showing on the outside; the words rubber band are lettered beside it.]

[Figure ava: Fig. 2. — The prepared card case with its flap open, shaded gray, showing a small rectangular piece of tin glued over the hole on the front.]

[Figure avb: Fig. 3. — The finished card case, covered with the pasted front and back of the extra case, with the flap open and the rubber ends and tin concealed.]

[Figure avc: Fig. 4. — The card case with the flap open and the pack of cards rising out of it, an eight of diamonds showing on the top card.]

Through each rubber band loop on the outside of the case insert a piece of the tin and glue the latter firmly on the outside of the case, right over each of the holes, Fig. 2.

Carefully cut the front and back away from the extra card case and paste them, respectively, over the front and back of the prepared card case. This conceals the rubber ends and tin reinforcements, besides giving rigidity to the case, Fig. 3. Allow for thorough drying of the pasted parts.

The pack is now placed in the case. As the cards are pushed down the double strand of rubber band is carried down by pressure of the cards. When the pack is all the way down, the rubber is stretched around the pack. The tension of the rubber is such that the pack will be lifted right out of the case unless the flap is closed, Fig. 4. With the flap closed, you are all ready to perform.

To Perform

Take the case and hold it firmly in left hand to prevent premature action as you open the flap with the right hand. By gauging the pressure of your right fingers on the outside of the case, you may cause the pack to rise quickly or slowly from the case. Toss the case aside (where nobody can reach it) and proceed to use the pack as desired.

This is another of those incidental effects that adds greatly to the performer’s prestige.

The Rising Cards and Card Case

A method for presenting a rising card effect which can be used for work at close quarters if necessary.

Effect

Performer fans a deck of cards and divides it into two halves, giving one half to a spectator. Spectator is requested to remove any card from his section of the deck and place it among those held by the performer. Two other spectators likewise select cards and return them to section held by magician. All the cards are now placed in the card case and it is shown freely. On magician’s command, the selected cards rise one at a time. You may permit spectators to remove cards themselves to prove to them that cards rise from center of deck.

Paraphernalia

1—Prepared deck of cards.

2—Prepared card case.

To Prepare

Take half of a deck of cards. With a sharp penknife, cut out the central portion of one card as shown in Fig. 13.

[Figure avd: Fig. 13. — A playing card, the eight of hearts, with a rectangular central portion between the pips outlined as the part to be cut out with a penknife.]

[Figure ave: Fig. 14. — A squared-up packet of the cut cards seen end-on, showing a uniform rectangular hole running through the whole packet.]

Using this card as a guide, cut out the central portions of 23 more cards. Square up the 24 prepared cards and you will have a packet with a uniform rectangular hole running through them, Fig. 14.

On “top” of these prepared cards place the Queen of Diamonds and on the “bottom” place the King of Hearts. (You may use any other cards, just so you remember them as key cards. I merely suggest using the Queen and King.) Then place all of these cards on “top” of the rest of deck, Fig. 15.

[Figure avf: Fig. 15. — Side view of two packets of cards standing side by side, the faked cards and the regular cards, with arrows marking the Queen on one and the King on the other.]

[Figure avg: Fig. 16. — Back of the card case with its flap open, showing the rectangular hole cut in the back of the box and an arrow noting that the lid covers the opening.]

[Figure avh: Fig. 17. — The card case seen from the other side with the flap folded down over the hole, covering the opening.]

Take the cardboard case in which the cards came and cut a rectangular hole in the back of box, about an inch wide and about an inch and a half in height. This hole should be so placed that when the flap of box is pulled back it is completely covered. If necessary slit down the back cover of box about half an inch on each side to permit flap to go back farther, Figs. 16 and 17. Usually, however, the box is already slit on each side.

To Perform

Have the deck in its case when you start performing. Remove the deck from case and place case on table with prepared side down and the opening away from audience.

Fan the deck with both hands. You will find that you have no difficulty in fanning the cards, showing faces to audience, without exposing the holes. Note where the King of Hearts is in the pack. Then separate the deck into two packets with the King of Hearts on the “bottom” of packet in left hand, Fig. 18. Square up the cards in each hand.

[Figure avi: Fig. 18. — Both hands fan the cards, faces toward the audience, the left packet in the left hand and the other in the right hand.]

“*Will you, sir, take this half?*” Give the unprepared cards in right hand to spectator.

“*Just remove a card, remember it, and return it to this half of the deck which I hold.*”

Spectator places card among those which you hold. Deck should be held fanned out with backs of cards up. Have two more spectators select cards from unprepared section of deck and return them to the section you hold. Have each selected card placed in a different part of packet, Fig. 19.

[Figure avj: Fig. 19. — The left hand holds the packet fanned out with backs up; the first, second and third selected cards are marked where they stand out in different parts of the fan.]

[Figure avk: Fig. 20. — The card case held in the right hand, rear view away from the audience, with the forefinger against the first card showing through the hole in the back.]

Square up the packet. Collect the remainder of deck which spectator is holding and place these cards in front of the packet you hold. Shift the Queen from the “top” of deck to the “bottom.”

Pick up card case from table, being careful not to expose hole in back. Place deck in box with backs of cards against hole in back of case. Fold down the lid of box over the hole in case. Show box freely on both sides to audience.

Take box in right hand, the prepared side towards you. Allow the flap to fly up. Place forefinger of right hand against the first card exposed through hole in case. Fig. 20 shows view away from audience. To spectator who drew first card, say,

“*Have you much influence with cards? Some people seem to have remarkable power over them. What was the name of the card you selected, sir? The Five of Diamonds? Thank you. Now you say, ‘Five of Diamonds, come to papa.’ That’s it.*”

[Figure avl: Fig. 21. — The case seen from the front as the right forefinger pushes the first selected card, the five of diamonds, up out of the top of the case.]

With forefinger of right hand, which is in position, push up the first selected card—in this instance, the Five of Diamonds, Fig. 21.

“*Talk about influence! You not only make them sit up, but rise up.*”

Push down the lid of box over hole in back and turn box over so that audience can see back of it. You must also show the audience that the selected card is rising from among the other cards. Remove card with left hand, Fig. 22.

[Figure avm: Fig. 22. — The right hand pulls the risen card out of the card case with the left hand from the back, the case held upright against the left forefinger.]

You may drop the card on table or, if more convenient, place the card back in the box in front of the deck. To second spectator who selected card, say,

“*Have you a similar acquaintanceship with cards? Will they shift around to suit you? The name of your card, please. The Ace of Hearts. Now say to yourself mentally, ‘Ace of Hearts, walk right out and greet your friend.’*”

Push the Ace up with one push to make it rise about an inch, and then suddenly pull it down again.

“*Ah, it’s playing peek-a-boo with you.*”

Suddenly push the card up until it is exposed for a few inches. Then make it jump up and down four or five times, pulling it down about an inch each time.

“*Either you can’t make up your mind, or else the card is shimmying.*”

Now push the card all the way up and remove it with left hand as you did the first.

“*And now for the last. Do not tell me what it is. Just think of it. Now concentrate. Up she comes—the Six of Spades—your card.*”

Remove the card and place it in the rear of deck in the case.

Allow the whole deck to slide out of the case, being careful not to expose the hole. Drop the case on the table with the hole down. Fan the cards slightly, show them on both sides, square them up, and place them on table.

Note

Another way of utilizing this principle is to use two decks. Prepare one by cutting a hole as described above through all the cards except the “top” and “bottom” ones. Place this deck in your lower right vest pocket.

Come forward with the regular unprepared deck in the prepared case. Remove deck from case and have three or four cards selected by spectators, giving the whole deck to each spectator to make his selection.

Then take the deck. Request that spectators hold up their cards so that the rest of the audience can see them, but not the magician. So saying, turn your back to audience for a moment. This gives you a chance to drop the deck into the inner right coat pocket and to remove the prepared deck from the vest pocket.

Have the selected cards placed back into this prepared deck. Transfer “top” card to “bottom” of deck. Place the cards in the case and proceed with experiment as described above.

Rising Card from the Pocket

This is Keith Clark’s routine for the rising card out of the pocket and one that has been popular in his act.

Effect

Performer has a card freely selected from a deck of cards. Card is returned to deck. Performer makes a motion of palming a card and puts his hand as though containing card in his right trousers pocket. Audience notes this and comments on the fact that the performer has put a card in his pocket. “*In my pocket. Of course.*” He looks at upper left breast pocket of coat and the Ace of Diamonds rises out of the pocket. The gentleman who selected the card says it is not his card but upon looking at it again it turns out to be the selected card.

Paraphernalia

1—A deck of cards.

2—A special card case that fits into the outer left breast pocket. It is easily constructed from a piece of medium weight card or card-board, size 5 × 10 inches. Fold this in half and cut a slot out of each side 1¼ inches, Fig. 1. Fold over the two sides of the lower portion so as to make an envelope into which a playing card can be inserted, Fig. 2. Fold the envelope upward onto the other half of the cardboard, Fig. 3. Trim with scissors to fit the breast pocket, Fig. 4. Slots are cut in the side and a rubber band is put around the case before putting it in the pocket.

[Figure avn: Fig. 1. — A rectangle of card with a slot cut in from each side at the middle, the two cut-outs shown as short notches on the left and right edges.]

[Figure avo: Fig. 2. — The same card folded so the lower portion forms a narrow envelope under a wider upper flap, with the two sides folded over.]

[Figure avp: Fig. 3. — The folded card case laid flat, a tall rectangle divided by vertical lines into three strips with the envelope folded up onto the other half.]

[Figure avq: Fig. 4. — The trimmed card case, narrower at the top where a small button is tied on the thread, ready to fit the breast pocket.]

A heavy black thread is threaded through the upper part of case with a needle. A button is tied on end of thread on front of envelope. The other end of thread goes through pocket and is attached to a button on the inside of coat. Some coats have button already in place as is customary in the double-breasted coats. Figs. 5 and 6 show the set-up.

[Figure avr: Fig. 5. — Front of a coat with the breast pocket shown in dotted lines and a thread running from it down inside the coat to a button on the inside.]

[Figure avs: Fig. 6. — Side view of the pocket with the card case in it; labelled lines show the button, the card case and the thread running down and away.]

[Figure avt: Fig. 7. — A smiling man in evening dress with a bow tie and one arm folded; a playing card shows above the breast pocket as the thread draws it up.]

Card case is in the pocket and the thread goes through coat to the inner button with enough slack in the thread to allow the insertion of a playing card in the case in the pocket. By pulling on thread the card rises, Fig. 7.

To Perform

The Ace of Diamonds, or other card, has been placed in the special card case in breast pocket, unknown to the audience. The card faces outward.

You pick up the deck from the table and have a spectator select a card, remember it, and return it to the center of the deck. Bring the card to the “top” of deck by the pass.

Holding the deck in the left hand, backs towards audience, bring up your hand to the deck and make a rather crude movement of palming a card off the deck. Apparently put the card in your right hand trousers pocket. This will get comments or recognition from the audience.

“*I heard you. You said I put a card in my pocket. I guess you caught me that time for I did put the gentleman’s card in my pocket.*”

Look at your breast pocket. At the same time the right hand goes inside of coat, takes hold of thread, and pulls which causes the card to rise out of the pocket.

Remove the card with right hand and show. To gentleman, say, “*What’s that? This is NOT your card?*”

Bend forward a bit with the deck in left hand near body and do the Top Change (Lesson 25, Figs. 81 to 84), bringing the Ace of Diamonds to the “bottom” of the deck and removing the “top” card.

“*Look again. Oh, it is your card. Congratulations, sir!*”

Properly timed and presented this routine is good for comedy.

Rising Cards from Glass Goblet

This is perhaps the most popular method of performing the rising cards. It is particularly suited to stage performance or working under conditions in which the magician is some distance from his audience. Magician must be far enough away and have such lighting conditions that a fine silk thread will not be visible to spectators.

Effect

Three spectators select a card each. These are returned to the deck and thoroughly shuffled in. The deck is placed in a glass tumbler. A hoop is passed over glass and cards to show that there is no outside connection. The magician then commands and the selected cards rise one at a time. Cards and glass are examined by spectators after performing the trick, without their discovering the secret.

Paraphernalia

1—Two decks of cards.

2—A spool of very fine black silk thread—Number 000 is best. Magic dealers have it.

3—A glass goblet with bottom large enough to hold a deck of cards easily.

4—A wooden hoop, such as is used for embroidery work. It is effective to have this painted a bright color.

5—A table on which to set supplies.

6—A small wire staple.

7—A handkerchief.

To Prepare

Take one of the decks and remove the following cards:

Queen of Hearts.

Ten of Hearts.

Ten of Diamonds.

Seven of Spades.

And Seven Indifferent Cards.

Take one of the indifferent cards, say, the King of Spades. Cut a small slit in upper edge A of the card, about one-fourth inch deep. Insert an end of silk thread into this slit, allowing about one-fourth inch to hang down on face of card, Fig. 23.

[Figure avu: Fig. 23. — A playing card, the King of Spades, with a slit marked in its upper edge and a silk thread running from the slit diagonally down across the face of the card.]

[Figure avv: Fig. 24. — Side view of the threaded packet, cards labelled QH, 10H, 10D and 7S standing in a row, the thread zigzagging between them from face side to back and trailing off at the right.]

Let thread come down over back of card, then place the Queen of Hearts on “top” of it. Pull thread up over back of Queen exactly halfway between the ends. On the Queen and on top of the thread place an indifferent card. Pull thread over back of this card. Now place the Ten of Hearts on “top” and pull thread up again. Continue the threading of the cards, placing the Ten of Diamonds next, then an indifferent card, then the Seven of Spades, and finally two indifferent cards. Place the seventh indifferent card on the “bottom” of the packet. Fig. 24 shows you the set-up. All the cards must face the same way.

You can readily understand that if the thread is pulled the Seven of Spades will be pulled up as the back two cards act as a fulcrum.

[Figure avw: Fig. 25. — Plan of the table showing the staple at the back, the thread looping in curves toward the front, with hoop, glass, prepared cards and handkerchief placed along the edges.]

[Figure avx: Fig. 25A. — A tablecloth drawn as a shaded square with a pin pushed in near the centre and the thread running down the cloth and under it.]

Fig. 25 shows the arrangement of your table. The staple is driven in at the back end. To this the free end of the thread is tied. If table has a tablecloth, a pin can be inserted in same as in Fig. 25 A and thread run under center of it. It answers the same purpose as a staple. Determine the length of your thread by holding the cards about 18 inches above the table and about a foot in front of you. With cards in this position, the thread should be taut. Place prepared cards at front of table, faces up. In front of cards place a handkerchief to screen them from audience. Arrange thread carefully on table so that it will not get tangled or caught in anything. Place glass tumbler near cards at front of table and wooden hoop on opposite side and farther back.

On the other deck of cards place the Queen of Hearts, the Ten of Hearts, and the Seven of Spades. Arrange these in reverse order with the Seven of Spades on “top” in preparation for forcing.

To Perform

Force the Seven of Spades, the Ten of Hearts, and the Queen of Spades on three different spectators, respectively. Give the pack to each spectator and ask him to return his card to it. Finally have some member of audience thoroughly shuffle the deck.

Come back to table and secretly place the pack on the threaded cards with left hand, faces of cards up. At same moment pick up handkerchief with right hand and then the glass tumbler also with right hand.

*“There is an old saying that people who live in glass houses should dress in the dark. It might not hurt this glass to give it a polish and make it still more transparent.”* Show glass freely and wipe it out with handkerchief.

*“This glass is of pure crystal, made especially for this magical experiment so that you can see through it—that is, the glass and not the experiment.”*

Drop the handkerchief onto table and pick up the cards. Place them in tumbler, faces towards audience. The thread hangs down behind the glass, Fig. 26.

[Figure avy: Fig. 26. — A hand holds a glass tumbler by its stem, with the deck standing in the glass, faces toward the viewer, and the thread hanging down behind it to the left.]

[Figure avz: Fig. 27. — Side view: a deck of cards in a glass held in the left hand at the table front, the thread stretched straight out along a slope to the back of the table.]

*“You can see the cards in the glass, can you not? That is why I wanted the glass to be transparent. There is nothing left for you to imagine. Fifty-two cards isolated in a glass house.”*

Fig. 27 shows the arrangement of cards—the unprepared deck facing the audience, behind it the threaded packet with thread hanging down behind it. You see here also how you hold the glass with the cards in your left hand in front of table, with the thread stretched straight out from back of table.

*“I hear one card telling another that he might be in a glass house but that he can not see much because of the others. Ah, there he is registering his dissatisfaction and coming out.”*

Move glass slightly forward. This pulls the thread tighter and causes the Seven of Spades to rise because this is the last card which was threaded, Fig. 28.

[Figure awa: Fig. 28. — A man in a suit stands holding a glass with a deck of cards in his left hand, held out in front of him.]

[Figure awb: Fig. 29. — The right hand holds the hoop horizontally above the glass of cards, marked A and B, with an arrow pointing down; the left hand holds the glass stem and the thread runs off to the left.]

[Figure awc: Fig. 30. — The hoop has been brought down over the glass and rests on the left arm, tilted, with the thread running up from the glass and the right hand steadying the hoop.]

*“The Seven of Spades. Was that your card, sir? Correct.”*

Pretend that you hear a murmur in audience. *“What’s that? Oh, I know what you are thinking. You think that some spirit pushed the card out. Oh, my, no!”*

Pick up the hoop from table with right hand and pass it over cards and glass. Practice how to do this so that you can do it very naturally. Place hoop above glass in a horizontal position, Fig. 29. Bring hoop down over glass and onto left arm, Fig. 30.

[Figure awd: Fig. 31. — The hoop stands vertical on the left side of the glass, the left hand gripping the stem and the right hand holding the hoop edge, with the thread across the glass.]

[Figure awe: Fig. 32. — The hoop, with its B side pulled over the glass, lies nearly horizontal, an arrow showing it being drawn down over the bottom of the glass and the stem.]

Shift left hand upward a little on glass. Now bring hoop to vertical position still on left side of glass, Fig. 31. Pull B side of hoop over glass and down to a horizontal position again. Hoop is now clear of thread and can be pulled down over bottom of glass and removed, Fig. 32.

Figs. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, and 38 show the routine of passing a hoop over a threaded object. Learn this thoroughly. It is exceedingly useful in convincing your audience that certain things have no outside connection, although they really have. Never mention anything about threads or wires. Do not even suggest the fact that magicians ever use such things.

[Figure awf: Fig. 33. — The hoop, lettered A and B, is held flat above and beside a vertical rectangle that stands for the threaded glass, with the thread slanting away to the left.]

[Figure awg: Fig. 34. — The hoop is lowered flat around the lower part of the upright glass, lettered A and B, with the thread slanting up past it.]

[Figure awh: Fig. 35. — The hoop is tilted and slipped across the upright glass, with the thread passing through it, lettered A and B.]

[Figure awi: Fig. 36. — The hoop stands upright and narrow, lettered A at the top and B near the glass, with the thread slanting off to the lower left.]

[Figure awj: Fig. 37. — The hoop is swung back toward horizontal above the glass, lettered A and B, with the thread slanting off to the left.]

[Figure awk: Fig. 38. — The hoop lies flat below the glass, lettered B and A, clear of the thread that slants up past the glass.]

Follow each step shown in the diagram and you will have no difficulty in learning how to perform this. Learn each stage of the move and then perform it quickly as one continuous movement.

*“No ‘spookses.’ That card came out because of pure curiosity.”* To spectator who selected second card, *“And what card did you select? The Ten of Hearts? Ten of Hearts, arise!”*

By this time you have stepped forward a little to take up slack in thread. You now push glass forward a little again, causing the next threaded card to rise, which is the Ten of Diamonds.

*“I said the Ten of Hearts, not the Ten of Diamonds. Your card was the Ten of Hearts, wasn’t it, sir? The Ten of Diamonds is so anxious to break into society that it breaks in wherever there is the slightest chance.”*

Push card down into glass again. This leaves it threaded as before. Move glass back a little to give thread enough slack to enable you to push card down easily.

*“We’ll try again. Up, Ten of Hearts!”* Up comes the Ten of Diamonds again. *“What? Coming up again? You are a naughty, naughty card.”* Place glass on table and remove the Ten of Diamonds from deck in glass. Place it in the palm of your left hand, back up. Spank card about four times with right hand.

*“Papa will have to spank. Now you go back with the rest of the little ‘cardses’ and stay there.”* Return card to front portion of deck so that it will not interfere with remaining threaded portion of prepared deck. Pick up glass from table again and hold in left hand as before.

*“Perhaps you would have more influence with your card, sir. Will you just say, ‘Ten of Hearts, arise?’ ”* When spectator says this, permit the Ten of Hearts to rise. This is the next threaded card and it will come up readily if your thread is taut. *“I think the Ten of Hearts likes you better than it does me.”* Remove Ten of Hearts and place on front of deck.

*“Now, for the third and last card. Up—up—up.”* No card comes up. Look at the deck a moment, perplexed.

*“Did you see any card come up? If any did, I can’t see it.* (To spectator who selected third card.) *What was the name of your card, may I ask? The Queen of Hearts? Oh, no wonder. We cannot expect a Queen to rise under ordinary circumstances.”*

Make a low graceful bow, and as you do so, say, *“Could we have the delightful pleasure of having your gracious majesty arise so that we might gaze on your gorgeous beauty?”*

Let the Queen rise. *“All hail the Queen!”* Stand up straight again. Remove the Queen and place it on the front of the deck.

Push glass forward a little. This causes the thread to pull out of the slit in the King card from which you started your threading. This frees the glass and deck entirely. Take deck from glass and fan it wide with right hand. Also show glass freely. Replace deck and glass on table.

Ed. Reno Method

There are numerous ways of applying this principle in the working of - the rising cards. One method is to arrange your table as shown in Fig. 39.

[Figure awl: Fig. 39. — Plan of the table: a small staple at the back, the thread winding in curves toward the front, ending at an iron weight near the prepared cards, handkerchief and glass.]

Everything is set in the same way as described in preceding effect, except that thread is not tied to staple or pin at back of table, but is pulled through it and tied to an iron washer or nut or small weight. Enough thread is allowed to enable the performer to stand several feet away from the table with weight in his left trousers pocket. The glass with the cards is not held in the hand but remains at the front of the table.

Have table set as in Fig. 39. Force cards you desire selected. Have them returned to pack. Place pack on the prepared cards already on table.

Pick up handkerchief and glass with right hand, and at same time pick up iron weight with left hand and place it in your left trousers pocket. This move will not be noticed for the leaning of the body makes such a movement appear natural. Also you are using misdirection—directing the attention of the audience to the handkerchief and glass, Fig. 40.

[Figure awm: Fig. 40. — A man leaning over a table picks up the glass with one hand while the other hand puts the iron weight into his pocket, shown by a lettered arrow.]

[Figure awn: Fig. 41. — A man stands away from a table holding the glass of cards, the thread stretched taut from the glass to his body, one hand gesturing.]

[Figure awo: Fig. 42. — Plan view of the table with the glass of cards inside the outline, the thread running to a staple at the back and then off to the right.]

Proceed to wipe glass as before and place it on table. Pick up the deck and place it in glass, faces of cards towards audience.

Now stand far enough away from table to make thread taut. Move your body slightly and the pull on the string will cause the first threaded card to rise. You may make a movement of your hands towards cards to cover your body movement, or gesture with right hand and push left hand against thread, Fig. 41.

Assistant Method

This is a popular method when magician carries an assistant with him. In this case, thread is passed through the staple on back of table, Fig. 42, then to wings where an assistant holds it and causes cards to rise.

Al Baker Method

In this case the end of the thread is tied around a book, a box, or some object on the table. In apparently arranging the table this book, box, or object is placed on the seat of a chair three to five feet back of the table, Fig. 42 A. By simply standing so that body is against the taut thread, the thread is moved enough to cause a card to rise out of glass. By the slight movement of the body against the thread, all three cards will rise, one at a time. In case any slack is ever needed to be taken up, this is done by moving table a bit forward, or the glass can be moved a bit forward on the table.

[Figure awp: Fig. 42A. — A covered table at left holds the glass of cards, the thread running across the room to a book lying on the seat of a chair at right.]

Sometimes Al Baker merely has a thumb tack attached to the end of thread and pushes it into the back of the chair in moving chair back out of the way a bit.

Henry Gordien Method

This consists of having a phonograph motor attached to underside of table by four rubber suckers. The end of thread is attached to revolving shaft. A touch of the finger is all that is needed to start the motor which winds up the thread around the revolving shaft which is small enough in diameter to insure the proper speed for rising of the cards. Motor can be stopped or started at will by touching the lever.

Rising Cards Through the Air

Here you learn how to make cards rise and soar into the air and up into your hand. Howard Thurston made a hit years ago with this style of rising card effect. I give you methods which are practical and easy to perform with or without an assistant. The effects are adapted to stage work and other work where a black thread is invisible.

Howard Thurston Rising Cards

Effect

Performer asks persons in the audience to call out names of four cards. The deck is shuffled and placed in a glass goblet on the table. Magician places his right hand high above the glass and causes one of the selected cards to rise out of the deck and soar up into the air to his finger tips. Each of the four selected cards is made to rise in similar manner. At the end of the experiment, selected cards are thrown out to audience.

Paraphernalia

1—Two decks of cards.

2—A tray.

3—A glass goblet large enough to hold a deck of cards easily.

4—A Wrist Reel.

To Prepare

One deck of cards is placed, face up, on table offstage so that audience is not aware of it. Deal the cards into four or more rows so that any card can be picked up instantly. Nearby have the glass goblet on the tray. An assistant offstage has charge of this, Fig. 43.

[Figure awq: Fig. 43. — A stemmed glass goblet standing on a flat tray seen at an angle.]

[Figure awr: Fig. 44. — The wrist reel: a round box inside a loop of elastic with snaps at the top, and a flesh-colored ring below it with the waxed button beside it.]

[Figure aws: Fig. 45. — Detail of the reel box with its thread running out to the flesh-colored ring, a button marked at the top of the ring, the ring marked, and the box lid raised.]

The Wrist Reel is a special piece of magical apparatus. It consists of a small round box, 1⅜ inch in diameter and ⅜ inch thick. At one side is a flesh-colored ring attached to a button, about ⅜ inch in diameter. A piece of elastic with snaps on the ends is attached to the reel. This is to go around performer’s forearm, Fig. 44.

Inside of the box is a drum in which a spring is coiled and attached to a pivot. Around the drum is wound about 30 inches of fine black silk thread. One end is attached to the drum inside, and the other free end comes through a small hole in the side of the box. This end of thread goes through eyelet of a small flesh-colored ring and is finally tied to a small flat button. When reel is not in use, the force of the spring keeps ring and button up against the box. A piece of conjurer’s wax is placed on button, Fig. 45.

Fasten the reel around your right forearm by snapping the elastic tape into place. Reel should be placed up high enough on forearm so that ring and box do not show. Coat sleeve is, of course, pulled down to cover reel. It is important to be able to reach up with left hand and take hold of ring easily. You will have to experiment in adjusting apparatus, Figs. 46 and 47.

[Figure awt: Fig. 46. — A forearm and hand held out, with the reel and ring hanging under the wrist, shown in side outline.]

[Figure awu: Fig. 47. — The same forearm with the coat sleeve drawn in dotted lines over the reel, which is hidden up the arm.]

As the silk thread will wear out, you must watch it closely. Test apparatus before every performance. It is easy to change thread. To do so, lift off top of box, loosen the spring at center pivot, take out drum, and put new thread on. Then replace drum in box, tighten spring, and replace top of box.

Just before starting your experiment, secretly get the ring on second joint of second finger of right hand. Help adjust it with left hand. Have button towards inside of hand. If ring is too large or too small, have a jeweler adjust it, Fig. 48.

[Figure awv: Fig. 48. — Side outline of the right hand and forearm with the ring on the second finger, the reel under the sleeve shown in dotted lines.]

To Perform

Have assistant offstage at the table with cards. Come forward with second deck of cards. The reel is adjusted to your forearm with ring on second finger. Ask members of audience to call out four cards.

As cards are called, assistant picks up each card called for from first deck on table offstage. He places these four cards together faces up, on tray with glass goblet. First card called goes on bottom, then second, third and fourth. Assistant comes on to stage with tray, holding it tilted back slightly so that audience cannot see the cards on it.

As spectators have called cards, you have named each selected card after them. Now give deck a good shuffle to give assistant time to get out on stage with tray. Be sure that none of the cards named is on the face of deck after the shuffle.

Place shuffled deck, cards facing up, on top of the four cards already on tray. Pick up the glass. Assistant places tray with cards on a table on stage and exits. You tap the goblet.

*“This glass was once the property of an old East Indian conjurer. It is clear and has a good ring. He used to tell his audience that he used a glass goblet in his trick so that his spectators could see through it—that is, the goblet, not the trick.”*

[Figure aww: Fig. 49. — The right hand holds the deck of cards upright with fingers above and thumb below, while the left hand comes up to meet it.]

Replace goblet on tray and pick up deck of cards. The four selected cards are on “top” of the deck and ready for use. Hold deck in right hand with fingers above and thumb at bottom edge. Cards face audience. Bring left hand up to deck, Fig. 49.

Grasp deck in left hand with fingers in front and thumb behind. Straighten second finger of right hand so that waxed button comes near cards. With tip of left thumb push button against “top” card about half an inch from top edge and midway between sides, Fig. 50.

[Figure awx: Fig. 50. — The left hand grips the deck while the left thumb presses the waxed button of the right second finger against the top card.]

[Figure awy: Fig. 51. — The deck, faces toward the viewer, is lowered into the glass by the right hand, with the thread hanging below the glass.]

[Figure awz: Fig. 52. — The right hand is raised high with the thread stretched straight up from the deck in the glass, held between thumb and forefinger, the left hand at the glass.]

[Figure axa: Fig. 53. — A performer in evening dress holds his right hand high, a card risen from the glass on the table hanging below his fingertips.]

Hold the button securely against card with left thumb. Then put right thumb against button and hold deck in right hand over the top edge of cards. Release left hand. Place deck in the glass, the cards facing the audience, Fig. 51.

Place left thumb on button again and release right hand, raising it about 18 inches above the deck. Left thumb holds button on card securely to prevent card from rising prematurely. As right hand is raised, thread is pulled out of reel. When right hand is in position, hold thread between thumb and forefinger to prevent its winding back into reel until you are ready, Fig. 52.

Release hold on button with left thumb and bring left hand away from cards. Say to person calling out first card: *“Pardon me, what was your card, sir? The Four of Diamonds. Four of Diamonds, rise!”*

Release hold on thread with right thumb and forefinger and allow card to rise into hand. The thread winds back onto the drum in reel and causes the card to come up to right hand. The speed with which card is to rise must be experimented with. It must be neither too slow nor too fast. Card should come up gracefully and speedily enough to keep it from turning around, Fig. 53.

When card reaches hand, grip it at upper edge. Fig. 54 shows view away from audience. With right thumb loosen button from card and allow it to fly back against ring on second finger.

Remove deck from glass with left hand, using some suitable patter. Place selected card which has risen, in front of deck and attach waxed button to rear card again. Replace deck in glass, following same routine until all four selected cards have been caused to rise.

[Figure axb: Fig. 54. — A hand seen from behind, away from the audience, gripping the upper edge of a playing card between thumb and finger, with the thread running off to the right.]

[Figure axc: Fig. 54A. — Cutaway of the left lower vest pocket showing the pocket reel, a pin closing the top of the pocket, the thread leaving at the left, and the waxed button above.]

Note

If desired, this experiment may be performed without an assistant. Have four spectators select cards from the deck and return them to middle of deck. Get selected cards to “top” of deck. As you go back to stage, you can get ring from under right coat sleeve and place it on second finger. Then proceed as above.

*Be careful that thread is not held in front of white shirt or some light-colored object.* It is best to have glass at the right so that your right hand is extended to the right and the thread is invisible against the background of the stage.

At a later date Thurston adopted a slightly different method using a Pocket Reel and a new way of getting the cards from his assistant. The reel was secreted in his left lower vest pocket and a pin used to close part of the pocket so that button would not go down into pocket or the reel come out, Fig. 54 A.

The audience called out the cards, as before, but the backstage assistant slipped the cards named into a clip on the back of his coat, backs out. When he brought the glass to Thurston he took care not to expose the cards on his back to audience. In reaching for glass, with left hand, Thurston palmed off the cards on assistant’s back with right hand.

If selected cards are placed in clip with faces of cards out, it is easy to reach back with pack and get cards on “top” and slip out of clip while left hand takes glass from assistant. A simple wire letter clip is practical.

Thurston took waxed button from pocket with thumb and first finger of right hand, attached it to top of rear card and held it in place with left thumb while right thumb came under thread and controlled thread with pressure of first finger on thumb, enabling him to relax hold of waxed button with thumb. Releasing pressure, the card rose up to his hand.

[Figure axd: Fig. 54B. — Thurston in evening dress holds his raised right hand above a goblet containing a deck of cards while a thread runs from the goblet up to his fingers, a card rising.]

Button was released from card, card placed on front of deck and button attached to second selected card on rear of deck. At the finish, the button was allowed to go back to top of vest pocket. Fig. 54 B shows the general operation.

Superba Rising Cards

This is the rising card method which Paul Fox and I have used. It has many possibilities and does not require mechanical apparatus.

Effect

Four cards are freely selected from deck, remembered, and returned to deck, which is then shuffled. Deck is placed in glass goblet. Magician holds his hand high above the glass and the selected cards rise, one by one, up to his hand.

Paraphernalia

1—A deck of cards.

2—A glass goblet, large enough to hold deck of cards.

3—A yard of fine black silk thread.

4—A small button.

5—Conjurer’s wax.

To Prepare

Tie one end of thread to stem of glass and the other end to a small flat button. Place a small piece of wax on button and stick button on stem of glass. Place glass thus prepared on table and you are ready to work. Turn side of glass with button away from audience. Thread is invisible, Fig. 55.

[Figure axe: Fig. 55. — A wine glass standing on the table with thread tied to its stem and a waxed button on the stem; the thread loops across the table. Labels name the button.]

To Perform

Have four cards freely selected, remembered, and replaced one by one in middle of deck. Do the pass and get cards to “top” of deck. Shuffle cards without disturbing four selected cards on “top.”

Return to stage. Pick up glass and show. Place cards inside of glass with faces towards audience. Hold glass by stem in left hand. With right hand remove button from stem, Fig. 56.

[Figure axf: Fig. 56. — A glass holding a deck of cards, with the faces toward the audience, held by the stem in the left hand while the right hand removes the button from the stem.]

[Figure axg: Fig. 57. — Side view of a glass with a card in it, held by the stem in the left hand below, while the right hand above holds the thread, showing the arrangement of hands and thread.]

[Figure axh: Fig. 58. — Thurston in evening dress, seen from the audience, with a card rising from the goblet to his raised right hand while his left hand holds the glass below.]

Attach button to rear card of deck as you did in the preceding trick. Get right forefinger under thread and raise right hand above glass about 18 inches. Fig. 57 shows view from the side to give you diagram of arrangement of hands and thread. Ask last spectator what card he selected. Then cause the rear card (his card) to rise out of the glass by raising your right hand and lowering your left. Card comes right up to hand. The lowering of glass and raising of right hand slightly causes cards to rise without any apparent movement of hands.

Fig. 58 shows view from audience, except that thread is invisible. Be careful to have right hand a little to one side so that thread is not in front of white shirt.

Place card in front of deck. As you do so, remove button and hold it concealed between right thumb and finger tips. Attach button to rear card again and place deck in goblet. Ask third spectator who selected card to name it, then cause this card to rise. Continue in this manner for all four cards.

Thurston’s Floating Card

Here is a splendid climax for the Rising Cards Through the Air if you are performing on a stage and have two assistants. It was one of the features of the Thurston show.

Effect

Same as for Rising Cards Through the Air. Then as the last selected card rises from deck and remains suspended in mid-air, performer passes his hands around card to show no connection. At command, the card ascends, descends, and finally sinks almost to the floor. Then it rises again to performer’s hand.

To Prepare

This effect requires a prepared card. Cut a piece from a card, straight at one edge and with two pointed tabs at the other. Paste down on back of another card at top. Bend the two tabs outward a bit so thread can easily be slipped under them, Fig. 59. Place this prepared card in a pocket which you can reach easily.

[Figure axi: Fig. 59. — The prepared card seen from the back: a piece pasted at the top with two pointed tabs bent outward, and the black thread slipped under the tabs across the card.]

Stretch a fine black silk thread across the stage. Have each end held by an assistant in opposite wings offstage. Before performing effect, put thread out of the way by tying it in slip knot fashion over a nail high up on each side of stage.

To Perform

In having cards selected, force a duplicate of this prepared card as the first selected card. After you have had four selected cards returned to deck and have performed the pass, this duplicate card is fourth from “top” of deck and is out of the way. As you go back to stage, get the prepared card and place it on “top” of deck. Or have assistant place prepared card on tray and you place rest of deck on it as taught to you in a preceding experiment.

In this case, place button on next to “top” card to cause three selected cards to rise. After three cards have risen, the prepared card is next. This is now on “top” of the deck.

Take cards out of the glass and hold in left hand, cards facing audience. Fingers are in front and thumb behind cards. Hold deck about a foot in front of you.

At this point, have assistants pull on thread enough to slip knots from nails and bring it down in front of you and back of deck so that you can easily hook prepared card on it. Raise right hand a little, apparently causing card to rise as assistants raise thread. Drop left hand with cards to your side, Fig. 60.

[Figure axj: Fig. 60. — Thurston in evening dress with his left hand dropped to his side holding cards, while a thread stretched across the stage in front of him carries the floating card.]

[Figure axk: Fig. 61. — Thurston standing, his right hand pointing down toward the card, which hangs from a slanting thread stretched from the wings, sinking almost to the floor.]

At command, the card is caused to ascend and descend at different rates of speed. At intervals you can pass hands above, below and around card to show no connections. When you pass hands over sides of card, do it behind thread. It looks as though you pass hands directly beside edges of card. Finally have card sink down almost to floor, and then quickly rise up to hand, Fig. 61. Catch card in right hand and hold it as one assistant drops thread and other assistant pulls it clear of card and

offstage. With good showmanship, you can get a wonderful effect with this.

De Kolta Card Fountain

This makes a beautiful effect with cards, adding action and display to your program with little effort.

Effect

Three cards are selected and shuffled back into deck. Deck is placed in a glass goblet which is placed on the seat of a chair. At command, the cards start flying out of the glass, way up into the air. They continue to fly out until only the selected cards remain in the glass. These are then removed from goblet and shown.

Method 1

This method is the one used by De Kolta, one of the greatest magicians of days gone by.

To Prepare

Take a spool of fine black silk thread and unwind several feet.

[Figure axl: Fig. 62. — A playing card with the end of the thread wrapped around it, the thread running up past the top of the card. The label marks the thread.]

[Figure axm: Fig. 63. — A card seen edge-on with the thread rising from its top, the three forcing cards placed in front of the wrapped starting card.]

[Figure axn: Fig. 64. — The whole deck threaded: the thread loops over the tops of the cards in turn, front and back. Labels point to the three selected cards and the starting card.]

Wrap the end of the thread twice around a card, Fig. 62.

In front of this wrapped card, place three cards. When you perform the trick, you force duplicates of these three cards as selected cards. Remember these three cards for forcing later, Fig. 63.

Now you proceed to thread the rest of deck. Thread is already wrapped around starting card. Now bring it back of card and down. Place another card back of starting card and bring thread up around this card, across top edges of all the other cards you have placed together, and then down in front of the selected cards. Place a card in front of selected cards and bring thread up around this card. Now carry thread over tops of all cards again and down in back. Place card behind rest of cards again and bring thread up around it, over tops of cards and down in front of all cards again. Place another card in front and bring thread up around it again. Proceed in this manner to thread the whole deck, Fig. 64.

When deck is completely threaded, bring thread down around whole deck and up in back. Fig. 65 shows the threaded deck as it looks when finished.

[Figure axo: Fig. 65. — The finished threaded deck seen from the front, a king of spades facing out, with the thread coming up from the top of the deck.]

Place threaded deck on seat of a chair and run thread up over back of chair and out backstage, where it is secured on a nail in the wall. Assistant can thus get end of thread when time comes for him to pull on it. Place a silk or pocket handkerchief in front of deck on chair to conceal it. Have a glass goblet on chair also.

To Perform

Pick up another deck, unprepared. Come down to audience and force duplicates of the three cards already placed in center of prepared deck, unthreaded. Have these selected cards well shuffled into deck.

Come back to stage and place this deck on chair next to threaded one behind handkerchief. Pick up glass goblet and show it, then replace on seat of chair again. Pick up threaded deck as if it were an ordinary one and place it in glass, Fig. 66.

[Figure axp: Fig. 66. — A chair with a goblet holding the threaded deck on its seat, beside the handkerchief and the unprepared deck; the thread runs up over the chair back. Labels name the handkerchief and unprepared deck.]

[Figure axq: Fig. 67. — Cards flying out of the goblet in all directions high into the air, while the three unthreaded selected cards remain standing in the glass.]

At command, assistant pulls thread fast. All the cards fly out of the glass high into the air, except the three unthreaded ones, Fig. 67. The three selected cards are picked up and shown separately. Call out the name of each.

A little practice will be necessary to get the knack of throwing cards high into the air, but when you have it mastered, you will be well repaid in having a beautiful effect. In this method it is necessary for the thread to be pulled vertically. That is the reason the thread is run over the top of the chair.

Another ruse which may be used is this one: Screw a small eyelet near end of your wand. Run end of thread from deck of cards through eyelet and out backstage to assistant, Fig. 68.

[Figure axr: Fig. 68. — The end of a wand lying horizontally with a small eyelet screwed near its tip, and the thread passing through the eyelet and hanging straight down.]

Glass, deck and wand may be resting on a table with handkerchief screening threaded deck as before. When threaded deck is placed in glass, you have but to raise your wand above deck. Assistant pulls thread and cards fly out. Your wand keeps thread vertical above deck, Fig. 69.

[Figure axs: Fig. 69. — Thurston holds his wand out over a goblet of cards on a table; the thread from the deck runs up to the wand's eyelet, keeping it vertical above the deck.]

Another method is to have thread run up to an eyelet in one of the batons above stage and down backstage where it can be pulled by an assistant.

Harry Stork Card Fountain

This method was popular with Kellar. It was designed by Harry Stork. It requires no vertical pull. A strong pull is required, however, and for that reason it is necessary to clamp glass down on table and table must be heavy enough not to tip easily.

To Prepare

Take each card of deck and cut a quarter of an inch slit in middle of top edge, Fig. 70. Make knot in end of black silk thread and run thread through slit from front to back of first card.

[Figure axt: Fig. 70. — An ace of spades with a quarter-inch slit cut in the middle of its top edge, the slit marked by a label.]

[Figure axu: Fig. 71. — A card seen from the back with a half-inch loop of thread pushed through the top slit to the front; the thread runs down behind the card.]

Turn the card upside down and back of it place another card with slit end up. Bring thread up behind card. Push it through slit and back again, leaving a half-inch loop on front of card, Fig. 71.

Now bring thread down again. Place another card back of it and bring thread up around it and loop through top slit as before. Continue this until you have the whole deck threaded except for three cards. The first card is the only one with the slit end down. The rest are all up with the thread looped through, Fig. 72.

[Figure axv: Fig. 72. — Side view of the threaded deck: the first card with its slit end down, then the cards slit end up, the thread looped up through each. Labels mark the first card and thread.]

[Figure axw: Fig. 73. — A goblet holding the deck with the three selected cards behind it, the thread passing over the selected cards and running off to the lower right.]

Place three selected cards, duplicates of which you are going to force, on back of deck. Place deck on table with handkerchief screening it. Run thread back over table, through a screw eye at the edge, and out to assistant backstage, Fig. 73.

To secure glass to table, use a clamp of wood or metal. The clamp is of two sections. Have them screwed to table the width of the glass stem apart. Have screws at front end and arranged so that the two sections can be swung out. At the back end have a strong hook and eye arrangement for securing two sections of the clamp, Fig. 74. Fig. 75 shows glass held in clamp on table. Glass is put between sections and clamp is fastened together.

[Figure axx: Fig. 74. — The two sections of the wooden clamp swung open, each screwed to the table at the front end, with a hook on one section and an eye on the other at the back.]

[Figure axy: Fig. 75. — A goblet holding the deck, its stem held between the two closed clamp sections on the table, with the thread running down and away to the right.]

To Perform

Take regular deck and force three cards, duplicates of three unthreaded cards in prepared deck. Have cards returned and shuffled into deck. Place it on table behind handkerchief. Show glass and clamp it to table. Pick up threaded deck and place in glass. Upon command cards fly from glass, leaving the three selected ones.

Jean Hugard’s Card Fountain

This superior method has an advantage over the other methods as the glass does not have to be clamped to the table, and the thread can be pulled in the usual manner as with any rising card trick. It requires a bit of time to prepare but the preparation is more than worth it.

Paraphernalia

1—A deck of specially prepared cards.

2—A regular deck.

3—A glass goblet to hold cards.

4—A spool of strong black silk thread.

5—A handkerchief.

To Prepare

A small flap one-half the thickness of the card is made in one end of a playing card at center, Fig. 76. This is readily made with a sharp knife by cutting two slits, the depth of half the card, and a slit at top to loosen the flap. This is done with every card in the deck.

[Figure axz: Fig. 76. — A playing card seen at a slant, with a small flap cut at the center of its upper end, half the thickness of the card.]

[Figure aya: Fig. 77. — A card face-on with the flap at the top; a black silk thread runs up the center over the flap and down again, trailing off below.]

If you desire to have the selected cards remain in the glass after the other cards have flown out, leave three of the cards unprepared. These cards may thus be thrown into the audience at the finish.

To Thread

Pick up a card that is to go on face of the deck and cut a quarter-inch slit at the bottom. Make a knot in the end of a strong black silk thread and run the thread through the slit so that knot is on face of card. Bring the thread up over the flap and down again, Fig. 77. On the back of this card place another card in the same position with the flap at the top. Bring up thread from center bottom of card up over the flap and down again. Repeat with the whole deck.

Place the three cards to be left in glass, at rear of deck, with the thread going over their upper edges.

Preliminary Arrangement

Threaded deck, with duplicate force cards on “top,” is placed on table behind a handkerchief or under the handkerchief. The thread from deck runs through a pin stuck through tablecloth or through an eyelet on back of table, thence backstage to an assistant. Table must be substantial enough to stand a pull of the thread without moving. In some cases an eyelet is screwed into the stage at back of table, with thread passing through. Another emergency method is to have a chair back of the table and thread run around back of chair and offstage.

The rising card glass sets on table. Also the regular deck with cards to be forced at “top” of deck. Or, if desired, a forcing deck containing three different cards, may be used.

To Perform

Force the three cards on three spectators, have cards returned and shuffled. Place deck on table behind handkerchief and pick up the glass with one hand while the other pushes handkerchief over the regular deck, exposing the threaded pack. If desired you can rap the glass with the wand to accent the ring of the glass.

Place cards in glass—flaps up—face of cards towards audience. Place glass and cards on the table.

Upon command, assistant pulls thread which releases it from flap on rear card and card rises out of glass. The second card follows this, and finally the third.

Then by pulling the thread faster the cards spurt out of the glass leaving only the three selected cards remaining in the glass. They are removed, shown separately, and tossed out.

Another effect is to have four cards selected and first to have three of them rise singly, after which all the other cards fly out of the glass in a fountain leaving the fourth selected card in the glass at the finish.

Tommy Dowd’s Rising Cards

Tommy Dowd’s ingenuity is evident in this, his own conception of the Rising Cards which is here released for the first time.

Effect

Two or three cards are selected, shuffled back into the pack which is placed in a clear glass tumbler, and another empty tumbler placed mouth to mouth over the first one. While performer holds the tumblers in his hands, a selected card is seen to rise from the enclosed pack and ascend into the upper tumbler from which the spectator may remove it. Likewise with the other chosen cards.

Paraphernalia

1—A bottomless glass tumbler, Fig. 1, sufficiently wide to take a half if not a whole pack of poker width cards.

2—An unprepared glass tumbler to match the bottomless one.

3—A regular pack of poker width (broad) cards.

[Figure ayb: Fig. 1. — A bottomless glass tumbler seen from slightly above, with lines of reflected light on its sides and its open bottom edge showing a ring of small notches.]

With the above articles on your table, all is ready.

To Perform

Have cards selected, two are enough, and have them replaced in pack (or half of pack) and you shuffle so as to leave selected cards on “top” of pack. You will have to bend the pack a little to press the cards all the way down in the bottomless glass. Cards face outward and the bend of cards follows the same arc as the front of the tumbler, Fig. 2.

[Figure ayc: Fig. 2. — A glass tumbler seen from the front with a bent pack of cards inside, showing the face card, a five of diamonds, curving with the glass.]

[Figure ayd: Fig. 3. — The tumbler of cards standing on the outstretched palm of the right hand, with the fingers curled up around the bottom of the glass.]

Have your right side towards audience. Take tumbler with cards in left hand, quickly wave it to show it and place it down on outstretched palm of right hand, Fig. 3.

Left hand picks up empty tumbler, waves it and places it mouth to mouth, on top of the other tumbler, the hands being over and under the glasses in order to hold them steady, Fig. 4.

[Figure aye: Fig. 4. — Both hands hold the two tumblers mouth to mouth, the left hand over the upper empty one and the right hand under the lower one holding the cards.]

[Figure ayf: Fig. 5. — A bottomless tumbler seen from the side with the third finger of the hand pushing up through the open bottom against the rear card.]

[Figure ayg: Fig. 6. — The two tumblers held mouth to mouth; one card has risen out of the lower pack, an eight of clubs, and is passing into the upper tumbler.]

The third finger of right hand has been secretly slipped through the bottom of the tumbler, Fig. 5, and, by successive small upward thrusts, causes the rear (selected) card to rise from the pack, Fig. 6. Final push-up is done with tip of finger under card so as to push it higher. As that card ascends into the upper tumbler, its edges bind against the edges of the upper tumbler, and the latter is lifted off, with the card inside, and the spectator allowed to remove his card, Fig. 7.

[Figure ayh: Fig. 7. — A hand lifts off the upper tumbler with a card wedged inside it, an eight of clubs, held by the edges of the glass.]

Replacing the upper tumbler, the second card is handled in the same manner.

The first and second fingers of right hand curl up and rest against the side of the lower tumbler in such a way as to conceal the fact that the third finger is inside the glass. If a full pack is too stiff to press down into the tumbler, have selected cards returned to half of the pack and proceed as above.

[Figure ayi: A small rabbit in a black coat and bow tie stands upright and holds a large cone-shaped horn or funnel with a handkerchief draped from its mouth.]

[Figure ayj: A small rabbit in a black coat and bow tie stands upright, holding a large egg raised in one hand and a dotted cloth bag in the other.]
