Lesson 28: Egg Magic

Eggs have played a big part in successful magic. The extremely puzzling effect which egg tricks have on the audience are due to the nature of the material used. Eggs are so fragile and difficult to handle that spectators marvel at the magician as he produces eggs and vanishes them in the most nonchalant manner.

Comedy is, of course, closely associated with eggs. In these effects there is opportunity for much good comedy.

Humpty Dumpty Outdone

This effect has been a favorite in my program for years as it is a bit unusual and very puzzling.

Effect

Performer passes his handkerchief and an egg around for examination, then asks a spectator to bring them back to him and assist him in the trick. Magician then grasps handkerchief by the corners and tells assistant to drop egg into it. The egg, of course, falls to the center of the handkerchief. Spectator is told to feel of the egg through the handkerchief, then to break the egg. The crushing of the egg is heard and all believe it to be smashed. Performer then asks assistant to reach inside the handkerchief and remove the egg. Assistant hesitates for a broken egg is rather a messy thing to pick up. He finally does reach in, however, and brings out the egg wholly restored to the amazement of himself and the rest of the spectators. Handkerchief is opened wide and shown empty.

Paraphernalia

1—A man’s white handkerchief. This should be as heavy and as nearly opaque as possible. A freshly laundered handkerchief will be more satisfactory for this reason.

2—An egg.

3—An egg shell. This is easily prepared by making a small hole in each end of an egg with tip of pocket knife blade, inserting small blade to break the yolk, and then expelling the contents through one hole by blowing through the other.

4—A small piece of white cloth. Part of an old handkerchief will do for this. Size: about 6½ × 2¾ inches.

5—A pin, a small piece of white string, a needle and white thread.

To Prepare

Make a small bag of the white piece of cloth. This must be large enough to hold the egg shell.

Fold the cloth over in two to make the bag about 3¼ inches long. Sew the two edges together as shown in Fig. 1. Then trim off the edges close to the seam. Fold the top edges down all around about three-eighths of an inch, insert the white string under the fold, and sew this fold down. Tie a knot in the ends of the string close to the bag, Fig. 2.

[Figure ayk: Fig. 1. — A flat square piece of cloth folded to form the bag, with a dotted seam curving around the bottom corners and a width marked as 2 and three-quarters.]

[Figure ayl: Fig. 2. — The finished bag with a hem folded along the top edge, the string run through it and knotted, the knot labelled.]

[Figure aym: Fig. 3. — The bag turned inside out with a bent pin run through the top edge of one side, its little hook pointing up; measurements of 3 and two and a half inches are marked.]

[Figure ayn: Fig. 4. — The bag drawn shut with the string pulled tight and the loose ends tucked inside, the egg shell inside it, labelled egg in bag.]

[Figure ayo: Fig. 5. — A man in a suit, the front of his coat held open to show the bag pinned inside the upper left vest pocket.]

Turn bag inside out. Take the pin and bend the end of it over about three-eighths of an inch. Run it through top edge of one side of bag, pushing it up until head is close to bag on inside and little hook extends up, Fig. 3. Place empty egg shell inside the bag and draw the string tight to close bag and keep fragments of shell, when it is broken, from falling out. Tuck loose ends of string into inside of bag, Fig. 4.

Take bag and insert point of pin into upper edge of upper left vest pocket, Fig. 5. Your coat covers bag completely and no one is aware, of course, that you have this bag arrangement under it. Have handkerchief and whole egg in some convenient place, and you are ready for the experiment.

To Perform

Come forward with egg and handkerchief as you say, *“You have, no doubt, heard of the famous egg called Humpty Dumpty. ‘Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall.’ Well, this is one of his descendants.”* Show the egg, and hand it to a spectator. *“Would you mind, sir, holding Humpty Junior?”*

Turn to another spectator and give him the handkerchief. *“And would you mind giving this handkerchief the once over? I think you will agree that there is enough material to make Humpty a nice wedding dress in case he ever needed one.”*

Take handkerchief from gentleman and hold it in left hand as shown in Fig. 6. The way you grip the handkerchief is very important. Hold it against base of thumb with second, third and fourth fingers gripping it tightly on under side. Top edge is gripped between index finger on under side and thumb on top. Handkerchief must be drawn taut between the two grips.

[Figure ayp: Fig. 6. — The left hand gripping the handkerchief, its upper corner lettered A, the cloth held taut between the thumb and the fingers.]

[Figure ayq: Fig. 7. — The right hand, seen from the side, holding the bag between the tips of the thumb and first finger after removing it from the vest.]

[Figure ayr: Fig. 8. — The right hand pins the bag to the handkerchief held in the left hand, about four inches from the upper corner lettered A.]

To spectator holding egg: *“Will you please come up here with me and act as guardian over the egg?”*

Turn your back to the audience and walk towards your stage or place where you are performing. The moment your back is turned, reach inside of coat with right hand. Grasp head of pin on bag firmly between tips of thumb and first finger. Remove bag from vest, Fig. 7.

Bring left hand with handkerchief in front of you and quickly pin the bag to handkerchief. Insert pin about four inches from upper corner of handkerchief. It is easy to do this if you hold handkerchief taut in your left hand. Perform this move of attaching bag very quickly, Fig. 8.

Extend left arm a little towards left so that audience sees handkerchief and back of left hand. They cannot see bag with egg shell as it is on palm side of hand, Fig. 9.

[Figure ays: Fig. 9. — A man seen from behind and the side with his left arm extended, showing the handkerchief and the back of his left hand, the bag hidden on the palm side.]

[Figure ayt: Fig. 10. — A man facing the audience after his turn, his left hand brought in front of him with the back of it towards the audience.]

Now you have reached the stage where you turn left to face your audience. Be careful not to expose bag as you turn. Gradually in making your turn, bring your left hand in front of you with back of it towards audience, Fig. 10. To all appearances you merely took the handkerchief from the spectator who examined it, went back to the stage, and then turned around to start the experiment.

The spectator holding the egg has followed you. Have him stand to your right and a little forward so that he cannot see the bag on the back of the handkerchief. Keep the handkerchief near your body to screen bag. *“I shall ask you, sir, to stand right there.”*

Take upper corner A between your teeth. Hold out the two side corners B and C with your right and left hands. This is done to show the handkerchief empty without saying that it is. The little bag is, of course, concealed behind the handkerchief, Fig. 11.

[Figure ayu: Fig. 11. — A man holding a diamond-shaped handkerchief by two side corners B and C, with corner A between his teeth and corner D hanging at the bottom.]

[Figure ayv: Fig. 12. — A man with corners B and C brought up to corner A, held in his left hand beneath his chin, the handkerchief hanging down to corner D.]

[Figure ayw: Fig. 13. — Close view of the three corners A, B and C gripped in the left hand while the right hand holds corner D and the handkerchief hangs open between them.]

Bring corners B and C up with each hand to corner A. Grasp corner A with left forefinger and thumb, Fig. 12.

Remove corner from mouth, holding the three corners A, B and C with thumb and first two fingers of left hand. Grasp corner D with right hand. Hold handkerchief as shown in Fig. 13. Ask assistant to place egg in the handkerchief as shown in illustration. . . . *“You are quite certain, sir, that you have an egg? All right. Then place the egg in the handkerchief.”*

[Figure ayx: Fig. 14. — The handkerchief with all four corners held in the left hand; labels mark the back, the shell and the egg inside the hanging fold, with the bag behind it.]

[Figure ayy: Fig. 15. — The right hand closes around the hanging center of the handkerchief, the egg in its palm and the thumb behind the egg shell.]

After assistant has done this, bring up corner D and place it with the other three corners. Grasp it in left hand as in Fig. 14. This illustration also shows position of the bag containing the egg shell and the whole egg. Place right hand around center of handkerchief which is hanging down and the egg in it. This brings egg into palm of right hand and the thumb of right hand comes behind egg shell, Fig. 15.

With right thumb push the egg shell in the bag upward. Be careful to conceal whole egg in right hand by turning back of hand to audience. The effect is that you are merely grasping one end of the handkerchief with your right hand and the other end with your left, and that the egg is brought up under the handkerchief between your hands, Fig. 16.

[Figure ayz: Fig. 16. — The two hands grasp the ends of the handkerchief with the egg brought up between them; labels mark the shell and the egg.]

[Figure aza: Fig. 17. — Close view of the handkerchief held in the left hand while the spectator's hand crushes the shell; labels read spectator breaks shell and egg.]

*“Will you please feel it now and see that the egg is safe within the handkerchief?”* Have assistant feel the egg. He believes, of course, that he is feeling the egg which he placed there. The audience, too, believes this.

*“Please break the egg. You needn’t have any fear of the consequence. It is wrapped in the handkerchief, and as it’s my handkerchief, all is well. So just go ahead and break.”* Have assistant grasp egg shell and break it. The crushing of the shell is heard by the assistant and the audience so that they do not doubt that the egg has been broken, Fig. 17.

*“There certainly isn’t any doubt about your breaking the egg.”* Drop handkerchief again to position shown in Fig. 15. Then release hold with right hand and hold handkerchief as in Fig. 14. Now open corner D a little with right hand.

*“Will you please reach inside the handkerchief and take out the egg? You would, no doubt, like to have it as a souvenir of this momentous occasion and our little tête-à-tête.”* This gets a laugh from audience as they think the egg is broken and a mess inside the handkerchief. Assistant, too, usually hesitates about reaching in.

*“Of course, you remember that old Humpty Dumpty fell off a wall and all the king’s horses and all the king’s men couldn’t put Humpty Dumpty together again. Personally, I don’t see what horses had to do with it—unless it was a horse on the king, as we commonly say.”*

Assistant reaches into handkerchief and, to his surprise and the surprise of everyone, removes the egg whole. *“However, Humpty Junior is different. He lives in this more modern age of flippers and flappers, so a mere squashing means nothing in his young life. He just pulls himself together again. I believe you will find the egg fully restored.”*

As you say this, hold corner A with thumb and first finger of left hand and corner B with right hand. Pull hands apart, allowing corner C to drop down. Be sure to have little bag at back of handkerchief. Hold handkerchief spread out before audience to show it empty. Fig. 18 shows view as seen by performer and away from audience. Fold up handkerchief with bag concealed inside and place it aside or in pocket.

[Figure azb: Fig. 18. — A handkerchief held spread out by its two top corners, seen from the performer's side, with the little bag sewn at its back near the upper left corner.]

*“I know, sir, that you will find this experiment very useful should you order scrambled eggs and then suddenly decide that you want them soft boiled.”*

If you desire, you may break the egg into a saucer at the finish to prove that it is a real egg. Or you may just put egg aside and start with another trick, or you may use this egg for the next trick with the egg bag.

Note

A borrowed handkerchief may be used for this trick. If you use a borrowed handkerchief, palm off the little bag from it after you have completed the effect. You can crush the bag up small in your palm as the egg shell is broken. As you go to return handkerchief, held in left hand, place bag in your pocket with your right hand.

Tarbell’s Unbreakable Egg

After performing the preceding effect for many years I altered the method somewhat and devised a new patter story. The “Humpty Dumpty” patter was never discarded, but was used wherever it seemed most appropriate.

Effect

Same as in “Humpty Dumpty Outdone.”

Paraphernalia

1—A special double handkerchief. Get three 15-inch silk pocket handkerchiefs at a men’s furnishing store. These should be alike and of a dark opaque color.

With one handkerchief make a 7½-inch square pocket open at the top. This pocket is fitted in the upper left hand corner between the other two handkerchiefs, Fig. 1. The two handkerchiefs are sewn all around the edges with exception of a three and a half inch opening at top. This opening also has upper edges of pocket sewn in it and fastened together with three black snap fasteners. Anything dropped into the opening will drop into the pocket. The closing of pocket with the snap fasteners keeps anything placed in pocket from falling out even if opening is held upside down.

[Figure azc: Fig. 1. — The double handkerchief laid flat, with the opening marked at the top left and the sewn pocket outlined in dotted lines in the upper left corner.]

[Figure azd: Fig. 2. — The handkerchief held up by corner A in one hand and corner B in the other, with the pocket opening shown and the egg shell lying near the centre corner C, D at the bottom.]

2—A blown egg shell. The opening in each end should be about three-sixteenths of an inch or so, large enough to be felt through the handkerchief later on.

3—A real egg.

4—A glass tumbler.

To Prepare

Place egg shell into pocket of the double handkerchief and fasten pocket with snap fasteners. Let the shell slide down to center corner of the pocket. Fig. 2. Let ends C and B fall together and stretch handkerchief out on table with corner A towards rear. Nearby sets the glass with the egg inside.

To Perform

Pick up glass and turn egg out into your right hand.

*“Once upon a time a young man fell in love with a Princess, but because he was not a Prince he was ordered to leave the kingdom. ‘But, Your Majesty,’ the young man said to the King, ‘is there not a test I could be given to prove that I am worthy of your daughter, for I am in love with her and she with me? If I fail to pass your test I will leave her forever.’ ”*

*“ ‘Yes,’ said the King, ‘There is a test. In an Oriental kingdom it is said that a man had an egg which when wrapped up in silk could not be broken. It was a real egg and easily broken when the silk was removed. Find me such an egg and you may marry my daughter.’ ”*

*“The next day the young man appeared before the King carrying an egg and a silk handkerchief.”* Pick up handkerchief from table by corner A. *“ ‘I have found such an egg,’ said the young man, ‘An egg which wrapped in silk can not be broken.’ ”*

You address a man in audience. *“Would you mind playing the part of the King?”* Have spectator come up on stage and give him the egg to hold.

*“I will let you hold the egg. You will note it is a real egg. In the meantime I will bring the corners of this silk handkerchief up so as to make a sort of a bag.”*

Holding silk first by corners A and B as in Fig. 2, show handkerchief both sides. Holding corner A in left hand, drop corner B from right hand. Pick up corner C with right hand and bring up to left hand. Then bring up corner D. And hold corner B in right hand, Fig. 3.

[Figure aze: Fig. 3. — A handkerchief held by corner A in the left hand and corner B in the right, hanging in a bag, with the faint outline of the egg inside.]

[Figure azf: Fig. 4. — The handkerchief gathered into a bag held up by its corners in the left hand, with the egg shell and the real egg inside, both labelled.]

[Figure azg: Fig. 5. — The right hand grips the silk, tightening it around the egg shell above the hand, while the real egg lies below in the palm of the left hand; both labelled.]

*“Drop the egg down into the handkerchief.”* Spectator drops the egg down into the handkerchief. You bring the corner B up with the other corners and hold handkerchief in left hand as in Fig. 4.

With right hand take hold of bottom of handkerchief, grasping eggs through the handkerchief. Bring eggs and center of handkerchief upward, releasing hold of corners by left hand. With right hand fingers feel for the egg shell. You can tell it because it is lighter in weight, and you can feel the two openings in ends of egg. Bring shell up above hand and real egg into palm of left hand, tightening the silk around the shell, Fig. 5.

*“I have wrapped the silk tightly around the egg. You can feel the egg, sir. And now, Your Majesty, I want you to put your right hand around the egg and squeeze it just as tight as you can, and you will find you can not break the egg.”*

Assistant squeezes the egg (shell) and it breaks. The audience laughs and you look discomfited. *“I meant for you to just squeeze the egg and not dig your fingernails in.”*

You further squash up egg shell in handkerchief by pressing with right hand.

*“Now we have got a mess. ‘Well, anyhow,’ as the young man said. ‘You can not break this egg in a silk handkerchief.’ ”*

Unfold handkerchief and with right hand take out the real egg whole. Show to audience. Handkerchief is draped over left hand. Hold handkerchief by corner and shake out, and place on table. Pick up glass on table.

*“And to prove this is just a real egg, all I have to do is to break it in the glass. . . . And so the young man married the Princess and they lived happily ever after.*

Note

With some eggs that have firm egg shells, the shell will stand considerable pressure. If one person squeezes shell and does not break it, say, *“See, the egg can not be broken.”* Give to another person. Finally egg will be broken. Some people smash egg between both hands which gets laugh from audience. I have had a spectator suddenly smash the egg with his fist!

The Egg Bag

Some magical effects live throughout the years and with varying types of presentation are popular the world around. Such is the case with the Egg Bag Mystery.

There are two types of Egg Bag Mysteries. One is performed with a rather large bag which is turned inside out to show empty, and yet the performer can produce a dozen or two eggs from it. In Holland, Grandpa Bamberg (there are seven generations of magicians in the Bamberg family, including Okito and Fu Manchu), after producing eggs from a bag, would then produce a full size hen, as the one which laid the eggs. Grandpa Bamberg’s moves were so natural and clever and filled with misdirection, that he kept many people, well versed in magic, puzzled as to the exact method he used.

Dante uses a routine in which different sizes of eggs are produced according to how hard the assistant blows. When a negro assistant blows at the bag, Dante produces a black egg for a finish.

The other type of egg bag is rather small and has to accommodate only one egg, since the routine is based on vanishing and appearing that egg. I only wish that I knew who was the originator of the egg bag. It may have started in early magic by a magician using a small bag and a smooth egg-shaped rock pebble and as a variation of the cups and balls.

The egg bag is typical of Egyptian magic, as magic of the Guli-Guli magicians is based upon the egg. Religion and the occult enter much into Eastern magic and the egg represents the symbol of birth. Egg and baby chick mysteries are all a part of Guli-Guli magic. For instance, the Egyptian magician may produce an egg, then place the egg between his cupped hands and change it to a live baby chick. He pulls the chick apart and there are two chicks. These two chicks placed under a bowl become a dozen chicks.

Cups and balls with eggs and baby chicks are popular with Egyptian mystics. As a finish, three baby chicks, placed under the three cups, vanish and are found in a spectator’s inner coat pocket.

A number of magicians have popularized the small size egg bag in their vaudeville and theatre programs including Albini, Larry Crane, Arnold De Biere and Dante. I have performed the egg bag mystery in my own programs for years. I worked out a routine which has been very entertaining and popular with audiences and full of comedy situations. One wonders sometimes why people do laugh so hard over the vanish or appearance of an egg.

In this lesson I will give you a version of my own routine in which I use the small bag and egg. Thousands of the finest people in America have been entertained with it.

Effect

Performer gets a boy and a girl up from the audience to assist him. He places the girl at his left and the boy at his right. He discovers an egg in the girl’s hair which he gives her to hold, together with a silk handkerchief. A small cloth bag is shown inside and out to be empty and given to the boy to hold. The egg is vanished in the handkerchief and found inside the bag. Magician replaces the egg in the bag, followed by a suspicious movement of his right hand inside his right trousers pocket. This leads the audience to suspect that he has dropped the egg into his pocket. The excitement in audience has started and performer must turn out his various pockets to satisfy the crowd that they are empty and eggless. The egg is found in the bag again. Magician now offers to explain how the mystery is performed, with the result that the audience knows less than ever of the modus operandi.

Paraphernalia

1—An Egyptian fez.

2—Two wooden or celluloid eggs.

3—A double handkerchief. To make this, you require two dark colored opaque silk handkerchiefs, both alike. Sew them together around the edges, carefully matching the edges. On one side sew only halfway so as to leave an opening half the length of one side, Fig. 6.

[Figure azh: Fig. 6. — The double handkerchief laid flat, shown as a dark square with a lighter inner area and the word OPENING marking the unsewn gap along the upper left side.]

At corner of handkerchief near this opening sew a quarter inch mark with white thread, running parallel with the opening so that you can easily find it. Sew this mark on both sides of the handkerchief.

4—A “Tarbell Style” Egg Bag. This varies from the egg bag commonly used. Both have a double side to secrete the egg but in the regular style bag the opening of the double side is in the bottom of the bag. This makes it necessary for the performer himself to reach into the bag to produce an egg. In the Tarbell style bag the opening is a couple of inches above the bottom, and its length is only half the length of the bag, which allows egg to fall into bag, where it can be removed by a spectator. Each style of bag has its uses. In this routine I will describe the Tarbell style egg bag and in the “Fool-Zum” egg bag routine following I will describe the usual type.

Bag should be made of a colored woolen cloth. I use a blue-toned Scotch plaid. The design helps to cover up even a close view of opening in bag, when bag is turned wrong side out. I try to get away from the usual “red” bags that are so commonly sold. I am a greater believer in individuality.

To Construct

Cut out two pieces of woolen cloth 13 × 8½ inches each. Fold over edges of each side about a quarter of an inch wide, on inside, to keep from unraveling. Stitch the two cloths together around all four edges. Also stitch across the center, Fig. 1. Stitching should be done on a sewing machine. Stitches in illustrations are exaggerated for clarity.

Fold cloth in half so that the two narrow edges touch. Sew the two sides together and put a one-inch ribbon around edge of opening of bag. This gives a half-inch binding on both sides, Fig. 2.

[Figure azi: Fig. 1. — A tall rectangle of cloth with stitching around all four edges and a dotted line of stitches across the centre.]

[Figure azj: Fig. 2. — The cloth folded in half, a wide rectangle with stitched sides and a ribbon binding along the bottom edge, which is the opening of the bag.]

Now measure about 2⅛ inches from the bottom of the bag. Sew a seam across one of the (double) sides of the bag. Cut a slit 3¾ inches long at left just above the seam. Sew the edges of this opening to prevent raveling, Fig.3. The opening is large enough to easily slip an egg into the pocket so egg will be concealed. The egg will easily come out of opening into bag proper when egg is tipped towards opening.

[Figure azk: Fig. 3. — The bag with a seam sewn across one of its double sides and the slit just above it, marked OPENING with an arrow.]

[Figure azl: Fig. 4. — The finished bag as it looks to the audience, made of plaid cloth with a ribbon binding along the bottom edge.]

[Figure azm: Fig. 5. — Two cross sections of the bag. A shows the double side stitched where marked SEWN HERE; B shows the pocket with an egg inside the double side.]

Turn the bag inside out so as to bring it into proper position with opening inside. Fig. 4 shows bag as it looks to audience. Figs. 5 A and 5 B show a cross section of the bag.

To Prepare

Place an egg in inner pocket of egg bag. Place bag on table. Nearby, place the double handkerchief folded to a quarter of its size. Lay the other egg on center of folded handkerchief and fold one of the corners back over the egg, giving the handkerchief a triangular shape. Ends point away from audience, Fig. 7.

[Figure azn: Fig. 7. — The double handkerchief folded into a triangle with one corner turned back over the egg, whose outline shows in dotted lines; the ends point away from the audience.]

To Perform

*“I will perform a classic of Egypt—a mystery of the Guli-Gulis. A Guli-Guli is an Egyptian magician. He says ‘Guli-Guli! Guli-Guli!’ and strange things happen. In order to preserve the proper atmosphere I shall wear this Egyptian fez. . . . Now that I’m a Guli-Guli magician, I must have two assistants—a boy and a girl.”*

Have a boy and girl come up out of audience. Ask their first names. Let us say they are “John” and “Frances.” Have the girl stand at your left and the boy at your right.

*“Frances, how would you like to be a Guli-Guli magician? You can wear this fez.”* Remove your fez and place it on the girl’s head. *“Now you are a Guli-Guli.”*

Pick up double handkerchief from table with your right hand. The hand comes under upper corner and under egg, which brings egg into a Finger Palm position, concealed from audience by handkerchief, Fig. 8.

[Figure azo: Fig. 8. — The right hand holding the handkerchief by its upper corner, with the egg held in finger palm position behind the cloth, its outline shown in dotted lines.]

[Figure azp: Fig. 9. — The right hand seen from the back with the egg palmed in the curled fingers, the first finger pointing out, after the handkerchief has been taken away.]

Turn to Frances so that back of right hand faces audience. Take handkerchief from right hand with left hand, leaving egg palmed in right hand, Fig. 9.

*“I know you are a Guli-Guli because I see an egg in your hair.”* Reach up and produce egg from her hair. To do this as you touch her hair egg is shot from palm to your finger tips, where it is held by tip of first finger and tip of thumb, Fig. 10.

[Figure azq: Fig. 10. — A hand seen from the side holding the egg upright between the tip of the first finger and the tip of the thumb.]

[Figure azr: Fig. 11. — The girl wearing the fez, holding the egg in one hand and the folded handkerchief by its centre in the other.]

[Figure azs: Fig. 12. — Both hands holding the egg bag up by its top edge, seen from the front, with the egg supported behind it by the right fingers.]

*“Hold the handkerchief and the egg.”* Give her handkerchief to hold by center. Handkerchief is still folded quarter size. She can hold handkerchief in left hand and egg in the right, Fig. 11. Pick up egg bag from table.

*“This is an interesting bag.”* Hold bag as in Fig. 12. Egg, supported by right fingers, is in pocket on front side. *“It not only has an outside but also an inside.”*

Turn bag inside out, Fig. 13. Pocket is on rear side and egg comes into right hand. Audience is shown both sides. Turn the bag back to normal and hold as in Fig. 14. Egg is held in upper right hand corner of pocket with right hand. Say to John:

[Figure azt: Fig. 13. — Both hands holding the bag turned inside out, with the pocket on the rear side and the outline of the egg showing through the cloth.]

[Figure azu: Fig. 14. — The bag turned back to normal and held open at the top by both hands, with the egg held in the upper right corner of the pocket, shown in dotted lines.]

*“John, you can even feel inside.”* Boy puts his hand inside bag and feels around. He does not feel egg as it is held too high and protected by your right fingers.

*“Did you feel anything? No? The reason is, there is nothing inside.”*

Bring left hand up and take the corner and egg from the right hand, Fig. 15. Allow egg to drop down into the lower corner. Fold bag over and give to the boy to hold, as in Fig. 16.

[Figure azv: Fig. 15. — The left hand takes the corner of the bag and the egg from the right hand, with the egg outlined in dotted lines and a second dotted outline at the lower corner.]

[Figure azw: Fig. 16. — The boy in profile holding the folded bag up in one hand while his other hand rests on his heart.]

*“John, you can hold the bag. Lots of folks have held the bag. And, John, I want you to place your left hand on your heart.”* By placing left hand on his heart he cannot use hand to feel the bag and discover the egg. Turn to the girl.

*“Frances, if you will just give me this Oriental silk I will show you it has four corners.”* Take handkerchief and hold it outstretched between left and right hands, as in Fig. 6. The opening is on left side. You can find the opening easily by looking for the white thread mark on corner of silk.

*“We will bring the corners up to form a bag. . . .”*

[Figure azx: Fig. 17. — A hand holding the four corners of the double handkerchief together at the top, the silk hanging down in a bag.]

[Figure azy: Fig. 18. — One hand holds the gathered corners at the top while the other reaches into the opening of the double silk and spreads it open.]

Drop right upper corner with right hand and pick up the lower left hand corner instead and bring it up to be held with other corner in left hand. Run right hand down side of handkerchief and pick up the next corner and place in left hand, and finally the last corner, Fig. 17. The opening of double silk is nearest you. Reach into this opening with right hand and spread it open, Fig. 18.

“. . . . and have you drop the egg down into the handkerchief.” Girl drops egg into opening of the inner pocket of handkerchief. Egg falls to bottom of bag.

“Frances, do you feel the egg inside the handkerchief?” Have her feel egg through center of handkerchief, Fig. 19.

[Figure azz: Fig. 19. — A handkerchief held up by one hand at its top corner, hanging in a point, while the other hand feels the egg through the cloth near the bottom.]

[Figure baa: Fig. 20. — The handkerchief spread flat between both hands holding its top corners, with the opening along the top edge, and the egg lying at the bottom.]

[Figure bab: Fig. 21. — The bag held in the left hand in a similar position, with the pocket side and slit at the rear and the egg in the upper corner.]

“You do? John, do you feel the egg in this handkerchief? You can feel it with your left hand.”

As he is feeling egg, run your right hand along opening side and up the side to the nearest corner. Drop the other two corners which spreads handkerchief out in position shown in Fig. 20. The opening is at the top and egg falls to bottom of the handkerchief. You shake handkerchief as you do this.

“I am glad you are both feeling so well.” If timed right, this action will cause laughter. Fold up handkerchief and place on table. Reach over and take egg bag from boy. Open it.

“John, reach inside the bag and take out the egg.” Boy removes the egg and shows it.

“Didn't I tell you, Frances, that you were a magician? . . . . and now for an experiment in psychology. John, here, is a prominent psychologist—a graduate of Princeton. I will tell you what I am going to do and I want you to watch me closely and see if you can see me do it. I am going to place the egg inside of the bag,”

You hold bag in left hand in a similar position as shown in Fig. 21. Pocket side with slit is at rear. Place egg into left upper corner and hold with left hand.

“Then I shall strike it with my right hand.” Remove right hand from bag and strike egg from front side of bag, through the cloth, with the right hand.

“And the egg shall disappear, and I doubt if there will be anyone here who can find where the egg goes.”

Reach into bag again, remove the egg and show it. . . “Watch!”

Place egg back into bag and slip it into the inner opening in bag, Fig. 21, which allows egg to go into hidden pocket. Then with eyes on bag take out hand which goes into right hand trousers pocket for a moment, as though you had slipped egg into your pocket. Bring hand up to bag and strike it as before.

“I strike the egg and it disappears.” Turn bag inside out and show. “It has completely vanished. John, even you can reach inside the bag and find nothing.”

Allow boy to reach inside of bag for a moment. By this time audience is yelling “It’s in your pocket.” If there are children and young people present they will make it known that they know the egg is in your pocket. An older audience will know you have put the egg in your pocket but are too polite to speak out, so you say; “I know what you are thinking.”

Or if audience is noisy, you may say, “There seems to be some sort of a disturbance out here in the audience. What's that? You say I put the egg in my pocket. Oh, no!”

Reach into left trousers pocket and bring it out showing it to be empty. Replace pocket. “Nothing in my pocket.”

Audience now usually says “No, your other pocket.” So you turn with your back towards audience and take out the same left pocket again.

“Oh, you mean the pocket on this other side.” Replace the pocket again and turn towards audience. “Well, what pocket do you mean? Do you mean John’s pocket?” Finally point to your right hand trousers pocket.

“You don’t mean this pocket? Oh, no, there’s nothing in this pocket. This is my right hand trousers pocket. I belong to the society of magicians and in order to belong to the society you cannot vanish an egg in your right hand trousers pocket. So that settles that. Now—”

By this time the audience is in a state of excitement. “Of course, there are a lot of people who do not believe me, in which case I turn my pocket inside out.” With right hand, reach into trousers pocket and turn it out to show it contains nothing.

“By the way, John, would you mind reaching inside the bag . . . . and taking out the egg?” Open bag, allowing egg to slip out of opening of inner pocket down into bag proper. John reaches into bag and takes out the egg.

This gives a good climax, for you have gotten out of a predicament from which the audience did not think you could escape.

“Would you like to learn how to do this egg mystery?” Naturally, the audience wants to learn how it is done.

“I have been asked so many times if I wouldn’t explain how to do a trick and I think I will teach you this one. Now, first of all you must get an egg—a hen’s egg, duck’s egg, goose egg, ostrich egg, dinosaur’s egg, a china egg, or a door knob; and a cloth bag the size of this one. The only peculiarity about the bag is that it must have an inside as well as an outside. Otherwise it is just a bag.”

You can turn bag inside out as you talk about bag. Now, hold bag as in Fig. 21, with left hand. Show egg.

“First, you place the egg up into the corner of the bag.” Place egg inside bag up into the upper left hand corner. Then remove hand from bag, with egg palmed in right hand, but thumb is over the egg.

“And then you take it out again—so you can show the bag empty.” Turn palm of hand towards audience so people can see the egg in your hand.

“Now, if I placed an egg against the palm of my hand it would fall off, but if I put my thumb over it I can hold the egg and keep it from dropping.”

You demonstrate this, by first placing egg against right palm while right thumb is held upward. Then you place thumb over egg in a somewhat exaggerated manner and show how egg can be held without dropping.

“This is what you do. You put the egg up inside the bag, and then you take your hand out again.” Put egg up in bag and then remove hand with egg, the back of your hand towards the audience.

“Of course, you keep the back of your hand towards the audience and never let them see the other side.” Turn hand so that palm is towards audience, then bring palm to rear again.

“Strange, with an audience, they think a magician vanishes things up his sleeve or in his pocket, so when I put my hand in my pocket, they naturally suppose I placed the egg in my pocket. The audience is right; I did put the egg in my pocket—but, I did not keep it there. I took it out again. . . . and put the egg up under my arm.”

Place egg up under left arm pit as in Fig. 22. Be sure audience sees egg when placed there. Hold egg in place by slight pressure of arm against body.

[Figure bac: Fig. 22. — A man in evening dress seen from the front, his left arm bent so that the hand holds an egg tucked up under the left arm pit.]

“Then all you have to do is to show bag inside out a number of times. . . . by this time, people are saying ‘He put it in his pocket! He put the egg in his pocket.’ While their attention is on your pocket you calmly remove the egg from under your arm and drop it back into the bag.” Remove egg and drop it into the bag.

“Then after people have said, ‘This pocket, or that pocket,’ you turn the pocket inside out and show it empty. . . . Simple, isn’t it? But as P. T. Barnum, the great showman once said, if you want a person to know a thing once, you must tell them seven times. So I will repeat the routine so you will better remember it. You have an egg and a bag. Place the egg in the upper corner of the bag.” Place egg into bag and place it into inner opening, Fig. 21.

“Take the hand out again and pretend to put the egg in your pocket.’ With back of hand towards audience pretend to put the egg in your pocket.

“But in reality you place the egg under your arm.” Pretend to put egg under your left arm pit.

“Be sure to hold your arm rather tight against the egg so it will not fall. Then when audience is yelling about the egg in your pocket, turn the bag inside out a couple of hundred times, or less.” Turn bag inside out a couple of times.

“With the egg under your arm you can do almost anything with the bag. The main idea is not to lift your arm during the excitement.”

Raise your left arm and let audience see there is no egg under your arm.

“But if you do, merely turn to John and tell him to reach into the bag. . . . and remove the egg.”

You hold opening of bag upright and allow egg to drop through inner opening into the bag proper. Let John reach into bag and remove the egg. Take egg from John and show. Remove fez from girl’s head.

“Fool-Zum” Egg Bag Routine

This is a Percy Abbott routine and gets away from the usual presentation. This effect illustrates a point I have stressed to the student, that combining one effect with another gives a new variety in magic. It is that new twist, that showmanship, that distinctive touch that makes one individual stand out from the crowd.

Effect

Performer shows a silken bag which he turns inside out to show it is empty. To further prove this, he passes the bag through a one-inch metal ring. Yet, showing his right hand empty, he reaches into the bag and removes an egg. Egg is placed back in bag but audience sees performer sneak it out again and slip it under his left arm. After a bit of by-play, performer lifts up his arm to show egg is not there, and removes it from the bag. Egg is placed in the right hand trousers pocket. Bag is tucked into the right hand and when hand is opened the bag has changed to an egg. The bag is removed from the right hand trousers pocket. Egg is broken into a glass to prove that it is real.

Paraphernalia

1—A prepared silken bag. Abbott uses a red bag, but any other color can be used. This is about 7½ × 6 inches in size. The cloth is of an opaque silken type of material that will fold into small space. One side is double with an opening across bottom of bag, Figs. 1 and 2. This double side with opening is inside the bag. An article placed in bag and into opening can be hidden between the double sides, Fig. 3.

[Figure bad: Fig. 1. — A plain rectangular bag seen from the front, the unprepared side, with a hem along its top edge.]

[Figure bae: Fig. 2. — The same bag showing the prepared side, with the opening at bottom lettered on it and the double side marked in the lower part.]

[Figure baf: Fig. 3. — The bag seen edge-on as a narrow pointed shape, with a round egg hidden between its double sides.]

[Figure bag: Fig. 4. — The extra large hollow egg, shown as a wide egg shape with a small hole at its top end.]

[Figure bah: Fig. 5. — The metal ring, about one inch across, drawn as a plain round ring.]

2—A duplicate bag which is unprepared and has no double side.

3—Extra large size hollow egg, Fig. 4.

4—A special thin rubber egg, same size as the hollow egg. It has a small hole in one end which allows it to be collapsed and yet when released resumes full egg size.

5—A metal ring about one inch in diameter, Fig. 5.

6—An egg holder, made of wire into which a real egg can be clipped, Figs. 6 and 7.

[Figure bai: Fig. 6. — The wire egg holder with a safety pin across the top and two small loops hanging below it, empty.]

[Figure baj: Fig. 7. — The wire egg holder with a safety pin at the top, with an egg clipped in it.]

7—A glass tumbler.

To Prepare

The egg holder is pinned under the left side of coat. A real egg is placed in the holder. This egg should be as near the color and size as the hollow egg as possible. Egg under coat is high enough so audience can not see and yet by curling left fingers under the coat the egg can be quickly released from holder and allowed to be removed in hand, Fig. 8.

[Figure bak: Fig. 8. — The egg holder pinned inside the bottom of the coat with the egg in it; the words bottom of coat are lettered along the coat edge.]

The unprepared bag is in the right trousers pocket, along with the hollow egg which is on top of the bag.

Place the rubber egg in the double side of the prepared egg bag and place bag on table. Nearby is the metal ring.

To Perform

Pick up the egg bag from table. Turn bag inside out, showing both sides, and bring bag to original position again. As bag is turned, double side is kept towards the rear. You patter—

“In Egypt lived Wuli-Wuli, the Guli-Guli man. Now a Guli-Guli man is an Egyptian magician, who under the blue sky and on the golden sands adds to the mystery of the land of the Pharaohs. Wuli-Wuli had a bright red bag. It had an inside and an outside.”

“A camel may not pass through the eye of a needle but this bag could pass through the magician’s ring.” Pick up ring and pass the bag through the ring. The egg being of fine rubber will come through the ring easily, Fig. 9. “ ‘This,’ said Wuli-Wuli, ‘shows the fine quality of this silken bag.’ ”

[Figure bal: Fig. 9. — A hand gripping the bag gathered up like a closed bundle, the silk pushed through the ring and its top spreading out in a small fan.]

Ring can be dropped on table or the floor with a noise for showmanship. Fold the bag into a small two-inch square and have an assistant from audience hold the folded bag. (Assistant can be eliminated if desired.) Pull back your sleeves a bit and show hand empty.

“Fine material, is it not?” Take bag from assistant and open it up, with opening at top. “Wuli-Wuli called on the spirit of Allah and reaching down into the bag produced an egg.”

As you say this, reach into the bag with right hand and remove the egg which you show to audience. Egg is easily removed by pulling out through opening of double side in bottom of bag and allowing egg to be fully expanded in the hand.

“Guli-Guli. Strange was the power of Wuli-Wuli. Where it came from nobody knows: where it went to adds to our woes.”

Place rubber egg back into the bag and into the pocket, but hand comes out and pretends to slip the egg under the left arm pit. Turn bag inside out again and return it to normal. “The egg has gone.”

By this time someone should be saying that the egg is under the arm. If not, pretend you heard someone whisper the fact. “What’s that? I heard some sacrilegious whispering going on out there. Egg under my arm? Oh, no! Nothing under my arm.” Lift up the right arm and show nothing under it.

“You mean the other side?” Turn around with back towards audience and lift up the same right arm again. By this time audience is yelling for the ‘other arm’, or ‘both arms’.

Face audience again. Look at left arm. “You don’t mean this arm. Nothing under this arm. Now we’ll take the empty bag.”

You do not lift up left arm as you say this. Finally, however, you do raise the arm and show there is nothing under it. “Skeptics!” Reach into the bag and remove the missing egg.

“Of course, instead of using a bag I could use my pocket, and put the egg in my pocket.”

Place the rubber egg in your right trousers pocket, pushing it up into the left hand upper corner. Then palm the hollow egg, and bring out right hand with back towards audience so they can not see the palmed egg.

“The only trouble is, if I put the egg in my pocket and tuck the bag out of sight in my hand. . . .” Close the right hand around the egg, opening of egg upward, and poke the bag down into the fist and into the hollow egg.

“I find I really have the egg in my hand.” Open your hand and show the egg, keeping opening of egg away from audience. Transfer egg to the left hand. Turn so that your right side is towards audience.

“And the bag is in my pocket.” When left side is away from audience, you drop hollow egg into left coat pocket and then reach under the coat and remove the real egg from the holder. The right hand goes into the right trousers pocket and takes out the unprepared bag. Put bag on table. Pick up glass.

“Which goes to prove, my friends, that an egg . . . . is always an egg.” Break egg and let contents fall into glass, showing that the egg is genuine.

Note

Should conditions make it impossible to get collapsible rubber eggs, you can still do an excellent routine by using a celluloid or wooden egg to match the hollow egg. This would eliminate the passing through the ring, and placing bag with egg in spectator’s hand; but the routine otherwise would be practically the same.

[Figure bam: A rabbit in evening dress standing upright, holding a large egg in one hand and a cloth bag in the other.]

[Figure ban: A rabbit in evening dress standing upright, holding a top hat open at his side by the brim while the other hand holds a small black ball.]
