Lesson 29: Billiard Ball Manipulation

For years the billiard ball mystery has been popular with the magician. At first it was performed with solid balls and was a step up from cups and balls. Then some genius who knew that you could see only one-half of a ball at a time, because of its spherical shape, developed a half shell which fitted over half of a ball rather snugly. This shell was made of metal. Two shells were used, hinged together so as to contain the solid ball, Figs. A, B, C.

[Figure bao: Fig. A. — Two metal half shells side by side, joined by a hinge at their lower edges, with an arrow pointing to the hinge lettered hinge.]

[Figure bap: Fig. B. — A solid ball with one half shell opened away from it, so that the ball and the shell look like two balls.]

The ball was inside of shell as in Fig. C. One shell was lifted with half shell towards audience, Fig. B, which looked like two balls. The ball could even be slipped out of the shell and two half shells folded together and shown all around as a solid ball. By holding the ball and two half shells open it looked like three balls in the hand, Fig. D.

[Figure baq: Fig. C. — A single round ball, the solid ball inside its two closed half shells, shown as one ball.]

[Figure bar: Fig. D. — A hand holding three balls, the solid ball and the two open half shells, so that they look like three balls in the hand.]

Finally the ball was slipped back into one of the half shells to show ball had vanished. The other half shell was closed around the ball, and all shown as one ball, which in turn could be vanished by sleight of hand.

T. Nelson Downs still stuck to this method of performing with billiard balls throughout his career. The effect was truly magical. You will still find the hinged shells now and then among the apparatus of the old-timers. These shells are no longer standard but can sometimes be picked up from some dealer in magical apparatus, or made to order.

Many years ago, A. Roterberg, the late Chicago magic dealer, figured that it might be well to unhinge the half shells and use one separately. He found that he could hold both shell and ball between his thumb and index finger and swing the ball up between the first and second fingers while shell remained between thumb and first finger and looked like a ball. Then another ball could be secretly slipped into the half shell, or out of shell, and thus would enable the performer to mysteriously produce a ball, or vanish a ball.

The single half shell was later made of wood like the balls, and a new era in billiard ball tricks was brought forth which swept the field of magic. With the magic of billiard balls came a field of manipulation and movements closely akin to the juggler.

Dante, then known as Herr Jansen, made his clever manipulation and magic with billiard balls a feature in his show. Showing one ball he suddenly caused four balls to appear between his fingers. Cardini introduced new interest with billiard balls, with various colors and much larger balls, his being about the size of regular billiard balls. Bill Baird has also brought billiard ball effects to interesting heights.

In this lesson I have tried to make billiard ball magic practical, with fundamental moves that cover a wide range and yet are in the realm of the beginner as well as the experienced performer.

I gave these routines to the magical profession in 1926. They have lived through the years and have been well received by audiences over the world. Cardini, himself, posed for the various moves and sleights which I teach you in this lesson.

The Routine with Billiard Balls

Instead of just teaching you the various sleights with billiard balls, I have worked up a routine with them so as to get dramatic action, so important in good entertaining. Into the first series of manipulations I have woven a story to account for the appearance and disappearance of each ball.

In this work, watch your angles carefully. Also do not forget that your audience must see every effect. You must be careful not to hide your moves behind your body and, by all means, avoid facial contortions in performing sleights. As Cardini says, “Entertain your audience—and not yourself.”

Now to help you time your work, keep in mind the psychological reaction of your audience as you vanish and produce each ball. This is the reaction you get: When you vanish the ball, the minds of your audience say, “Gone,” and then add, “Where is it?” You produce the ball and they say, “There it is,”—then finally, “How did he do it?” You must also react in accordance with the way your audience reacts.

Adam and Eve

Effect

A story is told about Adam and Eve and illustrated with billiard ball manipulations. During the tale, four bright red, or clear white, billiard balls magically appear between the fingers of the right hand, one at a time, and as mysteriously vanish.

Paraphernalia

1—A colored silk handkerchief.

2—A professional set of billiard balls. This consists of three bright red, or white, solid wooden balls and a half shell which fits over any one of the balls.

[Figure bas: Fig. 1. — A solid wooden billiard ball seen from the front, shown as a round ball with swirling grain lines and a small light patch at the top.]

[Figure bat: Fig. 2. — The half shell alone, a hollow cap shaped like half a ball, shown at an angle so the inside is visible.]

[Figure bau: Fig. 3. — The half shell fitted over a ball, forming one apparent ball with a curved edge line across it where the shell ends.]

Fig. 1 shows a ball, Fig. 2 the half shell, and Fig. 3 the way in which the shell fits over the ball.

The half shell has made billiard ball manipulation easy and very mysterious. The audience believes that you use only solid balls and is never aware of the half shell. When viewed from the front, the shell looks like a billiard ball. If you hold a ball and a half shell side by side, it is impossible to tell the difference between them. The shell should fit snugly over the ball so that shell and ball look like one ball. With the ball in motion and at a short distance from spectators, the edge of shell is not noticeable.

The shell must be loose enough so that ball will slide out of it easily. With a shell over a ball, you have one ball. When shell is suddenly lifted from ball, it appears that you have two balls. Thus you may show one or two balls at will. When shell is struck at the center with solid ball, it sounds as though two solid balls were struck together. Fig. 4 is a side view illustrating the manner in which this is done.

[Figure bav: Fig. 4. — Side view of two hands held together, the fingers of one hand striking a solid ball against the half shell held in the other so the two sound like two balls.]

The most popular size of balls is 1¾ inches. For boys who are learning, or those with very small hands, the 1½-inch size is better. The larger the ball used the better the effect, but you must use a size which you can handle successfully. Cardini uses a set of 2⅛-inch balls. His hand is only medium size, but his manipulative training enables him to use these large balls.

To Prepare

Place a ball with shell over it in rear right trousers pocket. Place another ball in front left trousers pocket, or in lower left vest pocket. Place third ball in left coat pocket, together with silk handkerchief.

To Perform

Get ball out of left coat pocket and Finger Palm it in left hand. You can do this easily under pretext of placing some object in pocket after finishing another trick. Or you can place your left hand in pocket casually and remove the ball without attracting attention, Fig. 5.

[Figure baw: Fig. 5. — The left hand, back to the audience, holds a ball Finger Palmed after drawing it from the coat pocket.]

Hold left hand in front of body in natural manner at about the height of lower vest button.

Bring right hand up under left. As you do so, turn the right side of your body slightly to audience, Fig. 6.

[Figure bax: Fig. 6. — The right hand comes up under the left hand, which holds the ball in front of the body at vest height.]

Let ball drop into right fingers where you Finger Palm it, Fig. 7.

[Figure bay: Fig. 7. — The left hand is lifted away showing the palm empty while the ball has dropped into the fingers of the right hand below, Finger Palmed.]

Bring left hand away from right and show empty palm to audience. You have performed the Change Over Palm. You have apparently shown both hands empty. The larger movement of turning body from right to left helps cover actual movement of hands. This Change Over Palm may be used in transferring ball from one hand to the other as occasion demands.

*“In the beginning, the Lord created the world.”*

Get thumb under ball in right hand, Fig. 8.

[Figure baz: Fig. 8. — The right hand seen from the audience side, thumb curling under a ball held at the fingertips.]

Bring ball quickly to top of hand, closing fingers to make a fist.

Fig. 9 is a view towards yourself.

[Figure bba: Fig. 9. — The ball held in the right hand as seen from the performer's side, the fingers closing into a fist beneath it.]

Fig. 10 shows hand and ball as it looks to audience.

[Figure bbb: Fig. 10. — The right hand closed in a fist with the ball resting on top, as the audience sees it.]

*“And the world. . . .”*

Place left hand in front of ball, Fig. 11.

[Figure bbc: Fig. 11. — The left hand held in front of the ball, which sits in the closed right fist below it.]

As you close left hand around ball, allow it to drop into right hand, where it is Finger Palmed again, Fig. 12.

[Figure bbd: Fig. 12. — The left hand closed as if holding the ball, while the ball is held out of sight, Finger Palmed in the right hand below.]

Move closed left hand, apparently holding the ball, away from right and hold it away from body with back of it to audience, Fig. 13.

*“Wandered around. . . .”*

Turn left hand with palm side towards audience.

*“Hither. . . .”*

[Figure bbe: Fig. 13. — The left hand turned palm toward the audience and shown empty, while the right hand below holds the ball Finger Palmed.]

Open left hand and show that ball has vanished.

Reach up under left elbow with right hand and produce ball suddenly from elbow. To make this production and others from elbow, knee, etc., bring hand up with back to audience, then turn it showing palm, and make production, Fig. 14.

[Figure bbf: Fig. 14. — The performer in evening dress, left arm raised with the hand turned palm out to produce the ball, while a ball falls or hangs below his hand.]

*“And thither.”*

Turn left side of body towards audience. Throw the ball into the air a few feet, Fig. 15.

[Figure bbg: Fig. 15. — The performer in profile, turned with his left side to the audience, both hands raised after throwing the ball into the air.]

Catch ball in palms of hands. Repeat. Then pretend to throw ball up a third time, but merely make the motions and keep ball palmed in left hand, Figs. 16 and 17.

The illusion is that the ball has vanished in midair. In throwing up hands, be sure that right hand comes up about a foot higher than the left. This makes the vanish more effective for audience can easily see empty right hand, Fig. 16.

[Figure bbh: Fig. 16. — The performer in profile with both hands thrown up, the right higher than the left, the left hand marked Ball Palmed.]

[Figure bbi: Fig. 17. — An open hand seen from above with a ball lying in the palm, shown as the ball palmed in the left hand.]

*“To keep the world in place, the Lord made Adam.”*

Produce ball at top of closed left fist.

Fig. 18 shows performer as he appears to audience.

[Figure bbj: Fig. 18. — The performer seen from the front, holding a ball at the top of his closed left fist as the audience sees him.]

*“But Adam . . . .”*

Hold ball on fingers of left hand in full view of audience. Thumb is nearest audience, Fig. 19.

[Figure bbk: Fig. 19. — The left hand held open to the audience with a ball resting on the fingers, thumb nearest the audience.]

Bring ball over to right hand and apparently place it there.

Fig. 20 shows movement as you see it, and not as audience sees it.

[Figure bbl: Fig. 20. — The left hand seen from the performer's side, the thumb and fingers holding a ball as the right fingers close over it.]

As you close right fingers supposedly over ball, Finger Palm ball in left hand. Turn palm of hand downward, and as you do so, push ball into position between palm and thumb. Fig. 21 shows view away from audience.

[Figure bbm: Fig. 21. — View away from the audience of the hands, the ball pushed into position between the left palm and thumb below the right hand.]

Right hand is carried away as though it contains the ball. Left hand is kept with back to audience to conceal ball, Fig. 22.

[Figure bbn: Fig. 22. — The left hand with back to the audience hides the ball, while the right hand is carried away closed as though holding it.]

Pretend to toss ball into the air with right hand. Open both hands and hold as in Fig. 23. Palm of right hand is exposed and left fingers are straight out, giving impression that left hand is also empty.

[Figure bbo: Fig. 23. — Both hands opened toward the audience, the right palm exposed and the left fingers straight out, each looking empty.]

*“. . . . was a worse rounder than the world itself.”*

Produce ball from inner side of right knee with left hand. Hold ball on left fingers.

Fig. 24 shows hand as audience sees it.

[Figure bbp: Fig. 24. — The left hand held out flat to the audience with a ball resting on the fingertips.]

Place right hand over ball. This view shows hands as audience sees them, Fig. 25.

[Figure bbq: Fig. 25. — The right hand placed over the ball held on the left fingers, shown as the audience sees the two hands.]

Turn left hand with back to audience. Pretend to take ball with right hand, twisting hand over so that fingers extend to right, Fig. 26.

[Figure bbr: Fig. 26. — The right hand twisted over, fingers extending to the right, as it pretends to take the ball from the left hand.]

Carry right hand away, closed, and with back to audience. Move hand upward and turn left side of body slightly to audience, Fig. 27.

[Figure bbs: Fig. 27. — The right hand carried away closed with its back to the audience, drawn in two positions as it moves upward.]

Turn right palm to audience and show hand to be empty and ball to have vanished.

*“You could never tell where Adam was. Pardon? I understood someone to say that he wandered around to my pocket.”*

Reach into rear right trousers pocket and remove the ball with shell over it in right hand. Hold between thumb and forefinger so that front of shell is exposed to audience and edge is concealed, Fig. 28.

[Figure bbt: Fig. 28. — The right hand holding the ball with its shell between thumb and forefinger, the front of the shell shown to the audience and the edge hidden.]

*“Yes, there’s Adam.”*

Your left side is towards the audience and you have a ball palmed in your left hand. With thumb and forefinger gripping edge of shell on ball in right hand, turn right hand upward to show palm empty. Bring hand back to position shown in Fig. 28.

*“So the Lord took one of Adam’s ribs . . . .”*

Bring second finger of right hand down under ball. Finger should have second joint pressed firmly upward on ball, Fig. 29.

[Figure bbu: Fig. 29. — The right second finger comes down under the ball and shell held between thumb and forefinger, its second joint pressed upward on the ball.]

Fig. 30 shows a side view away from audience.

[Figure bbv: Fig. 30. — Side view away from the audience of the right hand gripping the shell and ball, marked Side View.]

Press shell between thumb and first finger and press ball between first and second fingers. Using second joint of second finger as a pivot, raise ball upward with finger until it is in position shown in Fig. 31. Shell remains between thumb and first finger and ball comes between first and second fingers.

[Figure bbw: Fig. 31. — The right hand with the shell held between thumb and first finger and the ball raised between first and second fingers, so two balls appear one above the other.]

This is the fundamental move in billiard ball work. It is not difficult and you will have it mastered after practicing it a few times. Thus you have mysteriously produced another ball.

*“. . . . and made Eve.”*

Bring left hand up to right hand and take ball from between first and second fingers. As you do so, slip palmed ball from left hand into shell in right hand. This is also an important move in ball manipulation and it is quite easy to do, Fig. 32.

[Figure bbx: Fig. 32. — The left hand reaches up to the right hand, taking the ball from between the right first and second fingers while a second ball is slipped into the shell.]

Separate the hands and show a ball in each.

*“Adam and Eve.”*

Knock the two balls together to show that they are solid. Then replace ball from left hand between first and second fingers of right hand, Fig. 33.

[Figure bby: Fig. 33. — The right hand holds two balls one above the other, the ball from the left hand replaced between the first and second fingers.]

*“No doubt, you remember Adam’s first Christmas Eve. It was then that Eve brought Adam . . . .”*

Bring third finger of right hand down under upper ball, Fig. 34.

[Figure bbz: Fig. 34. — The right hand holding two balls, one above the other, with the right third finger coming down under the upper ball, labelled Second Finger.]

Bring third finger upward and second finger downward, pivoting the ball to position between second and third fingers. First and second fingers are now together, Fig. 35.

[Figure bca: Fig. 35. — The right hand with the balls pivoted between second and third fingers, the labels Third Finger and Second Finger marking the two fingers.]

Turn hand so that audience can see empty palm.

The ball which is in the shell is now gripped as in Fig. 29 and 30, between first and second fingers. Grip ball well between these two fingers. Grip shell between thumb and first finger, Fig. 36.

[Figure bcb: Fig. 36. — The right hand gripping the shell between thumb and first finger and the solid ball between first and second fingers, labelled Shell and Solid Ball.]

Begin to turn hand so that back will be towards audience, and as you do so, get shell off ball and into position between thumb and first finger. You have mysteriously produced a third ball, Fig. 37.

[Figure bcc: Fig. 37. — The right hand showing three balls in a row after the shell is lifted off the ball, the lower one labelled Shell.]

*“An apple.”*

Note

The method I have given you for producing the third ball is effective since the balls are held close together and the appearance of the third shows up well. However, there is another method for producing the third ball which may fit some fingers better at first until the fingers limber up.

Here is the other method: After second ball is produced and the two balls struck together, the left hand places its ball in right hand between third and fourth fingers instead of between first and second, Fig. 38.

[Figure bcd: Fig. 38. — The right hand holding two balls, the left hand's ball placed between the third and fourth fingers below the shell ball.]

Turn hand and show palm empty. As you turn hand back to position again, get second finger under ball and lift it out of shell and into position between first and second fingers, Fig. 39. Try both methods and adopt the one that you can do the better.

[Figure bce: Fig. 39. — The right hand with three balls in a row, the second finger lifting the ball out of the shell into position between first and second fingers.]

*“Now, Adam preferred ham and eggs for supper, but Eve insisted that an apple diet was far healthier, as an apple a day keeps the doctor away.”*

Reach up with left hand and pretend to remove ball between first and second fingers. Under cover of left hand, slip ball into shell, Fig. 40.

[Figure bcf: Fig. 40. — The left hand reaches over the right hand and its balls, pretending to remove a ball while it is slipped into the shell.]

Close left hand and carry it away as though it held the ball. Two balls are left in right hand and the illusion of removing a ball is perfect, Fig. 41. Turn right hand over casually to show empty palm.

[Figure bcg: Fig. 41. — The right hand holding two balls, and below it the closed left hand carried away as though it held the removed ball.]

*“So Adam ate the apple.”*

Bring left hand to mouth and pretend to place ball inside. Push tongue into cheek to make it bulge as if ball were really in mouth, Fig. 42. Remove left hand and show it empty. Then push bulge of cheek in with left forefinger and pretend to swallow ball.

[Figure bch: Fig. 42. — The performer in a suit with his left hand at his mouth and his cheek bulging as if the ball were inside, the right arm hanging down.]

*“Naturally, swallowing a big bite gave Adam indigestion and his trouble commenced. It was really too bad that chiropractic treatments had not been invented at that time for if Adam had been instructed to strike himself on the first lumbar vertebra . . . .”*

Strike small of your back with left hand. Then reach into left trousers pocket and bring out the ball concealed there. Show it to audience.

*“He could have taken it out here.”*

Place ball just produced between first and second fingers of right hand. As you do so, steal ball from shell and Finger Palm it in left hand.

*“Oh, by the way, did I ever tell you about the beautiful daughter Adam and Eve had? Her name was Clementina.”*

With left forefinger point to three balls in right hand.

*“There you are—Adam and Eve and Clementina.”*

*“One Sunday evening a young gentleman came to call on Clementina.”*

Produce ball in left hand suddenly at left finger tips, Fig. 43.

[Figure bci: Fig. 43. — The performer in evening dress, left arm stretched out to the side with a ball produced at the fingertips, the right hand held at his waist.]

Place ball between third and fourth fingers of right hand, Fig. 44.

[Figure bcj: Fig. 44. — The right hand shown from the front with three balls held in a row along the fingers, the new ball between the third and fourth fingers.]

*“Now mother leaves the room.”*

Reach up with left hand and pretend to take the ball from between first and second fingers of right hand. As left hand covers ball, Finger Palm it in left hand and then slip it into shell, Fig. 45. Carry left hand away as if it held ball. Turn right hand over to show it empty, then back to position again.

[Figure bck: Fig. 45. — The left hand reaching over the right hand, which holds three balls, to take the ball from between its first and second fingers.]

Open left hand gracefully and show ball has vanished. Reach up with left hand and remove ball from between second and third fingers. Strike it against other two balls to show them solid. Place this ball between

first and second fingers of right hand, and as you do so, steal ball from shell and Finger Palm in left hand. Bring left hand down to level of bottom of vest.

*“But Adam—does Adam leave the room? Not much. He sits there, reading* The Chicago American *(or name local paper). Finally, Eve yells out, ‘Oh, Adam, the beer is boiling over,’ so Adam gets up. . . .”*

Vanish ball from between first and second fingers by bringing it down into shell. This is easy to do by merely reversing movement of the production from the shell. The lowering of the second finger pivots the ball into the shell. Now show empty palm of right hand.

*“Leaves the room . . . and goes down cellar.”* Turn back of right hand to audience again. With left hand, reach behind left knee and produce the ball already palmed in that hand.

*“But realizing it would never do to let Adam stay down cellar, Eve took Adam up the back stairway. . . .”* Place ball up under right side of coat, apparently getting ball at armhole of coat, but really dropping ball into inside coat pocket.

*“Into the attic and locked the door.”* Remove hand from coat and let coat hang down. *“But Adam went down the front stairway. . . .”* Produce ball out of shell between first and second fingers again.

*“And into the parlor again. Then satisfied that he had outwitted mother, . . . .”* Reach up with left hand and pretend to take ball from first and second fingers of right hand. Slip ball into shell. Bring left hand down as if carrying ball away. Show palm of right hand, then turn it back to position. Toss left hand into air and open it as you pretend to vanish ball into air. . . . *“He retired upstairs.”*

Pick up top ball from right hand and strike the two balls together to show them solid. Replace ball between first and second fingers of right hand, and as you do so, steal ball out of shell.

*“And thus Clementina and her beau were left alone. Now, it so happened that he tried to steal a kiss and she darted away.”*

Vanish ball in right hand by slipping it into shell. Show palm of hand, then turn it back to position. Quickly produce ball palmed in left hand from under right elbow, Fig. 46.

[Figure bcl: Fig. 46. — A man in a suit seen from the side holds his right arm out level while his left hand, palming a ball, reaches under the right elbow to produce it.]

*“And darted over here.”*

Place ball from left hand between first and second fingers of right and steal other ball from shell. Then place both hands down at knees.

Keep back of left hand to audience as it conceals ball. Ball and shell in right hand are kept in sight. Have legs a few inches apart so that it will not look as though a ball could be thrown in back of them, Fig. 47.

[Figure bcm: Fig. 47. — Two hands seen from behind beside two vertical lines of the legs: the left hand at the left hides a ball in its palm, the right hand shows ball and shell.]

*“Or an easy—a knee-sy explanation—would be to say that she played sort of a game of . . . .”*

With throwing motion of right hand, vanish ball into shell and produce ball from under left knee by turning left hand and exposing ball to audience, Fig. 48.

[Figure bcn: Fig. 48. — Two hands beside the legs: the left hand, turned at the left knee, exposes a ball to the audience while the right hand has vanished its ball into the shell.]

*“Hide and seek.”*

Turn left side of body to audience again and place ball from left hand between first and second fingers of right, stealing ball from shell again with left hand.

[Figure bco: Fig. 49. — A silk handkerchief hangs by one corner from the left hand above, while the right hand below holds two balls with the shell edge kept out of sight.]

*“As it is getting rather late, Clementina’s caller calls a taxicab.”*

Reach into left coat pocket, leave ball there, and bring out silk handkerchief. Hold silk by corner in left hand. Bring right hand down to position shown in Fig. 49.

[Figure bcp: Fig. 50. — The silk hangs from the left hand while the right hand reaches behind the handkerchief to conceal the balls.]

Be careful in moving right hand around not to expose edge of shell.

*“So he kisses her goodnight.”*

Reach behind handkerchief with right hand to conceal balls, Fig. 50. Let handkerchief drop on right hand, Fig. 51.

[Figure bcq: Fig. 51. — The handkerchief, held by a corner at the top, drops over the right hand beneath it and falls in folds around it.]

Pretend to pick up ball through the handkerchief with left hand. In reality, slip ball into shell and bring right hand away with one ball while left hand carries away only the silk, Fig. 52.

[Figure bcr: Fig. 52. — A hand at lower left holds a ball between its fingers while the silk handkerchief hangs from the other hand above it, showing the silk carried away alone.]

Grasp a corner of handkerchief between first and second fingers of right hand and snap silk from left hand, showing that ball has vanished. Place silk in left hand again as in Fig. 49. Suddenly reach behind silk with right hand. Bring ball out of shell into first and second finger position and bring out hand, showing two balls. This should be done quickly.

*“He started to go but came back to say goodnight all over again.”*

Place right hand behind handkerchief and vanish ball into shell again. This time shake silk with left hand and show one ball in right hand. Show palm and backs of hands.

Bring right hand over to silk in left, and under cover of handkerchief, remove shell from ball and place it in left coat pocket with handkerchief. Get ball on right fist as in Fig. 9.

*“Thus leaving the beautiful Clementina. . . .”*

Cover ball with left hand, pretend to remove it, dropping it into right hand. (See Figs. 11, 12 and 13.) Looking at closed left hand, say:

*“To hie herself upstairs.”*

Toss left hand into air and open it, showing that ball has vanished.

*“And dream pleasant dreams. While Adam—comes down . . . . to put out the cat.”* Reach suddenly into the air with right hand and produce the ball at finger tips.

Note

The moves required to present the above routine are not difficult, but you must practice them to do them gracefully and with good showmanship. Study your angles of visibility carefully so as not to expose shell at wrong angle. Practice bringing ball in and out of shell until you can do it easily. Practice until you can put art into your work. Do not forget to look at your audience often.

The Multiplying Golf Balls

Another advance in ball manipulation was brought out by Laurie Ireland of Chicago, in the form of rubber golf balls and metal half shells to match. The half shell adheres to the ball because of the pressure of rubber, and the ball can be thrown into the air without dislodging the shell.

A ball will hold two half shells, and can be handled freely with the two shells, Fig. E. One ball can be multiplied into two and three very easily.

[Figure bcs: Fig. E. — A half shell and a whole golf ball side by side, both covered in a dimpled pattern; the ball is labeled and the shell is labeled.]

The manipulation of the golf balls is similar to that of the regular wooden billiard balls—with the addition of the toss into the air before multiplication, or after the ball goes back into the shell for the vanish.

These golf balls come in various colors such as red, yellow, green, blue, black and white for those who wish to do colored ball magic or manipulation.

Special Adjuncts for Ball Manipulators

The modern magic dealer has some ingenious mechanical aids for ball manipulators who go in for special routines. There are cloth holders which can be pinned inside the coat and which hold four balls, each easily secured by squeezing out of the bottom. The balls are on top of each other. There are special single ball holders for production, and special pulls for vanishing.

[Figure bct: Fig. F. — A tall narrow black cloth holder with a folded-over pleat and safety pin at the top and an elastic band at the bottom, the band marked by a label.]

[Figure bcu: Fig. G. — The same kind of holder drawn as an outline, with four balls stacked one on top of another inside it and the elastic at the bottom holding them in.]

A simple holder can be made of black cloth, with folded-over pleat at top and an elastic band sewed into the bottom, Fig. F. A safety pin is placed at the top with which to fasten the holder under coat at the side so the balls can be secretly secured one at a time by a squeeze of the fingers under coat. Fig. G shows balls placed in holder. Elastic at bottom keeps balls from falling through until released by pressure of fingers.

Rainbow Billiard Balls

This effect is performed with balls of various colors. It is taught to you in pantomime style and is best presented with music. There is no reason, however, why this effect cannot be “Pattered” and used without music, or pantomimed without music.

The effect of the different colored balls is very pretty and will make a good number for your programs. Before you attempt this routine, however, be sure that you have mastered the moves in the preceding pages.

Effect

Four balls mysteriously appear, one at a time, between the fingers of the magician’s right hand. These balls apparently change color at will. At the finish, a red, a white, a green, and a yellow ball are held between the fingers and are then dropped onto a plate one at a time to prove them solid.

Paraphernalia

A set of Rainbow Billiard Balls, which consists of:

1 white ball—1 white shell.

1 yellow ball.

1 green ball.

1 red ball.

These balls are usually 1¾ inches in diameter; however, larger or smaller balls may also be obtained.

To Prepare

Place white shell over yellow ball in rear right trousers pocket. Place green ball in left coat pocket and red ball up under left side of vest, about two inches up from bottom edge. Place white ball in right coat pocket.

If this routine is to be performed after “Adam and Eve,” you can arrange the balls a little differently so as not to interfere with the first effect you perform. The white shell and yellow ball can be in the right coat pocket instead of the trousers pocket, or in the right vest pocket. In arranging a program, the placing of the balls in preparation for this effect will have to be done in accordance with your requirements. You will have no difficulty, however, in varying your arrangements.

To Perform

Get white ball into palm of right hand. Do the Change Over Palm and get ball into left palm. See Figs. 6 and 7, using opposite hands. Now produce ball on closed left fist. (See Figs. 8, 9 and 10.)

Throw ball into air twice, then pretend to throw it a third time but keep it palmed in left hand. (See Figs. 15 and 16.)

Produce ball from right elbow, or by pretending to blow it from nose, allowing it to fall down into right hand. Then turn left side of body to audience. Toss ball to left hand, back to right, then to left again. Pretend to toss it once more to right hand but keep it palmed in left. (See Fig. 22.) Then open right hand and show that ball has vanished.

Look at audience a moment, then raise forefinger of right hand to head as though you had made a discovery. Reach into back pocket with right hand and get white shell with yellow ball. Hold it between thumb and first finger of right hand so that only shell shows to audience. Apparently you have produced the white ball which you vanished a moment ago.

Suddenly produce the yellow ball between first and second fingers of right hand. (See Figs. 28, 29, 30 and 31.)

[Figure bcv: Fig. 53. — The right hand seen from the audience holds the yellow ball and the white shell between its fingers, one above the other, as two apparently solid balls.]

Fig. 53 shows mysterious appearance of yellow ball between fingers.

To Show Ball and Shell as Two Solid Balls

Method A

Hold balls as in Fig. 53.

Bring third finger under yellow ball, Fig. 54.

[Figure bcw: Fig. 54. — The same two balls, yellow above and white shell below, with the third finger brought under the yellow ball.]

Fig. 55 shows a side view of this position, away from audience.

[Figure bcx: Fig. 55. — Side view of the hand away from the audience, with the yellow ball above and the shell below gripped between the fingers; labeled side view.]

Grip yellow ball between second and third fingers and bring it downward between these two fingers. Bring shell upward between thumb and first finger until it can be gripped between back of second finger and first finger. You may keep thumb on shell or remove it, as you like. Be sure to keep back of shell away from audience. As you make this movement, wave your hand a little, Fig. 56.

[Figure bcy: Fig. 56. — The hand turned so the white shell is at the top and the yellow ball below, gripped between second and third fingers, as the hand is waved.]

You have now shown back and front of right hand and have apparently shown all sides of the balls. Bring shell and ball back to position shown in Fig. 54, and finally to that in Fig. 53.

Method B

Here is another method for apparently showing ball and shell on all sides to convince audience that you hold two solid balls. This “Thumb Twist” method is a very handy one.

Hold ball and shell as in Fig. 57.

[Figure bcz: Fig. 57. — The right hand seen from the front holds a ball above and the shell below, the shell labeled, in the starting position of the Thumb Twist.]

Bend forefinger, rolling shell back to thumb joint, Fig. 58.

[Figure bda: Fig. 58. — The forefinger is bent, rolling the shell back toward the thumb joint, while the ball stays above it; the shell is labeled.]

Bend thumb inward, turning shell with it so that front of shell faces outward as you expose palm of hand to audience. Thus you have shown back and palm of right hand and audience believes they have seen all sides of the balls, Fig. 59.

[Figure bdb: Fig. 59. — The open palm faces the audience with the shell turned outward on the thumb and the ball above it; the shell is labeled.]

Right hand may be brought over in front of body and turned outward to expose palm.

This move is not difficult, once you get the knack and can determine the exact position of shell on thumb joint at which you can turn it easily. In an emergency, third finger can be pressed against edge of shell to turn it. Now bring shell back to position by reversing movements performed above.

You now have the white shell and yellow ball in right hand and the white ball palmed in left hand. Bring left hand up to right and remove yellow ball, at the same time slipping white ball into shell. (See Fig. 32.)

Strike balls together to prove them solid. Then place yellow ball between third and fourth fingers of right hand. Show palm of right hand freely now, for white ball is in white shell. Then as you turn hand to show back again, bring white ball out of shell between first and second fingers, Fig. 60.

[Figure bdc: Fig. 60. — The yellow ball is held between the third and fourth fingers while the white ball and white shell are held above it between the first and second fingers.]

Expose right palm again and show balls solid by Thumb Twist Method. With tossing motion of right hand, vanish white ball by dropping it into shell again. Show both sides of hand.

Reach into left coat pocket with left hand and palm out the green ball. . . . *“Here?”* . . . .

Shake your head and remove hand as though there was nothing in it. . . . *“No—here.”*

Produce white ball from behind right knee in this manner: Place right hand back of knee. Lift white ball out of shell into first and second finger position, and bring hand out showing appearance of white ball. Take white ball from finger of right hand placing green ball in shell. Strike balls to prove solid and to show left hand empty. Replace white ball in right fingers and palm out green ball into left hand, Fig. 61.

[Figure bdd: Fig. 61. — The left hand, wrist above, with the green ball palmed out on it while the right hand holds the white ball and shell at its side, letters marking each.]

Now you perform the “Throw Down” color change:

Hold hands to your right in position shown in Fig. 62. This is view of hands as audience sees them.

[Figure bde: Fig. 62. — The two hands held to the right as the audience sees them: the right hand above with yellow ball, white ball and shell, the left hand below with the green ball.]

Raise right hand about twelve inches above left. Then with throwing motion downward, slip white ball into white shell, and just as it is supposed to drop into left hand, expose green ball in left hand. The effect is that you threw the white ball down into left hand and it changed to green in transit, Fig. 63.

[Figure bdf: Fig. 63. — The right hand above holds the yellow ball and white shell after the throwing motion, while the open left hand below shows the green ball.]

Place green ball between second and third fingers of right hand and steal white ball from shell with left hand. (See Fig. 40.)

Fig. 64 shows position of balls at this stage. This view is away from the audience.

[Figure bdg: Fig. 64. — View away from the audience: the right hand holds the green and yellow balls and the shell, while the left hand steals the white ball.]

Reach into air with left hand and produce white ball on left fist.

Look at audience in quizzical way after this production, just as though you didn’t know how it happened yourself. Then place white ball between first and second fingers of right hand, Fig. 65.

[Figure bdh: Fig. 65. — The right hand holds a row of balls between its fingers, yellow and green at the top and the white ball and the shell below, for the display of four balls.]

Look at the display of the four balls to misdirect attention as you bring left hand against left side of vest. Press base of thumb against top of red ball, vested there. Move right hand downward and upward in sweeping motion, and at the same time, push left thumb against vested ball, forcing it down into left palm where it is Finger Palmed, or get ball by lifting edge of vest with thumb.

Bring left hand up to right and place red ball in white shell, Fig. 66.

[Figure bdi: Fig. 66. — The right hand holds the yellow, green and white balls between its fingers while the left hand brings the red ball up to place it in the white shell.]

Remove red ball and white shell with left hand, being careful not to expose red ball to audience. Show both sides of right hand. Replace shell and ball between thumb and first finger of right hand and show both sides of left hand.

Now bring left hand up to right again and Finger Palm white shell away from red ball. Red ball is now exposed and the effect is that you touched the white ball with your left hand and caused it to change to red, Fig. 67.

[Figure bdj: Fig. 67. — The right hand holds a column of balls, yellow, green, white and the red ball at the bottom, each named, the red one having replaced the white in view.]

Turn right hand over to show that palm is empty and that balls are all solid, Fig. 68.

[Figure bdk: Fig. 68. — The right hand turned palm out, with the red, white, green and yellow balls held in a row between its fingers, each marked with a letter.]

Drop balls one at a time onto a dish on table. Keep back of hand toward audience and drop red ball first, then white one, then green one, and finally yellow one. Turn palm of right hand with fingers wide apart toward audience to show it empty. Dispose of shell by getting some article from pocket for next trick or in any manner you find suitable for the occasion, such as casually placing hand in pocket for a moment.

Suggestion

If inconvenient for you to carry red ball under vest, have it in left trousers pocket. Turn right side towards audience as you hold right hand high up to show four balls. Reach into pocket with left hand and palm out red ball, then turn left side to audience again.

A Mysterious Ball Transposition

There have been many descriptions written for this effect in which a red ball is wrapped in a piece of paper or handkerchief and a black ball is wrapped in another paper or handkerchief, and upon command the balls change places. I have seldom seen it performed, however. I have tried out several of these methods, but the effect proved to be somewhat lifeless, so I discarded them. I finally worked out this method which is clean-cut, snappy, and gives a chance for applause at the end. The suspicious moves are eliminated—the effect is sped up and has entertainment value.

Effect

Performer freely shows a red and a green billiard ball, a red and a green handkerchief, and two glass goblets. Performer wraps the green ball in the green handkerchief and places it in one of the glasses. The red ball is wrapped in the red handkerchief and placed in the other glass. Magician suddenly whisks the green handkerchief from the glass, showing the red ball whirling in the glass and then whisks the red handkerchief from the other glass, showing the green ball there.

Paraphernalia

1—One green billiard ball.

One red billiard ball.

One red shell.

2—One green silk handkerchief.

One red silk handkerchief.

Silks must be heavy enough so that audience can not see color of ball through them.

3—Two glass goblets.

4—A table—a card table is suitable for many occasions.

To Perform

Show the two glasses, the two silks, and two balls freely. Shell is on red ball. Place glasses on table about 18 inches apart. Place silks on table within easy reach.

Place red ball with shell between thumb and first finger of right hand, shell facing audience. Place green ball between first and second fingers.

Show hands freely as the audience must be convinced that you use only two balls. Then pick up green silk and place it over left hand, Fig. 69.

[Figure bdl: Fig. 69. — A hand holding the green ball and red shell, labelled Green, Red and Red Shell, above a handkerchief spread out below it.]

[Figure bdm: Fig. 70. — A man in profile holding a handkerchief over his left hand, ready for the next move.]

Bring left hand over to right and pretend to take green ball in center of handkerchief. In reality, slip red ball out of shell into handkerchief and drop green ball into red shell, Fig. 70.

Bring left hand away and drop silk completely over ball. Grasp silk under ball to show ball wrapped in center of silk. Show “red ball” remaining in right hand, Fig. 71, and, as you look at handkerchief, say, “*Green.*”

[Figure bdn: Fig. 71. — The right hand shows the red ball above, while the left hand grasps the ball wrapped in the silk below.]

[Figure bdo: Fig. 72. — A goblet with the silk-wrapped ball inside and part of the silk hanging out over the rim.]

Place silk with ball into goblet at right. Form of ball can be seen through glass. Part of silk hangs out of glass so that it can be jerked away when the time comes, Fig. 72.

Pick up red silk and place over left hand. Place red shell and green ball into center of silk, turning them so that shell is on bottom and ball can be grasped through the silk in left hand.

“*Red.*” As you say this, turn right side to audience. Remove right hand from silk with shell Finger Palmed. Grasp red silk as you did the green one before and place it with ball in second goblet.

Point to right hand glass, saying “*Green.*” Point to left hand glass, saying “*Red.*”

With right hand, grasp corner of green silk and jerk it suddenly from glass, causing red ball to whirl in the glass, Fig. 73, as you say, “*No! Red!*”

Grasp red silk with left hand and jerk it suddenly from glass to show green ball whirling there. .. . “*Green!*”

[Figure bdp: Fig. 73. — A hand jerks a silk upward away from a goblet, which holds the whirling ball.]

Dispose of shell in the silks. I have often disposed of shell by putting it in my right coat pocket at the moment I jerk first silk from the glass— in this case, using left hand for jerking away first silk.
