Lesson 31: Rope Magic

Years ago I made a very careful study of rope magic and succeeded in starting a new era in mysteries with a piece of rope. For hundreds of years tricks that were done with string, cord or rope were quite simple. People talked of the “Hindu Rope Mystery,” where a boy supposedly disappeared in the air from the top of a piece of rope that stood upright in the air. But magicians were slow to awaken to the possibilities that were in rope magic and how it could be featured.

One of our modern day clever magicians, Milbourne Christopher, took a special interest in rope mysteries and originated a very clever act featuring rope magic. His act was popular in Europe and America. He developed an interesting method of stretching a short piece of rope into a long one.

Christopher has given me a number of rope mysteries which will make interesting openers for rope routines. You will find any one of them quick and snappy for getting immediate attention.

It is the purpose of this lesson to discuss mysteries with an unprepared piece of rope. I have entertained the finest audiences of America with routines built from the rope tricks described in this lesson.

Type of Rope Used

These mysteries are best done with soft unwaxed clothesline. I use “Tarbell Special,” “Comet” or “Beauty” brands. These can be softened further and strands loosened a bit more by the hands. If you can not get what you want in the hardware or department stores, magic dealers can supply the proper rope.

There is also a special loose woven soft rope which can compress into fairly small space. Al Baker has been very successful with this soft rope.

Christopher’s Three Knots in a Rope

One of the hit openers which Milbourne Christopher uses in his act, is this original effect given you here.

Effect

Performer shows a six-foot piece of soft clothesline. Suddenly three knots appear in the rope about a foot and a half apart. Performer blows at the left hand knot and it disappears from rope.

He unties the center knot as evidence that the knots are real ones. Passing his right hand over the remaining knot, he removes it and tosses it out to the audience.

Paraphernalia

1—A six-foot piece of soft clothesline.

2—An extra knot. This is made by tying a knot in a piece of soft clothesline and clipping the rope near the knot, Fig. 1.

[Figure bgq: Fig. 1. — The extra knot: a single overhand knot tied in a short piece of soft clothesline, with the rope clipped off close to the knot.]

To Prepare

Tie a slip knot about eighteen inches away from end of rope. Also tie another slip knot eighteen inches away from the other end, Figs. 2 and 3.

[Figure bgr: Fig. 2. — The six-foot rope lying straight, with a slip knot tied about eighteen inches in from each end.]

[Figure bgs: Fig. 3. — A close view of one slip knot tied in the rope.]

[Figure bgt: Fig. 4. — The performer's view of the rope hung in a U between both hands, knots hidden in the fists, with a label marking the extra knot concealed in the right hand.]

Knots should be drawn fairly tight so as not to loosen during manipulation. A good pull will release them.

To Perform

Prepared rope can be picked up from table in such a way that a knot is concealed in each hand. Or, on entering, rope can be in performer’s hands. The extra knot is concealed, finger palmed, under the curled-back third and fourth fingers of right hand.

Hold rope up in front of you, as in Fig. 4, which is your viewpoint. Knots must be concealed so that audience is wholly unaware of them. Audience must think you are just holding an unprepared piece of rope.

Note how on left side, rope comes up over *back* of left hand and down over the front, while on right side the rope comes up over *front* of right hand and down over the back. Position of rope is for “The Speedy Single Knot” (Volume 1, Lesson 18).

Bring hands together and place right end of rope between second and third fingers of left hand, and grasp left end, below slipknot, between first and second fingers of right hand, Fig. 5. Fingers of left and right hands clamp the rope and hold tight.

[Figure bgu: Fig. 5. — Close view of both hands: the right end of the rope held between the second and third fingers of the left hand, the left end between two fingers of the right, knots hidden.]

[Figure bgv: Fig. 6. — The hands drawn apart, the rope hanging in a long loop between them, with knots showing at the fingers.]

Hands are suddenly drawn apart, Fig. 6. Hands slide along rope a bit towards ends, revealing the concealed knots. Result is that audience sees three knots suddenly appear in a piece of rope, Fig. 7. The movements are done rapidly and without hesitation. Practice moves before a mirror until you have them perfected.

[Figure bgw: Fig. 7. — The straight rope held at both ends with three knots along it; a label points to the extra knot concealed in the right hand.]

Bring left hand knot up in front of your mouth, Fig. 8, and blow out the knot. Knot disappears by pulling on rope, as it is a slipknot.

[Figure bgx: Fig. 8. — A man holds the rope up before his mouth in both hands, the left hand knot at his lips, as if blowing the knot away.]

[Figure bgy: Fig. 9. — Close view of the left hand around the rope and the right hand around the knot, pulling apart to draw out the slipknot.]

Untie the center knot to show that it is a real knot.

Reverse the ends of the rope and with left hand around rope and right hand around knot, Fig. 9, pull hands apart enough to pull out slipknot. The left hand should do the pulling while right fingers grasp rope tightly below the knot.

When this knot has disappeared, remove right hand from rope and toss out the extra knot to the audience, the effect being you just removed the knot and threw it to the spectators.

Christopher’s Jumping Knot

Christopher uses this as a follow-up for his “Three Knots in a Rope,” just described.

Effect

Performer ties a knot about a foot and a half from the end of a six-foot piece of soft clothesline. He places that end of rope under his left foot so it is held firmly to floor. Knot is plainly seen by audience above foot. Right hand holds other end of rope in air so rope is taut. Suddenly the knot jumps from the lower part of the rope to the upper part.

Paraphernalia

A six-foot piece of soft clothesline.

To Perform

Show rope and place one end over left hand, so about a foot and a half hangs down over back of hand, Fig. 1.

Bring lower part of rope up around back of hand between first and second fingers and over the back of the hand, Fig. 2.

[Figure bgz: Fig. 1. — The left hand holds one end of the rope over the back of the hand, the rope hanging down in two strands, one longer than the other.]

[Figure bha: Fig. 2. — The lower part of the rope brought up around the back of the left hand between the first and second fingers, forming a loop over the hand.]

[Figure bhb: Fig. 3. — The right hand has pulled the upper end of the rope through the loop to the front, leaving a knot-like coil at the left hand and the rope hanging down.]

Reach through loop of rope from the front and pull upper end through to the front, Fig. 3.

Nip rope between first and second fingers tightly and turn fingers down and backwards forming a loop, Fig. 4. Drawing shows more of a side view. Audience is not to be aware of loop but must think you tie a single knot.

Right hand, in the meantime, pulls down on the upper end of rope tightening the slipknot, Fig. 5. You can use both hands to tighten knot properly. Fig. 5 shows how knot looks to audience.

[Figure bhc: Fig. 4. — Close view of the left hand nipping the rope between the first and second fingers, fingers turned down and back to form a loop; the rope hangs below.]

[Figure bhd: Fig. 5. — The knot as the audience sees it: the left hand holds the tightened knot at the top, the rope hanging down below the hand.]

Place knot end of rope down under left foot, as in Fig. 6. The right hand holds upper end, but with rope coming up over palm of hand, down over back of hand and around in front of rope proper and the end is held by first and second fingers.

*“Watch!”*

Call attention to the knot in lower part of rope. Allow loop of rope above to fall down off the hand, the first and second fingers still holding end tightly. Pull the rope up taut which pulls out the slipknot and ties a knot in upper part of rope, Fig. 7. Call attention to upper knot.

Christopher, himself, uses the Instantaneous One-Hand Knot, as described in Volume 1, Lesson 18. But I find that looping the rope up over the hand makes the effect easier to do for anyone who is not experienced in doing the Instantaneous One-Hand Knot.

[Figure bhe: Fig. 6. — A performer in tails and bow tie stands with the knotted end of the rope under his left foot, the loop of rope hanging on his raised right hand.]

[Figure bhf: Fig. 7. — The rope pulled taut from the foot upward, a knot now tied in its upper part, the knot that has jumped from the lower part.]

Another variation is to reach down with left hand and cover lower knot, then with a sudden upward movement apparently cause the knot to travel up along the rope under cover of the hand.

Method 2

In this case only one of the knots in “Three Knots in a Rope” is a slipknot. The other two are regular single knots.

After the rope has been tied into the three knots, undo the left hand regular single knot and then the center knot, showing that real knots have actually been tied in the rope.

Do not untie the third knot, the slipknot, but place that end under the left foot and proceed to do the Jumping Knot.

Tannen’s Ring, Knot and Rope

Conceived by Louis Tannen, this is a novel and surprising effect that is just a bit different.

Effect

A ring is borrowed, placed in a handkerchief, and given to a spectator to hold. A six-foot rope is then stretched between performer’s left foot and outstretched right hand. Performer grasps one corner of handerkchief with left hand and snaps handkerchief for a moment in front of the rope. Ring is now found threaded on the knot in the center of the rope.

Paraphernalia

1—A borrowed ring.

2—A ring handkerchief, Fig. 1, which consists in having a cheap ten cent store ring, with setting, sewed in a pocket on corner of handkerchief. Pocket comes up to handkerchief border. Pocket is made of same material as handkerchief. It consists of just a square piece of cloth sewn onto handkerchief.

[Figure bhg: Fig. 1. — A square handkerchief with a border, seen flat; a small square pocket holding the ring is sewn onto the upper left corner.]

[Figure bhh: Fig. 2. — The end of the rope tapered with tape, drawn diagonally with the taped section wound round it and an arrow labelled Tape pointing to it.]

3—A piece of soft clothesline six feet in length. Ends are tapered off with paper tape or regular adhesive tape, Fig. 2.

To Perform

From a lady, borrow a ring with a setting somewhat in shape like the one in ring handkerchief.

Pick up ring handkerchief from table, and holding same by two upper corners show both sides. Pick up center of handkerchief with left hand and allow it to be held as in Fig. 3, the ring in pocket at rear.

Show borrowed ring in right hand and place under handkerchief. As you do so, you grasp the ring corner of handkerchief and bring it under and up to the center of the handkerchief, Fig. 4. The borrowed ring is palmed in the crotch of right thumb, and hand withdrawn. Spectator is given ring in handkerchief to hold, Fig. 4. Moves should be made naturally and fairly fast, so that spectator just thinks he is holding borrowed ring.

[Figure bhi: Fig. 3. — A hand holds the handkerchief by its center so it hangs down; the duplicate ring in its pocket shows at the lower rear corner, marked by an arrow.]

[Figure bhj: Fig. 4. — The right hand has folded the ring corner up into the center of the handkerchief, which hangs from the held fold; an arrow labelled Duplicate Ring points to the ring.]

Holding borrowed ring in crotch of thumb, Fig. 5, the rope is held up near one end by left hand, and, in transferring rope to right hand, the right hand slips down over the upstanding end of rope and allows rope to secretly slip through the ring, Fig. 5.

[Figure bhk: Fig. 5. — A hand with the borrowed ring palmed at the crotch of the thumb, and the rope running diagonally through the ring.]

[Figure bhl: Fig. 6. — The right hand holds the rope's end between first and second fingers, the rope looping down in a U, with the ring on the rope labelled Ring.]

End of rope is brought down over back of right hand, then up in front of rope proper and held between first and second fingers, Fig. 6. The thumb screens the ring. These moves can be made naturally so that audience does not suspect you are holding ring. They think the ring is under the handkerchief.

[Figure bhm: Fig. 7. — The rope hangs straight down from the right hand at the top in a loop; its lower end is pinned to the floor under the left foot.]

Lower end of rope is on floor. Left foot steps on it and rope is pulled a bit taut, Fig. 7. With left hand you reach over and grasp one of the ends of the handkerchief which is hanging down. Snap the handkerchief away from the spectator so it comes over in front of the rope, Fig. 8.

As this is done, the upper end of rope is brought through loop in rope, loop allowed to slide off right hand which falls down forming a knot with ring inside. Right hand immediately stretches rope which tightens the knot and brings rope taut again, Fig. 8.

[Figure bhn: Fig. 8. — The handkerchief snapped across the taut rope, the ring in the knot labelled Ring in Knot, an arrow showing the loop slipping off the raised hand; foot on the rope's end below.]

Fig. 9 shows ring hanging in knot.

The moves are all done so suddenly that the effect to the audience is that you just snapped the borrowed ring suddenly out of the handkerchief into a knot on the rope. Handerchief is placed in pocket or just tossed aside on table. Ring is untied from rope and returned to the owner.

Variation

Some magicians have the ability of the Texas ranger who ties a knot suddenly in his rope by snapping rope out into the air and allowing the lower end to flip back against rope. Mr. Tannen did not always use a loop over hand, but would allow ring to slide down the rope as he snapped such a knot into rope, with the result that the ring appeared in the knot.

[Figure bho: Fig. 9. — Close view of the rope with a knot tied in it and the borrowed ring hanging in the knot.]

The interesting thing in magic is that principles can be varied so as to meet individual requirements and styles of performing.

Christopher’s Thread to Rope

Another novel opener, and quite surprising.

Effect

Performer takes a spool of white thread from his pocket and apparently unwinds a piece of thread about five feet long. Holding one end of thread in right hand, he gives it a snap, saying he will tie an over-hand knot. Pretending to hear someone say he can not see the thread, the performer says he will make the thread a little larger. He now holds a five-foot piece of soft white clothesline with a knot tied in the center.

Paraphernalia

1—A piece of soft white clothesline about five feet long.

2—A spool of strong black silk thread.

3—A spool of white thread. Spool should be large enough so that audience can readily see it is a spool of thread.

To Prepare

Tie a single knot in the center of clothesline, Fig. 1.

[Figure bhp: Fig. 1. — A length of clothesline running diagonally with a single knot tied in its center.]

[Figure bhq: Fig. 2. — The clothesline wrapped into a small oval hank or bundle, with a black silk thread hanging from its outer end, labelled Thread.]

[Figure bhr: Fig. 3. — A smiling man in a dinner jacket and bow tie; the rope bundle is tucked under his right lapel and a thread hangs down to the upper coat button.]

Wrap clothesline into a small hank or bundle, Fig. 2. To the outer end of rope, tie the end of a piece of black silk thread. The thread must be long enough so that when the bundle of rope is placed under the right coat lapel and the lower end of thread is tied to upper coat button, the thread hangs down a bit, Fig. 3. Spool of white thread is in your coat pocket.

To Perform

Come forward with rope coiled under right lapel and black silk thread in place.

Remove spool of white thread from pocket and pretend to unreel about five feet of the thread. Break it off and replace spool in pocket.

Hold imaginary thread by one end in right hand and move hand up and down a bit as though waving thread in order to show it.

*“Tying an over-hand knot.”* Shake right hand in air with a snap as though tying a knot in the imaginary piece of thread.

*“What? You can’t see it back there? I’ll make it a little larger.”*

As you say that, slip your right thumb under the black silk thread, Fig. 4, and with a quick upward movement you raise your hand, allowing the thread to slide along right thumb.

[Figure bhs: Fig. 4. — The right hand's thumb is slipped under the black silk thread running from the coat button to the rope bundle under the lapel.]

[Figure bht: Fig. 5. — The raised right hand has drawn the bundle of clothesline out from under the lapel into the hand, the thread still running to the button.]

Raising the hand automatically pulls the bundle of clothesline from underneath lapel over into the hand, Fig. 5. Right hand is thrown forward, throwing the rope over the hand, thus opening the rope, Fig. 6.

The sliding of right thumb under silk thread, raising of right hand and drawing rope from under lapel and over the right hand, should be well practiced until the effect looks as though the white thread enlarged itself into a piece of clothesline. In Christopher’s hands the effect is beautiful.

Variation

In this case two single knots, about eight inches apart are tied in the soft white clothesline, Fig. 7. Roll into a bundle, attach to black thread, and operate the same as the rope with the single knot just described. Right hand holds imaginary white thread.

[Figure bhu: Fig. 6. — The right hand thrown forward with the rope opened out and hanging down with a single knot, the black thread running up to the hand and labelled Thread.]

[Figure bhv: Fig. 7. — A length of soft white clothesline hanging in an arch with two single knots tied in it about eight inches apart.]

*“Watch! I’ll tie a knot in the thread.”* With a snap of the right hand pretend to tie a knot in the center of the thread.

*“What? You can’t see the knot back there! Look! I’ll tie another!”*

As you say that, the right thumb under silk thread pulls rope from under lapel, over hand, in the apparent tying of the second knot.

Note

If using the rope for a succeeding trick or routine it is easy to disconnect the silk thread.

Self-Untying Rope

This is a nice follow-up for the Thread to Rope mystery, as the secret thread is already attached to the end of rope and the other end of thread to the coat button.

Tie the thread end of rope into a single knot, as in Fig. 1. Rope is held by left hand.

By pressing the right thumb against thread near coat and moving towards the right, the thread is pulled, thus bringing the threaded end of the rope up through the loop, and thereby untying the rope.

[Figure bhw: Fig. 1. — The left hand holds the rope up, a single knot near its lower end; a thread labelled Thread Attached to Coat Button crosses to the knot loop.]

Christopher’s Cigarette to Rope

Here are three brilliant opening effects. Doing three shows per night, you could amaze the spectators with a new one for each performance.

Version 1

Effect

Performer places a lighted cigarette into his left fist. Upon opening the hand the cigarette is found to have changed to a five-foot length of white clothesline.

Paraphernalia

1—An extra soft five-foot piece of white clothesline such as is sold by the better magic dealers. This type of rope does not occupy much space and can be easily folded and opened.

2—A long Petrie-Lewis thumb tip.

3—A lighted cigarette.

To Prepare

Wrap the length of clothesline around the thumb tip and tuck the outer end in so as to keep rope secure on thumb tip, Fig. 1.

To Perform

Performer is smoking a lighted cigarette. Thumb tip is secretly placed on right thumb, Fig. 2. Fingers of right hand hide the prepared tip from audience, the back of hand being towards spectators.

[Figure bhx: Fig. 1. — A thumb tip with the clothesline wrapped around it in coils, the outer end tucked in to hold the rope secure.]

[Figure bhy: Fig. 2. — The right hand seen from the back with its fingers curled to hide the prepared thumb tip, the wrapped rope showing at the thumb.]

[Figure bhz: Fig. 3. — The left hand comes down in front of the right hand; the right thumb with the tip is raised under cover of the left hand into the left palm.]

Show left hand empty as you casually take cigarette from mouth, puff smoke from mouth, and place cigarette back between the lips.

Left hand comes down a bit in front of right hand, Fig. 3, and as hand comes to that position for a moment, the right thumb with tip is raised, under cover of left hand, into left palm. Left hand closes around the thumb tip and rope, and pulls away from right hand.

Cigarette is removed from mouth with right hand and placed, lighted end first, within the thumb tip, Fig. 4. Right thumb pushes cigarette into the tip and gets the tip securely on thumb. Now remove right thumb together with tip, under cover of right fingers, leaving rope in left hand.

[Figure bia: Fig. 4. — The right hand pushes the lighted cigarette, held in the left hand's grasp, into the thumb tip on the right thumb.]

[Figure bib: Fig. 5. — The left hand held up with the opened white rope unwinding and hanging in a long diagonal line from it.]

You can momentarily turn the end of the tip on thumb, and palm of hand towards audience, and then screen the tip again with right fingers. Finally Finger Palm the tip off the thumb.

Left hand is opened revealing the rope which is allowed to unwind as left hand holds one end, Fig. 5. Rope can be snapped out of hand, or unwound under control of both hands.

Note

Methods of using a Thumb Tip are well described in Volume 1.

Version 2

Effect

Performer enters smoking a cigarette, which is between his lips and is held between first and second fingers of right hand. Suddenly the cigarette visibly changes into a five-foot length of white clothesline.

Paraphernalia

A five-foot piece of soft white clothesline.

To Prepare

End of rope is placed under coat and down the right sleeve so that enough of the end of the rope is exposed beyond first and second fingers of right hand to resemble a cigarette, Fig. 1.

[Figure bic: Fig. 1. — The right hand seen in profile with the end of the rope showing beyond the first and second fingers like a cigarette; the rope runs back up the coat sleeve.]

[Figure bid: Fig. 2. — A man in a bow tie raises his right hand to his mouth, holding the end of the rope between his fingers as though smoking.]

[Figure bie: Fig. 3. — A man in profile blowing a cloud of smoke from his lips while holding the rope end like a cigarette in his lowered right hand.]

Opposite end of rope under coat can be placed in inner coat pocket, together with extra slack.

Before coming on stage draw smoke into the mouth from a lighted cigarette, putting the latter aside.

To Perform

Come out with rope held up to mouth as though smoking a cigarette, Fig. 2.

Remove rope a bit and blow smoke, Fig. 3, as you would do if you were smoking a cigarette. You can put cigarette to lips a couple of times and blow smoke.

Bring right hand down in front of body and with left hand take hold of end of rope, Fig. 4, and pull straight upward, which pulls rope out of sleeve and into view of audience, Fig. 5. This is done rather quickly to give appearance of cigarette changing to a rope.

[Figure bif: Fig. 4. — The right hand brought down in front of the body while the left hand takes hold of the end of the rope where it emerges from the sleeve.]

[Figure big: Fig. 5. — The left hand pulls the rope straight upward out of the sleeve, the rope stretched vertically past the right hand held low.]

Note

End of rope should be blackened up a bit to resemble burned end of cigarette. If an orange tinted or light red Christmas tree ball ornament were broken up into small pieces, a few of these pieces could be glued onto rope end to look like fire. This just adds a touch of realism. The black end idea, however, carries out the illusion.

Version 3

Effect

Performer takes a package of cigarettes from his pocket and removes one. It changes to a piece of white clothesline as it is being removed.

Paraphernalia

1—An empty cigarette package. Have only a small opening in top at one end.

2—A soft piece of white clothesline about four or five feet in length. Length will be determined by the type of rope used and the amount that can be placed into a cigarette package.

To Prepare

Tuck rope into the cigarette package so one end sticks out of opening in top about a half inch, Fig. 1. Put the prepared package in your pocket.

[Figure bih: Fig. 1. — A cigarette package filled with coiled rope, one end of the rope sticking out of the small opening in the top about a half inch.]

[Figure bii: Fig. 2. — The left hand holds the package while the right hand grips the end of the rope and pulls it up just high enough to look like a cigarette.]

[Figure bij: Fig. 3. — The right hand holds the empty package low while the left hand raises the rope to full length, hanging straight up out of the package.]

To Perform

Remove the prepared cigarette package from the pocket and hold in left hand, Fig. 2. Right hand takes hold of end of rope and pulls it just high enough to make it look like a cigarette.

Pull the rope out of the cigarette package, Fig. 3, after which replace the package back in your pocket.

The Phantom Knot

A pretty effect with a piece of soft clothesline.

Effect

Performer ties a single knot in a piece of clothesline. He merely passes his hand over the knot and it disappears.

Paraphernalia

A piece of soft clothesline, about three feet long.

To Perform

Hold rope between first and second fingers of left hand about five

inches from one end. Grasp rope between first finger and thumb of right hand about the same distance from the other end, Fig. 28.

With right hand bring end B up *behind* end A, making loop C, Fig. 29.

[Figure bik: Fig. 28. — The rope held between the right thumb and first finger near end A and the left hand near end B, with the rope hanging straight between the hands.]

[Figure bil: Fig. 29. — The right hand brings end B up behind end A, making an oval loop C between the hands.]

[Figure bim: Fig. 30. — End B is slipped through loop C from the back to the front, the right fingers pushing it through.]

Slip end B through loop C from the back to the front, Fig. 30.

Pull end B down to make a loose single knot. The tie appears to be a knot to the audience, but in reality it is a fake knot. A real knot would be tied by placing end B in front of end A. In this case you put end B in back of A, and the result is there is no knot, Fig. 31.

[Figure bin: Fig. 31. — A loose single knot has been formed with loop C between the hands, which still hold ends A and B.]

[Figure bio: Fig. 32. — The left thumb and fingers cover the crossing of A and B while the right hand pulls up on end A to tighten the knot a little.]

[Figure bip: Fig. 33. — The knot hangs loose near the left fingers while the right hand pulls down on end B, showing the audience the apparent knot.]

To tighten knot a little, pull up on end A. Be careful to cover point where A and B cross each other with thumb and fingers of left hand to prevent detection of fake knot by audience, Fig. 32.

Pull down on end B again with right hand and slip left fingers out of loop. This gives audience a good opportunity to see knot, Fig. 33.

Every move has been made slowly and deliberately and audience believes that they have seen you make a real knot. Now bring right hand around knot and slowly move hand downward, Fig. 34.

This causes fake knot to untie and rope hangs straight between your hands, Fig. 35.

[Figure biq: Fig. 34. — The right hand is brought around the knot at end A, the fingers closing about the rope as the hand begins to move downward.]

[Figure bir: Fig. 35. — The rope hangs straight between the hands, end A held in the left fingers above and end B at the right hand below.]

[Figure bis: Fig. 36. — The rope hangs straight from the left hand alone, the knot gone, with the right hand removed.]

Remove right hand from rope before you reach lower end and show right hand empty to prove that you have not slipped knot from end of rope. Let rope hang from left hand and show to audience, Fig. 36.

Hindu Knots

This effect may be presented in any kind of Oriental program to good advantage. In days gone by, “Spirit Mediums” presented this as a bit of genuine phenomena.

Effect

Performer shows a piece of soft, white clothesline about eight feet long. He coils this up in his left hand and places rope on table. Suddenly he jerks up one end of rope and a number of single knots have been formed in rope. He places rope on table again. In a moment magician again jerks up one end of rope, and the knots have disappeared.

Paraphernalia

A piece of very soft clothesline, six to eight feet long.

A piece of soft, twisted cord, such as is used to hold curtains, or on bathrobes, is ideal for this trick. The rope used must be soft so that it will knot and unknot easily. Cut tassels from bathrobe cords and you will find these cords most satisfactory for use here.

To Perform

Hold rope near one end as shown in Fig. 37. Rope lies over palms of both hands and is held in place by thumbs. Bring right hand up, turning back of it to audience and tips of fingers towards left hand. Bring C part of rope up near left hand and let end of rope fall back of end in left hand, Fig. 38.

[Figure bit: Fig. 37. — The rope lies over the palms of both hands, held by the thumbs, with ends and points of the rope lettered A, B and C.]

[Figure biu: Fig. 38. — The right hand, back to the audience, brings part C of the rope up near the left hand, forming a first loop.]

[Figure biv: Fig. 39. — The left hand grasps C, holding a loop about six inches across with the rope end hanging behind it.]

Grasp C in left hand, making a loop of rope. Size of this loop should be about six inches in diameter. You will have to experiment with size of loop to get the proper size for the particular rope you use. Size must be right to make forming of the knots easy, Fig. 39.

Take rope again in right hand in position shown in Fig. 37. Make another loop in the rope, bringing end of rope back of loop again. Study Fig. 40 carefully to get proper looping of rope.

Continue making loops until most of the rope has been used. When you reach the right hand end, grasp it between thumb and first finger of left hand and release right hand, Fig. 41.

[Figure biw: Fig. 40. — A second loop has been made in the rope with the end brought back of the loop, held in the left hand.]

[Figure bix: Fig. 41. — Many loops of rope are gathered in the left hand, whose thumb and first finger hold the right hand end.]

[Figure biy: Fig. 42. — The magician holds up one end of the rope in his right hand, and the rest falls to the table in a loose coil.]

Place rope on table, and as you do so, pull right hand end through the loops. Audience is not aware that you do this. To them it appears that you merely looped the rope and placed it on the table.

Now pick up right hand end of rope and give whole rope a quick jerk, Fig. 42.

The rope will stretch out with a series of knots in it, about an equal distance apart. There will be a knot formed for every loop you made in the rope. Suspend rope from right hand and show, Fig. 43.

[Figure biz: Fig. 43. — The rope hangs from the right hand held at the top, with a series of single knots tied at about equal distances down its length.]

To Untie the Knots Magically
Call attention to the fact that the knots are genuine by starting the first one and pulling it out big enough to insert the fingers of your left hand. Study Fig. 44 carefully. The exact position of knot and the point at which rope leaves knot are important things.

[Figure bja: Fig. 44. — The left fingers are inserted in the first knot, held open as a loop, showing the exact position of the knot and where the rope leaves it.]

Take up the next knot, open it and hold in same manner as first one in left hand. Continue to do this until you have all the knots gathered up in left hand. Then grasp right hand end of rope between thumb and first finger of left hand also, Fig. 45.

Pull right hand end through loops and allow rest of rope to hang suspended from left hand. The knots automatically untie themselves and the rope hangs straight down, Fig. 46.

[Figure bjb: Fig. 46. — The rope hangs straight down from the left hand, the knots gone, with a small coil of rope lying at its lower end.]

The tying and untying knots may be greatly elaborated for stage production. Have two brass bowls or jars a few feet apart. Show each empty. Coil the rope and place it in one bowl. Do not pull end through loops until rope is concealed in bowl. Take another rope and tie the series of knots in it as taught to you above. Gather up the knots—see Figs. 44 and 45. Place rope in second bowl. When it is concealed, pull right hand end of rope through the loops.

[Figure bjc: Fig. 45. — All the knots are gathered up in the left hand, whose thumb and first finger also grasp the right hand end of the rope.]

Now you proceed to show the sympathetic nature between the ropes. Pull out the first rope and show that knots have appeared in it. Take out the second rope, which was knotted, and show that the knots have disappeared, Fig. 47.

[Figure bjd: Fig. 47. — A hand lifts one rope out of a round jar or bowl, the rope hanging straight.]

Chefalo’s Knot

I believe this knot was brought out by Chefalo, the famous Italian magician. It works very nicely in an Oriental program.

Effect

Performer ties a double knot. Then to make knot even more secure, he loops an end of the rope through the knot several times. In spite of this, the knot disappears on command.

[Figure bje: Fig. 48. — A single knot with a ring marked A, the rope passing with part 1 coming up behind part 2.]

[Figure bjf: Fig. 49. — Two single knots one above the other, loops B and A, the second tied with part 1 coming in front of part 2.]

[Figure bjg: Fig. 50. — The right end of the rope is brought down through loop A of the two knots, loop B above.]

[Figure bjh: Fig. 51. — The same end of the rope is then brought up through loop B, interlacing the two loops A and B.]

Paraphernalia

A piece of rope or cord.

To Perform

Tie a single knot in center of rope. Note just how knot is made with part 1 of the rope coming up behind part 2, Fig. 48. Tie another single knot. This time part 1 comes in front of part 2, Fig. 49.

Bring right end of rope down through loop A, Fig. 50. Now bring same end of rope up through loop B, Fig. 51.

Pull on both ends of rope and knots disappear.

Tarbell’s Triple Chefalo Knot

This variation of the Chefalo knot has been popular in my magical programs for years. It is done as a Chinese effect. It looks almost impossible.

Effect

A system of single and interlaced knots are tied in a piece of rope. Ends of rope are given to a spectator to hold. Without releasing ends each of the knots is quickly removed by performer, starting with lower end.

Paraphernalia

A piece of soft rope five or six feet long.

To Perform

Tie the Chefalo knot already described. Then tie another Chefalo knot on top of this, just as though there were none tied below it. Tie a third Chefalo knot, Fig. 52.

[Figure bji: Fig. 52. — A tall chain of three Chefalo knots tied one above another in a rope, the two ends hanging straight up from the top knot.]

Give two ends of rope to a spectator to hold, an end in each hand.

Start untying knot at lower end of rope, farthest away from the two ends. You will find that with slight manipulations the knots untie themselves until each knot has vanished and rope is held in spectator’s hands without knots.

Suggested Patter

Tell about the “Chinese triple knots,” and that they not only tie a single, and a double knot but also lock the knots by tying a third knot. (You have now completed a Chefalo Knot.) They continue tying triple knots. To untie the knots instead of starting with the ends as most people do they start at the knotty end and untie it and continue likewise with the other knots, until all the knots are gone.

“Hocus Pocus” Cut and Restored Rope

In a book on legerdemain, “Hocus Pocus, Junior,” published in London in 1634, was described a cut and restored tape trick which gained favor with early day magicians. Three figures were used to illustrate the effect. The principle was not only applicable to tape but also soft rope and cord.

I have found that by using soft clothesline, the trick was well received on the stage. I will teach it with the various moves I use myself and with the necessary illustrations.

Effect

Two ends of a soft clothesline are knotted together. Hands slip into loop of rope and stretch it out, with knot at top, to show rope freely. Rope is formed into a double loop and a spectator cuts through both ropes with scissors. Another cut through ropes removes the knot. The two pieces of rope are shown and two of the ends are tied together in a double knot. One end of rope is given to a spectator to hold and other end is given to another spectator. Passing hand over knot, performer causes knot to disappear leaving rope in one piece, fully restored.

Paraphernalia

A piece of soft clothesline five or six feet long.

To Perform

Tie the two ends of rope together with a double knot, then slip hands into the loop of rope and stretch it out as in Fig. 1. The knot is on top about one-third the distance away from left hand.

[Figure bjj: Fig. 1. — The rope loop stretched between both hands, with the knot on top about one-third of the way from the left hand and the two sides lettered A and B.]

Bring hands together and as you do so give right loop a half twist, Fig. 2. This brings lower part of rope B on top of A. Place left hand loop on the other loop in right hand, Fig. 2 A. Stretch rope with left hand in bottom loop and right hand in upper loop. Show rope freely to have just a double loop.

Bring rope back into position, Fig. 1. Half twist rope into position, Fig. 2, and as hands come together, give rope another half twist in same direction, Fig. 3.

[Figure bjk: Fig. 2-2A. — The right loop is given a half twist so that part B lies on A, and a smaller loop labelled Fig. 2A rises above, held in the left hand.]

[Figure bjl: Fig. 3. — The rope is given another half twist in the same direction as the hands come together, the knot hanging at the lower left.]

[Figure bjm: Fig. 4. — The left hand loop lies on top of the right hand loop, forming a twisted double loop with the opening marked C.]

Place left hand loop on top of right hand loop, Fig. 4. Bring left hand into opening at C and stretch out rope between hands. There is now one end looped into the other, Fig. 5. Knot is at top. Left hand conceals the junction of the two loops.

Holding rope as in Fig. 6, have spectator cut the ropes, with sharp scissors, at left side of knot and then the right side (your left and right). Spectator cuts through both ropes. Piece with knot and the other piece fall to the floor.

[Figure bjn: Fig. 5. — The doubled loop of rope held up, the knot at the top and the two ropes lying side by side around the ring.]

[Figure bjo: Fig. 6. — The rope held in both hands as the spectator cuts, with the words cut here lettered and pointing to either side of the knot at the top.]

Allow the ends in left hand to drop which brings the rope into position as in Figs. 7 and 8. The left thumb screens loop part of short piece in the loop of the longer piece. Apparently you hold two separate pieces of rope in your hand.

[Figure bjp: Fig. 7. — Two ropes hang down side by side from the left hand, the thumb screening the loop of the short piece.]

[Figure bjq: Fig. 8. — Two ropes hang down with the short piece looped into the longer piece; L and R mark the left and right ends.]

[Figure bjr: Fig. 9. — Rear view of both hands wrapping the right end of the short piece around the long rope to imitate a single knot.]

[Figure bjs: Fig. 10. — A finished knot tied around the long rope, the ends hanging down in a loop below it.]

[Figure bjt: Fig. 11. — A small tight knot with the ends clipped off close to the knot proper.]

Wrap right end of short piece around long rope as in Fig. 9 to imitate a single knot. The figure shows rear view. Under cover of hands allow right end of short piece to swing back to position in Fig. 8. Tie around long rope to make knot as in Fig. 10. After showing knot, clip off the ends near to knot proper, Fig. 11.

Hold rope with right hand covering knot. Pick up the end hanging down on the left side and give to a spectator at left to hold. Place your left hand over right hand as though to exchange hands over knot, or just to pass rope from right hand to the left. In reality under cover of left hand you slip the knot to the right with right hand, and left hand apparently still covers knot. As you hand the right end to another spectator at right slip the knot towards the end, and give the rope to spectator to hold, he grasping it at the left of your right hand. Now secretly slip the knot off rope.

You can remove a “magic coin” from your pocket, leaving knot in pocket as you do so. Remove left hand from rope to show that knot has vanished and rope is whole again.

Another way of getting rid of knot is to wrap rope around left hand with right hand and steal off knot in right hand during the wrapping process.

A Novel Knot Steal

This method of tying a false knot and stealing it, while rope is stretched between two spectators, is an example of good magic. It is also baffling to those who might expect you to slip a knot off the rope. In this method the knot comes off in the place it is tied.

Short piece is in position, as in Fig. 8 in the preceding trick. Allow right end R to slip down, Fig. 12. Bring end L to right and back to left over rope, Fig. 13. End R slips back out of rope and over to left side so a single knot can be tied around long rope, Fig. 14. Bring single knot out farther on loop of rope, Fig. 15, and stretch out the long rope offering an end each to a spectator at left and at right.

[Figure bju: Fig. 12. — A hand holds the short piece and long rope with end L above; the right end R of the short piece slips down.]

[Figure bjv: Fig. 13. — End L is brought to the right and back to the left over the rope, forming a loop, with end R below.]

[Figure bjw: Fig. 14. — A single knot tied around the long rope, with ends R at the left and L at the right.]

[Figure bjx: Fig. 15. — The single knot brought out farther along the loop of rope, with the long rope stretched across between the two sides.]

Clip ends of short piece, Fig. 16. Place right hand over and around knot. When spectators pull rope taut, knot automatically comes off the rope and into your hand, Fig. 17.

[Figure bjy: Fig. 16. — A single knot tied in the rope, the clipped ends of the short piece showing beside the long rope.]

[Figure bjz: Fig. 17. — The right hand closed over and around the knot as the rope is pulled taut, the knot coming off into the hand.]

Place left hand over right, slipping right hand away while left hand apparently covers knot on rope. At the psychological moment, left hand is opened and raised from rope. Left hand is shown empty.

This type of false knot and stealing of knot will be found handy for many cut and restored rope effects where it is necessary to get rid of a small piece of rope.

Magician’s Cut and Restored Rope

This is a fine impromptu effect that I have used on and off the stage for many years. There is a fairness and squareness about it that makes it very illusive.

Effect

A piece of soft clothesline is brought up into a loop, and loop cut. Performer shows that rope is in two pieces about the same length. The rope is restored into one piece again.

Paraphernalia

A piece of soft clothesline five or six feet in length.

This effect can be done with clothesline much shorter, also with heavy wrapping cord.

To Perform

Hold clothesline as in Fig. 1. An end is in each hand.

[Figure bka: Fig. 1. — The clothesline hangs in a long loop with an end held in each hand, the hands raised at the top.]

Bring the end in right hand over to left hand running it between first and second fingers of left hand and across the hand, Fig. 2.

[Figure bkb: Fig. 2. — A left hand holds the rope across its fingers while the right hand brings an end over it, crossing the rope between the first and second fingers.]

[Figure bkc: Fig. 3. — The left hand holds the crossed rope with the thumb while the right hand draws the other end down along the hand.]

Now bring the other end down as in Fig. 3, holding end with right hand. Continue pulling downward until a loop is formed, Fig. 4. The top of loop should be about center of rope.

Because the left thumb covers the hidden fake loop, the effect to the audience is that you just looped the rope up in your hand.

[Figure bkd: Fig. 4. — The left hand grips the top of a long loop of rope hanging downward, the thumb covering the hidden fake loop at the top.]

[Figure bke: Fig. 5. — A large loop hangs from the left hand, with an arrow marked Cut Here pointing at the top of the loop.]

[Figure bkf: Fig. 6. — The left hand holds the rope as the cut piece at the right falls free, the two cut ends standing up above the thumb.]

Have spectator take scissors and cut rope at top of large loop, Fig. 5. Drop the piece of rope at right allowing it to fall, Fig. 6. It looks as though you were just holding two pieces of rope about the same size. Fig. 7 shows left thumb screening the loop made with short and long pieces.

Bring up the lower right end to the right end of the short piece and hold together between left thumb and first finger, Fig. 8. Bring up the other lower end of long rope and hold as in Fig. 9.

[Figure bkg: Fig. 7. — The left thumb screens the loop made with the short and long pieces, two rope ends hanging down below the hand.]

[Figure bkh: Fig. 8. — A large loop hangs from the left hand, with the lower right end held to the short piece's end between thumb and first finger; a note reads Ends Held Together.]

[Figure bki: Fig. 9. — The left hand holds the other lower end of the long rope, forming a double loop, with the point A marked at the top.]

Grasp rope at A with right hand and slide hand along rope to the right, which straightens out the rope and shows it to be restored again. The short piece is held on the end of long rope, Figs. 10 and 11.

This concealing of short piece by holding it at the end of a long piece is very deceptive.

[Figure bkj: Fig. 10. — The right hand slides along the rope to the right, straightening it, while the left hand holds the short piece at the end of the long rope.]

[Figure bkk: Fig. 11. — A closer view of the left hand holding the short piece at the end of the long rope, with labels pointing to the short piece.]

[Figure bkl: Fig. 12. — The rope is held in both hands as a large loop, the right end in the right hand, with an arrow marked Cut Here at the top of the loop.]

[Figure bkm: Fig. 13. — The left thumb covers the secret loop at the top of the hand while the visible loop hangs down in front of the palm.]

The short piece can be easily gotten rid of, in case you want to throw rope out to audience for examination, by wrapping rope around left hand a bit, and then unrolling rope, and tossing out. Short piece is left in hand.

Variation of Looping

Rope can also be held as in Fig. 12. The right end is held in right hand. Upper part of loop is cut between the hands.

Another method of looping which is very illusive is shown in Fig. 13. The left thumb covers the secret loop. The visible loop is formed by just bringing rope at back of regular loop in front of hand on palm and holding with thumb against fingers. Cut the loop at top, and let the right side of rope fall down as in Figs. 6 and 7.

Perplexo Cut and Restored Rope

This is a logical follow-up for the rope trick just described, where performer is left with a short piece of rope and a long piece.

To Perform

Let us say that you are left in position of Figs. 10 and 11 of the preceding effect. Take hold of lower end of short piece of rope with right hand and fold it up into left hand where end can be held between thumb and fingers, Fig. 1 A. Wrap long rope around left hand a couple of times, and then unroll and let long rope be free from short piece. Holding long rope in right hand, you bring left hand with loop down towards your left side and in turning left side away from audience a bit in order to show long rope, you reverse the loop in left hand into position as in Fig. 1.

Even up the long rope and hold its center between thumb and first and second fingers of right hand, Fig. 2. Ends of rope hang down.

[Figure bkn: Fig. 1-1A. — The left hand holds the folded short piece of rope, its end between thumb and fingers; a smaller inset above, Fig. 1A, shows the end being folded up into the hand.]

[Figure bko: Fig. 2. — The right hand holds the center of the long rope between thumb and first and second fingers, the two ends hanging down.]

[Figure bkp: Fig. 3. — The center of the rope is brought over to the left hand and placed on the concealed loop, the left thumb pressing on it.]

Bring center of rope over to left hand and place on concealed loop, Fig. 3. Pull loop up and adjust, Fig. 4. To audience, you have just brought center of rope up through hand. The left thumb covers place where ends of loop join real center of rope. Turn palm of left hand towards audience and show rope and loop, Fig. 4. Pick up scissors and cut the top of loop, Fig. 5.

[Figure bkq: Fig. 4. — The loop is pulled up and adjusted in the left hand, the thumb covering the place where the ends of the loop join the real center of the rope.]

[Figure bkr: Fig. 5. — The left palm shows the rope and loop to the audience, the two rope ends standing up above the hand ready to be cut.]

*“Someone once asked me, ‘How do you get rid of the ends? Do you cut them off?’ ”* Cut off part of short pieces.

*“Yes, you can cut them off; but you still have ends. And if you cut them off . . . .”* Keep cutting until all of short pieces are cut off, and only long rope left.

*“You still have ends. No, the solution is not in cutting off the ends. The solution is in the art of magic. Watch!”*

Wrap the rope a couple or three times around the left hand. Slip rope off left hand with right hand and throw rope into the air.

*“Cum—hi—ya!”* Catch rope as it descends, stretch it out and show it is restored.

Himber’s Rope Mystery

Richard Himber, is well known nationally as an orchestra leader, and his love for things mysterious has caused him to inject many feats of magic into his programs.

He worked out an impromptu cut and restored rope mystery which is very puzzling, and it has become a favorite of his.

To Perform

A piece of soft clothesline is shown and a single knot tied with both ends, to make a loop of rope about halfway between the bottom of loop and the two ends, Fig. 1.

[Figure bks: Fig. 1. — Both hands hold the two ends of a clothesline tied in a single knot, forming a round loop of rope hanging below.]

[Figure bkt: Fig. 2. — A second single knot tied in the rope, making a double knot above a round loop, with the rope sides lettered A and B and the B side coming out at the right.]

[Figure bku: Fig. 3. — The hands hold the rope at the points marked B on each side of the knot, pulling it taut so the knot becomes a slipknot, with the sides lettered A and B.]

Have a spectator tie another single knot, Fig. 2. You now have a double knot tied in rope. When spectator ties rope normally the B side of rope comes out at right side.

Now if the rope is held at each point marked B with hands on each side of the knot and rope pulled taut, the knot becomes a slipknot, Fig. 3. Knot is now in position on the straight B part of rope to be easily slid off later.

Bring up the two A sections of rope, via front, and hold as in Fig. 4. Have spectator cut through both A sections with scissors. Then suddenly pretend that you have made a mistake.

*“I really didn’t mean to have you cut both pieces of rope. I meant just to have you cut off the loose end from the knot. Now we are in a pickle.”*

[Figure bkv: Fig. 4. — Both hands hold the two A sections of rope, brought up in front, forming a loop below, with an arrow marked Cut Here pointing at the top.]

[Figure bkw: Fig. 5. — The hands hold the rope taut between them, showing the knot near the right hand after the cut.]

Show rope and knot, Fig. 5. You may have to cut a bit off the ends of knot so as not to have too much end length.

*“But since this is a magic program, I will ask you, sir, to hold this end of the rope.”* Give one end of rope to spectator at left. *“And you, sir, to hold the other end.”*

You are now addressing spectator at right. Your right hand covers the knot. Your left hand comes over right hand as though to cover knot while right hand in reality slides knot along rope to right end. Give end of rope to spectator at right and slip off knot as he takes rope. You can just hold knot in right hand, or leave in right hand pocket when you reach for a magic ring to wave at rope. Open left hand and remove from rope showing palm of hand empty and knot gone. Rope is fully restored.

Ted Collins’ Panama Rope Mystery

Richard DuBois first told me about having seen Ted Collins perform this rope effect in Panama, and what a hit it made. At the International Brotherhood of Magicians’ Convention at Fort Worth, Texas, it won a prize trophy. It is very illusive and adapted to the performer who wishes to cut the rope into a number of pieces.

Effect

Performer shows a six-foot length of rope and after cutting it in half, ties two ends together in a knot. He makes a loop of rope in each of the other ends by tying knots in them. Both loops are cut, actually making four pieces of the rope, tied together with three knots. When the rope is wound around magician’s hand, the knots disappear and the rope is fully restored in one piece again.

Paraphernalia

1—A six-foot length of soft clothesline.

2—A pair of scissors.

To Perform

Apparently cut the rope in half by any popular method so that a small piece of rope is left tied around the center of the rope, Fig. 1. The Magician’s Cut and Restored Rope in this lesson is well adapted to this.

[Figure bkx: Fig. 1. — The rope hangs in two strands from a small knot at its center, a small piece of rope tied around the middle.]

[Figure bky: Fig. 2. — The left hand holds the rope, with the right end brought up in front to begin a single knot, a loop hanging below and a knot near the bottom.]

[Figure bkz: Fig. 3. — A single knot is tied at the top of a loop of rope, the side of the loop marked A and the end running off to the upper right.]

Show rope freely with knot in center. Holding rope in left hand as in Fig. 2, bring up the right end of rope in front and then make single knot, Fig. 3. Twist end of rope and side A of loop towards you and over to left side, Fig. 4, and finish making a square knot, Fig. 5.

[Figure bla: Fig. 4. — The end of the rope and side A of the loop are twisted toward you and over to the left, the knot beginning to take shape.]

[Figure blb: Fig. 5. — The finished square knot sits at the top of the loop, side A marked, with the rope and small knot hanging at the left.]

Now reverse the rope and make a similar loop, tying the same *square* knot in the other end, Fig. 6. This results in a double looped rope.

*“In Panama they tie a rope like this for a team of oxen to stick their necks through. That is, if they have any oxen. . . . If they want to take the oxen out of the rope, they cut the rope.”*

Pick up scissors in right hand as you hold looped rope in left hand. Holding rope in left hand as in Fig. 7, cut the rope on the same side as the end. This leaves a knot with both ends about even.

[Figure blc: Fig. 6. — A double looped rope: a loop at the top and another at the bottom, each closed with a square knot, joined by a straight length of rope with a knot between.]

[Figure bld: Fig. 7. — The left hand holds a looped rope while the right hand cuts the loop with scissors on the same side as the end, leaving a knot.]

[Figure ble: Fig. 8. — The left hand holds the rope up at the top, showing the cut loops and the three knots spaced along its length.]

*“Which still leaves a knot, but the loop has been cut.”* Cut other loop in a similar manner. *“What is good for one loop is good for the other.”*

Hold rope in left hand as in Fig. 8, and show freely with the three knots.

Place the right hand on lower part of rope and stretch rope taut. This will cause the upper and the lower knot to take the shape as shown in Fig. 9, which can be readily slipped along the rope proper. Ends are trimmed so as to keep knots from being too bulky. All three knots should be trimmed as requirements demand.

[Figure blf: Fig. 9. — A close view of the upper knot as it takes shape when the rope is pulled taut, with its short ends sticking out.]

*“By clipping the knots, we have less knots.”*

Wrap rope around the fingers of left hand, Fig. 10, and slip off the knots into the right hand as the latter slides along the rope.

[Figure blg: Fig. 10. — The rope is wrapped around the fingers of the left hand while the right hand slides along the rope and slips the knots off.]

Reach into pocket for “magic ring” or “magic powder,” leaving knots in pocket.

Allow a spectator, if one is near, to grasp one end of the rope. Unwrap rope around hand and show rope to be fully restored in one piece. Or just unwrap rope yourself, exhibit it, and pass for examination, if you wish.

Note

Much of the beauty in this rope mystery lies in the nonchalant, apparently careless manner in which the loops of rope are cut. By making square knots it is so easy to cut the rope on the same side beside which the rope end lies.

Rope Routines

There is enough material in this one lesson alone to make a number of rope routines.

You can easily arrange a routine that will be very entertaining, logical in operation, and mystifying with plenty of variety.

Start with a quick opener, go into knot effects, and finish with a cut and restored method or two.

[Figure blh: A small black and white rabbit in evening dress, standing upright, holds an egg in one raised paw and a sack in the other.]
