Lesson 32: “Ghostlite” Mysteries

S. W. Reilly of Columbus, Ohio, has made possible this lesson on luminous effects, through his development of a superior luminous paint sold under the trade name of “Ghostlite.” It is made of harmless chemicals that absorb rays of light which are thrown off in the dark. Objects painted with “Ghostlite” are exposed to a bright light for a few moments and they will then glow in the dark. Such objects can be used over and over again.

_ This lesson familiarizes the student with some of the many types of illusions dependent upon the use of luminous paint, and will enable him to work out his own ideas for mysterious ghostly phenomena.

The following effects are taken out of Syl Reilly’s own personal repertoire, and will prove quite effective.

Ghostly Card in the Dark

Effect

A spectator selects a card and the lights in the room are extinguished. Presently a large luminous pip is seen floating around. Other pips appear and, after moving around in the dark, come together and form a ghostly image of the selected card.

Paraphernalia and Preparation

1—With “Ghostlite” luminous paint, make a large diamond on each of three 4-inch pieces of black cardboard, Fig. 1. Expose the painted sides of the cardboards to a bright light for a few seconds after which put the cardboards into your coat pocket.

[Figure bli: Fig. 1. — A large diamond pip painted on a piece of black cardboard, shown as a thick luminous outline around an open diamond.]

2—A deck of cards. Secretly place the Three of Diamonds on the bottom of the deck.

To Perform

Have a spectator select a card. The selected card must be the Three of Diamonds, therefore it should be forced. Various methods have been described for forcing a card. A simple method is to place the deck of cards on table, backs up. Ask spectator to cut the deck. Have him place the upper cut portion B near the lower portion on table, Fig. 2.

[Figure blj: Fig. 2. — Two packets of cards lie face down on the table at an angle, the upper cut portion B set near the lower portion A.]

[Figure blk: Fig. 3. — A blank piece of paper or calling card lies across the corner of packet B, with packet A beside it.]

[Figure bll: Fig. 4. — Packet A lies on top of packet B with the blank paper or calling card showing between them, completing the cut.]

Calmly place a piece of blank paper or calling card on the packet B that spectator placed on the table, Fig. 3. Complete the cut by placing packet A on top of B, Fig. 4. Thus the playing card directly above the paper or calling card is the Three of Diamonds.

Be seated in one corner of the room with all spectators facing you and have the lights extinguished. Remove one of the cardboards from your pocket, unpainted side towards the spectators. Now slowly turn the painted side towards the spectators and the ghostly pip will seem to materialize from nowhere. Move the cardboard around in a crazy fashion for several moments, then bring it to your mouth and hold one corner tightly between your teeth.

[Figure blm: Fig. 5. — A seated man in the dark holds one diamond cardboard overhead, one between his teeth and one lower in his hand, forming the Three of Diamonds.]

Produce the other two cardboards in the foregoing manner, one at a time. Holding a cardboard in each hand, move them slowly around, finally bring one above and one below the cardboard held by the teeth so as to form the image of the Three of Diamonds, Fig. 5. In the dark, this ghost card will appear to be four or five feet in height, Fig. 6.

[Figure bln: Fig. 6. — A tall dark silhouette of a ghostly figure with three glowing diamond pips one above the other, the ghost card four or five feet high.]

Cause the pips to vanish one at a time by simply turning the blank or black side towards the spectators, then secretly return the cardboards to the coat pocket.

Call for the lights up and have a spectator disclose the selected card, which in this instance will be the Three of Diamonds, the same as the ghost card.

Date on a Borrowed Coin

An interesting effect would be to materialize the date on any borrowed coin. I would suggest the use of two sets of cardboards bearing the numerals from 0 to 9. Coin date can be read under light of one of the cards, the light being away from spectators.

A simple method is to have a half-dollar palmed in your hand upon which you know the date of coin, and in your pocket are four cardboards bearing the same numerals. Borrow a half-dollar from a spectator and switch it for one you have palmed. Allow another spectator to hold your half-dollar in his closed hand. The original borrowed coin can be disposed of when lights go out. The four cardboards are brought from the pocket and numbers brought into line. Cards returned to pocket. Lights up and coin in hand is checked and returned as the original borrowed coin.

A Selected Word

A word could be forced from a book and duplicate letters be painted on cardboards and placed in the pocket.

Spirit Answers

A set of cardboards, each bearing a letter of the alphabet, Fig. 7, might easily be manipulated, one at a time, to spell out names or spirit answers to spectators’ questions.

[Figure blo: Fig. 7. — A black cardboard bearing a large white letter A, one of the set of lettered cardboards used to spell names or spirit answers.]

The Phantom Die

Here is a cute little pocket trick for special occasions.

Effect

A die with the usual spots from one to six is removed from a small cloth bag by a spectator who thinks of a number and returns the die to the bag. Performer names the thought of number.

Paraphernalia

1—A die about ¾ or 1 inch square. It should be a colored die with white spots. Coat each one of the spots with luminous paint, Fig. 8.

[Figure blp: Fig. 8. — A die drawn in perspective with the top, front and side faces showing, each white spot coated with luminous paint.]

2—A cloth bag about 4 inches wide and 6 inches long. Bag can have a draw string in order to close it, if desired.

3—A lighted reading lamp on spectator’s table.

To Perform

Spectator is asked to think of any number from one to six. He is given bag with die and told to remove the die and place on the table so all can see with the selected number upright.

While this is being done you turn your back. Spectator then returns die to the bag and gives the bag to you.

In looking in the bag to remove die, you will readily see which side shines brightly and the number on the shining side will be the number thought of.

When spectator places die on table the rays from the lighted table lamp activate the prepared spots uppermost on the die. In a room where a floor lamp may be used with shade, have spectator hold die on palm of his hand under the lighted lamp so all may see it.

The Magazine Test

This test will appeal to those with a taste for the literary type of mental effects. Such work always makes a good impression.

Effect

Spectator secretly selects a page in one of the popular weekly publications and carefully notes the top line of the selected page. Performer immediately takes the magazine, and turning to the secretly selected page, reads aloud the top line.

Paraphernalia

A weekly publication such as *Saturday Evening Post*, *Liberty*, or *Collier’s Magazine*.

Preparation

The magazine is prepared by placing a minute spot of “Ghostlite” luminous paint on all the odd-numbered pages, near the upper right hand corner, Fig. 9.

[Figure blq: Fig. 9. — An open magazine seen from above, with a picture on the right-hand page and a small spot of luminous paint marked near its upper right corner.]

To Perform

For this test you select for an assistant, a spectator who is seated near a lighted lamp. Give him the magazine. Let us say it is a *Liberty*.

*“In all magazines we have odd- and even-numbered pages. Will you kindly select and name aloud which you prefer—the odd or even pages.”*

Regardless of the spectator’s choice you have eliminated half the pages in the magazine and now know whether the selected line will be on the odd- or even-numbered pages. Let us say he says, “Odd.”

*“There are about fifty leaves or a hundred pages in this magazine. I want you to think secretly of any odd number between one and a hundred. Now while I turn my back to you, secretly open the magazine to the odd number you have thought of and secretly read the top line on the selected page.”*

Turn your back to spectator while he does this. As the spectator reads, the light will activate the luminous dot on the page.

*“When you have pictured well this first line in your mind, close the magazine.”*

This done, you turn again and face spectator. You take the magazine from him, and by casting a shadow on the pages with your body, quickly glance through the pages by running thumb along the edges near upper right corner and locate the luminous spot that glows. Knowing beforehand that the selected page is odd, you can easily pick out the correct page.

*“Concentrate a moment on the line you were reading. I think I catch what you are thinking.”*

Open out magazine and read aloud the top line on the selected page.

The Phantom Tray

This is another interesting mental effect.

Effect

Performer holds an ash tray behind his back. Into the tray a spectator places any small object such as a coin, key, knife, ring, match or the like, and after concentrating on the article for a moment, removes the article again and places it in his pocket. Even though the performer does not see the article, he can readily know what it is.

Paraphernalia

1—A Phantom Tray. This is made by painting the inside bottom of a cheap ash tray with luminous paint, Fig. 10.

[Figure blr: Fig. 10. — A shallow oval ash tray seen at a slant, with an arrow from the words luminous paint pointing to the painted inside bottom.]

Preparation

The Phantom Tray is carried in the inside coat pocket.

To Perform

Select a spectator who is seated near a lighted lamp.

*“Picture some article in your mind that you might happen to have on your person. Any small article such as a coin, key, knife, ring, match or the like. While my back is turned to you remove that article and hold it tightly concealed in your closed right hand.”*

You turn your back to spectator while this is being done. After spectator has the article concealed in his hand you reach into your inside pocket remove the Tray and hold it behind your back, towards the spectator.

*“In order for you to concentrate better on the article place it on the tray for a moment and concentrate on it intently.”*

Spectator places object on tray. Let us say it is an auto key. You hold tray a moment so that light from lamp activates the luminous paint.

*“Now remove the article and place in your closed hand again.”*

Spectator does as directed. You immediately return the tray to your inside coat pocket. When the shadow of your coat strikes the tray, as you replace it, you will notice a black silhouette of the article which is easily recognized. In this instance we said it was a key. You can tell by size and shape it must be an auto key. Turn towards spectator.

*“The article you were concentrating on was a KEY—I would say—an auto key! Am I right? Correct. Thank you.”*

“Ghostlite” in the Dark Seance

So called “spirit” seances and the production of luminous ghostly effects have been quite popular, and combined with an audience’s imagination, “Ghostlite” effects can be used quite dramatically.

Later in the course much more will be said about the dark room seances.

The Evil Eye

You can have lots of fun with the evil eye when holding a dark seance, especially when it floats in mid-air and over the spectator’s heads.

Make a large cat’s eye with luminous paint on a piece of black cardboard about 4 inches square, Fig. 11.

[Figure bls: Fig. 11. — A black diamond-shaped cardboard with a large cat's eye cut or painted in its centre, a slit pupil inside a pointed oval.]

Secure a 25 cent steel extension rule and have a short pin or hook soldered to one end.

Before presenting this effect, expose the Evil Eye to a bright light and place it, along with the extension rule, in your coat pocket.

Have all the spectators in the room seated and facing you when the lights are extinguished. Bring the Evil Eye into view and wave it around for a few seconds. Then fasten it to the extension rule. Slowly and noiselessly feed out the extension rule until you can float the Evil Eye high into space and over the spectators’ heads.

To make the Evil Eye vanish, reverse the foregoing, and when you have all the apparatus in your pocket, call for the lights.

Spooky Lights

Spooky lights darting here and there around a dark room can always be relied upon for an eerie effect. Many and varied are the pieces of apparatus made for accomplishing this effect, but the most simple method is to put a large spot of “Ghostlite” luminous paint on the bottom of each shoe, under the instep near the heel. In this position the paint is not disturbed when walking, Fig. 12.

[Figure blt: Fig. 12. — The sole of a shoe seen from below, with an arrow from the words luminous paint pointing to a spot under the instep near the heel.]

The effect is particularly good when those present are seated in a circle, in a dark room.

Before the demonstation you must expose the luminous spots to a bright light, then after being seated in the circle and all is in darkness just raise either foot, or both feet, as high as possible and wave the foot or feet around a bit. The spooky light becomes visible to the persons facing you. Bring the foot or feet back to floor and the light vanishes.

You could even stand on the chair and raise foot higher.

This effect also has possibilities for presentation under test conditions by having your arms and hands securely bound or held by unknown spectators. This will not interfere with waving your feet about.

Apparitions of Spirit Articles

Apparitions of spirit articles are easily made and used. Just put a coat of “Ghostlite” luminous paint directly on the articles you desire to use and after exposing them to a bright electric light for a few moments, they will glow in the dark.

Ordinary articles such as horns, bells, stars, etc., can be cut from cardboard and readily hidden about one’s person. Paint the cardboards black on one side and give the opposite side a coat of luminous paint, Figs. 13, 14 and 15.

[Figure blu: Fig. 13. — A cardboard cut-out horn and hand bell, the horn slanting up across the bell, set against a black patch.]

[Figure blv: Fig. 14. — A heart and a five-pointed star cut from cardboard, overlapping, against a black patch.]

[Figure blw: Fig. 15. — A cardboard cut-out of a gloved hand with the fingers spread, set against a black patch.]

Luminous articles must be easily accessible in the dark whether hidden on your person or in the room. Fumbling or noise in the dark will prove fatal to this type of ghost effect.

A luminous glove, its fingers wiggling, will create a riot when suddenly flashed before a crowd of people in any dark place. Give an ordinary white cloth glove a coat of luminous paint. When dry, and exposed to a bright light, you are ready and prepared to go places, and do things.

Ghostly Faces

The late Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, it is said, claimed to have witnessed and recognized faces at several of the dark room seances he attended.

You can duplicate this effect at a cost of but a few cents. Purchase a cheap gauze mask representing the type of person you wish to have appear in the dark. Give the mask a coat of luminous paint, allowing a one-inch band around the mask to be painted black, Fig. 16. Always hold the unpainted portion of the mask when handling it in the dark and your fingers will not be seen.

[Figure blx: Fig. 16. — A face mask in outline with closed eyes, eyebrows, nose and mouth drawn on, a dark band painted along its left edge and top.]

When the mask is dry, redraw the eyes, eyebrows, mouth, etc., with a soft black lead pencil. The mask may be concealed in your clothes until wanted. You can secrete three or four of them, if desired.

Present this effect in a dark room with a little showmanship and you will be surprised how frequently the spectators’ imaginations will run wild, claiming they recognize the ghostly face.

Ectoplasm

It is claimed that ectoplasm is a “spirit” substance that emanates from a medium’s body, is visible in the dark, and after a short exposure, returns whence it came. It is told that should a person touch this ecto-plasm the medium would likely pass away.

This weird idea has been demonstrated by the use of many complicated devices, but here is a simple method whereby you can get the same effect.

Secure an old-time piece of lace curtain about 16 inches long and 5 inches wide. Tear or cut this piece of lace into a pennant shape so that the edge will be rough and straggly. Coat the lace with luminous paint, Fig. 17.

[Figure bly: Fig. 17. — A pennant-shaped piece of lace curtain with a rough, straggly edge, shown against a black patch, coated with luminous paint.]

Before demonstrating expose the lace to a bright light, then tuck it down between your collar and left side of neck so that the narrow tip is accessible.

In the dark room, grasp the tip of the luminous lace hidden behind your collar and slowly draw it from its hiding place. Keep your head turned towards the left side and to a keen observer it will appear as if the substance was coming from your mouth. Keep the lace near your body at all times, Fig. 18.

[Figure blz: Fig. 18. — A performer's head turned to the left, with a long strip of luminous lace drawn from behind his collar and held up in his raised hand near his mouth.]

To dematerialize the ectoplasm, it is slowly rolled into a small ball and placed in your coat pocket. To really appreciate the value of this mysterious effect, try it several times before a mirror in the dark and you undoubtedly will be so well pleased that you will want to perform the effect over and over again.

Ghost Materialization

The most interesting and intriguing of all luminous effects is the materialization of a ghost in the dark. Although ghosts are comparatively easy to construct and build, the success of a ghost materialization depends considerably on the showmanship and atmosphere created by the performer. In such a seance music is a great asset.

One good method for making an inexpensive and useful ghost is to paint the figure of a ghost on a strip of black cloth with luminous paint. Then tack a black stick or batten across the top edge of the cloth, just above the ghost, Fig. 19.

[Figure bma: Fig. 19. — A strip of black cloth hung from a batten at the top, with a ghost figure in a hooded robe painted on it with luminous paint.]

When dry, and ready for use, expose the painted side to a bright electric light and roll the cloth around the stick like a window blind. In this condition it is easily concealed under coat or vest.

To materialize this ghost, unroll the cloth with blank side facing spectators and hold by the stick, then slowly, or instantly, turn the luminous side towards the spectators. The speed of the materialization is easily governed. To dematerialize just reverse the foregoing operation.

Another method for making a ghost is to use a wire frame that is shaped with a head and shoulders. To this frame is attached a luminous mask, and several strips of luminous cheesecloth hang from the shoulders forming a ghostly robe, Fig. 20.

[Figure bmb: Fig. 20. — A tall ghost on a wire frame with a luminous mask for a face and long strips of cheesecloth hanging from the shoulders as a robe, against a black patch.]

This type of ghost is concealed behind a black screen or in a black bag until wanted, and is extremely suitable for ghost shows. It can be floated over the audience by simply attaching to a long black fishing pole. For a vanish just bring the ghost behind the black screen or if you desire a dissolving disappearance, gather it up slowly and put into a black bag.

Spirit Lights Under Test Conditions

What an experienced showman can devise, and the flights of imagination he can induce through his remarkable power of suggestion, is well illustrated in this effect which employs a very simple little article.

Edward Saint, the Houdini Archivist, and a veteran mystic who is known for seeing things “through the monocle,” was once challenged by a group to produce some “spirit” manifestations under rigid test conditions which they would impose.

Effect

Four men comprised the challengers. An audience sat in a circle about the room. Mr. Saint was seated in a chair at one end of the circle. Of the challengers, A sat on Saint’s right knee, facing the audience, and with one foot on Saint’s right foot. B sat in a similar position on Saint’s left knee. C stood to the right of Saint and slightly back of him, C with both hands holding Saint’s extended right arm and hand. D likewise stood and held Saint’s left arm and hand. Thus, seemingly under “complete control,” what could the medium produce in the way of spirit manifestations? The audience had not been informed what might occur, but they, as well as the challengers, were in an expectant mood when all lights were turned out by agreement. A rug covered the floor.

Faint flashes of light appeared in a distant corner of the room, then vanished . . . successive flashes occurred in other parts of the room, some high in the air, some down low . . . the lights flitted about, gradually growing brighter, sometimes lingering a bit longer, sometimes a series of momentary flashes! Spectators felt definite “spirit touches” from the fingers of unseen hands.

Ejaculations of the spectators were ample proof that they had been “seeing things,” a fact which was freely acknowledged, and reaffirmed when the lights were turned on—and there sat Mr. Saint, calm and nonchalant under the weight of A and B, with his arms and hands still firmly held by C and D. He could not move under such restraint, and it is a fact that the four challengers did not once release their control for even a moment from start to finish.

Paraphernalia

1—One “Luminous Locator” button, such as sold for attachment to electric light pull cords, etc.

2—Five or six lead pellets or “BB” shot.

To Perform

The mechanical part of the secret is apparent from the paraphernalia mentioned, but the showmanship and patter are responsible for the seeming room-wide travels of the lights, and a certain amazement on the part of the challengers who never saw any of the lights at any time, despite the fact that everybody else saw them!

Just before the time set for the seance, Mr. Saint exposed his luminous button to brilliant light and placed it in his mouth, concealed from view when he talked. The “BB” shot were also concealed in the mouth. He saw to it that A and B faced the audience as they sat upon his knees; and that C and D were a little back of him, as they held his arms, “*so as not to obstruct the view of the audience any more than absolutely necessary.*”

Thus A, B, C, and D at no time could see into Saint’s mouth, and since the luminous button remained in Saint’s mouth all the time, it explains the inability of the challengers to see the manifestations. They would have discovered the secret had they been able to get a glimpse when the light was “made to appear” by the mere opening of the mouth. Mr. Saint’s patter during the seance was designed to create the impression that the lights were in all parts of the room, especially at points far distant from him.

Such was his showmanship that the spectators afterward swore that they saw lights “all over the room,” whereas the only light ever visible was the tiny luminous bulb in Mr. Saint’s mouth, and it, of course, appeared in only that one spot. His patter ran something like the following, and each time he mentioned seeing a light in any location, however near or far from him, he opened his mouth so anyone who happened to be looking in his direction would see it—such spectators would naturally assume that this was another light—one of them that Saint said he saw in a distant spot, and this actual light which the spectator saw with his own eyes.

Large mirrors, or polished reflecting surfaces, strategically located around the seance room would add to the seeming multiplicity of the lights and would enable even the challengers to observe the mysterious lights as though at an extreme distance.

The “spirit touches” occur when the medium pops out one at a time the “BB” shot from between his teeth. It is surprising with what force a shot can be thus projected at the spectators, the shot striking them unexpectedly and producing the desired effect. The carpeted floor prevents any sound being made as the shot finally falls to the floor.

The Patter

*“All quiet, please. In a few moments your eyes will become accustomed to the darkness . . . THERE!! . . . over THERE, on your left, see that flash! . . . it’s gone . . . no, THERE it is again, over your heads . . . now up near the ceiling . . . SEE? . . . it fades out . . . just wait and watch . . . maybe it will return. . . .*

*“Now there are two of them!* *.* *.* *.* *vision is improving .* *.* *.* *easier to see through the veil of darkness .* *.* *.* *one right over me .* *.* *.* *there’s one at the rear .* *.* *.* *they’re both flashing on and off .* *.* *.* *see them flit about!* *.* *.* *.* *now they’re here, now over there .* *.* *.* *back again .* *.* *.* *and gone again .* *.* *.* *there’s a faint light coming towards me .* *.* *.* *oh, so fast does it seem to rush forward .* *.* *.* *right upon me .* *.* *.* *NOW!* *.* *.* *.* *and so bright .* *.* *.* *but vanished again .* *.* *.* *THERE?* *.* *.* *.* *no, all is black .* *.* *.* *do you see any more flashes?* *.* *.* *.* *I don’t .* *.* *.* *still all black .* *.* *.* *that bright one must have waved farewell .* *.* *.* *goodbye .* *.* *.* *goodbye .* *.* *.* *come again some other time .* *.* *.* *thank you, friendly tokens from the great beyond.* *.* *.* *.* *Will someone please turn on the lights?”*

Thus ends what I think is a great seance, short, but creating a profound and lasting impression. Edward Saint has again proven that showmanship can turn the tiniest effect into a sensation.
