page: 4

+ and isolated facts. The only justification for devoting a separate chapter to acoustics in the theory of the motions of elastic bodies, to which it essentially belongs, is, that the application of the ear as an instrument of research influenced the nature of the experiments and the methods of observation.

But in addition to a *physical* there is a *physiological theory of acoustics*, the aim of which is to investigate the processes that take place within the ear itself. The section of this science which treats of the conduction of the motions to which sound is due, from the entrance of the external ear to the expansions of the nerves in the labyrinth of the inner ear, has received much attention, especially in Germany, since ground was broken by ¶ Johannes Mueller. At the same time it must be confessed that not many results have as yet been established with certainty. But these attempts attacked only a portion of the problem, and left the rest untouched. Investigations into the processes of each of our organs of sense, have in general three different parts. First we have to discover how the agent reaches the nerves to be excited, as light for the eye and sound for the ear. This may be called the *physical* part of the corresponding physiological investigation. Secondly we have to investigate the various modes in which the nerves themselves are excited, giving rise to their various *sensations*, and finally the laws according to which these sensations result in mental images of determinate external objects, that is, in *perceptions*. Hence we have secondly a specially *physiological* investigation for sensations, and ¶ thirdly, a specially *psychological* investigation for perceptions. Now whilst the physical side of the theory of hearing has been already frequently attacked, the results obtained for its *physiological* and *psychological* sections are few, imperfect, and accidental. Yet it is precisely the physiological part in especial—the theory of the sensations of hearing—to which the theory of music has to look for the foundation of its structure.

In the present work, then, I have endeavoured in the first place to collect and arrange such materials for the theory of the *sensations of hearing* as already existed, or as I was able to add from my own personal investigations. Of course such a first attempt must necessarily be somewhat imperfect, and be limited to the elements and the most interesting divisions of the subject discussed. It is in this light that I wish these studies to be regarded. ¶ Although in the propositions thus collected there is little of entirely new discoveries, and although even such apparently new facts and observations as they contain are, for the most part, more properly speaking the immediate consequences of my having more completely carried out known theories and methods of investigation to their legitimate consequences, and of my having more thoroughly exhausted their results than had heretofore been attempted, yet I cannot but think that the facts frequently receive new importance and new illumination, by being regarded from a fresh point of view and in a fresh connection.

The First Part of the following investigation is essentially physical and physiological. It contains a general investigation of the phenomenon of harmonic *upper partial tones*. The nature of this phenomenon is established, and its relation to *quality of tone* is proved. A series of qualities of tone are analysed in respect to their harmonic upper partial tones, and it results
