page: 9

This is a peculiarity of all so-called *undulatory motions*. Suppose a stone to be thrown into a piece of calm water. Round the spot struck there forms a little ring of wave, which, advancing equally in all directions, expands to a constantly increasing circle. Corresponding to this ring of wave, sound also proceeds in the air from the excited point and advances in all directions as far as the limits of the mass of air extend. The process in the air is essentially identical with that on the surface of the water. The principal difference consists in the spherical propagation of sound in all directions through the atmosphere which fills all surrounding space, whereas the waves of the water can only advance in rings or circles on its surface. The crests of the waves of water correspond in the waves of sound to spherical shells where the air is condensed, and the troughs to shells where it is rarefied. On the free surface of the water, the mass when compressed can slip upwards and so form ridges, but in the interior of the sea of air, the mass must be condensed, ¶ as there is no unoccupied spot for its escape.

The waves of water, therefore, continually advance without returning. But we must not suppose that the particles of water of which the waves are composed advance in a similar manner to the waves themselves. The motion of the particles of water on the surface can easily be rendered visible by floating a chip of wood upon it. This will exactly share the motion of the adjacent particles. Now, such a chip is not carried on by the rings of wave. It only bobs up and down and finally rests on its original spot. The adjacent particles of water move in the same manner. When the ring of wave reaches them they are set bobbing; when it has passed over them they are still in their old place, and remain there at rest, while the ring of wave continues to advance towards fresh spots on the surface of the water, and sets new particles of water in motion. Hence the waves which pass over the surface of the water are constantly built up of fresh particles of water. What really advances as a wave is only the tremor, the altered form of the surface, ¶ while the individual particles of water themselves merely move up and down transiently, and never depart far from their original position.

The same relation is seen still more clearly in the waves of a rope or chain. Take a flexible string of several feet in length, or a thin metal chain, hold it at one end and let the other hang down, stretched by its own weight alone. Now, move the hand by which you hold it quickly to one side and back again. The excursion which we have caused in the upper end of the string by moving the hand, will run down it as a kind of wave, so that constantly lower parts of the string will make a sidewards excursion while the upper return again into the straight position of rest. But it is evident that while the wave runs down, each individual particle of the string can have only moved horizontally backwards and forwards, and can have taken no share at all in the advance of the wave.

The experiment succeeds still better with a long elastic line, such as a thick piece of india-rubber tubing, or a brass-wire spiral spring, from eight to twelve feet ¶ in length, fastened at one end, and slightly stretched by being held with the hand at the other. The hand is then easily able to excite waves which will run very regularly to the other end of the line, be there reflected and return. In this case it is also evident that it can be no part of the line itself which runs backwards and forwards, but that the advancing wave is composed of continually fresh particles of the line. By these examples the reader will be able to form a mental image of the kind of motion to which sound belongs, where the material particles of the body merely make periodical oscillations, while the tremor itself is constantly propagated forwards.

Now let us return to the surface of the water. We have supposed that one of its points has been struck by a stone and set in motion. This motion has spread out in the form of a ring of wave over the surface of the water, and having reached the chip of wood has set it bobbing up and down. Hence by means of the wave, the motion which the stone first excited in one point of the surface of the water has been communicated to the chip which was at another point of the same surface.
