page: 14

The disc shown in fig. 1, p. 11c, has two circles of 8 and 12 holes respectively. Each, blown successively, gives two tones which form with each other a perfect Fifth, independently of the velocity of rotation of the disc. Hence, *two musical tones stand in the relation of a so-called Fifth when the higher tone makes three vibrations in the same time as the lower makes two.*

If we obtain a musical tone by blowing into a circle of 8 holes, we require a circle of 16 holes for its Octave, and 12 for its Fifth. Hence the ratio of the pitch numbers of the Fifth and the Octave is 12 : 16 or 3 : 4. But the interval between the Fifth and the Octave is the Fourth, so that we see that *when two musical tones form a Fourth, the higher makes four vibrations while the lower makes three.*

The polyphonic siren of Dove has usually four circles of 8, 10, 12 and 16 holes respectively. The series of 16 holes gives the Octave of the series of 8 holes, and ¶ the Fourth of the series of 12 holes. The series of 12 holes gives the Fifth of the series of 8 holes, and the minor Third of the series of 10 holes. While the series of 10 holes gives the major Third of the series of 8 holes. The four series consequently give the constituent musical tones of a major chord.

By these and similar experiments we find the following relations of the pitch numbers:—

	1 : 2 | Octave
	2 : 3 | Fifth
	3 : 4 | Fourth
	4 : 5 | major Third
	5 : 6 | minor Third

When the fundamental tone of a given interval is taken an Octave higher, the interval is said to be *inverted*. Thus a Fourth is an inverted Fifth, a minor Sixth ¶ an inverted major Third, and a major Sixth an inverted minor Third. The corresponding ratios of the pitch numbers are consequently obtained by doubling the smaller number in the original interval.

	From 2 : 3 | the Fifth, we thus have | 3 : 4 | the Fourth
	„ 4 : 5 | the major Third . . . | 5 : 8 | the minor Sixth
	„ 5 : 6 | the minor Third, | 6 : 10 = 3 : 5 | the major Sixth.

These are all the consonant intervals which lie within the compass of an Octave. With the exception of the minor Sixth, which is really the most imperfect of the above consonances, the ratios of their vibrational numbers are all expressed by means of the whole numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Comparatively simple and easy experiments with the siren, therefore, corroborate that remarkable law mentioned in the Introduction (p. 1d), according to which the pitch numbers of consonant musical tones bear to each other ratios expressible ¶ by small whole numbers. In the course of our investigation we shall employ the same instrument to verify more completely the strictness and exactness of this law.

Long before anything was known of pitch numbers, or the means of counting them, Pythagoras had discovered that if a string be divided into two parts by a bridge, in such a way as to give two consonant musical tones when struck, the lengths of these parts must be in the ratio of these whole numbers. If the bridge is so placed that 2/3 of the string lie to the right, and 1/3 on the left, so that the two lengths are in the ratio of 2 : 1, they produce the interval of an Octave, the greater length giving the deeper tone. Placing the bridge so that 3/5 of the string lie on the right and 2/5 on the left, the ratio of the two lengths is 3 : 2, and the interval is a Fifth.

These measurements had been executed with great precision by the Greek musicians, and had given rise to a system of tones, contrived with considerable art. For these measurements they used a peculiar instrument, the *monochord*,
