page: 21

+ position f, and then it continued descending on the opposite side till the end of \(\frac{9}{120}\) of a second and so on. We can also easily determine where the vibrating point was to be found at the end of any fraction of this hundred-and-twentieth of a second. A drawing of this kind consequently shows immediately at what point of its path a vibrating particle is to be found at any given instant, and hence gives a complete image of its motion. If the reader wishes to reproduce the motion of the vibrating point, he has only to cut a narrow vertical slit in a piece of paper, and place it over fig. 6 or fig. 7, so as to show a very small portion of the curve through the vertical slit, and draw the book slowly but uniformly under the slit, from right to left; the white or black point in the slit will then appear to move backwards and forwards in precisely the same manner as the original drawing point attached to the fork, only of course much more slowly.

We are not yet able to make all vibrating bodies describe their vibrations

[Figure 7]

+ ¶ directly on paper, although much progress has recently been made in the methods required for this purpose. But we are able ourselves to draw such curves for all sounding bodies, when the law of their motion is known, that is, when we know how far the vibrating point will be from its mean position at any given moment of time. We then set off on a horizontal line, such as e f, fig. 7, ¶ lengths corresponding to the interval of time, and let fall perpendiculars to it on either side, making their lengths equal or proportional to the distance of the vibrating point from its mean position, and then by joining the extremities of these perpendiculars we obtain a curve such as the vibrating body would have drawn if it had been possible to make it do so.

Thus fig. 8 represents the motion of the hammer raised by a water-wheel, or of a point in a string excited by a violin bow. For the first 9 intervals it rises slowly and uniformly, and during the 10th it falls suddenly down.

[Figure 8]

[Figure 9]

¶ Fig. 9 represents the motion of the ball which is struck up again as soon as it comes down. Ascent and descent are performed with equal rapidity, whereas in fig. 8 the ascent takes much longer time. But at the lowest point the blow suddenly changes the kind of motion.

Physicists, then, having in their mind such curvilinear forms, representing the law of the motion of sounding bodies, speak briefly of the *form of vibration* of a sounding body, and assert that *the quality of tone depends on the form of vibration.* This assertion, which has hitherto been based simply on the fact of our knowing that the quality of the tone could not possibly depend on the periodic time of a vibration, or on its amplitude (p. 10c), will be strictly examined hereafter. It will be shown to be in so far correct that every different quality of tone requires a different form of vibration, but on the other hand it will also appear that different forms of vibration may correspond to the same quality of tone.

On exactly and carefully examining the effect produced on the ear by different forms of vibration, as for example that in fig. 8, corresponding nearly to a violin
