page: 30

+ motion of the air, and that its pitch is determined by the length of the periodic time, but that the kind of motion during any one single period is perfectly arbitrary, and may indeed be infinitely various. If then the motion of the air lying in the aural passage is not periodic, or if at least its periodic time is not as short as that of an audible musical tone, this fact will distinguish it from any motion which belongs to a musical tone; it must belong either to noises or to several simultaneous musical tones. Of this kind are really the greater number of cases where the different musical tones have been only accidentally combined, and are therefore not designedly framed into musical chords; nay, even where orchestral music is performed, the method of tempered tuning which at present prevails, prevents an accurate fulfilment of the conditions under which alone the resulting motion of the air can be exactly periodic. Hence in the greater number of cases a want of periodicity in the motion might furnish a mark for distinguishing the presence ¶ of a composite mass of musical tones.

But a composite mass of musical tones may also give rise to a *purely periodic motion of the air*, namely, *when all the musical tones which intermingle, have pitch numbers which are all multiples of one and the same old number*, or which

[Figure 11]

+ ¶ comes to the same thing, when *all these musical tones, so far as their pitch is concerned, may be regarded as the upper partial tones of the same prime tone.* It ¶ was mentioned in Chapter I. (p. 22a, b) that the pitch numbers of the upper partial tones are multiples of the pitch number of the prime tone. The meaning of this rule will be clear from a particular example. The curve A, fig. 11, represents a pendular motion in the manner explained in Chap. I. (p. 21b), as produced in the air of the aural passage by a tuning-fork in action. The horizontal lengths in the curves of fig. 11, consequently represent the passing time, and the vertical heights the corresponding displacements of the particles of air in the aural passage. Now suppose that with the first simple tone to which the curve A corresponds, there is sounded a second simple tone, represented by the curve B, an Octave higher than the first. This condition requires that two vibrations of the curve B should be made in the same time as one vibration of the curve A. In A, the sections of the curve d₀δ and δ δ₁ are perfectly equal and similar. The curve B is also divided into equal and similar sections e ε and ε ε₁ by the points e, ε, ε₁. We could certainly halve each of the sections e ε and ε ε₁, and thus obtain equal and similar sections, each of which would then correspond to a single period of B. But by
