page: 32

+ receive another form if the curves B, fig. 11, were displaced a little with respect to the curve A before the addition were commenced. Let B be displaced by being slid to the right until the point e falls under d₁ in A, and the composition will then give the curve D with narrow crests and broad troughs, both sides of the crest being, however, equally steep; whereas in the curve C one side is steeper than the other. If we displace the curve B still more by sliding it to the right till e falls under d₂, the compound curve would resemble the reflection of C in a mirror: that is, it would have the same form as C reversed as to right and left; the steeper inclination which in C lies to the left would now lie to the right. Again, if we displace B till e falls under d₃ we obtain a curve similar to D, fig. 11, but reversed as to up and down, as may be seen by holding the book upside-down, the crests being broad and the troughs narrow.

[Figure 12]

¶ ¶ All these curves with their various transitional forms are periodic curves. Other composite periodic curves are shown at C, D, fig. 12 above, where they are compounded of the two curves A and B, having their periods in the ratio of 1 to 3. The dotted curves are as before copies of the first complete vibration or period of the curve A, in order that the reader may see at a glance that the compound curve is always as much higher or lower than A, as B is higher or lower than the horizontal line. In C, the curves A and B are added as they stand, but for D the curve B has been first slid half a wave's length to the right, and then the addition ¶ has been effected. Both forms differ from each other and from all preceding ones. C has broad crests and broad troughs, D narrow crests and narrow troughs.

In these and similar cases we have seen that the compound motion is perfectly and regularly periodic, that is, it is exactly of the same kind as if it proceeded from a single musical tone. The curves compounded in these examples correspond to the motions of single simple tones. Thus, the motions shown in fig. 11 (on p. 30b, c) might have been produced by two tuning-forks, of which one sounded an Octave higher than the other. But we shall hereafter see that a flute by itself when gently blown is sufficient to create a motion of the air corresponding to that shown in C or D of fig. 11. The motions of fig. 12 might be produced by two tuning-forks of which one sounded the twelfth of the other. Also a single closed organ pipe of the narrower kind (the stop called *Quintaten*⁎) would give nearly the same motion as that of C or D in fig. 12.

Footnote: ⁎ [The names of the stops on German organs do not always agree with those on English organs. I find it best, therefore, not to translate them, but to give their explana-
