page: 33

Here, then, the motion of the air in the aural passage has no property by which the composite⁎ musical tone can be distinguished from the single musical tone. If the ear is not assisted by other accidental circumstances, as by one tuning-fork beginning to sound before the other, so that we hear them struck, or, in the other case, the rustling of the wind against the mouthpiece of the flute or lip of the organ pipe, it has no means of deciding whether the musical tone is simple or composite.

Now, in what relation does the ear stand to such a motion of the air? Does it analyse it or does it not? Experience shows us that when two tuning-forks, an Octave or a Twelfth apart in pitch, are sounded together, the ear is quite able to distinguish their simple tones, although the distinction is a little more difficult with these than with other intervals. But if the ear is able to analyse a composite musical tone produced by two tuning-forks, it cannot but be in a condition to ¶ carry out a similar analysis, when the same motion of the air is produced by a single flute or organ pipe. And this is really the case. The single musical tone of such instruments, proceeding from a single source, is, as we have already mentioned, analysed into partial simple tones, consisting in each case of a prime tone, and one upper partial tone, the latter being different in the two cases.

The analysis of a single musical tone into a series of partial tones depends, then, upon the same property of the ear as that which enables it to distinguish different musical tones from each other, and it must necessarily effect both analyses by a rule which is independent of the fact that the waves of sound are produced by one or by several musical instruments.

The rule by which the ear proceeds in its analysis was first laid down as generally true by G. S. Ohm. Part of this rule has been already enunciated in the last chapter (p. 23a), where it was stated that only that particular motion of the air which we have denominated a *simple vibration*, for which the vibrating ¶ particles swing backwards and forwards according to the law of pendular motion, is capable of exciting in the ear the sensation of a single simple tone. *Every motion of the air, then, which corresponds to a composite mass of musical tones, is, according to Ohm's law, capable of being analysed into a sum of simple pendular vibrations, and to each such single simple vibration corresponds a simple tone, sensible to the ear, and having a pitch determined by the periodic time of the corresponding motion of the air.*

The proofs of the correctness of this law, the reasons why, of all vibrational forms, only that one which we have called a simple vibration plays such an important part, must be left for Chapters IV. and VI. Our present business is only to gain a clear conception of what the rule means.

The simple vibrational form is inalterable and always the same. It is only its amplitude and its periodic time which are subject to change. But we have seen in figs. 11 and 12 (p. 30b and p. 32b) what varied forms the composition of only two ¶ simple vibrations can produce. The number of these forms might be greatly increased, even without introducing fresh simple vibrations of different periodic times, by merely changing the proportions which the heights of the two simple

Footnote+ tions from E. J. Hopkins's *The Organ, its History and Construction*, 1870, pp. 444-448. In this case Mr. Hopkins, following other authorities, prints the word 'quintaton,' and defines it, in 16 feet tone, as 'double stopped diapason, of rather small scale, producing the Twelfth of the fundamental sound, as well as the ground-tone itself, that is, sounding the 16 and 5⅓ ft. tones' which means sounding the notes beginning with *C,*, simultaneously with the notes beginning with *G*, which is called the 5⅓ foot tone, because according to the organ-makers' theory (not practice) the length of the *G* pipe is ⅓ of the length of the *C* pipe, and ⅓ of 16 is 5⅓. [See p. 15d, note ‡.] And similarly, in other cases, 'a pipe for sounding the Twelfth in addition to the fundamental tone'. It seems to be properly the English stop '*Twelfth, Octave Quint, Duodecima*,' No. 611, p. 141 of Hopkins.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ⁎ [The reader must distinguish between *single* and *simple* musical tones. A *single* tone may be a *compound* tone inasmuch as it may be compounded of several simple musical tones, but it is *single* because it is produced by *one* sounding body. A *composite* musical tone is necessarily *compound*, but it is called *composite* because it is made up of tones (simple or compound) produced by *several* sounding bodies.—*Translator.*]
