page: 35

+ such curves are combined, and are so chosen that in certain places they all bend in the same direction, and in others in opposite directions, the curvatures mutually strengthen each other in the first case, finally producing an infinitely great curvature, that is, an acute angle, and in the second case they mutually weaken each other, so that ultimately a straight line results. Hence we can generally lay it down as a rule that the force or loudness of the upper partial tones is the greater, the sharper the discontinuities of the atmospheric motion. When the motion alters uniformly and gradually, answering to a vibrational curve proceeding in smoothly curved forms, only the deeper partial tones, which lie nearest to the prime tone, have any perceptible intensity. But where the motion alters by jumps, and hence the vibrational curves show angles or sudden changes of curvature, the upper partial tones will also have sensible force, although in all these cases the amplitudes decrease as the pitch of the upper partial tones becomes higher.⁎

¶ We shall become acquainted with examples of the analysis of given vibrational forms into separate partial tones in Chapter V.

The theorem of Fourier here adduced shows first that it is mathematically possible to consider a musical tone as a sum of simple tones, in the meaning we have attached to the words, and mathematicians have indeed always found it convenient to base their acoustic investigations on this mode of analysing vibrations. But it by no means follows that we are obliged to consider the matter in this way. We have rather to inquire, do these partial constituents of a musical tone, such as the mathemathical theory distinguishes and the ear perceives, really exist in the mass of air external to the ear? Is this means of analysing forms of vibration which Fourier's theorem prescribes and renders possible, not merely a mathematical fiction, permissible for facilitating calculation, but not necessarily having any corresponding actual meaning in things themselves? What makes us hit upon pendular vibrations, and none other, as the simplest element of all motions producing sound? We can conceive a whole to be split into parts in very different ¶ and arbitrary ways. Thus we may find it convenient for a certain calculation to consider the number 12 as the sum 8 + 4, because the 8 may have to be cancelled, but it does not follow that 12 must always and necessarily be considered as merely the sum of 8 and 4. In another case it might be more convenient to consider 12 as the sum of 7 and 5. Just as little does the mathematical possibility, proved by Fourier, of compounding all periodic vibrations out of simple vibrations, justify us in concluding that this is the only permissible form of analysis, if we cannot in addition establish that this analysis has also an essential meaning in nature. That this is indeed the case, that this analysis has a meaning in nature independently of theory, is rendered probable by the fact that the ear really effects the same analysis, and also by the circumstance already named, that this kind of analysis has been found so much more advantageous in mathematical investigations than any other. Those modes of regarding phenomena that correspond to the most intimate constitution of the matter under investigation are, of course, also always ¶ those which lead to the most suitable and evident theoretical treatment. But it would not be advisable to begin the investigation with the functions of the ear, because these are very intricate, and in themselves require much explanation. In the next chapter, therefore, we shall inquire whether the analysis of compound into simple vibrations has an actually sensible meaning in the external world, independently of the action of the ear, and we shall really be in a condition to show that certain mechanical effects depend upon whether a certain partial tone

Footnote: ⁎ Supposing \(n\) to be the number of the order of a partial tone, and \(n\) to be very large, then the amplitude of the upper partial tones decreases: (1) as \(\frac{1}{n}\), when the amplitude of the vibrations themselves makes a sudden jump; (2) as \(\frac{1}{n.n}\), when their differential quotient makes a sudden jump, and hence the curve has an acute angle; (3) as \(\frac{1}{n.n.n}\), when the curvature alters suddenly; (4) when none of the differential quotients are discontinuous, they must decrease at least as fast as \(e^{-n}\).
