page: 36

+ is or is not contained in a composite mass of musical tones. The existence of partial tones will thus acquire a meaning in nature, and our knowledge of their mechanical effects will in turn shed a new light on their relations to the human ear.

CHAPTER III.

ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL TONES BY SYMPATHETIC RESONANCE.

We proceed to show that the simple partial tones contained in a composite mass of musical tones, produce peculiar mechanical effects in nature, altogether independent of the human ear and its sensations, and also altogether independent of ¶ merely theoretical considerations. These effects consequently give a peculiar objective significance to this peculiar method of analysing vibrational forms.

Such an effect occurs in the phenomenon of *sympathetic resonance.* This phenomenon is always found in those bodies which when once set in motion by any impulse, continue to perform a long series of vibrations before they come to rest. When these bodies are struck gently, but periodically, although each blow may be separately quite insufficient to produce a sensible motion in the vibratory body, yet, provided the periodic time of the gentle blows is precisely the same as the periodic time of the body's own vibrations, very large and powerful oscillations may result. But if the periodic time of the regular blows is different from the periodic time of the oscillations, the resulting motion will be weak or quite insensible.

Periodic impulses of this kind generally proceed from another body which is already vibrating regularly, and in this case the swings of the latter in the course ¶ of a little time, call into action the swings of the former. Under these circumstances we have the process called *sympathetic oscillation* or *sympathetic resonance.* The essence of the mechanical effect is independent of the rate of motion, which may be fast enough to excite the sensation of sound, or slow enough not to produce anything of the kind. Musicians are well acquainted with *sympathetic resonance.* When, for example, the strings of two violins are in exact unison, and one string is bowed, the other will begin to vibrate. But the nature of the process is best seen in instances where the vibrations are slow enough for the eye to follow the whole of their successive phases.

Thus, for example, it is known that the largest church-bells may be set in motion by a man, or even a boy, who pulls the ropes attached to them at proper and regular intervals, even when their weight of metal is so great that the strongest man could scarcely move them sensibly, if he did not apply his strength in determinate periodical intervals. When such a bell is once set in motion, it continues, like a ¶ struck pendulum, to oscillate for some time, until it gradually returns to rest, even if it is left quite by itself, and no force is employed to arrest its motion. The motion diminishes gradually, as we know, because the friction on the axis and the resistance of the air at every swing destroy a portion of the existing moving force.

As the bell swings backwards and forwards, the lever and rope fixed to its axis rise and fall. If when the lever falls a boy clings to the lower end of the bell-rope, his weight will act so as to increase the rapidity of the existing motion. This increase of velocity may be very small, and yet it will produce a corresponding increase in the extent of the bell's swings, which again will continue for a while, until destroyed by the friction and resistance of the air. But if the boy clung to the bell-rope at a wrong time, while it was ascending, for instance, the weight of his body would act in opposition to the motion of the bell, and the extent of swing would decrease. Now, if the boy continued to cling to the rope at each swing so long as it was falling, and then let it ascend freely, at every swing the motion of the bell would be only increased in speed, and its swings would gradually become
