page: 40

+ effect this they may be fastened on sounding boxes which have been exactly tuned to their tone, as shown in fig. 13. If we have two such forks of exactly the same

[Figure 13]

+ pitch, and excite one by a violin bow, the other will begin to vibrate in sympathy, even if placed at the further end of the same room, and it will continue to sound, after the first has been damped. The astonishing nature of such a case of sympathetic vibration will appear, if we merely compare the heavy and powerful mass of steel set in motion, with the light yielding mass of air which produces the effect by such ¶ small motive powers that they could not stir the lightest spring which was not in tune with the fork. With such forks the time required to set them in full swing by sympathetic action, is also of sensible duration, and the slightest disagreement in pitch is sufficient to produce a sensible diminution in the sympathetic effect. By sticking a piece of wax to one prong of the second fork, sufficient to make it vibrate once in a second less than the first—a difference of pitch scarcely sensible to the finest ear—the sympathetic vibration will be wholly destroyed.

After having thus described the phenomenon of sympathetic vibration in general, we proceed to investigate the influence exerted in sympathetic resonance by the different forms of wave of a musical tone.

¶ First, it must be observed that most elastic bodies which have been set into sustained vibration by a gentle force acting periodically, are (with a few exceptions

[Figure 14]

+ ¶ to be considered hereafter) always made to swing in pendular vibrations. But they are in general capable of executing several kinds of such vibration with different periodic times and with a different distribution over the various parts of the vibrating body. Hence to the different lengths of the periodic times correspond different simple tones producible on such an elastic body. These are its so-called *proper tones.* It is, however, only exceptionally, as in strings and the narrower kinds of organ pipes, that these proper tones correspond in pitch with the har-
