page: 46

+ tone. For three sections the pitch number is tripled, for four sections quadrupled, and so on.

To bring a spiral wire into these different forms of vibration, we move it periodically with the finger near one extremity, adopting the period of its slowest swings for a, twice that rate for b, three times for c, and four times for d. Or else we just gently touch one of the nodes nearest the extremity with the finger, and pluck the string half-way between this node and the nearest end. Hence when γ₁ in c, or δ₁ in d, is kept at rest by the finger, we pluck the string at ε. The other nodes then appear when the vibration commences.

[Figure 17]

¶ ¶ For a sonorous string the vibrational forms of fig. 17 above are most purely produced by applying to its sounding board the handle of a tuning-fork which has been struck and gives the simple tone corresponding to the form required. If only a determinate number of nodes are desired, and it is indifferent whether the individual points of the string do or do not execute simple vibrations, it is sufficient to touch the string very gently at one of the nodes and either pluck the string or rub it with a violin bow. By touching the string with the finger all those simple vibrations are damped which have no node at that point, and only those remain which allow the string to be at rest in that place.

The number of nodes in long thin strings may be considerable. They cease to be formed when the sections which lie between the nodes are too short and stiff to ¶ be capable of sonorous vibration. Very fine strings consequently give a greater number of higher tones than thicker ones. On the violin and the lower pianoforte strings it is not very difficult to produce tones with 10 sections; but with extremely fine wires tones with 16 or 20 sections can be made to sound. [Also compare p. 78d.]

The forms of vibration here spoken of are those in which each point of the string performs pendular oscillations. Hence these motions excite in the ear the sensation of only a single simple tone. In all other vibrational forms of the strings, the oscillations are not simply pendular, but take place according to a different and more complicated law. This is always the case when the string is plucked in the usual way with the finger (as for guitar, harp, zither) or is struck with a hammer (as on the pianoforte), or is rubbed with a violin bow. The resulting motions may then be regarded as compounded of many simple vibrations, which, when taken separately, correspond to those in fig. 17. The multiplicity of such composite forms of motion is infinitely great, the string may indeed be considered as capable of assuming any given form (provided we confine ourselves in all cases
