page: 48

+ two upper partial tones are excited, such as *c''* and *g''*, as would be the case if both these notes were struck at once on the pianoforte, because the whole string of *c'* would then be in motion.

Although the relations for strings appear more complicated to the eye, their sympathetic vibration is subject to the same law as that which holds for resonators, membranes, and other elastic bodies. The sympathetic vibration is always determined by the analysis of whatever sonorous motions exist, into simple pendular vibrations. If the periodic time of one of these simple vibrations corresponds to the periodic time of one of the proper tones of the elastic body, that body, whether it be a string, a membrane, or a mass of air, will be put into strong sympathetic vibration.

These facts give a real objective value to the analysis of sonorous motion into simple pendular vibration, and no such value would attach to any other analysis. ¶ Every individual single system of waves formed by pendular vibrations exists as an independent mechanical unit, expands, and sets in motion other elastic bodies having the corresponding proper tone, perfectly undisturbed by any other simple tones of other pitches which may be expanding at the same time, and which may proceed either from the same or any other source of sound. Each single simple tone, then, can, as we have seen, be separated from the composite mass of tones, by mechanical means, namely by bodies which will vibrate sympathetically with it. Hence every individual partial tone exists in the compound musical tone produced by a single musical instrument, just as truly, and in the same sense, as the different colours of the rainbow exist in the white light proceeding from the sun or any other luminous body. Light is also only a vibrational motion of a peculiar elastic medium, the luminous ether, just as sound is a vibrational motion of the air. In a beam of white light there is a species of motion which *may* be represented as the sum of many oscillatory motions of various periodic times, each of ¶ which corresponds to one particular colour of the solar spectrum. But of course each particle of ether at any particular moment has only *one* determinate velocity, and only *one* determinate departure from its mean position, just like each particle of air in a space traversed by many systems of sonorous waves. The really existing motion of any particle of ether is of course only one and individual; and our theoretical treatment of it as compound, is in a certain sense arbitrary. But the undulatory motion of light can also be analysed into the waves corresponding to the separate colours, by external mechanical means, such as by refraction in a prism, or by transmission through fine gratings, and each individual simple wave of light corresponding to a simple colour, exists mechanically by itself, independently of any other colour.

We must therefore not hold it to be an illusion of the ear, or to be mere imagination, when in the musical tone of a single note emanating from a musical instrument, we distinguish many partial tones, as I have found musicians inclined ¶ to think, even when they have heard those partial tones quite distinctly with their own ears. If we admitted this, we should have also to look upon the colours of the spectrum which are separated from white light, as a mere illusion of the eye. The real outward existence of partial tones in nature can be established at any moment by a sympathetically vibrating membrane which casts up the sand strewn upon it.

Finally I would observe that, as respects the conditions of sympathetic vibration, I have been obliged to refer frequently to the mechanical theory of the motion of air. Since in the theory of sound we have to deal with well-known mechanical forces, as the pressure of the air, and with motions of material particles, and not with any hypothetical explanation, theoretical mechanics have an unassailable authority in this department of science. Of course those readers who are unacquainted with mathematics, must accept the results on faith. An experimental way of examining the problems in question will be described in the next chapter, in which the laws of the analysis of musical tones by the ear have
