page: 52

+ qualities of tone, especially in respect to the weaker upper partials. At least, I must confess, that my own attempts to discover the upper partial tones in the human voice, and to determine their differences for different vowels, were most unsatisfactory until I applied the resonators.

We now proceed to prove that the human ear really does analyse musical tones according to the law of simple vibrations. Since it is not possible to institute an exact comparison of the strength of our sensations for different simple tones, we must confine ourselves to proving that when an analysis of a composite tone into simple vibrations, effected by theoretic calculation or by sympathetic resonance, shows that certain upper partial tones are absent, the ear also does not perceive them.

The tones of strings are again best adapted for conducting this proof, because they admit of many alterations in their quality of tone, according to the manner ¶ and the spot in which they are excited, and also because the theoretic or experimental analysis is most easily and completely performed for this case. Thomas Young⁎ first showed that when a string is plucked or struck, or, as we may add, bowed at any point in its length which is the node of any of its so-called harmonics, those simple vibrational forms of the string which have a node in that point are not contained in the compound vibrational form. Hence, if we attack the string at its middle point, all the simple vibrations due to the evenly numbered partials, each of which has a note at that point, will be absent. This gives the sound of the string a peculiarly hollow or nasal twang. If we excite the string at ⅓ of its length, the vibrations corresponding to the third, sixth, and ninth partials will be absent; if at ¼, then those corresponding to the fourth, eighth, and twelfth partials will fail; and so on.†

This result of mathematical theory is confirmed, in the first place, by analysing the compound tone of the string by sympathetic resonance, either by the ¶ resonators or by other strings. The experiments may be easily made on the pianoforte. Press down the digitals for the notes *c* and *c'*, without allowing the hammer to strike, so as merely to free them from their dampers, and then pluck the string *c* with the nail till it sounds. On damping the *c* string the higher *c'* will echo the sound, except in the particular case when the *c* string has been plucked exactly at its middle point, which is the point where it would have to be touched in order to give its first harmonic when struck by the hammer.

If we touch the *c* string at ⅓ or ⅔ its length, and strike it with the hammer, we obtain the harmonic *g'*; and if the damper of the *g'* is raised, this string echoes the sound. But if we pluck the *c* string with the nail, at either ⅓ or ⅔ its length, *g'* is not echoed, as it will be if the *c* string is plucked at any other spot.

In the same way observations with the resonators show that when the *c* string is plucked at its middle the Octave *c'* is missing, and when at ⅓ or ⅔ its length the Twelfth *g'* is absent. The analysis of the sound of a string by the sympathetic ¶ resonance of strings or resonators, consequently fully confirms Thomas Young's law.

But for the vibration of strings we have a more direct means of analysis than that furnished by sympathetic resonance. If we, namely, touch a vibrating string gently for a moment with the finger or a camel's-hair pencil, we damp all those simple vibrations which have no node at the point touched. Those vibrations, however, which have a node there are not damped, and hence will continue to sound without the others. Consequently, if a string has been made to speak in any way whatever, and we wish to know whether there exists among its simple vibrations one corresponding to the Twelfth of the prime tone, we need only touch one of the nodes of this vibrational form at ⅓ or ⅔ the length of the string, in order to reduce to silence all simple tones which have no such node, and leave the Twelfth sounding, if it were there. If neither it, nor any of the sixth, ninth,

Footnote: ⁎ London. *Philosophical Transactions*, 1800, vol. i. p. 137.

Footnote: † See Appendix III.
