page: 55

+ tinkling of the fork at the moment of being struck, and generally become rapidly inaudible. If the tuning fork is held in the fingers, it imparts very little of its tone to the air, and cannot be heard unless it is held close to the ear. Instead of holding it in the fingers, we may screw it into a thick board, on the under side of which some pieces of india-rubber tubing have been fastened. When this is laid upon a table, the india-rubber tubes on which it is supported convey no sound to the table, and the tone of the tuning-fork is so weak that it may be considered inaudible. Now if the prongs of the fork be brought near a resonance chamber⁎ of a bottle-form of such a size and shape that, when we blow over its mouth, the air it contains gives a tone of the same pitch as the fork's, the air within this chamber vibrates sympathetically, and the tone of the fork is thus conducted with great strength to the outer air. Now the higher secondary tones of such resonance chambers are also inharmonic to the prime tone, and in general the secondary ¶ tones of the chambers correspond neither with the harmonic nor the inharmonic secondary tones of the forks; this can be determined in each particular case by producing the secondary tones of the bottle by stronger blowing, and discovering those of the forks with the help of strings set into sympathetic vibration, as will be presently described. If, then, only one of the tones of the fork, namely, the prime tone, corresponds with one of the tones of the chamber, this alone will be reinforced by sympathetic vibration, and this alone will be communicated to the external air, and thus conducted to the observer's ear. The examination of the motion of the air by resonators shows that in this case, provided the tuning-fork be not set into too violent motion, no tone but the prime is present, and in such case the unassisted ear hears only a single simple tone, namely, the common prime of the tuning-fork and of the chamber, without any accompanying upper partial tones.

The tone of a tuning-fork can also be purified from secondary tones by placing its handle upon a string and moving it so near to the bridge that one of the proper ¶ tones of the section of string lying between the fork and the bridge is the same as that of the tuning-fork. The string then begins to vibrate strongly, and conducts the tone of the tuning-fork with great power to the sounding board and surrounding air, whereas the tone is scarcely, if at all, heard as long as the above-named section is not in unison with the tone of the fork. In this way it is easy to find the lengths of string which correspond to the prime and upper partial tones of the fork, and accurately determine the pitch of the latter. If this experiment is conducted with ordinary strings which are uniform throughout their length, we shield the ear from the inharmonic secondary tones of the fork, but not from the harmonic upper partials, which are sometimes faintly present when the fork is made to vibrate strongly. Hence to conduct this experiment in such a way as to create purely pendular vibrations of the air, it is best to weight one point of the string, if only so much as by letting a drop of melting sealing-wax fall upon it. This causes the upper proper tones of the string itself to be inharmonic to the prime tone, and ¶ hence there is a distinct interval between the points where the fork must be placed to bring out the prime tone and its audible Octave, if it exists.

In most other cases the mathematical analysis of the motions of sound is not nearly far enough advanced to determine with certainty what upper partials will be present and what intensity they will possess. In circular plates and stretched membranes which are struck, it is theoretically possible to do so, but their inhar-

Footnote+ put the fork into excessively strong vibration in order to make the Octave sensible. Thus, taking a fork of 232 and another of 468 vibrations, after striking them both, and letting the deeper fork spend most of its energy until I could not see the vibrations with the eye at all, the beats were heard distinctly, when I pressed both on to a table, and continued to be heard even after the forks themselves were separately inaudible. See also Prof. Helmholtz's experiments on a fork of 64 vibrations at the close of Chap. VII., and Prof. Preyer's in App. XX. sect. L. art. 4, *c*. The conditions according to Koenig that tuning-forks should have no upper partials are given in App. XX. sect. L. art. 2, *a*.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ⁎ Either a bottle of a proper size, which can readily be more accurately tuned by pouring oil or water into it, or a tube of pasteboard quite closed at one end, and having a small round opening at the other. See the proper sizes of such resonance chambers in App. IV.
