page: 59

+ partials, they were weaker than the theory required. He concluded that the definition of a simple tone as given by Ohm was too limited, and that not only pendular vibrations, but other vibrational forms, provided they were not too widely separated from the pendular, were capable of exciting in the ear the sensation of a single simple tone, which, however, had a variable quality. He consequently asserted that when a musical tone was compounded of several simple tones, part of the intensity of the upper constituent tones went to increase the intensity of the prime tone, with which it fused, and that at most a small remainder excited in the ear the sensation of an upper partial tone. He did not formulate any determinate law, assigning the vibrational forms which would give the impression of a simple and those which would give the impression of a compound tone. The experiments of Seebeck, on which he founded his assertions, need not be here described in detail. Their object was only to produce musical tones for which ¶ either the intensity of the simple vibrations corresponding to the upper partials could be theoretically calculated, or in which these upper partials could be rendered separately audible. For the latter purpose the siren was used. We have just described how the same object can be attained by means of strings. Seebeck shows in each case that the simple vibrations corresponding to the upper partials have considerable strength, but that the upper partials are either not heard at all, or heard with difficulty in the compound tone itself. This fact has been already mentioned in the present chapter. It may be perfectly true for an observer who has not applied the proper means for observing upper partials, while another, or even the first observer himself when properly assisted, can hear them perfectly well.⁎

Now there are many circumstances which assist us first in separating the musical tones arising from different sources, and secondly, in keeping together the partial tones of each separate source. Thus when one musical tone is heard for some time before being joined by the second, and then the second continues after ¶ the first has ceased, the separation in sound is facilitated by the succession of time. We have already heard the first musical tone by itself, and hence know immediately what we have to deduct from the compound effect for the effect of this first tone. Even when several parts proceed in the same rhythm in polyphonic music, the mode in which the tones of different instruments and voices commence, the nature of their increase in force, the certainty with which they are held, and the manner in which they die off, are generally slightly different for each. Thus the tones of a pianoforte commence suddenly with a blow, and are consequently strongest at the first moment, and then rapidly decrease in power. The tones of brass instruments, on the other hand, commence sluggishly, and require a small but sensible time to develop their full strength. The tones of bowed instruments are distinguished by their extreme mobility, but when either the player or the instrument is not unusually perfect they are interrupted by little, very short, pauses, producing in the ear the sensation of scraping, as will be described more ¶ in detail when we come to analyse the musical tone of a violin. When, then, such instruments are sounded together there are generally points of time when one or the other is predominant, and it is consequently easily distinguished by the ear. But besides all this, in good part music, especial care is taken to facilitate the separation of the parts by the ear. In polyphonic music proper, where each part has its own distinct melody, a principal means of clearly separating the progression of each part has always consisted in making them proceed in different rhythms and on different divisions of the bars; or where this could not be done, or was at any rate only partly possible, as in four-part chorales, it is an old rule, contrived for this purpose, to let three parts, if possible, move by single degrees of the scale, and let the fourth leap over several. The small amount of alteration in the pitch makes it easier for the listener to keep the identity of the several voices distinctly in mind.

Footnote: ⁎ [Here from 'Upper partial tones,' p. 94, to 'former analysis,' p. 100 of the 1st English edition are omitted, in accordance with the 4th German edition.—*Translator*.]
