page: 62

+ musical purposes, determined by that of its prime, the influence of the upper partial tones is by no means unfelt. They give the compound tone a brighter and higher effect. Simple tones are dull. When they are compared with compound tones of the same pitch, we are inclined to estimate the compound as belonging to a higher Octave than the simple tones. The difference is of the same kind as that heard when first the vowel *oo* in *too* and then *a* in *tar* are sung to the same note. It is often extremely difficult to compare the pitches of compound tones of different qualities. It is very easy to make a mistake of an Octave. This has happened to the most celebrated musicians and acousticians. Thus it is well known that Tartini, who was celebrated as a violinist and theoretical musician, estimated all combinational tones (Chap. XI.) an Octave too high, and, on the other hand, Henrici⁎ assigns a pitch too low by an Octave to the upper partial tones of tuning-forks.†

¶ The problem to be solved, then, in distinguishing the partials of a compound tone is that of analysing a given aggregate of sensations into elements which no longer admit of analysis. We are accustomed in a large number of cases where sensations of different kinds or in different parts of the body, exist simultaneously, to recognise that they are distinct as soon as they are perceived, and to direct our attention at will to any one of them separately. Thus at any moment we can be separately conscious of what we see, of what we hear, of what we feel, and distinguish what we feel in a finger or in the great toe, whether pressure or a gentle touch, or warmth. So also in the field of vision. Indeed, as I shall endeavour to show in what follows, we readily distinguish our sensations from one another when we have a precise knowledge that they are composite, as, for example, when we have become certain, by frequently repeated and invariable experience, that our present sensation arises from the simultaneous action of many independent stimuli, each of which usually excites an equally well-known individual sensation. This induces ¶ us to think that nothing can be easier, when a number of different sensations are simultaneously excited, than to distinguish them individually from each other, and that this is an innate faculty of our minds.

Thus we find, among others, that it is quite a matter of course to hear separately the different musical tones which come to our senses collectively, and expect that in every case when two of them occur together, we shall be able to do the like.

The matter is very different when we set to work at investigating the more unusual cases of perception, and at more completely understanding the conditions under which the above-mentioned distinction can or cannot be made, as is the case in the physiology of the senses. We then become aware that two different kinds or grades must be distinguished in our becoming conscious of a sensation. The lower grade of this consciousness, is that where the influence of the sensation in question makes itself felt only in the conceptions we form of external things and processes, and assists ¶ in determining them. This can take place without our needing or indeed being able to ascertain to what particular part of our sensations we owe this or that relation of our perceptions. In this case we will say that the impression of the sensation in question is *perceived synthetically*. The second and higher grade is when we immediately distinguish the sensation in question as an existing part of the sum of the sensations excited in us. We will say then that the sensation is *perceived analytically*.‡ The two cases must be carefully distinguished from each other.

Footnote: ⁎ Poggd. *Ann.*, vol. xcix. p. 506. The same difficulty is mentioned by Zamminer (*Die Musik und die musikalischen Instrumente*, 1855, p. 111) as well known to musicians.

Footnote: † [Here the passage from 'The problem to be solved,' p. 62b, to 'from its simple tones,' p. 65b, is inserted in this edition from the 4th German edition.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ‡ [Prof. Helmholtz uses Leibnitz's terms *percipirt* and *appercipirt*, alternating the latter with *wahrgenommen*, and then restricting the meaning of this very common German word. It appeared to me that it would be clearer to an English reader not to invent new words or restrict the sense of old words, but to use *perceived* in both cases, and distinguish them (for *percipirt* and *appercipirt* respectively) by the adjuncts *synthetically* and *analytically*, the use of which is clear from the explanations given in the text.—*Translator*.]
