page: 64

+ a finger against the eyeball or by injury to one of the muscles of the eye, our perception of the position of visible objects is also changed. But it is only by such occasional illusions that we become aware of the fact that muscular sensations form part of the aggregate of sensations by which our conception of the position of a visible object is determined.

The phenomena of mixed colours present considerable analogy to those of compound musical tones, only in the case of colour the number of sensations reduces to three, and the analysis of the composite sensations into their simple elements is still more difficult and imperfect than for musical tones. As early as 1686 R. Waller mentions in the *Philosophical Transactions* the reduction of all colours to the mixture of three fundamental colours, as something already well known. This view could in earlier times only be founded on sensations and experiments arising from the mixture of pigments. In recent times we have discovered better methods, ¶ by mixing light of different colours, and hence have confirmed the correctness of that hypothesis by exact measurements, but at the same time we have learned that this confirmation only succeeds within a certain limit, conditioned by the fact that no kind of coloured light exists which can give us the sensation of a single one of the fundamental colours with exclusive purity. Even the most saturated and purest colours that the external world presents to us in the prismatic spectrum, may by the development of secondary images of the complementary colours in the eye be still freed as it were from a white veil, and hence cannot be considered as absolutely pure. For this reason we are unable to show objectively the absolutely pure fundamental colours from a mixture of which all other colours without exception can be formed. We only know that among the colours of the spectrum scarlet-red, yellow-green, and blue-violet approach to them nearer than any other objective colours.⁎ Hence we are able to compound out of these three colours almost all the colours that usually occur in different natural bodies, but we cannot produce the ¶ yellow and blue of the spectrum in that complete degree of saturation which they reach when purest within the spectrum itself. Our mixtures are always a little whiter than the corresponding simple colours of the spectrum. Hence it follows that we never see the simple elements of our sensations of colour, or at least see them only for a very short time in particular experiments directed to this end, and consequently cannot have any such exact or certain image in our recollection, as would indisputably be necessary for accurately analysing every sensation of colour into its elementary sensations by inspection. Moreover we have relatively rare opportunities of observing the process of the composition of colours, and hence of recognising the constituents in the compound. It certainly appears to me very characteristic of this process, that for a century and a half, from Waller to Goethe, every one relied on the mixtures of pigments, and hence believed green to be a mixture of blue and yellow, whereas when sky-blue and sulphur-yellow beams of light, *not pigments*, are mixed together, the result is white. To this very ¶ circumstance is due the violent opposition of Goethe, who was only acquainted with the colours of pigments, to the assertion that white was a mixture of variously coloured beams of light. Hence we can have little doubt that the power of distinguishing the different elementary constituents of the sensation is originally absent in the sense of sight, and that the little which exists in highly educated observers, has been attained by specially conducted experiments, through which of course, when wrongly planned, error may have ensued.

On the other hand every individual has an opportunity of experimenting on the

Footnote: ⁎ [In his *Physiological Optics*, p. 227, Prof. Helmholtz calls scarlet-red or vermilion the part of the spectrum before reaching Fraunhofer's line *C*. He does not use *span-grün* (=*Grün-span* or verdigris, literally 'Spanish-green') in his *Optics*, but talks of green-yellow between the lines *E* and *b*, and he says, on p. 844, that Maxwell took as one of the fundamental colours 'a green near the line *E*,' hence I translate *span-grün* by 'yellow-green.' Maxwell's blue or third colour was between the lines *F* and *G*, but twice as far from the latter as the former, This gives the colour which Prof. H. in his *Optics* calls 'cyanogen blue,' or Prussian blue. The violet proper does not begin till after the line *G*. It is usual to speak of these three colours, vaguely, as Red, Green, and Blue.—*Translator*.]
