page: 69

+ and its composition out of individual simple tones. The peculiarities of quality of sound belonging to this division, we shall briefly call its *musical quality*.

The object of the present chapter is, therefore, to describe the different composition of musical tones as produced by different instruments, for the purpose of showing how different modes of combining the upper partial tones correspond to characteristic varieties of musical quality. Certain general rules will result for the arrangement of the upper partials which answer to such species of musical quality as are called, *soft*, *piercing*, *braying*, *hollow* or *poor*, *full* or *rich*, *dull*, *bright*, *crisp*, *pungent*, and so on. Independently of our immediate object (the determination of the physiological action of the ear in the discrimination of musical quality, which is reserved for the following chapter), the results of this investigation are important for the resolution of purely musical questions in later chapters, because they show us how rich in upper partials, good musical qualities ¶ of tone are found to be, and also point out the peculiarities of musical quality favoured on those musical instruments, for which the quality of tone has been to some extent abandoned to the caprice of the maker.

Since physicists have worked comparatively little at this subject I shall be forced to enter somewhat more minutely into the mechanism by which the tones of several instruments are produced, than will be, perhaps, agreeable to many of my readers. For such the principal results collected at the end of this chapter will suffice. On the other hand, I must ask indulgence for leaving many large gaps in this almost-unexplored region, and for confining myself principally to instruments sufficiently well known for us to obtain a tolerably satisfactory view of the source of their tones. In this inquiry lie rich materials for interesting acoustical work. But I have felt bound to confine myself to what was necessary for the continuation of the present investigation.

¶ 1. *Musical Tones without Upper Partials.*

We begin with such musical tones as are not decomposable, but consist of a single simple tone. These are most readily and purely produced by holding a struck tuning-fork over the mouth of a resonance tube, as has been described in the last chapter (p. 54d).⁎ These tones are uncommonly soft and free from all shrillness and roughness. As already remarked, they appear to lie comparatively deep, so that such as correspond to the deep tones of a bass voice produce the impression of a most remarkable and unusual depth. The musical quality of such deep simple tones is also rather dull. The simple tones of the soprano pitch sound bright, but even those corresponding to the highest tones of a soprano voice are very soft, without a trace of that cutting, rasping shrillness which is displayed by most instruments at such pitches, with the exception, perhaps, of the flute, for which the tones are very nearly simple, being accompanied with very few and faint upper partials. Among vowels, the *oo* in *too* comes nearest to a simple tone, ¶ but even this vowel is not entirely free from upper partials. On comparing the musical quality of a simple tone thus produced with that of a compound tone in which the first harmonic upper partial tones are developed, the latter will be found to be more tuneful, metallic, and brilliant. Even the vowel *oo* in *too*, although the dullest and least tuneful of all vowels, is sensibly more brilliant and less dull than a simple tone of the same pitch. The series of the first six partials of a compound tone may be regarded musically as a major chord with a very predominant fundamental tone, and in fact the musical quality of a compound tone possessing these partials, as, for example, a fine singing voice, when heard beside a simple tone, very distinctly produces the agreeable effect of a consonant chord.

Since the form of simple waves of known periodic time is completely given when their amplitude is given, simple tones of the same pitch can only differ in force and not in musical quality. In fact, the difference of quality remains

Footnote: ⁎ On possible sources of disturbance, see Appendix IV.
