page: 78

+ interest to the investigation of the composition of musical tones for this point of excitement. An essential advantage in the choice of this position seems to be that the seventh and ninth partial tones disappear or at least become very weak. These are the first in the series of partial tones which do not belong to the major chord of the prime tone. Up to the sixth partial we have only Octaves, Fifths, and major Thirds of the prime tone; the seventh is nearly a minor Seventh, the ninth a major Second of the prime. Hence these will not fit into the major chord. Experiments on pianofortes show that when the string is struck by the hammer and touched at its nodes, it is easy to bring out the six first partial tones (at least on the strings of the middle and lower octaves), but that it is either not possible to bring out the seventh, eighth, and ninth at all, or that we obtain at best very weak and imperfect results. The difficulty here is not occasioned by the incapacity of the string to form such short vibrating sections, for if instead of striking ¶ the digital we pluck the string nearer to its end, and damp the corresponding nodes, the seventh, eighth, ninth, nay even the tenth and eleventh partial may be clearly and brightly produced. It is only in the upper octaves that the strings are too short and stiff to form the high upper partial tones. For these, several instrument-makers place the striking point nearer to the extremity, and thus obtain a brighter and more penetrating tone. The upper partials of these strings, which their stiffness renders it difficult to bring out, are thus favoured as against the prime tone. A similarly brighter tone, but at the same time a thinner and poorer one, can be obtained from the lower strings by placing a bridge nearer the striking point, so that the hammer falls at a point less than \(\frac{1}{7}\) of the effective length of the string from its extremity.

While on the one hand the tone can be rendered more tinkling, shrill, and acute, by striking the string with hard bodies, on the other hand it can be rendered duller, that is, the prime tone may be made to outweigh the upper partials, by ¶ striking it with a soft and heavy hammer, as, for example, a little iron hammer covered with a thick sheet of india-rubber. The strings of the lower octaves then produce a much fuller but duller tone. To compare the different qualities of tone thus produced by using hammers of different constructions, care must be taken always to strike the string at the same distance from the end as it is struck by the proper hammer of the instrument, as otherwise the results would be mixed up with the changes of quality depending on altering the striking point. These circumstances are of course well known to the instrument-makers, because they have

Footnote+ the hammer abolishes the node of the striking place, and with it the partial belonging to it throughout the string. I do not find, however, that the hammer striking at the \(\frac{1}{8}\)th eliminates the 8th partial. It is as audible, when touched as an harmonic, as the 9th and higher partials. It is easy, on a long string of say ¶ from 25 to 45 inches, to obtain the series of upper partials up to the fifteenth. On a string of 45 inches I have obtained as far as the 23rd harmonic, the diameter of the wire being 1·17 mm. or ·07 inches, and the tension being 71 kilogrammes or 156·6 lbs. The partials diminish in intensity with the reduction of the vibrating length; the 2nd is stronger than the 3rd, and the 3rd than the 4th, &c. Up to the 7th a good harmonic note can always be brought out. After the 8th, as Helmholtz says, the higher partials are all comparatively weak and become gradually fainter. To strengthen them we may use a narrower harder hammer. To hear them with an ordinary hammer it is necessary to excite them by a firm blow of the hand upon the finger-key and to continue to hold it down. They sing out quite clearly and last a very sensible time. On removing the stop immediately after production, they last much longer and are much brighter.
'I do not think the treble strings are from shortness and stiffness incapable of forming high proper tones. If it were so the notes would be of a very different quality of tone to that which they are found to have. Owing to the very acute pitch of these tones our ears cannot follow them, but their existence is proved by the fact that instrument-makers often bring their treble striking place very near the wrestplank-bridge in order to secure a brilliant tone effect, or ring, by the preponderance of these harmonics.
'The clavichord differs entirely from hammer and plectrum keyboard instruments in the note being started from the end, the tangent (brass pin) which stops the string being also the means of exciting the sound. But the thin brass wires readily break up into segments of short recurrence, the bass wires, which are most indistinct, being helped in the latest instruments by lighter octave strings, which serve to make the fundamental tones apparent.' See also the last note, p. 76d', and App. XX. sect. N.—*Translator.*]
