page: 83

+ and c to c, and as the former give a more intelligible image of the motion of the string than the latter, the curves, which are seen as if they were traced on the surface of a cylinder, will be drawn as if their trace had been unrolled from the cylinder into a plane figure like A, B, C. The meaning of our vibrational curves will then precisely correspond to the similar curves in preceding chapters. When four vibrations of the violin string correspond to one vibration of the fork (as in our experiments, where the fork gave *B*♭ and the string *b'*♭, p. 82a), so that four waves seem to be traced on the surface of the imaginary cylinder, and when moreover they are made to rotate slowly and are thus viewed in different positions, it is not at all difficult to draw them from immediate inspection as if they had been rolled off on to a plane, for the middle jags have then nearly the same appearance on the cylinder as if they were traced on a plane.

The figures 23 B and 23 C (p. 82b), immediately give the vibrational forms for ¶ the middle of a violin string, when the bow bites well, and the prime tone of the string is fully and powerfully produced. It is easily seen that these vibrational forms are essentially different from that of a simple vibration (fig. 23, A). When the point is taken nearer the ends of the string the vibrational figure is shown in fig. 24, A, and the two sections *αβ*, *βγ*, of any wave, are to one another as the two sections of the string which lie on either side of the observed point. In the figure

[Figure 24]

+ this ratio is 3 : 1, the point being at \(\frac{1}{4}\) the length of the string from its extremity. Close to the end of the string the form is as in fig. 24, B. The short lengths of ¶ line in the figure have been made faint because the corresponding motion of the luminous point is so rapid that they often become invisible, and the thicker lengths are alone seen.⁎

These figures show that every point of the string between its two extremities vibrates with a constant velocity. For the middle point, the velocity of ascent is equal to that of descent. If the violin bow is used near the right end of the string descending, the velocity of descent on the right half of the string is less than that of ascent, and the more so the nearer to the end. On the left half of the string the converse takes place. At the place of bowing the velocity of descent appears to be equal to that of the violin bow. During the greater part of each vibration the string here clings to the bow, and is carried on by it; then it suddenly detaches itself and rebounds, whereupon it s seized by other points in the bow and again carried forward.†

Our present purpose is chiefly to determine the upper partial tones. The ¶ vibrational forms of the individual points of the string being known, the intensity of each of the partial tones can be completely calculated. The necessary mathematical formulæ are developed in Appendix VI. The following is the result of the calculation. When a string excited by a violin bow speaks well, all the upper partial tones which can be formed by a string of its degree of rigidity, are present, and their intensity diminishes as their pitch increases. The amplitude and the intensity of the second partial is one-fourth of that of the prime tone, that of the

Footnote: ⁎ [Dr. Huggins, F.R.S., on experimenting, finds it probable that under the bow, the relative velocity of descent to that of the rebound of the string, or ascent, is influenced by the tension of the hairs of the bow.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † These facts suffice to determine the complete motion of bowed strings. See Appendix VI. A much simpler method of observing the vibrational form of a violin string has been given by Herr Clem. Neumann in the *Proceedings* (*Sitzungsberichte*) *of the I. and R. Academy* at Vienna, mathematical and physical class, vol. lxi. p. 89. He fastened bits of wire in the form of a comb to the bow itself. On looking through this grating at the string the observer sees a system of rectilinear zigzag lines. The conclusions as to the mode of motion of the string agree with those given above.
