page: 86

+ the wood. But the art of bowing is evidently the most important condition of all. How delicately this must be cultivated to obtain certainty in producing a very perfect quality of tone and its different varieties, cannot be more clearly demonstrated than by the observation of vibrational figures. It is also well known that great players can bring out full tones from even indifferent instruments.

The preceding observations and conclusions refer to the vibrations of the strings of the instrument and the intensity of their upper partial tones, solely in so far as they are contained in the compound vibrational movement of the string. But partial tones of different pitches are not equally well communicated to the air, and hence do not strike the ear of the listener with precisely the same degrees of intensity as those they possess on the string itself. They are communicated to the air by means of the sonorous body of the instrument. As we have had already occasion to remark, vibrating strings do not directly communicate any ¶ sensible portion of their motion to the air. The vibrating strings of the violin, in the first place, agitate the bridge over which they are stretched. This stands on two feet over the most mobile part of the 'belly' between the two '*f* holes'. One foot of the bridge rests upon a comparatively firm support, namely the 'sound-post,' which is a solid rod inserted between the two plates, back and belly, of the instrument. It is only the other leg which agitates the elastic wooden plates, and through them the included mass of air.⁎

An inclosed mass of air, like that of the violin, vióla, and violoncello, bounded by elastic plates, has certain proper tones which may be evoked by blowing across the openings, or '*f* holes'. The violin thus treated gives *c'* according to Savart, who examined instruments made by Stradivari (Stradiuarius).† Zamminer found the same tone constant on even imperfect instruments. For the violoncello Savart found on blowing over the holes *F*, and Zamminer *G*.‡ According to Zamminer the sound-box of the vióla (tenor) is tuned to be a Tone ¶ deeper than that of the violin.§ On placing the ear against the back of a violin and playing a scale on the pianoforte, some tones will be found to penetrate the ear with more force than others, owing to the resonance of the instrument. On a

Footnote: ⁎ [This account is not quite sufficient. Neither leg of the bridge rests exactly on the sound-post, because it is found that this position materially injures the quality of tone. The sound-post is a little in the rear of the leg of the bridge on the *e''* string side. The position of the sound-post with regard to the bridge has to be adjusted for each individual instrument. Dr. William Huggins, F.R.S., in his paper 'On the Function of the Sound-post, and on the Proportional Thickness of the Strings of the Violin,' read May 24, 1883, *Proceedings of the Royal Society*, vol. xxxv. ¶ pp. 241-248, has experimentally investigated the whole action of the sound-post, and finds that its main function is to convey vibrations from the belly to the back of the violin, in addition to those conveyed by the sides. The (apparently ornamental) cuttings in the bridge of the violin, sift the two sets of vibrations, set up by the bowed string at right angles to each other and 'allow those only or mainly to pass to the feet which would be efficient in setting the body of the instrument into vibration'. As the peculiar shape of the instrument rendered strewing of sand unavailable, Dr. Huggins investigated the vibrations by means of a 'touch rod,' consisting of 'a small round stick of straight grained deal a few inches long; the forefinger is placed on one end and the other end is put lightly in contact with the vibrating surface. The finger soon becomes very sensitive to small differences of agitation transmitted by the rod.' In short, the touch rod acts as a sound-post to the finger. The place of least vibration of the belly is exactly over the sound-post and of the back at the point under the sound-post. On removing the sound-post, or covering its ends with a sheet of india-rubber, which did not diminish the support, the tone was poor and thin. But an external wooden clamp connecting belly and back in the places where the sound-post touches them, restored the tone.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [Zamminer, *Die Musik*, 1855, vol. i. p. 37, says *c'* of 256 vib.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ‡ [Zamminer, *ibid.* p. 41, and adds that judging from the violin the resonance should be *F*♯.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: § [The passage referred to has not been found. But Zamminer says, p. 40, 'The length of the box of a violin is 13 Par. inches, and of the vióla 14 inches 5 lines. Exactly in inverse ratio stand the pitch numbers 470 (a misprint for 270 most probably) and 241, which were found by blowing over the wind-holes of the two instruments.' Now the ratio 13 : \(14\frac{5}{12}\) gives 182 cents, and the ratio 241 : 270 gives 197 cents, which are very nearly, though not 'exactly' the same. This, however, makes the resonance of the violin 270 vib. and not 256 vib., and agrees with the next note. I got a good resonance with a fork of 268 vib. from Dr. Huggins's violoncello by Nicholas about A.D. 1792.—*Translator.*]
