page: 88

+ them are a Twelfth lower than on the violin. On the other hand, the most favoured partial tones of the vióla (tenor) corresponding nearly with *b'*, do not

[Figure 27]

+ lie between the first and second strings, but between the second and third; and this seems to be connected with the altered quality of tone on this instrument. Unfortunately this influence cannot be expressed numerically. The maximum of resonance for the proper tones of the body of air is not very marked; were it otherwise there would be much more inequality in the scale as played on these bowed instruments, immediately on passing the pitch of the proper tones of their bodies of ¶ air. We must consequently conjecture that their influence upon the relative intensity of the individual partials in the musical tones of these instruments is not very prominent.

5. *Musical Tones of Flute or Flue Pipes.*

In these instruments the tone is produced by driving a stream of air against an opening, generally furnished with sharp edges, in some hollow space filled with air. To this class belong the bottles described in the last chapter, and shown in fig. 20 (p. 60c), and especially flutes and the majority of organ pipes. For flutes, the resonant body of air is included in ¶ its own cylindrical bore. It is blown with the mouth, which directs the breath against the somewhat sharpened edges of its mouth hole. The construction of organ pipes will be seen from the two adjacent figures. Fig. 27, A, shows a square wooden pipe, cut open longwise, and B the external appearance of a round tin pipe. R R in each shows the tube which incloses the sonorous body of air, a b is the *mouth* where it is blown, terminating in a sharp *lip*. In fig. 27, A, we see the air chamber or *throat* K into which the air is first driven from the bellows, and whence it can only escape through the narrow slit c d, which directs it ¶ against the edge of the lip. The wooden pipe A as here drawn is *open*, that is its extremity is uncovered, and it produces a tone with a wave of air *twice* as long as the tube R R. The other pipe, B, is *stopped*, that is, its upper extremity is closed. Its tone has a wave *four times* the length of the tube R R, and hence an Octave deeper than an open pipe of the same length.⁎

Any air chambers can be made to give a musical tone, just like organ pipes, flutes, the bottles previously described, the windchests of violins, &c., provided they have a sufficiently narrow opening,

Footnote: ⁎ [These relations are only approximate, as is explained below. The mode of excitement by the lip of the pipe makes them inexact. Also they take no notice of the 'scale' or diameters and depths of the pipes, or of the force of the wind, or of the tempera-
