page: 90

+ reflected wave would indeed leave the state of density unaltered at the open ends, but would occasion great velocity in the oscillating molecules of air.

In reality the assumption made explains the essential phenomena of organ pipes. Consider first a pipe with two open ends. On our exciting a wave of condensation at one end, it runs forward to the other end, is there reflected as a wave of rarefaction, runs back to the first end, is here again reflected with another alteration of phase, as a wave of condensation, and then repeats the same path in the same way a second time. This repetition of the same process therefore occurs, after the wave in the tube has passed once forwards and once backwards, that is twice through the whole length of the tube. The time required to do this is equal to double the length of the pipe divided by the velocity of sound. This is the duration of the vibration of the deepest tone which the pipe can give.

Suppose now that at the time when the wave begins its second forward and ¶ backward journey, a second impulse in the same direction is given, say by a vibrating tuning-fork. The motion of the air will then receive a reinforcement, which will constantly increase, if the fresh impulses take place in the same rhythm as the forward and backward progression of the waves.

Even if the returning wave does not coincide with the first following similar impulse of the tuning-fork, but only with the second or third or fourth and so on, the motion of the air will be reinforced after every forward and backward passage.

A tube open at both ends will therefore serve as a resonator for tones whose pitch number is equal to the velocity of sound (332 metres) ⁎ divided by twice the length of the tube, or some multiple of that number. That is to say, the tones of strongest resonance for such a tube will, as in strings, form the complete series of harmonic upper partials of its prime.

The case is somewhat different for pipes stopped at one end. If at the open end, by means of a vibrating tuning-fork, we excite an impulse of condensation ¶ which propagates itself along the tube, it will run on to the stopped end, will be there reflected as a wave of condensation, return, will be again reflected at the open end with altered phase as a wave of rarefaction, and only after it has been again reflected at the stopped end with a similar phase, and then once more at the open end with an altered phase as a condensation, will a repetition of the process ensue, that is to say, not till after it has traversed the length of the pipe four times. Hence the prime tone of a stopped pipe has twice as long a period of vibration as an open pipe of the same length. That is to say, the stopped pipe will be an Octave deeper than the open pipe. If, then, after this double forward and backward passage, the first impulse is renewed, there will arise a reinforcement of resonance.

Partials † of the prime tone can also be reinforced, but only those which are unevenly numbered. For since at the expiration of half the period of vibration, the prime tone of the wave in the tube renews its path with an opposite phase of density, only such tones can be reinforced as have an opposite phase at the ¶ expiration of half the period of vibration. But at this time the second partial has just completed a whole vibration, the fourth partial two whole vibrations, and so on.

Footnote: ⁎ [This is 1089·3 feet in a second, which is the mean of several observations in free air; it is usual, however, in England to take the whole number 1090 feet, at freezing. At 60° F. it is about 1120 feet per second. Mr. D. J. Blaikley (see note p. 97d), in two papers read before the Physical Society, and published in the *Philosophical Magazine* for Dec. 1883, pp. 447-455, and Oct. 1884, pp. 328-334, as the means of many observations on the velocity of sound in dry air at 32° F., *in tubes*, obtained
	for diameter | ·45 | ·75 | 1·25 | 2·08 | 3·47 English inches.
	pitch various, velocity | 1064·26 | 1072·53 | 1078·71 | 1081·78 | 1083·13 „ feet.
	pitch 260 vib., velocity | 1062·12 | 1072·47 | 1078·73 | 1082·51 | 1084·88 „ „
The velocity in tubes is therefore always less than in free air.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [The original says 'upper partials' (*Obertöne*), but the *upper* partials which are unevenly numbered are the 1st, 3rd, 5th, &c., and these are really the 2nd, 4th, 6th, &c., (that is, the evenly numbered) partial tones (see footnote p. 23c), but it is precisely the latter which are *not* excited in the present case. This is only mentioned as a warning to those who faultily use the faulty expression 'overtones' indifferently for both partials and *upper* partials.—*Translator.*]
