page: 91

These therefore have the same phases, and cancel their effect on the return of the wave with an opposite phase. Hence the tones of strongest resonance in stopped pipes correspond with the series of unevenly numbered partials of its fundamental tone. Supposing its pitch number is \(n\), then \(3n\) is the Twelfth of \(n\), that is the Fifth of \(2n\) the higher Octave, and \(5n\) is the major Third of \(4n\) the next higher Octave, and \(7n\) the [sub] minor Seventh of the same Octave, and so on.

Now although the phenomena follow these rules in the principal points, certain deviations from them occur because there is not precisely no change of pressure at the open ends of pipes. From these ends the motion of sound communicates itself to the uninclosed air beyond, and the waves which spread out from the open ends of the tubes have relatively very little alteration of pressure, but are not entirely without some. Hence a part of every wave which is incident on the open end of the pipe is *not* reflected, but runs out into the open air, while the remainder ¶ or greater portion of the wave is reflected, and returns into the tube. The reflexion is the more complete, the smaller are the dimensions of the opening of the tube in comparison with the wave-length of the tone in question.

Theory ⁎ also, agreeing with experiment, shows that the phases of the reflected part of the wave are the same as they would be if the reflexion did not take place at the surface of the opening itself but at another and somewhat different plane. Hence what may be called the *reduced length* of the pipe, or that answering to the pitch, is somewhat different from the real length, and the difference between the two depends on the form of the mouth, and not on the pitch of the notes produced unless they are so high and hence their wave-lengths so short, that the dimensions of the opening cannot be neglected in respect to them.

For cylindrical pipes of circular section, with ends cut at right angles to the length, the distance of the plane of reflexion from the end of the pipe is theoretically determined to be at a distance of 0·7854 the radius of the circle.† For a ¶ wooden pipe of square section, of which the sides were 36 mm. (1·4 inch) internal measure, I found the distance of the plane of reflexion 14 mm. (·55 inch).‡

Now since on account of the imperfect reflexion of waves at the open ends of organ pipes (and respectively at their mouths) a part of the motion of the air must escape into the free air at every vibration, any oscillatory motion of its mass of air must be speedily exhausted, if there are no forces to replace the lost motion. In fact, on ceasing to blow an organ pipe scarcely any after sound is observable. Nevertheless the wave is frequently enough reflected forward and backward for its pitch to become perceptible on tapping against the pipe.

The means usually adopted for keeping them continually sounding, is *blowing*. In order to understand the action of this process, we must remember that when

Footnote: ⁎ See my paper in *Crelle's Journal for Mathematics*, vol. lvii.

Footnote: † Mr. Bosanquet (*Proc. Mus. Assn.* 1877-8, p. 65) is reported as saying: 'Lord Rayleigh and himself had gone fully into the matter, and had come to the conclusion that this correction was much less than Helmholtz supposed. Lord Rayleigh adopted the figure ·6 of the radius, whilst he himself adopted ·55.' See papers by Lord Rayleigh and Mr. Bosanquet in *Philosophical Magazine*. Mr. Blaikley by a new process finds ·576, which lies between the other two, see his paper in *Phil. Mag.* May 1879, p. 342.

Footnote: ‡ The pipe was of wood, made by Marloye, the additional length being 302 mm. (11·9 in.), corresponding exactly with half the length of wave of the pipe. The position of the nodal plane in the inside of the pipe was determined by inserting a wooden plug of the same diameter as of the internal opening of the pipe at its open end, until the pitch of the pipe, which had now become a closed one, was exactly the same as that of the open pipe before the insertion of the plug. [The sameness of the pitch is determined by seeing that each makes the same number of beats with the same fork.] The nodal surface lay 137 mm. (5·39 inch) ¶ from the end of the pipe, while a quarter of a wave-length was 151 mm. (5·94 inch). At the mouth end of the pipe, on the other hand, 83 mm. (3·27 inch) were wanting to complete the theoretical length of the pipe. [The additional piece being half the length of the wave, the pitch of the pipe before and after the addition of this piece remains the same, by which property the length of the additional piece is found. The length of the pipe from the bottom of the mouth to the open end was 205 mm. = 8·07 inch; the node, as determined, was 137 mm. = 5·39 inch from the open end, and 68 mm. = 2·68 inch from the bottom of the mouth. These lengths had to be increased by 14 mm. = ·55 in. and 83 mm. = 3·27 in. respectively, to make up each to the quarter length of the wave 151 mm. = 5·95 inch.—*Translator.*]
