page: 92

+ air is blown out of such a slit as that which lies below the lip of the pipe, it breaks through the air which lies at rest in front of the slit in a thin sheet like a blade or lamina, and hence at first does not draw any sensible part of that air into its own motion. It is not till it reaches a distance of some centimetres [a centimetre is nearly four-tenths of an inch] that the outpouring sheet splits up into eddies or vortices, which effect a mixture of the air at rest and the air in motion. This blade-shaped sheet of air in motion can be rendered visible by sending a stream of air impregnated with smoke or clouds of salammoniac through the mouth of a pipe from which the pipe itself is removed, such as is commonly found among physical apparatus. Any blade-shaped gas flame which comes from a split burner is also an example of a similar process. Burning renders visible the limits between the outpouring sheet of gas and the atmosphere. But the flame does not render the continuation of the stream visible.

¶ Now the blade-shaped sheet of air at the mouth of the organ pipe is wafted to one side or the other by every stream of air which touches its surface, exactly as this gas flame is. The consequence is that when the oscillation of the mass of air in the pipe ⁎ causes the air to enter through the ends of the pipe, the blade-shaped stream of air arising from the mouth is also inclined inwards, and drives its whole mass of air into the pipe.† During the opposite phase of vibration, on the other hand, when the air leaves the ends of the pipe the whole mass of this blade of air is driven outwards. Hence it happens that exactly at the times when the air in the pipe is most condensed, more air still is driven in from the bellows, whence the condensation, and consequently also the equivalent of work of the vibration of the air is increased, while at the periods of rarefaction in the pipe the wind of the bellows pours its mass of air into the open space in front of the pipe. We must remember also that the blade-shaped sheet of air requires time in order to traverse the width of the mouth of the pipe, and is during this time exposed to the action ¶ of the vibrating column of air in the pipe, and does not reach the lip (that is the line where the two paths, inwards and outwards, intersect) until the end of this time. Every particle of air that is blown in, consequently reaches a phase of vibration in the interior of the pipe, which is somewhat later than that to which it was exposed in traversing the opening. If the latter motion was inwards, it encounters the following condensation in the interior of the pipe, and so on.

This mode of exciting the tone conditions also the peculiar quality of tone of these organ pipes. We may regard the blade-shaped stream of air as very thin in comparison with the amplitude of the vibrations of air. The latter often amount to 10 or 16 millimetres (·39 to ·63 inches), as may be seen by bringing small flames of gas close to this opening. Consequently the alternation between the periods of time for which the whole blast is poured into the interior of the pipe, and those for which it is entirely emptied outside, is rather sudden, in fact almost instantaneous. Hence it follows ‡ that the oscillations excited by blowing are of ¶ a similar kind; namely, that for a certain part of each vibration the velocity of the particles of air in the mouth and in free space, have a constant value directed outwards, and for a second portion of the same, a constant value directed inwards. With stronger blowing that directed inwards will be more intense and of shorter duration; with weaker blowing, the converse may take place. Moreover, the pressure in the mass of air put in motion in the pipe must also alternate between two constant values with considerable rapidity. The rapidity of this change will, however, be moderated by the circumstance that the blade-shaped sheet of air is not infinitely thin, but requires a short time to pass over the lip of the pipe, and

Footnote: ⁎ [It has, however, not been explained how that 'oscillation' commences. This will be alluded to in the additions to App. VII. sect. B.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [The amount of air which enters as compared with that which passes over the lip outside the pipe is very small. A candle flame held at the end of the pipe only pulsates; held a few inches from the lip, along the edge of the pipe, it is speedily extinguished.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ‡ See Appendix VII. [especially sect. B, II.].
