page: 93

+ that secondly the higher upper partials, whose wave-lengths only slightly exceed the diameter of the pipe, are as a general rule imperfectly developed.

The kind of motion of the air here described is exactly the same as that shown in fig. 23 (p. 82b), B and C, fig. 24 (p. 83b), A and B, for the vibrating points of a violin string. Organ-builders have long since remarked the similarity of the quality of tone, for the narrower cylindrical-pipe stops when strongly blown, as shown by the names: *Geigenprincipal*, *Vióla di Gamba*, *Violoncello*, *Violon-bass.*⁎

That these conclusions from the mechanics of blowing correspond with the facts in nature, is shown by the experiments of Messrs. Toepler & Boltzmann,† who rendered the form of the oscillation of pressure in the interior of the pipe optically observable by the interference of light passed through a node of the vibrating mass of air. When the force of the wind was small they found almost a simple vibration (the smaller the oscillation of the air-blade at the lip, the more completely the ¶ discontinuities disappear). But when the force of the wind was greater they found a very rapid alternation between two different values of pressure, each of which remained almost unaltered for a fraction of a vibration.

Messrs. Mach and J. Hervert's ‡ experiments with gas flames placed before the end of an open pipe to make the vibrations visible, show that the form of motion just described really occurs at the ends of the pipes. The forms of vibration which they deduced from the analysis of the forms of the flames correspond with those of a violin string, except that, for the reason given above, their corners are rounded off.

By using resonators I find that on narrow pipes of this kind the partial tones may be clearly heard up to the sixth.

For wide open pipes, on the other hand, the adjacent proper tones of the tube are all somewhat sharper than the corresponding harmonic tones of the prime, and hence these tones will be much less reinforced by the resonance of the tube. Wide pipes, having larger masses of vibrating air and admitting of being much more ¶ strongly blown without jumping up into an harmonic, are used for the great body of sound on the organ, and are hence called *principalstimmen.*§ For the above reasons they produce the prime tone alone strongly and fully, with a much weaker retinue of secondary tones. For wooden 'principal' pipes, I find the prime tone and its Octave or first upper partial very distinct; the Twelfth or second upper partial is but weak, and the higher upper partials no longer distinctly perceptible. For metal pipes the fourth partial was also still perceptible. The quality of tone in these pipes is fuller and softer than that of the *geigenprincipal.*⁎ When flute or flue stops of the organ, and the German flute are blown softly, the upper partials lose strength at a greater rate than the prime tone, and hence the musical quality becomes weak and soft.

Another variety is observed on the pipes which are conically narrowed at their

Footnote: ⁎ [*Geigenprincipal*—violin or crisp-toned diapason, 8 feet,—violin principal, 4 feet. See supra, p. 91d, note. *Violoncello*—'crisp-toned open stop, of small scale, the Octave to the violone, 8 feet'. *Violon-bass*—this fails in Hopkins, but it is probably his '*violone*—double bass, a unison open wood stop, of much smaller scale than the Diapason, and formed of pipes that are a little wider at the top than at the bottom, and furnished with ears and beard at the mouth; the tone of the Violone is crisp and resonant, like that of the orchestral Double Bass; and its speech being a little slow, it has the Stopped Bass always drawn with it, 16 feet'. *Gamba* or *viol da gamba*—'bass viol. unison stop, of smaller scale, and thinner but more pungent tone than the violin diapason, 8 feet, . . . one of the most highly esteemed and most frequently disposed stops in Continental organs; the German gamba is usually composed of cylindrical pipes'. In England till very recently it was made exclusively conical with a bell top. From Hopkins on the *Organ*, pp. 137, 445, &c.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † Poggendorff's *Annal.*, vol. cxli. pp. 321-¶ 352.

Footnote: ‡ Poggendorff's *Annal.*, vol. cxlvii. pp. 590-604.

Footnote: § [Literally 'principal voices or parts'; may probably be best translated 'principal work' or 'diapason-work,' including 'all the open cylindrical stops of Open Diapason measure, or which have their scale deduced from that of the Open Diapason; such stops are the chief, most important or "*principal*," as they are also most numerous in an organ. The Unison and Double Open Diapasons, Principal, Fifteenth and Octave Fifteenth; the Fifth, Twelfth, and Larigot; the Tenth and Tierce; and the Mixture Stops, when of full or proportional scale, belong to the Diapason-work.' From Hopkins on the *Organ*, p. 131.—*Translator.*]
