page: 95

6. *Musical Tones of Reed Pipes.*

The mode of producing the tones on these instruments resembles that used for the siren: the passage for the air being alternately closed and opened, its stream is separated into a series of individual pulses. This is effected on the siren, as we have already seen, by means of a rotating disc pierced with holes. In reed instruments, elastic plates or tongues are employed which are set in vibration and thus alternately close and open the aperture in which they are fastened. To these belong—

1. *The reed pipes of organs and the vibrators of harmoniums.* Their tongues, shown in perspective in fig. 28, A, and in section in fig. 28, B, are thin oblong metal plates, z z, fastened to a brass block, a a, in ¶ which there is a hole, b b, behind the tongue and of the same shape. When the tongue is in its position of rest, it closes the hole completely, with the exception of a very fine chink all round its margin. When in motion it oscillates between the positions marked z₁ and z₂ in fig. 28, B. In the position z₁ there is an aperture for the stream of air to enter, in the direction shown by the arrow, and this is closed when the tongue has reached the other extreme position z₂. The tongue shown is a *free vibrator* or *anche libre*, such as is now universally employed. These tongues are slightly smaller than the corresponding opening, so that they can bend ¶ inwards without touching the edges of the hole.⁎ Formerly, *striking vibrators* or *reeds* were employed, which on each oscillation struck against their frame. But as these produced a harsh quality of tone and an uncertain pitch they have gone out of use.⁎

[Figure 28]

Footnote: ⁎ [The quality of tone produced by the free reed can be greatly modified by comparatively slight changes. If the reed is quite flat, the end not turning up, as it does in fig. 28, above, no tone can be produced. If the size of the slit round the edges be enlarged, by forcing a thin plate of steel between the spring and the flange, and then withdrawing it, the quality of tone is permanently changed. Another change is produced by curving the middle part up and then down in a curve of contrary flexure. Another change results from curving the ends of the reed up as in 'American organs'—a species of harmonium. One of the earliest free reed instruments is the Chinese 'shêng,' which Mr. Hermann Smith thus describes from his own specimen. See also App. XX. sect. K. 'The body of the instrument is in the form and size of a teacup with a tightly fitting cover, pierced with a series of holes, arranged in a circle, to receive a set of small pipe-like canes, 17 in number, and of various lengths, of which 13 are capable of sounding and 4 are mute, but necessary for structure. The lower end of each pipe is fitted with a little free reed of very delicate workmanship, about half an inch long, and stamped in a thin metal plate, having its tip slightly loaded with beeswax, which is also used for keeping the reed in position. One peculiarity to be noticed is that the reed is quite level with the face of the plate, a condition in which modern free reeds would not speak. But this singular provision is made to ensure speaking either by blowing or suction. The corners of the reeds are rounded off, and thus a little space is left between the tip of the reed and the frame for the passage of air, an arrangement quite adverse to the speaking of harmonium reeds. In each pipe the integrity of the column of air is broken by a hole in the side, a short distance above the cup. By this strange contrivance not a single pipe will sound to the wind blown into the cup from a flexible tube, until its side hole has been covered by the finger of the player, and then ¶ the pipe gives a note corresponding to its full speaking length. Whatever be the speaking length of the pipe the hole is placed at a short distance above the cup. Its position has no relation to nodal distance, and it effects its purpose by breaking up the air column and preventing it from furnishing a proper reciprocating relation to the pitch of the reed.' The instrument thus described is the 'sing' of Barrow (*Travels in China*, 1804, where it is well figured as 'a pipe, with unequal reeds or bamboos'), and 'le petit cheng' of Père Amiot (*Mémoires concernant l'histoire . . . des Chinois*, . . . 1780, vol. vi., where a 'cheng' of 24 pipes is figured.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [It will be seen by App. VII. to this edition, end of sect. A., that Prof. Helmholtz has somewhat modified his opinion on this point, in consequence of the information I
