page: 97

+ excursions are small, and the pressure of the lips brings it just near enough to make the chink sufficiently small without allowing it to strike. For the oboe and bassoon two reeds or tongues of the same kind are placed opposite each other at the end of the mouthpiece. They are separated by a narrow chink, and by blowing are pressed near enough to close the chink whenever they swing inwards.

3. *Membranous tongues.*—The peculiarities of these tongues are best studied on those artificially constructed. Cut the end of a wooden or gutta-percha tube obliquely on both sides, as shown in fig. 30, leaving two nearly rectangular points standing between the two edges which are cut obliquely. Then gently stretch strips of vulcanised india rubber over the two oblique edges, so as to leave a small slit between them, and fasten them with ¶ a thread. A reed mouthpiece is thus constructed which may be connected in any way with tubes or other air chambers. When the membranes bend inwards the slit is closed; when outwards, it is open. Membranes which are fastened in this oblique manner speak much better than those which are laid at right angles to the axis of the tube, as Johannes Müller proposed, for in the latter case they require to be bent outwards by the air before they can begin to open and shut alternately. Membranous tongues of the kind proposed may be blown either in the direction of the arrows or in the opposite direction. In the first case they open the slit when they move towards the air chamber, that is, towards the further end of the conducting tube. Tongues of this kind I distinguish as *striking inwards.* When blown they always give deeper tones than they would do if allowed to vibrate freely, that is, without being connected with an air chamber. The tongues ¶ of organ pipes, harmoniums, and wooden wind instruments already mentioned, are likewise always arranged to strike inwards. But both membranous and metal tongues may be arranged so as to act against the stream of air, and hence to open when they move towards the outer opening of the instrument. I then say that they *strike outwards.* The tones of tongues which strike outwards are always sharper than those of isolated tongues.

[Figure 30]

Only two kinds of membranous tongues have to be considered as musical instruments: the human *lips* in *brass instruments*, and the human *larynx* in *singing.*

The lips must be considered as very slightly elastic membranous tongues, loaded with much inelastic tissue containing water, and they would consequently vibrate very slowly, if they could be brought to vibrate by themselves. In brass instruments they form membranous tongues which strike outwards, and consequently by the above rule produce tones sharper than their proper tones. But as they offer very slight resistance, they are readily set in motion, by the alternate ¶ pressure of the vibrating column of air, when used with brass instruments.⁎

Footnote: ⁎ [Mr. D. J. Blaikley (manager of Messrs. Boosey & Co.'s Military Musical Instrument Manufactory, who has studied all such instruments theoretically as well as practically, and read many papers upon them, to some of which I shall have to refer) finds that this statement does not represent his own sensations when playing the horn. 'The lips,' he says, 'do not vibrate throughout their whole length, but only through a certain length determined by the diameter of the cup of the mouthpiece. Probably also the vibrating length can be modified by the mere pinch, at least this is the sensation I experienced when sounding high notes on a large mouthpiece. The compass (about 4 octaves) possible on a given mouthpiece is much greater than that of any one register of the voice, and the whole range of brass instruments played thus with the lips is about one octave greater than the whole range of the human voice from basso profundo to the highest soprano. That the lips, acting as the vocal chords do, can themselves vibrate rapidly when supported by the rim of a mouthpiece, may be proved, for if such a rim, unconnected with any resonating tube, be held against the lips, various notes of the scale can be produced very faintly, the difficulty being to maintain steadiness of pitch (*Philos. Mag.*, Aug. 1878, p. 2). *The office of the air in the tube in relation to the lips* (leaving out of consideration its work as a resonant body, intensifying and modifying the tone) *is to act as a pendulum governor in facilitating the maintenance* (not the origination) *of a*
