page: 98

In the larynx, the elastic vocal chords act as membranous tongues. They are stretched across the windpipe, from front to back, like the india-rubber strips in fig. 30 (p. 97a), and leave a small slit, the glottis, between them. They have the advantage over all artificially constructed tongues of allowing the width of their slit, their tension, and even their form to be altered at pleasure with extraordinary rapidity and certainty, at the same time that the resonant tube formed by the opening of the mouth admits of much variety of form, so that many more qualities of tone can be thus produced than on any instrument of artificial construction. If the vocal chords are examined from above with a laryngoscope, while producing a tone, they will be seen to make very large vibrations for the deeper breast voice, shutting the glottis tightly whenever they strike inwards.

The pitch of the various reeds or tongues just mentioned is altered in very different manners. The metal tongues of the *organ* and *harmonium* are always ¶ intended to produce one single tone apiece. On the motion of these comparatively heavy and stiff tongues, the pressure of the vibrating air has very small influence, and their pitch within the instrument is consequently not much different from that of the isolated tongues. There must be at least one tongue for each note on such instruments.

In *wooden wind instruments*, a single tongue has to serve for the whole series of notes. But the tongues of these instruments are made of light elastic wood, which is easily set in motion by the alternating pressure of the vibrating column of air, and swings sympathetically with it. Such instruments, therefore, in addition to those very high tones, which nearly correspond to the proper tones of their tongues, can, as theory and experience alike show, also produce deep tones of a very different pitch,⁎ because the waves of air which arise in the tube of the instrument excite an alternation in the pressure of air adjacent to the tongue itself sufficiently powerful to make it vibrate sensibly. Now in a vibrating column of ¶ air the alteration of pressure is greatest where the velocity of the particles of air is smallest; and since the velocity is always null, that is a minimum, at the end of a closed tube, such as a stopped organ pipe, and the alteration of pressure in that place is consequently a maximum, the tones of these reed pipes must be the same as those which the resonant tube alone would produce, if it were stopped at the place where the tongue is placed, and were blown as a stopped pipe. In musical practice, then, such tones of the instrument as correspond to the proper tones of the tongue are not used at all, because they are very high and screaming, and their pitch cannot be preserved with sufficient steadiness when the tongue is wet. The only tones produced are considerably deeper than the proper tone of the tongue, and have their pitches determined by the length of the column of air, which corresponds to the proper tones of the stopped pipe.

The *clarinet* has a cylindrical tube, the proper tones of which correspond to the third, fifth, seventh, &c., partial tone of the prime. By altering the style of ¶ blowing, it is possible to pass from the prime to the Twelfth or the higher major Third. The acoustic length of the tube may also be altered by opening the side

Footnote+ *periodic vibration of the lips*. Prof. Helmholtz does not say above what produces the alternate pressure, and I can conceive no source for it but a periodic vibration of the lips of a time suited to the *particular* note required.' The depth of the cup is also important:—'The shallower and more "cup-like" the cup,' says Mr. Blaikley, 'the greater the strength of the upper partials. Compare the deep and narrow cup of the French horn with weak upper partials, and the wide and shallow cup of the trumpet with strong upper partials.'—(MS. communications.) Mr. Blaikley kindly sounded for me the same instrument with different mouthpieces or cups, to show the great difference of quality they produce. In the great bass bombardon on which he produced a tone of 40 vib., the tone was, even at that depth, remarkably rich and fine, owing to the large and deep cup extinguishing the beating upper partials. Mr. Blaikley also drew my attention to the fact that where the tube opens out into the cup, there must be no sharp shoulder, but that the edge must be carefully rounded off, otherwise there is a great loss of power to the blower. In the case of the French horn the cup is very long and almost tapers into the tube.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ⁎ See Helmholtz, *Verhandlungen des naturhistorischen medicinischen Vereins zu Heidelberg*. July 26, 1861, in the *Heidelberger Jahrbücher*. Poggendorff's *Annalen*, 1861. [Reproduced in part in App. VII. sect. B., I.]
