page: 102

+ nature of the tongue, its position with respect to its frame, the tightness with which it closes, &c. Striking tongues which produce the most discontinuous pulses of air, also produce the most cutting quality of tone.* The shorter the puff of air, and hence the more sudden its action, the greater number of high upper partials should we expect, exactly as we find in the siren, according to Seebeck's investigations. Hard, unyielding material, like that of brass tongues, will produce pulses of air which are much more disconnected than those formed by soft and yielding substances. This is probably the reason why the singing tones of the human voice are softer than all others which are produced by reed pipes. Nevertheless the number of upper partial tones in the human voice, when used in emphatic *forte*, is very great, and they reach distinctly and powerfully up to the four-times accented [or quarter-foot] Octave (p. 26a). To this we shall have to return.

¶ The tones of tongues are essentially changed by the addition of resonance tubes, because they reinforce and hence give prominence to those upper partial tones which correspond to the proper tones of these tubes.† In this case the resonance tubes must be considered as closed at the point where the tongue is inserted.‡

A brass tongue such as is used in organs, and tuned to *b*♭, was applied to one of my larger spherical resonators, also tuned to *b*♭, instead of to its usual resonance tube. After considerably increasing the pressure of wind in the bellows, the tongue spoke somewhat flatter than usual, but with an extraordinarily full, beautiful, soft tone, from which almost all upper partials were absent. Very little wind was used, but it was under high pressure. In this case the prime tone of the compound was in unison with the resonator, which gave a powerful resonance, and consequently the prime tone had also great power. None of the higher partial tones could be reinforced. The theory of the vibrations of air in the sphere further ¶ shows that the greatest pressure must occur in the sphere at the moment that the tongue opens. Hence arose the necessity of strong pressure in the bellows to overcome the increased pressure in the sphere, and yet not much wind really passed.

If instead of a glass sphere, resonant tubes are employed, which admit of a greater number of proper tones, the resulting musical tones are more complex. In the clarinet we have a cylindrical tube which by its resonance reinforces the uneven partial tones.§ The conical tubes of the oboe, bassoon, trumpet, and French horn, on the other hand, reinforce all the harmonic upper partial tones of the compound up to a certain height, determined by the incapacity of the tubes to resound for waves of sound that are not much longer than the width of the opening. By actual trial I found only unevenly numbered partial tones, distinct to the seventh inclusive, in the notes of the clarinet,§ whereas on other instruments, which have conical tubes, I found the evenly numbered partials also. I have not yet had an opportunity of making observations on the further differences of quality in ¶ the tones of individual instruments with conical tubes. This opens rather a wide field for research, since the quality of tone is altered in many ways by the style of blowing, and even on the same instrument the different parts of the scale, when they require the opening of side holes, show considerable differences in quality. On wooden wind instruments these differences are striking. The opening of side holes is by no means a complete substitute for shortening the tube, and the reflection of the waves of sound at the points of opening is not the same as at the free open end of the tube. The upper partials of compound tones produced by a tube limited by an open side hole, must certainly be in general materially deficient in harmonic purity, and this will also have a marked influence on their resonance.⁎⁎

Footnote: ⁎ [But see footnote † p. 95d'.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [A line has been here cancelled in the translation which had been accidentally left standing in the German, as it refers to a remark on the passage which formerly followed p. 89, l. 2, but was cancelled in the 4th German edition.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ‡ See Appendix VII.

Footnote: § [But see note ⁎ p. 99b.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ⁎⁎ [The theory of side holes is excessively complicated and has not been as yet worked
