page: 103

7. *Vowel Qualities of Tone.*

We have hitherto discussed cases of resonance, generated in such air chambers as were capable of reinforcing the prime tone principally, but also a certain number of the harmonic upper partial tones of the compound tone produced. The case, however, may also occur in which the lowest tone of the resonance chamber applied does not correspond with the prime, but only with some one of the upper partials of the compound tone itself, and in these cases we find, in accordance with the principles hitherto developed, that the corresponding upper partial tone is really more reinforced than the prime or other partials by the resonance of the chamber, and consequently predominates extremely over all the other partials in the series. The quality of tone thus produced has consequently a peculiar character, and more or less resembles one of the vowels of the human voice. For the ¶ vowels of speech are in reality tones produced by membranous tongues (the vocal chords), with a resonance chamber (the mouth) capable of altering in length, width, and pitch of resonance, and hence capable also of reinforcing at different times different partials of the compound tone to which it is applied.⁎

In order to understand the composition of vowel tones, we must in the first place bear in mind that the source of their sound lies in the vocal chords, and that when the voice is heard, these chords act as membranous tongues, and like all tongues produce a series of decidedly discontinuous and sharply separated pulses of air, which, on being represented as a sum of simple vibrations, must consist of a very large number of them, and hence be received by the ear as a very long series of partials belonging to a compound musical tone. With the assistance of resonators it is possible to recognise very high partials, up to the sixteenth, when one of the brighter vowels is sung by a powerful bass voice at a low pitch, and, in the case of a strained forte in the upper notes of any human voice, we can ¶ hear, more clearly than on any other musical instrument, those high upper partials that belong to the middle of the four-times accented Octave (the highest on modern pianofortes, see note, p. 18d), and these high tones have a peculiar relation to the ear, to be subsequently considered. The loudness of such upper partials, especially those of highest pitch, differs considerably in different individuals. For cutting bright voices it is greater than for soft and dull ones. The quality of tone in cutting screaming voices may perhaps be referred to a want of sufficient smoothness or straightness in the edges of the vocal chords, to enable them to close in a straight narrow slit without striking one another. This circumstance would give the larynx more the character of striking tongues, and the latter have a much more cutting quality than the free tongues of the normal vocal chords. Hoarseness in voices may arise from the glottis not entirely closing during the vibrations of the vocal chords. At any rate, when alterations of this kind are made in artificial membranous tongues, similar results ensue. For a strong and ¶ yet soft quality of voice it is necessary that the vocal chords should, even when most strongly vibrating, join rectilinearly at the moment of approach with perfect tightness, effectually closing the glottis for the moment, but without overlapping

Footnote+ out scientifically. 'The general principles,' writes Mr. Blaikley, 'are not difficult of comprehension; the difficulty is to determine quantitatively the values in each particular case.' The paper by Schafhäutl (writing under the name of Pellisov), 'Theorie gedeckter cylindrischer und conischer Pfeifen und der Querflöten,' Schweiger, *Journ.* lxviii. 1833, is disfigured by misprints so that the formulæ are unintelligible, and the theory is also extremely hazardous. But they are the only papers I have found, and are referred to by Theobald Boehm, *Ueber den Flötenbau*, Mainz, 1847. An English version of this, by himself, made for Mr. Rudall in 1847, has recently been edited with additional letters by W. S. Broadwood, and published by Rudall, Carte, & Co., makers of his flutes. See also Victor Mahillon, *Étude sur le doigté de la Flûte Boehm*, 1882, and a paper by M. Aristide Cavaillé-Coll, in *L'Écho Musical* for 11 Jan. 1883.—*Translator*.

Footnote: ⁎ The theory of vowel tones was first enunciated by Wheatstone in a criticism, unfortunately little known, on Willis's experiments. The latter are described in the *Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society*, vol. iii. p. 231, and Poggendorff's *Annalen der Physik*, vol. xxiv. p. 397. Wheatstone's report upon them is contained in the *London and Westminster Review* for October 1837.
