page: 107

Experiments hereafter described show that the resonance of this single tone is sufficient to characterise the vowels above mentioned.

The second series of vowels consists of A, Ä, E, I. The lips are drawn so far apart that they no longer contract the issuing stream of air, but a fresh constriction is formed between the front (middle) parts of the tongue and the hard palate, the space immediately above the larynx being widened by depressing the root of the tongue, and hence causing the larynx to rise simultaneously. The form of the oral cavity consequently resembles a bottle with a narrow neck. The belly of the bottle is behind, in the pharynx, and its neck is the narrow passage between the upper surface of the tongue and the hard palate. In the above series of letters, Ä, E, I, these changes increase until for I the internal cavity of the bottle is greatest and the neck narrowest. For Ä [the broadest French *ê*, broader than *e* in *there*, and nearly as broad as *a* in *bat* lengthened, with which the name of their city is ¶ pronounced by the natives of Bath], the whole channel is, however, tolerably wide, so that it is quite easy to see down to the larynx when the laryngoscope is used. Indeed this vowel gives the very best position of the mouth for the application of this instrument, because the root of the tongue, which impedes the view when A is uttered, is depressed, and the observer can see over and past it.

When a bottle with a long narrow neck is used as a resonance chamber, two simple tones are readily discovered, of which one can be regarded as the proper tone of the belly, and the other as that of the neck of the bottle. Of course the air in the belly cannot vibrate quite independently of that in the neck, and both proper tones in question must consequently be different, and indeed somewhat deeper than they would be if belly and neck were separate and had their resonance examined independently. The neck is approximately a short pipe open at both ends. To be sure, its inner end debouches into the cavity of the bottle instead of the open air, but if the neck is very narrow, and the belly of the bottle very wide, ¶ the latter may be looked upon in some respect as an open space with regard to the vibrations of the air inclosed in the neck. These conditions are best satisfied for I, in which the length of the channel between tongue and palate, measured from the upper teeth to the back edge of the bony palate, is about 6 centimetres [2·36 inches]. An open pipe of this length when blown would give *e''''*, while the observations made for determining the tone of loudest resonance for I gives nearly *d''''*, which is as close an agreement as could possibly have been expected in such an irregularly shaped pipe as that formed by the tongue and palate.

In accordance with these experiments the vowels Ä, E, I, have each a higher and a deeper resonance tone. The higher tones continue the ascending series of the proper tones of the vowels U, O, A. By means of tuning-forks I found for Ä a tone between *g'''* and *a'''*♭, and for E the tone *b'''*♭. I had no fork suitable for I, but by means of the whistling noise of the air, to be considered presently (p. 108b), its proper tone was determined with tolerable exactness to be *d''''*.

¶ The deeper proper tones which are due to the back part of the oral cavity are rather more difficult to discover. Tuning-forks may be used, but the resonance is comparatively weak, because it must be conducted through the long narrow neck of the air chamber. It must further be remembered that this resonance only occurs during the time that the corresponding vowel is gently whispered, and disappears as soon as the whisper ceases, because the form of the chamber on which the resonance depends then immediately changes. The tuning-forks after being struck must be brought as close as possible to the opening of the air chamber which lies behind the upper teeth. By this means I found *d''* for Ä and *f'* for E. For I, direct observation with tuning-forks was not possible; but from the upper partial tones, I conclude that its proper tone is as deep as that of U, or near *f*. Hence, when we pass from A to I, these deeper proper tones of the oral cavity sink, and the higher ones rise in pitch.⁎

Footnote: ⁎ [Mr. Graham Bell, the inventor of the Telephone, son of the Mr. Melville Bell already mentioned (p. 105d, note), was in the habit of bringing out this fact by placing his mouth in
