page: 112

Thus the resonator *b'*♭ answers to O, to an Äö and to an E which resembles Ä, and these sounds may pass continuously one into the other.

The resonator *f'* answers to the transition Ou—Ö—E. The resonator *d''* to Oa—Äö—Ä. In a similar manner each of the higher tones may be connected with various deeper tones. Thus assuming a position of the mouth which would give *e'''* for whistling, we can, without changing the pitch of the fricative sound in the mouth, whisper a vowel inclining to Ö or inclining to Ü, by allowing the fricative sound in the larynx to have a higher or deeper resonance in the back part of the mouth.⁎

In comparing the strength of the upper partials of different vowels by means of resonators, it is further to be remembered, that the reinforcement by means of the resonance of the mouth affects the prime tone of the note produced by the voice, as well as the upper partials. And as it is especially the vibrations of the prime, ¶ which by their reaction on the vocal chords retain these in regular vibratory motion, the voice speaks much more powerfully, when the prime itself receives such a reinforcement. This is especially observable in those parts of the scale which the singer reaches with difficulty. It may also be noted with reed pipes having metal tongues. When a resonance pipe is applied to them tuned to the tone of the tongue, or a little higher, extraordinarily powerful and rich tones are produced, by means of strong pressure but little wind, and the tongue oscillates in large excursions either way. The pitch of a metal tongue becomes a little flatter than before. This is not perceived with the human voice because the singer is able to regulate the tension of the vocal chords accordingly. Thus I find distinctly that at *b'*♭, the extremity of my falsetto voice, I can sing powerfully an O, an A, and an A on the way to Ö, which have their resonance at this pitch, whereas U, if it is not made to come very near O, and I, are dull and uncertain, with the expenditure of more air than in the former case. Regard must be had to this circumstance in ¶ experiments on the strength of upper partials, because those of a vowel which speaks powerfully, may become proportionally too powerful, as compared with those of a vowel which speaks weakly. Thus I have found that the high tones of the soprano voice which lie in the reinforcing region of the vowel A at the upper extremity of the doubly-accented [or one-foot] Octave, when sung to the vowel A, exhibit their higher Octave more strongly than is the case for the vowels E and I, which do not speak so well although the latter have their strong resonance at the upper end of the thrice-accented [or six-inch] Octave.

It has been already remarked (p. 39c) that the strength and amplitude of sympathetic vibration is affected by the mass and boundaries of the body which vibrates sympathetically. A body of considerable mass which can perform its vibrations as much as possible without any hindrance from neighbouring bodies, and has not its motion damped by the internal friction of its parts, after it has once been excited, can continue to vibrate for a long time, and consequently, if it ¶ has to be set in the highest degree of sympathetic vibration, the oscillations of the exciting tone must, for a comparatively long time, coincide with those proper vibrations excited in itself. That is to say, the highest degree of sympathetic resonance can be produced only by using tones which lie within very narrow limits of pitch. This is the case with tuning-forks and bells. The mass of air in the cavity of the mouth, on the other hand, has but slight density and mass, its walls, so far as they are composed of soft parts, are not capable of offering much resistance, are imperfectly elastic, and when put in vibration have much internal friction to stop their motion. Moreover the vibrating mass of air in the cavity of the mouth communicates through the orifice of the mouth with the outer air, to which it rapidly gives off large parts of the motion it has received. For this reason a

Footnote: ⁎ This appears to me to meet the objections which were made by Herr G. Engel, in Reichart's and Du Bois-Reymond's *Archiv.*, 1869, pp. 317-319. Herr J. Stockhausen drew my attention to the habit of using such deviations from the usual qualities of vowels in syllables which are briefly uttered.
