page: 114

+ them into striking reeds, has a jarring quality of tone, that is, possesses stronger upper partials than the singing voice.

In singing, on the other hand, especially at higher pitches, conditions are less favourable for the characterisation of vowels. Every one knows that it is generally much more difficult to understand words when sung than when spoken, and that the difficulty is less with male than with female voices, each having been equally well cultivated. Were it otherwise, 'books of the words' at operas and concerts would be unnecessary. Above *f'*, the characterisation of U becomes imperfect even if it is closely assimilated to O. But so long as it remains the only vowel of indeterminate sound, and the remainder allow of sensible reinforcement of their upper partials in certain regions, this negative character will distinguish U. On the other hand a soprano voice in the neighbourhood of *f''* should not be able to clearly distinguish U, O, and A; and this agrees with my own experience. On singing the three vowels ¶ in immediate succession, the resonance *f'''* for A will, however, be still somewhat clearer in the cavity of the mouth when tuned for *b''*♭, than when it is tuned to b'♭ for O. The soprano voice will in this case be able to make the A clearer, by elevating the pitch of the cavity of the mouth towards *d'''* and thus making it approach to *f'''*. The O, on the other hand, can be separated from U by approaching Oₐ, and giving the prime more decisive force. Nevertheless these vowels, if not sung in immediate succession, will not be very clearly distinguished by a listener who is unacquainted with the mode of pronouncing the vowels that the soprano singer uses.⁎

A further means of helping to discriminate vowels, moreover, is found in commencing them powerfully. This depends upon a general relation in bodies excited to sympathetic vibration. Thus, if we excite sympathetic vibration in a suitable body with a tone somewhat different from its proper tone, by commencing it suddenly with great power, we hear at first, in addition to the exciting tone which is ¶ reinforced by resonance, the proper tone of the sympathetically vibrating body.† But the latter soon dies away, while the first remains. In the case of tuning-forks with large resonator, we can even hear beats between the two tones. Apply a *b'*♭ resonator to the ear, and commence singing the vowel O powerfully on *g*, of which the upper partials *g'* and *d''* have only a weak lasting resonance in the cavity of the mouth, and you may hear immediately at the commencement of the vowel, a short sharp beat between the *b'*♭ of the cavity of the mouth and of the resonator. On selecting another vowel, this *b'*♭ vanishes, which shows that the pitch of the cavity of the mouth helps to generate it. In this case then also the sudden commencement of the tones *g'* and *d''* belonging to the compound tone of the voice, excites the intermediate proper tone *b'*♭ of the cavity of the mouth, which rapidly fades. The same thing may be observed for other pitches of the resonator used, when we sing notes, powerfully commenced, which have upper partials that are not reinforced by the resonator, provided that a vowel is chosen with a characteristic pitch which ¶ answers to the pitch of the resonator. Hence it results that when any vowel in any pitch is powerfully commenced, its characteristic tone becomes audible as a short beat. By this means the vowel may be distinctly characterised at the moment of commencement, even when it becomes intermediate on long continuance. But for this purpose, as already remarked, an exact and energetic commencement is necessary. How much such a commencement assists in rendering the words of a singer intelligible is well known. For this reason also the vocalisation of the briefly-uttered words of a reciting *parlando*, is more distinct than that of sustained song.‡

Footnote+ draw particular attention to the point in this place. See also the table which I have added in a footnote on p. 124d.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ⁎ [In my *Pronunciation for Singers* (Curwen, 1877), and my *Speech in Song* (Novello, 1878) I have endeavoured to give a popular explanation of the alterations which a singer may make in the vowels in English, German, French and Italian, at different pitches, so as to remain intelligible.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † See the mathematical statement of this process in App. IX., remarks on equations 4 to 4b.

Footnote: ‡ The facts here adduced meet, I think, the objections brought against my vowel theory by
