page: 115

Moreover vowels admit of other kinds of alterations in their qualities of tone, conditioned by alterations of their characteristic tones within certain limits. Thus the resonating capability of the cavity of the mouth may undergo in general alterations in strength and definition, which would render the character of the various vowels and their difference from one another in general more or less conspicuous or obscure. Flaccid soft walls in any passage with sonorous masses of air, are generally prejudicial to the force of the vibrations. Partly too much of the motion is given off to the outside through the soft masses, partly too much is destroyed by friction within them. Wooden organ pipes have a less energetic quality of tone than metal ones, and those of pasteboard a still duller quality, even when the mouthpiece remains unaltered. The walls of the human throat, and the cheeks, are, however, much more yielding than pasteboard. Hence if the tone of the voice with all its partials is to meet with a powerful resonance and come out unweakened, ¶ these most flaccid parts of the passage for our voice, must be as much as possible thrown out of action, or else rendered elastic by tension, and in addition the passage must be made as short and wide as possible. The last is effected by raising the larynx. The soft wall of the cheeks can be almost entirely avoided, by taking care that the rows of teeth are not too far apart. The lips, when their co-operation is not necessary, as it is for Ö and Ü, may be held so far apart that the sharp firm edges of the teeth define the orifice of the mouth. For A the angles of the mouth can be drawn entirely aside. For 0 they can be firmly stretched by the muscles above and below them (*levator anguli oris* and *triangularis menti*), which then feel like stretched cords to the touch, and can be thus pressed against the teeth, so that this part of the margin of the orifice of the mouth is also made sharp and capable of resisting.

In the attempt to produce a clear energetic tone of the voice we also become aware of the tension of a large number of muscles lying in front of the throat, ¶ both those which lie between the under jaw and the tongue-bone and help to form the floor of the cavity of the mouth (*mylohyoideus*, *geniohyoideus*, and perhaps also *biventer*), and likewise those which run down near the larynx and air tubes, and draw down the tongue-bone (*sternohyoideus*, *sternothyroideus* and *thyrohyoideus*). Without the counteraction of the latter, indeed, considerable tension of the former would be impossible. Besides this a contraction of the skin on both sides of the larynx which takes place at the commencement of the tone of the voice, shows that the *omohyoideus* muscle, which runs obliquely down from the tongue-bone backwards to the shoulder-blade, is also stretched. Without its co-operation the muscles arising from the under jaw and breast-bone would draw the larynx too far forwards. Now the greater part of these muscles do not go to the larynx at all, but only to the tongue-bone, from which the larynx is suspended. Hence they cannot directly assist in the formation of the voice, so far as this depends upon the action of the larynx. The action of these muscles, so far as I have been able to observe it on ¶ myself, is also much less when I utter a dull guttural A, than when I endeavour to change it into a ringing, keen and powerfully penetrating A. Ringing and keen, applied to a quality of tone, imply many and powerful upper partials, and the stronger they are, of course the more marked are the differences of the vowels which their own differences condition. A singer, or a declaimer, will occasionally interpose among his bright and rich tones others of a duller character as a contrast. Sharp characterisation of vowel quality is suitable for energetic, joyful or vigorous frames of mind; indifferent and obscure quality of tone for sad and troubled, or taciturn states. In the latter case speakers like to change the proper tone of the vowels, by drawing the extremes closer to a middle Äö (say the short German E [the final

Footnote+ Herr E. v. Quanten (Poggendorff's *Annal.*, vol. cliv. pp. 272 and 522), so far as they do not rest upon misconceptions. [In the 1st edition of this translation, during the printing of which v. Quanten's first paper appeared, I added an article, pp. 724-741, with especial reference to it. In consequence of the new matter added by Prof. Helmholtz in his 4th German edition here followed, this article is omitted from the present edition.—*Translator.*]
