page: 118

+ Ä, Ö, E, and I with the same reed pipe, by applying glass spheres into whose external opening glass tubes were inserted from 6 to 10 centimetres (2·36 to 3·94 inches) in length, in order to imitate the double resonance of the oral cavity for these vowels.

Willis has also given another interesting method for producing vowels. If a toothed wheel, with many teeth, revolve rapidly, and a spring be applied to its teeth, the spring will be raised by each tooth as it passes, and a tone will be produced having its pitch number equal to the number of teeth by which it has been struck in a second. Now if one end of the spring is well fastened, and the spring be set in vibration, it will itself produce a tone which will increase in pitch as the spring diminishes in length. If then we turn the wheel with a constant velocity, and allow a watch spring of variable length to strike against its teeth, we shall obtain for a long spring a quality of tone resembling U, and as we shorten the ¶ spring other qualities in succession like O, A, E, I, the tone of the spring here playing the part of the reinforced tone which determines the vowel. But this imitation of the vowels is certainly much less complete than that obtained by reed pipes. The reason of this process also evidently depends upon our producing compound tones in which certain upper partials (which in this case correspond with the proper tones of the spring itself) are more reinforced than others.

Willis himself advanced a theory concerning the nature of vowel tones which differs from that I have laid down in agreement with the whole connection of all other acoustical phenomena. Willis imagines that the pulses of air which produce the vowel qualities, are themselves tones which rapidly die away, corresponding to the proper tone of the spring in his last experiment, or the short echo produced by a pulse or a little explosion of air in the mouth, or in the resonance chamber of a reed pipe. In fact something like the sound of a vowel will be heard if we only tap against the teeth with a little rod, and set the cavity of the mouth in the ¶ position required for the different vowels. Willis's description of the motion of sound for vowels is certainly not a great way from the truth; but it only assigns the mode in which the motion of the air ensues, and not the corresponding reaction which this produces in the ear. That this kind of motion as well as all others is actually resolved by the ear into a series of partial tones, according to the laws of sympathetic resonance, is shown by the agreement of the analysis of vowel qualities of tone made by the unarmed ear and by the resonators. This will appear still more clearly in the next chapter, where experiments will be described showing the direct composition of vowel qualities from their partial tones.

Vowel qualities of tone consequently are essentially distinguished from the tones of most other musical instruments by the fact that the loudness of their partial tones does not depend solely upon their numerical order but preponderantly upon the absolute pitch of those partials. Thus when I sing the vowel A to the note *E*♭,⁎ the reinforced tone *b''*♭ is the 12th partial of the compound tone; ¶ and when I sing the same vowel A to the note *b'*♭, the reinforced tone is still *b''*♭, but is now the 2nd partial of the compound tone sung.†

From the examples adduced to show the dependence of quality of tone from the mode in which a musical tone is compounded, we may deduce the following general rules: —

1. *Simple Tones*, like those of tuning-forks applied to resonance chambers and wide stopped organ pipes, have a very soft, pleasant sound, free from all roughness, but wanting in power, and dull at low pitches.

2. *Musical Tones*, which are accompanied by a moderately loud series of the

Footnote: ⁎ [*E*♭ has for 2nd partial *e*♭, for 3rd *b*♭, and hence for 6th *b'*♭, and for 12th, *b''*♭.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [See App. XX. sec. M. No. 1, for Jenkin and Ewing's analysis of vowel sounds by means of the Phonograph.—*Translator.*]
