page: 122

+ screw, as at g, so as to make the points of the platinum wires c c exactly touch the mercury below the alcohol in the cups d. A third clamping screw e is in conductive connection with the handle of the tuning-fork. When the fork vibrates, and an electric current passes through it from i to e, the current will be broken every time that the end of the fork a rises above the surface of the mercury in the cup d, and re-made every time the platinum wire dips again into the mercury. This intermittent current being at the same time conducted through the electro-magnet b b, fig. 33, the latter becomes magnetic every time it passes, and thus keeps up the vibrations of the fork a, which is itself magnetic. Generally only one of the cups d is used for conducting the current. Alcohol is poured over the mercury to prevent the latter from being burned by the electrical sparks which arise when the stream is interrupted. This method of interrupting the current was invented by Neef, who used a simple vibrating spring in place of the tuning-¶ fork, as may be generally seen in the induction apparatus so much used for medical purposes. But the vibrations of a spring communicate themselves to all adjacent

[Figure 33]

+ ¶ bodies and are for our purposes both too audible and too irregular. Hence the necessity of substituting a tuning-fork for the spring. The handle of a well worked symmetrical tuning-fork is extremely little agitated by the vibrations of the fork and hence does not itself agitate the bodies connected with it, so powerfully as the ¶ fixed end of a straight spring. The tuning-fork of the apparatus in fig. 33 must be in exact unison with the prime tone *B*♭. To effect this I employ a little clamp of thick steel wire h, placed on one of the prongs. By slipping this towards the free end of the prong the tone is deepened, and by slipping it towards the handle of the fork, the tone is raised.⁎

When the whole apparatus is in action, but the resonance chambers are closed, all the forks are maintained in a state of uniform motion, but no sound is heard, beyond a gentle humming caused by the direct action of the forks on the air. But on opening one or more resonance chambers, the corresponding tones are heard with sufficient loudness, and are louder as the lid is more widely opened. By this means it is possible to form, in rapid succession, different combinations of the prime

Footnote: ⁎ This apparatus was made by Fessel in Cologne. More detailed descriptions of its separate parts, and instructions for the experiments to be made by its means, are given in Appendix VIII. [This apparatus was exhibited by R. Koenig (see Appendix II.) in the International Exhibition of 1872 in London.—*Translator*.]
