page: 125

+ degrees, the relation between the strength of the resonance and the difference of phase is shown by the following table:—

	Strength of Resonance. | Difference of Phase in angular degrees.
	10 | 0°
	9 | 35° 54'
	8 | 50° 12'
	7 | 60° 40'
	6 | 68° 54'
	5 | 75° 31'
	4 | 80° 48'
	3 | 84° 50'
	2 | 87° 42'
	1 | 89° 26'

¶ This table shows that a comparatively slight weakening of resonance by altering the tuning of the chamber occasions considerable differences of phase, but that when the weakening is considerable there are relatively slight changes of phase. We can take advantage of this circumstance when compounding the vowel sounds by means of the tuning-forks to produce every possible alteration of phase. It is only necessary to let the lid shade the mouth of the resonance chamber till the strength of the tone is perceptibly diminished. As soon as we have learned how to estimate roughly the amount of diminution of loudness, the above table gives us the corresponding alteration of phase. We are thus able to alter the vibrations of the tones in question to any amount, up to a quarter of the periodic time of a vibration. Alterations of phase to the amount of half the periodic time are produced by sending the electric current through the electro-magnets of the corresponding fork in an opposite direction, which causes the ends ¶ of the fork to be repelled instead of attracted by the electro-magnets on the passage of the current, and thus sets the fork vibrating in the contrary direction. This counter-excitement of the fork, however, by repelling currents, must not be continued too long, as the magnetism of the fork itself would otherwise gradually diminish, whereas attracting currents strengthen it or maintain it at a maximum. It is well known that the magnetism of masses of iron that are violently agitated is easily altered.

After a tone has been compounded, in which some of the partials have been weakened and at the same time altered in phase by the half-shading of the apertures of their corresponding resonance chambers, we can re-compound the same tone by an equal amount of weakening in the same partials, but without shading the aperture, and therefore without change of phase, by simply leaving the mouths of the chambers wide open, and increasing their distances from the exciting forks, until the required amount of enfeeblement of sound is attained.

¶ For example, let us first sound the forks *B*♭ and *b*♭, with fully opened resonance chambers, and perfect accord. They will vibrate as shewn by the vibrational forms fig. 31, A and B (p. 120a), with the points e and d₀ coincident, and produce at a distance the compound vibration represented by the vibrational curve C. But by closing the resonance chamber of the fork *B*♭ we can make the point e on the curve B coincide with the points between d₀ and d₁ on the curve A. To make e coincide with d₁, the loudness of *B*♭ must be made about three-quarters of what it would be if the mouth of the chamber were unshaded. The point e can be made to coincide with d₄ by reversing the current in the electro-magnets and fully opening the mouth of the resonance chamber; and then by imperfectly opening the chamber of *B*♭ the point e can be made to move towards δ. On the other hand, an imperfect opening of the chamber *b*♭ will make e recede from coincidence with δ (which is the same thing as coincidence with d₀) or with d₄, towards d₄ or d₃ respectively. The proportions of loudness may be made the same in all these
