page: 127

+ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, in fig. 35, show the series of forms. Here 3 answers to the case when both forks pass through their position of rest at the same time; 2 and 4 differ from that position by 1/12, and 1 and 5 by 1/4 of a wave of the higher fork.

If we now bring the forks into the most perfect possible unison with the interrupting fork, so that both vibrate as strongly as possible, and then alter their

[Figure 35]

+ tuning a little by putting on or removing pieces of wax, we also see one figure of the microscopic image gradually passing into another, and can thus easily assure our-¶ selves of the correctness of the law already cited. Experiments on quality of tone are then conducted by first bringing all the forks as exactly as possible to the pitches of the harmonic upper partial tones of the interrupting fork, next removing the resonance chambers to such distances from the forks as will give the required relations of strength, and finally putting the forks out of tune as much as we please by sticking on lumps of wax. The size of these lumps should be previously so regulated by microscopical observation as to produce the required difference of phase. This, however, at the same time weakens the vibrations of the forks, and hence the strength of the tones must be restored to its former state by bringing the resonance chambers nearer to the forks.

The result in these experiments, where the forks are put out of tune, is the same as in those where the resonance chambers were put out of tune. There is no perceptible alteration of quality of tone. At least there is no alteration so marked as to be recognisable after the expiration of the few seconds necessary ¶ for resetting the apparatus, and hence certainly no such change of quality as would change one vowel into another.

An apparent exception to this rule must here be mentioned. If the forks *B*♭ and *b*♭ are not perfectly tuned as Octaves, and are brought into vibration by rubbing or striking, an attentive ear will observe very weak beats which appear like small changes in the strength of the tone and its quality. These beats are certainly connected with the successive entrance of the vibrating forks on varying difference of phase. Their explanation will be given when combinational tones are considered, and it will then be shown that these slight variations of quality are referable to changes in the strength of one of the simple tones.

Hence we are able to lay down the important law that *differences in musical quality of tone depend solely on the presence and strength of partial tones, and in no respect on the differences in phase under which these partial tones enter into composition.* It must be here observed that we are speaking only of musical ¶ quality as previously defined. When the musical tone is accompanied by unmusical noises, such as jarring, scratching, soughing, whizzing, hissing, these motions are either not to be considered as periodic at all, or else correspond to high upper partials, of nearly the same pitch, which consequently form strident dissonances. We were not able to embrace these in our experiments, and hence we must leave it for the present doubtful whether in such dissonating tones difference of phase is an element of importance. Subsequent theoretic considerations will lead us to suppose that it really is.

If we wish only to imitate vowels by compound tones without being able to distinguish the differences of phase in the individual constituent simple tones, we can effect our purpose tolerably well with organ pipes. But we must have at least two series of them, loud open and soft stopped pipes, because the strength of tone cannot be increased by additional pressure of wind without at the same time changing the pitch. I have had a double row of pipes of this kind made by Herr
