page: 132

+ the upper margin of the drumskin by a fold of mucous membrane, within which run a series of rather stiff bundles of tendinous fibres. These straps arise in a line which passes from the processus Folianus (fig. 38, l), above the contraction of the neck, towards the lower end of the surface of the joint for the anvil, and in elderly people is developed into a prominent ridge of bone. The tendinous bands or ligaments are strongest and stiffest at the front and back end of this line of insertion. The front portion of the ligament, lig. mallei anterius (fig. 40, ma), surrounds the processus Folianus, and is attached partly to a bony spine (figs. 39 and 40, Stp) of the osseous ring of the drum, which projects close to the neck of the hammer, and partly to its under edge, and partly falls into a bony fissure which leads towards the articulation of the jaw. The back portion of the same ligament, on the other hand, is attached to a sharp-edged bony ridge projecting inwards from the drumskin, and parallel to it, a little above the opening, through ¶ which a traversing nerve, the chorda tympănī (fig. 40, l, l, p. 131c), enters the bone. This second bundle of fibres may be called the lig. mallĕī posterĭus. In fig. 39 (p. 131c) the origin of this ligament is seen as a little projection of the ring to which the drumskin is attached. This projection bounds towards the right the upper edge of the opening for the drumskin, which begins to the left of Stp, exactly at the place where the long process of the anvil makes its appearance in the figure. These two ligaments, front and back, taken together form a moderately tense sinewy chord, round which the hammer can turn as on an axis. Hence even when the two other ossicles have been carefully removed, without loosening these two ligaments, the hammer will remain in its natural position, although not so stiffly as before.

The middle fibres of the broad ligamentous band above mentioned pass outwards towards the upper bony edge of the drumskin. They are comparatively short and are known as lig. mallei externum. Arising above the line of the axis of the ¶ hammer, they prevent the head from turning too far inwards, and the handle with the drumskin from turning too far outwards, and oppose any down-dragging of the ligament forming the axis. The first effect is increased by a ligament (lig. mallei superius) which passes from the processus Folianus, upwards, into the small slit, between the head of the hammer and the wall of the drum, as shewn in fig. 40 (p. 131c).

It must be observed that in the upper part of the channel of the Eustachian tube, there is a *muscle for tightening the drumskin* (m. tensor tympănī), the tendon of which passes obliquely across the cavity of the drum and is attached to the upper part of the handle of the hammer (at ⁎, fig. 40, p. 131c). This muscle must be regarded as a moderately tense elastic band, and may have its tension temporarily much increased by active contraction. The effect of this muscle is also principally to draw the handle of the hammer inwards, together with the drumskin. But since its point of attachment is so close to the ligamentous axis, ¶ the chief part of its pull acts on this axis, stretching it as it draws it inwards. Here we must observe that in the case of a rectilinear inextensible cord, which is moderately tense, such as the ligamentous axis of the hammer, a slight force which pulls it sideways, suffices to produce a very considerable increase of tension. This is the case with the present arrangement of stretching muscles. It should also be remembered that quiescent muscles not excited by innervation, are always stretched elastically in the living body, and act like elastic bands. This elastic tension can of course be considerably increased by the innervation which brings the muscles into action, but such tension is never entirely absent from the majority of our muscles.

The *anvil*, which is shewn separately in fig. 41, resembles a double tooth with two fangs; the surface of its joint with the hammer (at ⁎, fig. 41), replacing the masticating surface. Of the two roots of the tooth which are rather widely separated, the upper, directed backwards, is called the *short process* b; the other, thinner and directed downwards, the *long process of the anvil* l. At the tip of
