page: 133

+ the latter is the knob which articulates with the stirrup. The tip of the short process, on the other hand, by means of a short ligament and an imperfectly

[Figure 41]

+ developed joint at its under surface, is connected with the back wall of the cavity of the drum, at the spot where this passes backwards into the air cavities of the mastoid process behind the ear. The joint between anvil and hammer is a curved depression of a rather irregular form, like a saddle. In its action it may be compared with the joints of the well-known Breguet watchkeys, which have rows of interlocking teeth, offering scarcely any resistance to revolution in one ¶ direction, but allowing no revolution whatever in the other. Interlocking teeth of this kind are developed upon the under side of the joint between hammer and anvil. The tooth on the hammer projects towards the drumskin, that of the anvil lies inwards; and, conversely, towards the upper end of the hollow of the joint, the anvil projects outwards, and the hammer inwards. The consequence of this arrangement is that when the hammer is drawn inwards by the handle, it bites the anvil firmly and carries it with it. Conversely, when the drumskin, with the hammer, is driven outwards, the anvil is not obliged to follow it. The interlocking teeth of the surfaces of the joint then separate, and the surfaces glide over each other with very little friction. This arrangement has the very great advantage of preventing any possibility of the stirrup's being torn away from the oval window, when the air in the auditory passage is considerably rarefied. There is also no ¶ danger from driving in the hammer, as might happen when the air in the auditory passage was condensed, because it is powerfully opposed by the tension of the drumskin, which is drawn in like a funnel.

When air is forced into the cavity of the drum in the act of swallowing, the contact of hammer and anvil is loosened. Weak tones in the middle and upper regions of the scale are then not heard much more weakly than usual, but stronger tones are very sensibly damped. This may perhaps be explained by supposing that the adhesion of the articulating surfaces suffices to transfer weak motions from one bone to the other, but that strong impulses cause the surfaces to slide over one another, and hence the tones due to such impulses must be enfeebled.

Deep tones are damped in this case, whether they are strong or weak, perhaps because these always require larger motions to become audible.⁎

Another important effect on the apprehension of tone, which is due to the above arrangement in the articulation of hammer and anvil, will have to be considered in ¶ relation to combinational tones. [See p. 158b.]

Since the attachment of the tip of the short process of the anvil lies sensibly inwards and above the ligamentous axis of the hammer, the head of the hammer separates from the articulating surface between hammer and anvil, when the head is driven outwards, and therefore the handle and drumskin are driven inwards. The consequence is that the ligaments holding the anvil against the hammer, and on the tip of the short process of the anvil, are sensibly stretched, and hence the tip is raised from its osseous support. Consequently in the normal position of the ossicles for hearing, the anvil has no contact with any other bone but the hammer, and both bones are held in position only by stretched ligaments, which are tolerably tight, so that only the revolution of the hammer about its ligamentous axis remains comparatively free.

The third ossicle, the *stirrup*, shewn separately in fig. 42, has really a most striking resemblance to the implement after which it has been named. The foot B

Footnote: ⁎ On this point see Part II. Chapter IX.
