page: 135

A leverage is certainly employed, but only to a moderate extent. The tip of the handle of the hammer, on which the pull of the drumskin first acts, is about once and a half as far from the axis of rotation as that point of the anvil which presses on the stirrup (see fig. 39, p. 131c). The handle of the hammer consequently forms the longer arm of a lever, and the pressure on the stirrup will be once and a half as great as that which drives in the hammer.

The chief means of reinforcement is due to the form of the drumskin. It has been already mentioned that its middle or *navel* (umbĭlīcus) is drawn inwards by the handle, so as to present a funnel shape. But the meridian lines of this funnel drawn from the navel to the circumference, are not straight lines; they are slightly convex on the outer side. A diminution of pressure in the auditory passage increases this convexity, and an augmentation diminishes it. Now the tension caused in an inextensible thread, having the form of a flat arch, by a force acting ¶ perpendicular to its convexity, is very considerable. It is well known that a sensible force must be exerted to stretch a long thin string into even a tolerably straight horizontal line. The force is indeed very much greater than the weight of the string which pulls the string from the horizontal position.⁎ In the case of the drumskin, it is not gravity which prevents its radial fibres from straightening themselves, but partly the pressure of the air, and partly the elastic pull of the circular fibres of the membrane. The latter tend to contract towards the axis of the funnel-shaped membrane, and hence produce the inflection of the radial fibres towards this axis. By means of the variable pressure of air during the sonorous vibrations of the atmosphere this pull exerted by the circular fibres is alternately strengthened and weakened, and produces an effect on the point where the radial fibres are attached to the tip of the handle of the hammer, similar to that which would happen if we could alternately increase and diminish the weight of a string stretched horizontally, for this would produce a proportionate increase and decrease in the pull exerted by ¶ the hand which stretched it.

In a horizontally stretched string such as has been just described, it should be further remarked that an extremely small relaxation of the hand is followed by a considerable fall in the middle of the string. The relaxation of the hand, namely, takes place in the direction of the chord of the arc, and easy geometrical considerations show that chords of arcs of the same length and different, but always very small curvature, differ very slightly indeed from each other and from the lengths of the arcs themselves.† This is also the case with the drumskin. An extremely little yielding in the handle of the hammer admits of a very considerable change in the curvature of the drumskin. The consequence is that, in sonorous vibrations, the parts of the drumskin which lie between the inner attachment of this membrane to the hammer and its outer attachment to the ring of the drum, are able to follow the oscillations of the air with considerable freedom, while the motion of the air is transmitted to the handle of the hammer with much diminished ¶ amplitude but much increased force. After this, as the motion passes from the handle of the hammer to the stirrup, the leverage already mentioned causes a second and more moderate reduction of the amplitude of vibration with corresponding increase of force.

We now proceed to describe the innermost division of the organ of hearing, called the *labyrinth*. Fig. 43 (p. 134c) represents a cast of its cavity, as seen from different positions. Its middle portion, containing the *oval window* Fv (fenestra vestĭbŭlī) that receives the foot of the stirrup, is called the *vestibule of the labyrinth*.

Footnote: ⁎ [The following quatrain, said to have been unconsciously produced by Vince, as a corollary to one of the propositions in his 'Mechanics,' will serve to impress the fact on a non-mathematical reader:—
	Hence no force, however great,
	Can stretch a cord, however fine,
	Into a horizontal line,
	So as to make it truly straight.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † The amount of difference varies as the square of the depth of the arc. If the length of the arc be *l*, and the distance of its middle from the chord be *s*, the chord is shorter than the arc by the length \(\frac{8}{3}\cdot\frac{s^2}{l}\).
