page: 137

+ inwards, into which fibriles of the auditory nerve enter; and on the utriculus there is a place which is flatter and thickened. The peculiar manner in which the nerves terminate in this place will be described hereafter. Whether these, and the whole apparatus of the semicircular canals, assist in the sensation of hearing, has latterly been rendered very doubtful. [See p. 151b.]

[Figure 44]

In the inside of the utriculus is found the auditory *sand*, consisting of little crystals of lime connected by means of a mucous mass with each other and with the thickened places where the nerves are so abundant. In the hollow of the bony vestibule, near the utriculus, and fastened to it, but not communicating with it, lies ¶ the sacculus, also provided with a similar thickened spot full of nerves. A narrow canal connects it with the canal of the membranous cochlea. As to the cavity of the cochlea, we see by fig. 43 opposite, that it is exactly similar to the shell of a garden snail; but the canal of the cochlea is divided into two almost completely separated galleries, by a transverse partition, partly bony and partly membranous. These galleries communicate only at the vertex of the cochlea through a small opening, the *hĕlĭcotrēma*, bounded by the *hāmŭlus* or hook-shaped termination of its central axis or *mŏdĭŏlus*. Of the two galleries into which the cavity of the bony cochlea is divided, one communicates directly with the vestibule and is hence called the *vestibule gallery* (scāla vestĭbŭlī). The other gallery is cut off from the vestibule by the membranous partition, but just at its base, where it begins, is the round window, and the yielding membrane, which closes this, allows the fluid in the gallery to exchange vibrations with the ¶ air in the drum. Hence this is called the *drum gallery* (scāla tympănī).

Finally, it must be observed that the membranous partition of the cochlea is not a single membrane, but a membranous canal (ductus cochleāris). Its inner

[Figure 45]

+ margin is turned towards the central axis or mŏdĭŏlus, and attached to the rudimentary bony partition (lāmĭna spīrālis). A part of the opposite external surface is attached to the inner surface of the bony gallery. Fig. 45 shews the bony parts of a cochlea which has been laid open, and fig. 46 (p. 138a), a transverse section of the canal (which is imperfect on the left hand at bottom). In both figures Ls denotes the bony part of the partition, and in fig. 46 v and b are the two unattached parts ¶ of the membranous canal. The transverse section of this canal is, as the figure shews, nearly triangular, so that an angle of the triangle near Lls is attached to the edge of the bony partition. The commencement of the ductus cochlearis at the base of the cochlea, communicates, as already stated, by means of a narrow membranous canal with the sacculus in the vestibule. Of the two unattached strips of its membranous walls, the one facing the vestibule gallery is a soft membrane, incapable of offering much resistance—*Reissner's membrane* (membrāna vestibulāris, v, fig. 46, p. 138a); but the other, the *membrāna băsĭlāris* (b), is a firm, tightly stretched, elastic membrane, striped radially, corresponding to its radial fibres. It splits easily in the direction of these fibres, shewing that it is but loosely
