page: 138

+ connected in a direction transverse to them. The terminations of the nerves of the cochlea and their appendages, are attached to the membrana băsĭlāris, as is shewn by the dotted lines in fig. 46.

When the drumskin is driven inwards by increased pressure of air in the auditory passage, it also forces the auditory ossicles inwards, as already explained, and as a consequence the foot of the stirrup penetrates deeper into the oval window. The fluid of the labyrinth, being surrounded in all other places by firm bony walls, has only one means of escape,—the round window with its yielding membrane. To reach it, the fluid of the labyrinth must either pass ¶ through the hĕlĭcŏtrēma, the narrow opening at the vertex of the cochlea, flowing over from the vestibule gallery into the drum gallery, or, as it would probably not have sufficient time to do this in the case of sonorous vibrations, press the membranous partition of the cochlea against the drum gallery. The converse action must take place when the air in the auditory passage is rarefied.

[Figure 46]

Hence the sonorous vibrations of the air in the outer auditory passage are finally transferred to the membranes of the labyrinth, more especially those of the cochlea, and to the expansions of the nerves upon them.

¶ The terminal expansions of these nerves, as I have already mentioned, are connected with very small elastic appendages, which appear adapted to excite the nerves by their vibrations.

The nerves of the vestibule terminate in the thickened places of the bags of the membranous labyrinth, already mentioned (p. 137a), where the tissue has a greater and almost cartilaginous consistency. One of these places, provided with nerves, projects like a fillet into the inner part of the ampulla of each semicircular canal, and another lies on each of the little bags in the vestibule. The nerve fibres here enter between the soft cylindrical cells of the fine cuticle (ĕpĭthēlĭum) which covers the internal surface of the fillets. Projecting from the internal surface ¶ of this epithelium in the ampullae, Max Schultze discovered a number of very peculiar, stiff, elastic hairs, shewn in fig. 47. They are much longer than the vibratory hairs of the ciliated epithe'lium (their length is \(\frac{1}{25}\) of a Paris line [or ·00355 English inch] in the ray fish), brittle, and running to a very fine point. It is clear that fine stiff hairs of this kind are extremely well adapted for moving sympathetically with the motion of the fluid, and hence for producing mechanical irritation in the nerve fibres which lie in the soft epithelium between their roots.

[Figure 47]

According to Max Schultze, the corresponding thickened fillets in the vestibules, where the nerves terminate, have a similar soft epithelium, and have short hairs which are easily destroyed. Close to these
