page: 139

+ surfaces which are covered with nerves, lie the calcareous concretions, called *auditory stones* (ōtŏlĭths), which in fishes form connected convexo-concave solids, shewing on their convex side an impression of the nerve fillet. In human beings, on the other hand, the otoliths are heaps of little crystalline bodies, of a longish angular form, lying close to the membrane of the little bags, and apparently attached to it. These otoliths seem also extremely well suited for producing a mechanical irritation of the nerves whenever the fluid in the labyrinth is suddenly agitated. The fine light membrane, with its interwoven nerves, probably instantly follows the motion of the fluid, whereas the heavier crystals are set more slowly in motion, and hence also yield up their motion more slowly, and thus partly drag and partly squeeze the adjacent nerves. This would satisfy the same conditions of exciting nerves, as Heidenhain's *tetănomōtor*. By this instrument the nerve which acts on a muscle is exposed to the action of a very rapidly oscillating ivory hammer, which at every blow squeezes without bruising the nerve. A powerful ¶ and continuous excitement of the nerve is thus produced, which is shewn by a powerful and continuous contraction of the corresponding muscle. The above parts of the ear seem to be well suited to produce similar mechanical excitement.

The construction of the cochlea is much more complex. The nerve fibres enter through the axis or modiolus of the cochlea into the bony part of the partition, and then come on to the membranous part. Where they reach this, peculiar formations were discovered quite recently (1851) by the Marchese Corti, and have been named after him. On these the nerves terminate.

The expansion of the cochlean nerve is shewn in fig. 48. It enters through the axis (2) and sends out its fibres in a radial direction from the axis through the bony partition (1, 3, 4), as far as its margins. At this point the nerves pass under the ¶ commencement of the membrāna basilāris, penetrate this in a series of openings, and thus reach the ductus cochleāris and those nervous, elastic formations which lie on the inner zone (Zi) of the membrane.

[Figure 48]

The margin of the bony partition (a to b, fig. 49, p. 140a), and the inner zone of the membrana basilaris (a a') are shewn after Hensen. The under side of the figure⁎ ¶ corresponds with the scala tympăni, the upper with the ductus cochleāris. Here h at the top and k at the bottom, are the two plates of the bony partition, between which the expansion of the nerve b proceeds. The upper side of the bony partition bears a fillet of close ligamentous tissue (Z, fig. 49, also shewn at Lls, fig. 46, p. 138a), which, on account of the toothlike impressions on its upper side, is called the toothed layer (*zo'na denticula'ta*), and which carries a peculiar elastic pierced membrane, Corti's membrane, M.C. fig. 49. This membrane is stretched parallel to the membrana basilāris as far as the bony wall on the outer side of the duct, and is there attached a little above the other. Between these two membranes lie the parts in and on which the nerve fibres terminate.

Among these *Corti's arches* (over g in fig. 49) are relatively the most solid formations. The series of these contiguous arches consists of two series of *rods*

Footnote: ⁎ [As the engraving would have been too wide for the page if placed in its proper horizontal position, it has been printed vertically; the *left* side consequently corresponds to the *upper*, and its *right* to the *under* side.—*Translator*.]
