page: 140

+ or *fibres*, an external and an internal. A single pair of these is shewn in fig. 50, A, below, and a short series of them in fig. 50, B, attached to the membrana basilaris, and at † also connected with the pierced tissue, into which fit the terminal cells of the nerves (fig. 49, c), which will be more fully described presently. These formations are shewn in fig. 51, (p. 141b, c), as seen from the vestibule gallery; a is the *denticulated layer*, c the openings for the nerves on the internal margin of the membrana basilaris, its external margin being visible at u u; d is the inner series of Corti's rods, e the outer; over these, between e and x is seen the pierced membrane, against which lie the terminal cells of ¶ the nerves.

[Figure 49]

*The fibres of the first, or outer series*, are flat, somewhat S-shaped formations, having a swelling at the spot where they rise from the membrane to which they are attached, and ending in a kind of articulation which serves to connect them with the second or inner series. In fig. 51, p. 141, at d will be seen a great number of these ascending fibres, lying beside each other in regular succession. In the same way they may be seen all along the membrane of the cochlea, close together, so that there must be many thousands of them. Their sides lie close together, and even seem to be connected, leaving however occasional gaps in the line ¶ of connection, and these gaps are probably traversed by nerve fibres. Hence the fibres of the first series as a whole form a stiff layer, which endeavours to erect itself when the natural fastenings no longer resist, but allows the membrane on which they stand to crumple up between the attachments d and e of Corti's arches.

*The fibres of the second or inner series*, which form the descending part of the arch e, fig. 50, below, are smooth, flexible, cylindrical threads with thickened ends. The upper extremity forms a kind of joint to connect them with the fibres of the first series, the lower extremity is enlarged in a bell shape and is attached closely to the membrane at the base. In the microscopic preparations they generally

[Figure 50]

+ ¶ appear bent in various ways; but there can be no doubt that in their natural condition they are stretched with some degree of tension, so that they pull down
