page: 150

+ other hairs. Each hair answered to several notes of the horn, and from the notes mentioned we can approximatively recognise the series of under tones of one and the same simple tone. The results could not be quite exact, because the resonance of the conducting apparatus must have had some influence.

Thus one of these hairs answered strongly to *d*♯ and *d'*♯, more weakly to *g*, and very weakly to *G*. This leads us to suppose that it was tuned to some pitch between *d''* and *d''*♯. In that case it answered to the second partial of *d'* to *d'*♯, the third of *g* to *g*♯, the fourth of *d* to *d*♯, and the sixth of *G* to *G*♯. A second hair answered strongly to *a*♯ and the adjacent tones, more weakly to *d*♯ and *A*♯. Its proper tone therefore seems to have been *a*♯.

By these observations (which through the kindness of Herr Hensen I have myself had the opportunity of verifying) the existence of such relations as we have supposed in the case of the human cochlea, have been directly proved for these ¶ Crustaceans, and this is the more valuable, because the concealed position and ready destructibility of the corresponding organs of the human ear give little hope of our ever being able to make such a direct experiment on the intonation of its individual parts.⁎

So far the theory which has been advanced refers in the first place only to the lasting sensation produced by regular and continued periodical oscillations. But as regards *the perception of irregular motions of the air, that is, of noises*, it is clear that an elastic apparatus for executing vibrations could not remain at absolute rest in the presence of any force acting upon it for a time, and even a momentary motion or one recurring at irregular intervals would suffice, if only powerful enough, to set it in motion. The peculiar advantage of resonance over proper tone depends precisely on the fact that disproportionately weak individual impulses, provided that they succeed each other in correct rhythm, are capable of producing comparatively considerable motions. On the other hand, momentary ¶ but strong impulses, as for example those which result from an electric spark, will set every part of the basilar membrane into an almost equally powerful initial motion, after which each part would die off in its own proper vibrational period. By that means there might arise a simultaneous excitement of the whole of the nerves in the cochlea, which although not equally powerful would yet be proportionately gradated, and hence could not have the character of a determinate pitch. Even a weak impression on so many nerve fibres will produce a clearer impression than any single impression in itself. We know at least that small differences of brightness are more readily perceived on large than on small parts of the circle of vision, and little differences of temperature can be better perceived by plunging the whole arm, than by merely dipping a finger, into the warm water.

Hence a perception of momentary impulses by the cochlear nerves is quite possible, just as noises are perceived, without giving an especially sensible prominence to any determinate pitch.

¶ If the pressure of the air which bears on the drumskin lasts a little longer, it will favour the motion in some regions of the basilar membrane in preference to other parts of the scale. Certain pitches will therefore be especially prominent. This we may conceive thus: every instant of pressure is considered as a pressure that will excite in every fibre of the basilar membrane a motion corresponding to itself in direction and strength and then die off; and all motions in each fibre which are thus excited are added algebraically, whence, according to circumstances, they reinforce or enfeeble each other.† Thus a uniform pressure which lasts during the first half vibration, that is, as long as the first positive excursion, increases the excursion of the vibrating body. But if it lasts longer it weakens the effect first produced. Hence rapidly vibrating bodies would be proportionably less excited by such a pressure, than those for which half a vibration lasts as long as, or longer than, the pressure itself. By this means such an

Footnote: ⁎ [From here to the end of this chapter is an addition from the 4th German edition.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † See the mathematical expression for this conception at the end of Appendix XI.
