page: none

PART II.

ON THE INTERRUPTIONS OF HARMONY.

COMBINATIONAL TONES AND BEATS,⁎ CONSONANCE AND DISSONANCE.

CHAPTER VII.

COMBINATIONAL TONES.

In the first part of this book we had to enunciate and constantly apply the proposition that oscillatory motions of the air and other elastic bodies, produced by several sources of sound acting simultaneously, are always the exact sum of the individual motions producible by each source separately. This law is of extreme importance in the theory of sound, because it reduces the consideration of ¶ compound cases to those of simple ones. But it must be observed that this law holds strictly only in the case where the vibrations in all parts of the mass of air and of the sonorous elastic bodies are of *infinitesimally small dimensions*; that is to say, only when the alterations of density of the elastic bodies are so small that they may be disregarded in comparison with the whole density of the same body; and in the same way, only when the displacements of the vibrating particles vanish as compared with the dimensions of the whole elastic body. Now certainly in all practical applications of this law to sonorous bodies, the vibrations are always *very small*, and near enough to being *infinitesimally small* for this law to hold with great exactness even for the real sonorous vibrations of musical tones, and by far the greater part of their phenomena can be deduced from that law in conformity with observation. Still, however, there are certain phenomena which result from the fact that this law does *not* hold with perfect exactness for vibrations of elastic bodies, which, though almost always *very small*, are far from being *infinitesimally small*.† One of these phenomena, with which we are here interested ¶ is the occurrence of *Combinational Tones*, which were first discovered in 1745 by Sorge,‡ a German organist, and were afterwards generally known, although their pitch was often wrongly assigned, through the Italian violinist Tartini (1754), from whom they are often called *Tartini's tones*.§

These tones are heard whenever two musical tones of different pitches are

Footnote: ⁎ [So much attention has recently been paid to the whole subject of this second part—Combinational Tones and Beats—mostly since the publication of the 4th German edition, that I have thought it advisable to give a brief account of the investigations of Koenig, Bosanquet, and Preyer in App. XX. sect. L., and merely add a few footnotes to refer the reader to them where they especially relate to the statements in the text. But the reader should study the text of this second part, so as to be familiar with Prof. Helmholtz's views before taking up the Appendix.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † Helmholtz, on 'Combinational Tones,' in Poggendorf's *Annalen*, vol. xcix. p. 497. *Monatsberichte* of the Berlin Academy, May 22, 1856. From this last an extract is given in Appendix XII.

Footnote: ‡ *Vorgemach musikalischer Composition* (Antechamber of musical composition).

Footnote: § [In England they have hence been often called by Tartini's name, *terzi suoni*, or third sounds, resulting from the combination of two.
