page: 157

+ for their generation is that the same mass of air should be violently agitated by two simple tones simultaneously. This takes place most powerfully in the polyphonic siren,⁎ in which the same rotating disc contains two or more series of holes which are blown upon simultaneously from the same windchest. The air of the windchest is condensed whenever the holes are closed; on the holes being opened, a large quantity of air escapes, and the pressure is considerably diminished. Consequently the air in the windchest, and partly even that in the bellows, as can be easily felt, comes into violent vibration. If two rows of holes are blown, vibrations arise in the air of the windchest corresponding to both tones, and each row of openings gives vent not to a stream of air uniformly supplied, but to a stream of air already set in vibration by the other tone. Under these circumstances the combinational tones are extremely powerful, almost as powerful, indeed, as the generators. Their objective existence in the mass of air can be proved by ¶ vibrating membranes tuned to be in unison with the combinational tones. Such membranes are set in sympathetic vibration immediately upon both generating tones being sounded simultaneously, but remain at rest if only one or the other of them is sounded. Indeed, in this case the summational tones are so powerful that they make all chords extremely unpleasant which contain Thirds or minor Sixths. Instead of membranes it is more convenient to use the resonators already recommended for investigating harmonic upper partial tones. Resonators are also unable to reinforce a tone when no pendular vibrations actually exist in the air; they have no effect on a tone which exists only in auditory sensation, and hence they can be used to discover whether a combinational tone is objectively present. They are much more sensitive than membranes, and are well adapted for the clear recognition of very weak objective tones.

The conditions in the harmonium are similar to those in the siren. Here, too, there is a common windchest, and when two keys are pressed down, we have two ¶ openings which are closed and opened rhythmically by the tongues. In this case also the air in the common receptacle is violently agitated by both tones, and air is blown through each opening which has been already set in vibration by the other tongue. Hence in this instrument also the combinational tones are objectively present, and comparatively very distinct, but they are far from being as powerful as on the siren, probably because the windchest is very much larger in proportion to the openings, and hence the air which escapes during the short opening of an exit by the oscillating tongue cannot be sufficient to diminish the pressure sensibly. In the harmonium also the combinational tones are very clearly reinforced by resonators tuned to be in unison with them, especially the first and second differential and the first summational tone.† Nevertheless I have convinced myself, by particular experiments, that even in this instrument the greater part of the force of the combinational tone is generated in the ear itself. I arranged the portvents in the instrument so that one of the two generators was supplied with air by the ¶ bellows moved below by the foot, and the second generator was blown by the reserve bellows, which was first pumped full and then cut off by drawing out the so-called expression-stop, and I then found that the combinational tones were not much weaker than for the usual arrangement. But the objective portion which the resonators reinforce was much weaker. The noted examples given above (pp. 154-5-6) will easily enable any one to find the digitals which must be pressed down in order to produce a combinational tone in unison with a given resonator.

On the other hand, when the places in which the two tones are struck are entirely separate and have no mechanical connection, as, for example, if they come from two singers, two separate wind instruments, or two violins, the reinforcement

Footnote: ⁎ A detailed description of this instrument will be given in the next chapter.

Footnote: † [The experiments of Bosanquet, App. XX. sect. L. art. 4, *b*, render it probable that this apparent reinforcement by a resonator arose from imperfect blocking of both ears when using it. See also p. 43d', note.—*Translator*.]
