page: 159

+ cited body from its position of equilibrium, are proportional to these displacements themselves. This is always the case so long as these displacements are infinitesimal. But if the amplitude of the oscillations is great enough to cause a sensible deviation from this proportionality, then the vibrations of the exciting tone are increased by others which correspond to its harmonic upper partial tones. That such harmonic upper partials are occasionally heard when tuning-forks are strongly excited, has been already mentioned (p. 54d). I have lately repeated these experiments with forks of a very low pitch. With such a fork of 64 vib. I could, by means of proper resonators, hear up to the fifth partial. But then the amplitude of the vibrations was almost a centimetre [·3937 inch]. When a sharp-edged body, such as the prong of a tuning-fork, makes vibrations of such a length, vortical motions, differing sensibly from the law of simple vibrations, must arise in the surrounding air. On the other hand, as the sound of the fork fades, these ¶ upper partials vanish long before their prime, which is itself only very weakly audible. This agrees with our hypothesis that these partials arise from disturbances depending on the size of the amplitude.

Herr R. Koenig,⁎ with a series of forks having sliding weights by which the pitch might be gradually altered, and provided also with boxes giving a good resonance and possessing powerful tones, has investigated beats and combinational tones, and found that those combinational tones were most prominent which answered to the difference of one of the tones from the partial tone of the other which was nearest to it in pitch; and in this research partial tones as high as the eighth were effective (at least in the number of beats).† He has unfortunately not stated how far the corresponding upper partials were separately recognised by resonators.‡

Since the human ear easily produces combinational tones, for which the principal causes lying in the construction of that organ have just been assigned, it must also form upper partials for powerful simple tones, as is the case for ¶ tuning-forks and the masses of air which they excite in the observations described. Hence we cannot easily have the sensation of a *powerful* simple tone, without having also the sensation of its harmonic upper partials.§

The importance of combinational tones in the construction of chords will appear hereafter. We have, however, first to investigate a second phenomenon of the simultaneous sounding of two tones, the so-called *beats*.

CHAPTER VIII.

ON THE BEATS OF SIMPLE TONES.

¶ We now pass to the consideration of other phenomena accompanying the simultaneous sounding of two simple tones, in which, as before, the motions of the air and of the other co-operating elastic bodies without and within the ear may be conceived as an undisturbed coexistence of two systems of vibrations corresponding to the two tones, but where the auditory sensation no longer corresponds to the sum of the two sensations which the tones would excite singly. Beats, which have now to be considered, are essentially distinguished from combinational tones as follows:—In combinational tones the composition of vibrations in the elastic vibrating bodies which are either within or without the ear, undergoes certain disturbances, although the ear resolves the motion which is finally conducted to it,

Footnote: ⁎ Poggendorff's *Annal.*, vol. clvii. pp. 177-236.

Footnote: † [Even with this parenthetical correction, the above is calculated to give an inadequate impression of the results of Koenig's paper, which is more fully described in Appendix XX. sect. L.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ‡ [Koenig states that no upper partials could be heard. See Appendix XX. sect. L. art. 2, *a*.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: § [See App. XX. sect. L. art. 1, ii.—*Translator*.]
