page: 160

+ into a series of simple tones, according to the usual law. In beats, on the contrary, the objective motions of the elastic bodies follow the simple law; but the composition of the sensations is disturbed. As long as several simple tones of a sufficiently different pitch enter the ear together, the sensation due to each remains undisturbed in the ear, probably because entirely different bundles of nerve fibres are affected. But tones of the same, or of nearly the same pitch, which therefore affect the same nerve fibres, do not produce a sensation which is the sum of the two they would have separately excited, but new and peculiar phenomena arise which we term *interference*, when caused by two perfectly equal simple tones, and *beats* when due to two nearly equal simple tones.

We will begin with *interference*. Suppose that a point in the air or ear is set in motion by some sonorous force, and that its motion is represented by the curve 1, fig. 53. Let ¶ the second motion be precisely the same at the same time and be represented by the curve 2, so that the crests of 2 fall on the crests of 1, and also the troughs of 2 on the troughs of 1. If both motions proceed at once, the whole motion will be their sum, represented by 3, a curve of the same kind but with crests twice as high and troughs twice as deep as those of either of the others. Since the intensity of sound is proportional to the square of the ¶ amplitude, we have consequently a tone not of twice but of four times the loudness of either of the others.

[Figure 53]

But now suppose the vibrations of the second motion to be displaced by half the periodic time. The curves to be added will stand under one another, as 4 and 5 in fig. 54, and when we come to add to them, the heights of the second curve will be still the same as those of the first, but, being always in the contrary direction, the two will mutually destroy each other, giving as their ¶ sum the straight line 6, or no vibration at all.

[Figure 54]

+ In this case the crests of 4 are added to the troughs of 5, and conversely, so that the crests fill up the troughs, and crests and troughs mutually annihilate each other. The intensity of sound also becomes nothing, and when motions are thus cancelled within the ear, sensation also ceases; and although each single motion acting alone would excite the corresponding auditory sensation, when both act together there is no auditory sensation at all. One sound in this case completely cancels what appears to be an equal sound. This seems extraordinarily paradoxical to ordinary contemplation because our natural consciousness apprehends sound, not as the motion of particles of the air, but as something really existing and analogous to the sensation of sound. Now as the sensation of a simple tone of the same pitch shows no oppositions of positive and negative, it naturally appears impossible for one positive sensation to cancel another. But the really cancelling things in such a case are the vibrational impulses which the two sources of sound exert on the ear. When it so happens that the vibrational impulses due to one source constantly coincide
