page: 161

+ with opposite ones due to the other, and exactly counterbalance each other, no motion can possibly ensue in the ear, and hence the auditory nerve can experience no sensation.

The following are some instances of sound cancelling sound:—

Put two perfectly similar stopped organ pipes tuned to the same pitch close beside each other on the same portvent. Each one blown separately gives a powerful tone; but when they are blown together, the motion of the air in the two pipes takes place in such a manner that as the air streams out of one it streams into the other, and hence an observer at a distance hears no tone, but at most the rushing of the air. On bringing the fibre of a feather near to the lips of the pipes, this fibre will vibrate in the same way as if each pipe were blown separately. Also if a tube be conducted from the ear to the mouth of one of the pipes, the tone of that pipe is heard so much more powerfully that it cannot be entirely ¶ destroyed by the tone of the other.⁎

Every tuning-fork also exhibits phenomena of interference, because the prongs move in opposite directions. On striking a tuning-fork and slowly revolving it about its longitudinal axis close to the ear, it will be found that there are four positions in which the tone is heard clearly; and four intermediate positions in which it is inaudible. The four positions of strong sound are those in which either one of the prongs, or one of the side surfaces of the fork, is turned towards the ear. The positions of no sound lie between the former, almost in planes which make an angle of 45° with the surfaces of the prongs, and pass through the axis of the fork. If in fig. 55, a and b are the ends of the fork seen from above, c, d, e, f will be the four places of strong sound, and the dotted lines the four places of silence. The arrows under a and b shew the mutual motion of the two prongs. Hence while the prong a gives the air about c an ¶ impulse in the direction c a, the prong b gives it an opposite one. Both impulses only partially cancel one another at c, because a acts more powerfully than b. But the dotted lines shew the places where the opposite impulses from a and b are equally strong, and consequently completely cancel each other. If the ear be brought into one of these places of silence and a narrow tube be slipped over one of the prongs a or b, taking care not to touch it, the sound will be immediately augmented, because the influence of the covered prong is almost entirely destroyed, and the uncovered prong therefore acts alone and undisturbed.†

[Figure 55]

A double siren which I have had constructed is very convenient for the ¶ demonstration of these relations.‡ Fig. 56 (p. 162) is a perspective view of this instrument. It is composed of two of Dove's polyphonic sirens, of the kind previously mentioned, p. 13a; a₀ and a₁ are the two windchests, c₀ and c₁ the discs attached to a common axis, on which a screw is introduced at k, to drive a counting apparatus which can be introduced, as described on p. 12b. The upper box a₁ can be turned round its axis, by means of a toothed wheel, in which works a smaller wheel e provided with the driving handle d§. The axis of the box a₁ round which it turns, is a prolongation of the upper pipe g₁, which conducts the wind. On each of the two discs of the siren are four rows of holes, which

Footnote: ⁎ [If a screen of any sort, as the hand, be interposed between the mouths of the pipes, the tone is immediately restored, and then generally remains even if the hand be removed.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † [If instead of bringing the tuning-fork to the ear, it be slowly turned before a proper resonance chamber, the alternation of sound and silence, &c., can be made audible to many persons at once.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ‡ Constructed by the mechanician Sauerwald in Berlin.

Footnote: § [Three turns of the handle cause one turn of the box round its axis.—*Translator*.]
