page: 164

Other compound tones behave like those of the siren. When two tones of the same pitch are sounded together having differences of phase corresponding to half the periodic time, the tone does not vanish, but jumps up an Octave. When, for example, two open organ pipes, or two reed pipes of the same construction and pitch, are placed beside each other on the same portvent, their vibrations generally accommodate themselves in such a manner that the stream of air enters first one and then the other alternately; and while the tone of stopped pipes, which have only unevenly numbered partials, is then almost entirely destroyed, the tone of the open pipes and reed pipes falls into the upper Octave. This is the reason why no reinforcement of tone can be effected on an organ or harmonium by combining tongues or pipes of the same kind [on the same portvent].

So far we have combined tones of precisely the same pitch; now let us inquire what happens when the tones have slightly different pitch. The double siren ¶ just described is also well fitted for explaining this case, for we can slightly alter the pitch of the upper tone by slowly revolving the upper box by means of the handle, the tone becoming flatter when the direction of revolution is the same as that of the disc, and sharper when it is opposite to the same. The vibrational period of a tone of the siren is equal to the time required for a hole in the rotating disc to pass from one hole in the windbox to the next. If, through the rotation of the box, the hole of the box advances to meet the hole of the disc, the two holes come into coincidence sooner than if the box were at rest: and hence the vibrational period is shorter, and the tone sharper. The converse takes place when the revolution is in the opposite direction. These alterations of pitch are easily heard when the box is revolved rather quickly. Now produce the tones of twelve holes on both discs. These will be in absolute unison as long as the upper box is at rest. The two tones constantly reinforce or enfeeble each other according to the position of the upper box. But on setting the upper box in motion, the pitch of ¶ the upper tone is altered, while that of the lower tone, which has an immovable windbox, is unchanged. Hence we have now two tones of slightly different pitch sounding together. And we hear the so-called *beats* of the tones, that is, the intensity of the tone will be alternately greater and less in regular succession.⁎ The arrangement of our siren makes the reason of this readily intelligible. The revolution of the upper box brings it alternately in positions which as we have seen correspond to stronger and weaker tones. When the handle has been turned through a right angle, the windbox passes from a position of loudness through a position of weakness to a position of strength again. Consequently every complete revolution of the handle gives us four beats, whatever be the rate of revolution of the discs, and hence however low or high the tone may be. If we stop the box at the moment of maximum loudness, we continue to hear the loud tone; if at a moment of minimum force, we continue to hear the weak tone.

The mechanism of the instrument also explains the connection between the ¶ number of beats and the difference of the pitch. It is easily seen that the number of the puffs is increased by one for every quarter revolution of the handle. But every such quarter revolution corresponds to one beat. Hence *the number of beats in a given time is equal to the difference of the numbers of vibrations executed by the two tones in the same time.* This is the general law which determines the number of beats, for all kinds of tones. This law results immediately from the construction of the siren; in other instruments it can only be verified by very accurate and laborious measurements of the numbers of vibrations.

The process is shewn graphically in fig. 57. Here *c c* represents the series of puffs belonging to one tone, and *d d* those belonging to the other. The distance for *c c* is divided into 18 parts, the same distance is divided into 20 parts for *d d*. At

Footnote: ⁎ [The German word *Schwebung*, which might be rendered 'fluctuation,' implies this: The loudest portion only is called the *Stoss*, or 'beat'. But it is not usual to make the distinction in English, where the whole phenomenon is called beats.—*Translator*.]
