page: 165

+ 1, 3, 5, both puffs concur, and the tone is reinforced. At 2 and 4 they are intermediate and mutually enfeeble each other. The number of beats for the whole distance is 2, because the difference of the numbers of parts, each of which correspond to a vibration, is also 2.

The intensity of tone varies; swelling from a minimum to a maximum, and lessening from the maximum to the minimum. It is the places of maximum

[Figure 57]

+ intensity which are properly called *beats*, and these are separated by more or less distinct pauses.

¶ Beats are easily produced on all musical instruments, by striking two notes of nearly the same pitch. They are heard best from the simple tones of tuning-forks or stopped organ pipes, because here the tone really vanishes in the pauses. A little fluctuation in the pitch of the beating tone may then be remarked.⁎ For the compound tones of other instruments the upper partial tones are heard in the pauses, and hence the tone jumps up an Octave, as in the case of interference already described. If we have two tuning-forks of exactly the same pitch, it is only necessary to stick a little wax on to the end of one, to strike both, and bring them near the same ear or to the surface of a table, or sounding board. To make two stopped pipes beat, it is only necessary to bring a finger slowly near to the lip of one, and thus flatten it. The beats of compound tones are heard by striking any note on a pianoforte out of tune when the two strings belonging to the same note are no longer in unison; or if the piano is in tune it is sufficient to attach a piece of wax, about the size of a pea, to one of the strings. This puts them ¶ sufficiently out of tune. More attention, however, is required for compound tones because the enfeeblement of the tone is not so striking. The beat in this case resembles a fluctuation in pitch and quality. This is very striking on the siren according as the brass resonance cylinders (h₀ h₀ and h₁ h₁ of fig. 56, p. 162) are attached or not. These make the prime tone relatively strong. Hence when beats are produced by turning a handle, the decrease and increase of loudness in the tone is very striking. On removing the resonance cylinders, the upper partial tones are relatively powerful, and since the ear is very uncertain when comparing the loudness of tones of different pitch, the alteration of force during the beats is much less striking than that of pitch and quality of tone.

On listening to the upper partials of compound tones which beat, it will be found that these beat also, and that for each beat of the prime tone there are two of the second partial, three of the third and so on. Hence when the upper partials are strong, it is easy to make a mistake in counting the beats, especially when the ¶ beats of the primes are very slow, so that they occur at intervals of a second or two. It is then necessary to pay great attention to the pitch of the beats counted, and sometimes to apply a resonator.

It is possible to render beats visible by setting a suitable elastic body into sympathetic vibration with them. Beats can then occur only when the two exciting tones lie near enough to the prime tone of the sympathetic body for the latter to be set into sensible sympathetic vibration by both the tones used. This is most easily done with a thin string which is stretched on a sounding board on which have been placed two tuning-forks, both of very nearly the same pitch as the string. On observing the vibrations of the string through a microscope, or attaching a fibril of a goosefeather to the string which will make the same excursions on a magnified scale, the string will be clearly seen to make sympathetic

Footnote: ⁎ See the explanation of this phenomenon which was given me by Mons. G. Guéroult [the French translator of this work,] in Appendix XIV.
