page: 169

+ the rotating disc. Its tone will be heard intermittently and the number of intermissions can be regulated by altering the velocity of the rotation of the disc.

In both ways then we obtain intermittent tones. In the first case the tone of the reed pipe as heard in the outer air is interrupted, because it can only escape from time to time. The intermittent tone in this case can be heard by any number of listeners at once. In the second case the tone in the outer air is continuous, but reaches the ear of the observer, who hears it through the disc of the siren, intermittently. It can certainly be heard by one observer only, but then all kinds of musical tones of the most diverse pitch and quality may be employed for the purpose. The intermission of their tones gives them all exactly the same kind of roughness which is produced by two tones which beat rapidly together. We thus come to recognise clearly that beats and intermissions are identical, and that either ¶ when fast enough produces what is termed a jar or rattle.

Beats produce intermittent excitement of certain auditory nerve fibres. The reason why such an intermittent excitement acts so much more unpleasantly than an equally strong or even a stronger continuous excitement, may be gathered from the analogous action of other human nerves. Any powerful excitement of a nerve deadens its excitability, and consequently renders it less sensitive to fresh irritants. But after the excitement ceases, and the nerve is left to itself, irritability is speedily re-established in a living body by the influence of arterial blood. Fatigue and refreshment apparently supervene in different organs of the body with different velocities; but they are found wherever muscles and nerves have to operate. The eye, which has in many respects the greatest analogy to the ear, is one of those organs in which both fatigue and refreshment rapidly ensue. We need to look at the sun but an instant to find that the portion of the retina, or nervous expansion of the eye, which was affected by the solar light has become less sensitive for other ¶ light. Immediately afterwards on turning our eyes to a uniformly illuminated surface, as the sky, we see a dark spot of the apparent size of the sun; or several such spots with lines between them, if we had not kept our eye steady when looking at the sun but had moved it right and left. An instant suffices to produce this effect; nay, an electric spark, that lasts an immeasurably short time, is fully capable of causing this species of fatigue.

When we continue to look at a bright surface, the impression is strongest at first, but at the same time it blunts the sensibility of the eye, and consequently the impression becomes weaker, the longer we allow the eye to act. On coming out of darkness into full daylight we feel blinded; but after a few minutes, when the sensibility of the eye has been blunted by the irritation of the light,—or, as we say, when the eye has grown accustomed to the glare,—this degree of brightness is found very pleasant. Conversely, in coming from full daylight into a dark vault, we are insensible to the weak light about us, and can scarcely find our way about, ¶ yet after a few minutes, when the eye has rested from the effect of the strong light, we are able to see very well in the semi-dark room.

These phenomena and the like can be conveniently studied in the eye, because individual spots in the eye may be excited and others left at rest, and the sensations of each may be afterwards compared. Put a piece of black paper on a tolerably well-lighted white surface, look steadily at a point on or near the black paper, and then withdraw the paper suddenly. The eye sees a secondary image of the black paper on the white surface, consisting of that portion of the white surface where the black paper lay, which now appears brighter than the rest. The place in the eye where the image of the black paper had been formed, has been rested in comparison with all those places which had been affected by the white surface, and on removing the black paper this rested part of the eye sees the white surface in its first fresh brightness, while those parts of the retina which had been already fatigued by looking at it, see a decidedly greyer tinge on the whiter surface.

Hence by the continuous uniform action of the irritation of light, this irritation
