page: 173

+ marked, a series of impressions of light, following each other rapidly and regularly, excite a uniform and continuous sensation of light in the eye. When the separate luminous irritations follow one another very quickly, the impression produced by each one lasts unweakened in the nerves till the next supervenes, and thus the pauses can no longer be distinguished in sensation. In the eye, the number of separate irritations cannot exceed 24 in a second without being completely fused into a single sensation. In this respect the eye is far surpassed by the ear, which can distinguish as many as 132 intermissions in a second and probably even that is not the extreme limit. Much higher tones of sufficient strength would probably allow us to hear still more.⁎ It lies in the nature of the thing, that different kinds of apparatus of sensation should shew different degrees of mobility in this respect, since the result does not depend simply on the mobility of the molecules of the nerves, but also depends upon the mobility of the auxiliary apparatus through ¶ which the excitement is induced or expressed. Muscles are much less mobile than the eye; ten electrical discharges in a second directed through them generally suffice to bring the voluntary muscles into a permanent state of contraction. For the muscles of the involuntary system, of the bowels, the vessels, &c., the pauses between the irritations may be as much as one, or even several seconds long, without any intermission in the continuity of contraction.

The ear is greatly superior in this respect to any other nervous apparatus. It is eminently the organ for small intervals of time, and has been long used as such by astronomers. It is well known that when two pendulums are ticking near one another, the ear can distinguish whether the ticks are or are not coincident, within one hundredth of a second. The eye would certainly fail to determine whether two flashes of light coincided within \(\frac{1}{24}\) second; and probably within a much larger fraction of a second.†

But although the ear shews its superiority over other organs of the body in ¶ this respect, we cannot hesitate to assume that, like every other nervous apparatus, the rapidity of its power of apprehension is limited, and we may even assume that we have approached very near the limit when we can but faintly distinguish 132 beats in a second.

Footnote: ⁎ [In the two high notes *g''''* *f''''*♯ of the flageolet fifes (p. 153d, note), which if justly intoned should give 198 beats in a second, I could hear none, though the tones were very powerful, and the *scream* was very cutting indeed.—In the case of *b'' c'''*, which on the Harmonical are tuned to make 1056 and 990, the rattle of the 66 beats, or thereabouts, is quite distinct, and the differential tone is very powerful at the same time.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [The following is an interesting comparison between eye and ear, and eye and hand. The usual method of observing transits is by counting the pendulum ticks of an astronomical clock, and by observing the distances of the apparent positions of a star before and after passing each bar of the transit instrument at the moments of ticking, to estimate the moment at which it had passed each bar. This is done for five bars and a mean is taken. But a few years ago a chronograph was introduced at Greenwich Observatory, consisting of a uniformly revolving cylinder in which a point pricks a hole every second. Electrical communication being established with a knob on the transit instrument, the observer presses the knob at the moment he sees a star disappear behind a bar, and an electrical current causes another point to make a hole between the seconds holes on the chronograph. By applying a scale, the time of transit is thus measured off. A mean, of course, is taken as before. On my asking Mr. Stone (now Astronomer at Oxford, then chief assistant at Greenwich Observatory) as to the relative degree of accuracy of the two methods, he told me that he considered the first gave results to one-tenth, and the second to one-twentieth of a second. It must be remembered that the first method also required a mental estimation which had to be performed in less than a ¶ second, and the result borne in mind, and that this was avoided by the second plan. On the other hand in the latter the sensation had to be conveyed from the eye to the brain, which issued its orders to the hand, and the hand had to obey them. Hence there was an endeavour at performing simultaneously, several acts which could only be successive. Any one will find upon trial that an attempt to merely make a mark at the moment of hearing an expected sound, as, for example, the repeated tick of a common half seconds clock, is liable to great error.—*Translator.*]
