page: 174

CHAPTER IX.

DEEP AND DEEPEST TONES.

Beats give us an important means of determining the limit of the deepest tones, and of accounting for certain peculiarities of the transition from the sensation of separate pulses of air to a perfectly continuous musical tone, and to this inquiry we now proceed.

The question: what is the smallest number of vibrations in a second which can produce the sensation of a musical tone? has hitherto received very contradictory replies. The estimates of different observers fluctuate between 8 (Savart) ¶ and about 30. The contradiction is explained by the existence of certain difficulties in the experiments.

In the first place it is necessary that the strength of the vibrations of the air for very deep tones should be extremely greater than for high tones, if they are to make as strong an impression on the ear. Several acousticians have occasionally started the hypothesis that, *caeteris paribus*, the strength of tones of different heights is directly proportional to the *vis viva* of the motion of the air, or, which comes to the same thing, to the amount of the mechanical work applied for producing it. But a simple experiment with the siren shews that when equal amounts of mechanical work are applied to produce deep and high tones under conditions otherwise alike, the high tones excite a very much more powerful sensation than the deep ones. Thus, if the siren is blown by a bellows, which makes its disc revolve with increasing rapidity, and if we take care to keep up a perfectly uniform motion of the bellows by raising its handle by the same amount the same ¶ number of times in a minute, so as to keep its bag equally filled, and drive the same amount of air under the same pressure through the siren in the same time, we hear at first, while the revolution is slow, a weak deep tone, which continually ascends, but at the same time gains strength at an extraordinary rate, till when the highest tones producible on my double siren (near to *a''*, with 880 vibrations in a second) are reached, their strength is almost insupportable. In this case by far the greatest part of the uniform mechanical work is applied to the generation of sonorous motion, and only a small part can be lost by the friction of the revolving disc on its axial supports, and the air which it sets into a vortical motion at the same time; and these losses must even be greater for the more rapid rotation than for the slower, so that for the production of the high tones less mechanical work remains applicable than for the deep ones, and yet the higher tones appear to our sensation extraordinarily more powerful than the deep ones. How far upwards this increase may extend, I have as yet been unable to determine, for the rapidity of my siren cannot be further increased with the same pressure of air.

¶ The increase of strength with height of tone is of especial consequence in the deepest part of the scale. It follows that in compound tones of great depth, the upper partial tones may be superior to the prime in strength, even though in musical tones of the same description, but of greater height, the strength of the prime greatly predominates. This is readily proved on my double siren, because by means of the beats it is easy to determine whether any partial tone which we hear is the prime, or the second or third partial tone of the compound under examination. For when the series of 12 holes are open in both windboxes, and the handle, which moves the upper windbox, is rotated once, we shall have, as already shewn, 4 beats for the primes, 8 for the second partials, and 12 for the third partials. Now we can make the disc revolve more slowly than usual, by allowing a well-oiled steel spring to rub against the edge of one disc with different degrees of pressure, and thus we can easily produce series of puffs which correspond to very deep tones, and then, turning the handle, we can count the beats.
