page: 175

+ By allowing the rapidity of the revolution of the discs to increase gradually, we find that the first audible tones produced make 12 beats for each revolution of the handle, the number of puffs being from 36 to 40 in the second. For tones with from 40 to 80 puffs, each revolution of the handle gives 8 beats. In this case, then, the upper Octave of the prime is the strongest tone. It is not till we have 80 puffs in a second that we hear the four beats of the primes.

It is proved by these experiments that motions of the air, which do not take the form of pendular vibrations, can excite distinct and powerful sensations of tone, of which the pitch number is 2 or 3 times the number of the pulses of the air, and yet that the prime tone is not heard through them. Hence, when we continually descend in the scale, the strength of our sensation decreases so rapidly that the sound of the prime tone, although its *vis viva* is independently greater than that of the upper partials, as is shewn in higher positions of a musical tone of the ¶ same composition, is overcome and concealed by its own upper partials. Even when the action of the compound tone on the ear is much reinforced, the effect remains the same. In the experiments with the siren the uppermost plate of the bellows is violently agitated for the deep tones, and when I laid my head on it, my whole head was set into such powerful sympathetic vibration that the holes of the rotating disc, which vanish to an eye at rest, became again separately visible, through an optical action similar to that which takes place in stroboscopic discs. The row of holes in action appeared to stand still, the other rows seemed to move partly backwards and partly forwards, and yet the deepest tones were no more distinct than before. At another time I connected my ear by means of a properly introduced tube with an opening leading to the interior of the bellows. The agitation of the drumskin of the ear was so great that it produced an intolerable itching, and yet the deepest tones remained as indistinct as ever.

In order, then, to discover the limit of deepest tones, it is necessary not only to ¶ produce very violent agitations in the air but to give these the form of simple pendular vibrations. Until this last condition is fulfilled we cannot possibly say whether the deep tones we hear belong to the prime tone or to an upper partial tone of the motion of the air.⁎ Among the instruments hitherto employed the wide-stopped organ pipes are the most suitable for this purpose. Their upper partial tones are at least extremely weak, if not quite absent. Here we find that even the lower tones of the 16-foot octave, *C,* to *E,*, begin to pass over into a droning noise, so that it becomes difficult for even a practised musical ear to assign their pitch with certainty; and, indeed, they cannot be tuned by the ear alone, but only indirectly by means of the beats which they make with the tones of the upper octaves. We observe a similar effect on the same deep tones of a piano or harmonium; they form drones and seem out of tune, although their musical character is on the whole better established than in the pipes, because of their accompanying upper partial tones. In music, as artistically applied in an orchestra, the deepest tone ¶ used is, therefore, the *E,* of the [4-stringed German] double bass, with 41¼ vibrations in a second [see p. 18c, note], and I think I may predict with certainty that all efforts of modern art applied to produce good musical tones of a lower pitch must fail, not because proper means of agitating the air cannot be discovered, but because the human ear cannot hear them. The 16-foot *C,* of the organ, with 33 vibrations in a second, certainly gives a tolerably continuous sensation of drone, but does not allow us to give it a definite position in the musical scale. We almost begin to observe the separate pulses of air, notwithstanding the regular form of the motion. In the upper half of the 32-foot octave, the perception of the separate pulses becomes still clearer, and the continuous part of the sensation,

Footnote: ⁎ Thus Savart's instrument, where a rotating rod strikes through a narrow slit, is totally unsuitable for making the lowest tone audible. The separate puffs of air are here very short in relation to the whole periodic time of the vibration, and consequently the upper partial tones must be very strongly developed, and the deepest tones, which are heard for 8 to 16 passages of the rod through the hole in a second, can be nothing but upper partials.
