page: 176

+ which may be compared with a sensation of tone, continually weaker, and in the lower half of the 32-foot octave we can scarcely be said to hear anything but the individual pulses, or if anything else is really heard, it can only be weak upper partial tones, from which the musical tones of stopped pipes are not quite free.

I have tried to produce deep simple tones in another way. Strings which are weighted in their middle with a heavy piece of metal, on being struck give a compound tone consisting of many simple tones which are mutually inharmonic. The prime tone is separated from the nearest upper partials by an interval of several Octaves, and hence there is no danger of confusing it with any of them; besides, the upper tones die away rapidly, but the deeper ones continue for a very long time. A string of this kind ⁎ was stretched on a sounding-box having a single opening which could be connected with the auditory passage, so that the air of the sounding-box could escape nowhere else but into the ear. The tones of a string of customary ¶ pitch are under these circumstances insupportably loud. But for *D,*, with 37⅛ vibrations in a second, there was only a very weak sensation of tone, and even this was rather jarring, leading to the conclusion that the ear began even here to feel the separate pulses separately, notwithstanding their regularity. At *B,,*♭, with 29⅓ vibrations in a second, there was scarcely anything audible left. It appears, then, that those nerve fibres which perceive such tones begin as early as at this note to be no longer excited with a uniform degree of strength during the whole time of a vibration, whether it be the phases of greatest velocity or the phases of greatest deviation from their mean position in the vibrating formations in the ear which effect the excitement.†

Footnote: ⁎ It was a thin brass pianoforte string. The weight was a copper kreutzer piece [pronounce *kroitser*; three kreutzers make a penny at Heidelberg, where the experiment was probably tried], pierced in the middle by a hole ¶ through which the wire passed, and then made to grip the wire immovably by driving a steel point between the hole in the kreutzer and the string.

Footnote: † Subsequently I obtained two large tuning-forks from Herr Koenig in Paris, with sliding weights on their prongs. By altering the position of the weights, the pitch was changed, and the corresponding number of vibrations was given on a scale which runs along the prongs. One fork gave 24 to 35, the other 35 to 61 vibrations. The sliding weight is a plate, 5 centimetres [nearly 2 inches] in diameter, and forms a mirror. On bringing the ear close to these plates the deep tones are well heard. For 30 vibrations I could still hear a weak drone, for 28 scarcely a trace, although this arrangement made it easily possible to form ¶ oscillations of 9 millimetres [about ⅓ inch] in amplitude, quite close to the ear. Prof. W. Preyer has been thus able to hear down to 24 vib. He has also applied another method (*Physiologische Abhandlungen*, Physiological Treatises, Series 1, part 1, ' On the limits of the perception of tone,' pp. 1-17) by using very deep, loaded tongues, in reed pipes, which were constructed for this purpose by Herr Appunn of Hanau, and gave from 8 to 40 vib. These were set into strong vibration by blowing, and then on interrupting the wind, the dying off of the vibrations was listened to by laying the ear against the box. He states that tones were heard downwards as low as 15 vib. But the proof that the tones heard corresponded with the primes of the pipes depends only on the fact, that the pitch gradually ascended as they passed over into the tones of from 25 to 32 vib., which were more audible, but died off more rapidly. With extensive vibrations, however, the tongues may have very easily given their point of attachment longitudinal impulses of double the frequency, because when they reached each extremity of their amplitude they might drive back the point of attachment through their flexion, whereas in the middle of the vibration they would draw it forward by the centrifugal force of their weight. Since the power of distinguishing pitch for these deepest tones is extremely imperfect, I do not feel my doubts removed by the judgment of the ear when the estimates are not checked by the counting of beats.
[This check I am fortunately able to supply. A copy of the instrument used by Prof. Preyer is in the South Kensington Museum. It consists of an oblong box, in the lower part of which are the loaded harmonium reeds, not attached to pipes, but vibrating within the box, and governed by valves which can be opened at pleasure. On account of the beats between tongue and tongue taking place in strongly condensed air, they are accelerated, and the nominal pitch, obtained by counting the beats from reed to reed, is not quite the same as the actual pitch (see App. XX. sect. B. No. 6). The series of tones is supposed to proceed from 8 to 32 vib. by differences of 1 vib., from 32 to 64 by differences of 2 vib., and from 64 to 128 by differences of 4 vibs. In November 1879, for another purpose, I determined the pitch of every reed by Scheibler's forks (see App. XX. sect. B. No. 7), by means of the upper partials of the reeds. For Reeds 8, 9, 10, 11, I used from the 20th to the 30th partial, but I consider only Reed 11 as quite certain. I found it made 10·97 vib. by the 20th, and 10·95 by both the 21st and 24th partials. From Reed 11 upwards I determined every pitch, in many cases by several partials, the result only differing in the second place of decimals. I give the two lowest Octaves, the
