page: 182

+ *a'*; the beats of *a''* will be clearly heard. To an unpractised ear the resonators already described will be of great assistance. Apply the resonator for *a''*, and the above beats will be heard with great distinctness. If, on the other hand, a resonator, tuned to one of the prime tones *d'* or *a'*, be employed, the beats are heard much less distinctly, because the continuous part of the tone is then reinforced.

This last remark must not be taken to mean that no other simple tones beat in this combination except *a''*. On the contrary, there are other higher and weaker upper partials, and also combinational tones which beat, as we shall learn in the next chapter, and these beats coexist with those already described. But the beats of the lowest common upper partials are the most prominent, simply because these beats are the loudest and slowest of all.

Secondly, a direct experimental proof is desirable that the numerical ratios here deduced from the pitch numbers are really those which give no beats. This proof ¶ is most easily given by means of the double siren (fig. 56, p. 162). Set the discs in revolution and open the series of 8 holes on the lower and 16 on the upper, thus obtaining two compound tones which form an Octave. They continue to sound without beats as long as the upper box is stationary. But directly we begin to revolve the upper box, thus slightly sharpening or flattening the tone of the upper disc, beats are heard. As long as the box was stationary, the ratio of the pitch numbers was exactly 1 : 2, because exactly 8 pulses of air escaped on one rotation of the lower, and 16 on one rotation of the upper disc. By diminishing the speed of rotation of the handle this ratio may be altered as slightly as we please, but however slowly we turn it, if it move at all, the beats are heard, which shews that the interval is mistuned.

Similarly with the Fifth. Open the series of 12 holes above, and 18 below, and a perfectly unbroken Fifth will be heard as long as the upper windbox is at rest. The ratio of the vibrational numbers, fixed by the holes of the two series, is exactly ¶ 2 to 3. On rotating the windchest, beats are heard. We have seen that each revolution of the handle increases or diminishes the number of vibrations of the tone due to the 12 holes by 4 (p. 164c). When we have the tone of 12 holes on the lower discs also, we thus obtain 4 beats. But with the Fifth from 12 and 18 holes each revolution of the handle gives 12 beats, because the pitch number of the third partial tone increases on each revolution of the handle by 3 × 4 = 12, when that of the prime tone increases by 4, and we are now concerned with the beats of this partial tone.

In these investigations the siren has the great advantage over all other musical instruments, of having its intervals tuned according to their simple numerical relations with mechanical certainty by the method of constructing the instrument, and we are consequently relieved from the extremely laborious and difficult measurements of the pitch numbers which would have to precede the proof of our law on any other musical instrument. Yet the law had been already established by such ¶ measurements, and the ratios were shewn to approximate more and more closely to those of the simple numbers, as the degree of perfection increased, to which the methods of measuring numbers of vibrations and tuning perfectly had been brought.

Just as the coincidences of the two first upper partial tones led us to the natural consonances of the Octave and Fifth, the coincidences of higher upper partials would lead us to a further series of natural consonances. But it must be remarked that in the same proportion that these higher upper partials become weaker, the less perceptible become the beats by which the imperfect are distinguished from the perfect intervals, and the error of tuning is shewn. Hence the delimitation of those intervals which depend upon coincidences of the higher upper partials becomes continually more indistinct and indeterminate as the upper partials involved are higher in order. In the following table the first horizontal line and first vertical column contain the ordinal numbers of the coincident upper partial tones, and at their intersection will be found the name of the corresponding interval between the prime tones, and the ratio of the vibrational numbers of the tones
