page: 199

Further it is easy to see that if in our example we replaced 200 and 301, by the numbers 200 and 300 belonging to the perfect Fifth, all the numbers in our table would become multiples of 100, and hence all the different combinational and upper partial tones which now beat would become coincident and not generate any beats. What is here shewn to be the case in this example for the Fifth is also true for all other harmonic intervals.*

*The first differential tones of compounds cannot generate beats, except when the upper partials of the same compounds generate them, and the rapidity of the beats is the same in both cases*, supposing that the series of upper partials is complete. Hence the addition of combinational tones makes no essential difference in the results obtained in the last chapter on investigating the beats due to the upper partials only. There can be only a slight increase in the strength of the beats.†

But the case is essentially different when two simple tones are sounded together, ¶ so that there are no upper partials to consider. If combinational tones were not taken into account, two simple tones, as those of tuning-forks or stopped organ pipes, could not produce beats unless they were very nearly of the same pitch, and such beats are strong when their interval is a minor or major Second, but weak for a Third and then only recognisable in the lower parts of the scale (p. 171d), and they gradually diminish in distinctness as the interval increases, without shewing any special differences for the harmonic intervals themselves. For any larger interval between two simple tones there would be absolutely no beats at all, if there were no upper partial or combinational tones, and hence the consonant intervals discovered in the former chapter would be in no respect distinguished from adjacent intervals; there would in fact be no distinction at all between wide consonant intervals and absolutely dissonant intervals.

Now such wider intervals between simple tones are known to produce beats, although very much weaker than those hitherto considered, so that even for such ¶ tones there is a difference between consonances and dissonances, although it is very much more imperfect than for compound tones. And these facts depend, as Scheibler shewed,‡ on the combinational tones of higher orders.

It is only for the *Octave* that the first differential tone suffices. If the lower note makes 100 vibrations in a second, while the imperfect Octave makes 201, the first differential tone makes 201 - 100 = 101, and hence nearly coincides with the lower note of 100 vibrations, producing one beat for each 100 vibrations. There is no difficulty in hearing these beats, and hence it is easily possible to distinguish imperfect Octaves from perfect ones, even for simple tones, by the beats produced by the former.§

For the *Fifth*, the first order of differential tones no longer suffices. Take an imperfect Fifth with the ratio 200 : 301; then the differential tone of the first order is 101, which is too far from either primary to generate beats. But it forms an imperfect Octave with the tone 200, and, as just seen, in such a case beats ensue. ¶ Here they are produced by the differential tone 99 arising from the tone 101 and

Footnote: ⁎ This is proved mathematically in Appendix XVI.

Footnote: † [The great difference in the pitch of the two sets of beats, which are not necessarily even Octaves of each other, keeps them well apart. The beating partials, in this case 600, 602, and the beating differentials, here 101 and 99, are entirely removed from each other.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ‡ ['The physical and musical Tonometer, which makes evident to the eye, by means of the pendulum, the absolute vibrations of the tones, and of the principal kinds of combinational tones, as well as the most precise exactness of equally tempered and mathematical chords, invented and executed by Heinrich Scheibler, silk manufacturer in Crefeld.' (*Der physikalische und musikalische Tonmesser*, &c.)—Essen, G. D. Bädeker, 1834, pp. viii. 80, 5 lithographed Tables (called 3 on title-page), and an engraving of tuning-forks and waves. A most remarkable pamphlet, but unfortunately very obscurely written, as the author says in his preface, 'to write clearly and briefly on a scientific subject is a skill (*Fertigkeit*) I do not possess, and have never attempted.' See also App. XX. sect. B. No. 7. I do not find anywhere that Scheibler attempted to shew that combinational tones existed, especially intermediate ones; he merely assumed them and found the beats.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: § [See App. XX. sect. L. art. 3, latter part of *d*.—*Translator.*]
