page: 205

+ and the human voice, are pre-eminent. Artificial reed instruments, both of wood and brass, cannot materially diminish their power without stopping the action of the reeds. Flutes and organ pipes cannot greatly alter the force of their tone without at the same time altering their pitch. On the pianoforte the strength with which a tone commences is determined by the player, but not its duration; so that the rhythm can be marked delicately, but real melodic expression is wanting. All these points in the use of the above instruments are easy to observe and have long been known and allowed for. The influence of quality proper was more difficult to define. Our investigations, however, on the composition of musical tones have given us a means of taking into account the principal differences in the effect of the simultaneous action of different instruments and of shewing how the problem is to be solved, although there is still a large field left for a searching investigation in detail.

¶ Let us begin with the simple tones of *wide stopped organ pipes*. In themselves they are very soft and mild, dull in the low notes, and very tuneful in the upper. They are quite unsuited, however, for combinations of harmony according to modern musical theory. We have already explained that simple tones of this kind discriminate only the very small interval of a Second by strong beats. Imperfect Octaves, and the dissonant intervals in the neighbourhood of the Octave (the Sevenths and Ninths), beat with the combinational tones, but these beats are weak in comparison with those due to upper partials. The beats of imperfect Fifths and Fourths are entirely inaudible except under the most favourable conditions. Hence in general the impression made on the ear by any dissonant interval, except the Second, differs very little from that made by consonances, and as a consequence the harmony loses its character and the hearer has no certainty in his perception of the difference of intervals.⁎ If polyphonic compositions containing the harshest and most venturesome dissonances are played upon wide stopped ¶ organ pipes, the whole is uniformly soft and harmonious, and for that very reason also indefinite, wearisome and weak, without character or energy. Every reader that has an opportunity is requested to try this experiment. There is no better proof of the important part which upper partial tones play in music, than the impression produced by music composed of simple tones, such as we have just described. Hence the wide stopped pipes of the organ are used only to give prominence to the extreme softness and tunefulness of certain phrases in contradistinction to the harsher effect of other stops, or else, in connection with other stops, to strengthen their prime tones. Next to the wide stopped organ pipes as regards quality of tone stand *flutes* and the *flue pipes* on organs (open pipes, blown gently). These have the Octave plainly in addition to the prime, and when blown more strongly even produce the Twelfth. In this case the Octaves and Fifths are more distinctly delimited by upper partial tones; but the definition of Thirds and Sixths has to depend upon combinational tones, and hence is much weaker. The ¶ musical character of these pipes is therefore not much unlike that of the wide stopped pipes already described. This is well expressed by the old joke that nothing is more dreadful to a musical ear than a flute-concerto, except a concerto for two flutes.† But in combination with other instruments which give effect to the connection of the harmony, the flute, from the perfect softness of its tone and its great mobility, is extraordinarily pleasant and attractive, and cannot be replaced by any other instrument. In ancient music the flute played a much more important part than at present, and this seems to accord with the whole ideal of classical art, which aimed at keeping everything unpleasant from its productions, confining itself to pure beauty, whereas modern art requires more abundant means

Footnote: ⁎ [But see Prof. Preyer in App. XX. sect. L. art. 7.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † [In the original, 'dass einem musikalischen Ohre nichts schrecklicher sei als ein Flötenconcert, ausgenommen ein Concert von zwei Flöten.' The pun on 'Concert,' first as a *concerto* or peculiar piece of music for one instrument, and secondly as a *concert*, or piece of music for several instruments, cannot be properly rendered in the translation.—*Translator*.]
