page: 209

+ the dissonances near the Octave (the Sevenths and Ninths) are almost as harsh as the Seconds, and that diminished and augmented Twelfths and Fifths are rather rough. The 4th, 5th, and 6th partial tones, on the other hand, on which the Thirds depend, decrease rapidly in force, so that the Thirds are relatively much less distinctly delimited than the Octaves, Fifths, and Fourths. This last circumstance is important, because it makes the sharp Thirds of the equal temperament much more endurable upon the piano than upon other instruments with a more piercing quality of tone, whereas the Octaves, Fifths, and Fourths are delimited with great distinctness and certainty. Notwithstanding the relatively large number of upper partial tones on the pianoforte, the impression produced by dissonances is far from being so penetrating as on instruments of long-sustained tones. On the piano the note is powerful only at the moment when it is struck, and rapidly decreases in strength, so that the beats which characterise the dissonances have not time to become ¶ sensible during the strong commencement of the tone; they do not even begin until the tone is greatly diminished in intensity. Hence in the modern music written for the pianoforte, since the time that Beethoven shewed how the characteristic peculiarities of the instrument were to be utilised in compositions, we find an accumulation and reduplication of dissonant intervals which would be perfectly insupportable on other instruments. The great difference becomes very evident when an attempt is made to play recent compositions for the piano on the harmonium or organ.

That instrument-makers, led solely by practised ears, and not by any theory, should have found it most advantageous to arrange the striking place of the hammer so that the 7th partial tone entirely disappears, and the 6th is weak although actually present,⁎ is manifestly connected with the structure of our system of musical tones. The 5th and 6th partial tones serve to delimit the minor Third, and in this way almost all the intervals treated as consonances in modern ¶ music are determined on the piano by coincident upper partials; the Octave, Fifth, and Fourth by relatively loud tones; the major Sixth and major Third by weak ones; and the minor Third by the weakest of all. If the 7th partial tone were also present, the subminor† Seventh 4 : 7, as *c'⁷b'*♭, would injure the harmoniousness of the minor Sixth; the subminor Fifth 5 : 7, as *e'⁷b'*♭, that of the Fifth and Fourth; and the subminor Third 6 : 7, as *g'⁷b'*♭, that of the minor Third; without any gain in the more accurate determination of new intervals suitable for musical purposes.

Mention has already been made of a further peculiarity in the selection of quality of tone on the pianoforte, namely that its upper notes have fewer and weaker upper partial tones than the lower. This difference is much more marked on the piano than on any other instrument, and the musical reason is easily assigned. The high notes are usually played in combination with much lower notes, and the relation between the two groups of notes is given by the high upper partials of the ¶ deeper tones. When the interval between the bass and treble amounts to two or three Octaves, the second Octave, higher Third and Fifth of the bass note, are in the close neighbourhood of the treble, and form direct consonances and dissonances with it, without any necessity for using the upper partials of the treble note. Hence the only effect of upper partials on the highest notes of the pianoforte would be to give them shrillness, without any gain in respect to musical definition. In actual practice the construction of the hammers on good instruments causes the notes of the highest Octaves to be only gently accompanied by their second partials. This makes them mild and pleasant, with a flute-like tone. Some instrument-makers, however, prefer to make these notes shrill and piercing, like the piccolo flute, by transferring the striking place to the very end of the highest strings. This contrivance succeeds in increasing the force of the upper partial

Footnote: ⁎ [But see Mr. Hipkins' observations on pp. 77, 78, note.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † [For these terms see the table on p. 187. The 7th partial was very distinct on the pianos Mr. Hipkins examined. See also App. XX. sect. N.—*Translator*.]
