page: 226

+ [as the Harmonical]. The present system of tempered intonation certainly obliterates somewhat of the more delicate distinctions, without, however, entirely destroying them.

Having thus concluded that part of our investigations which rests upon purely scientific principles, it will be advisable to look back upon the road we have travelled in order to review our gains, and examine the relation of our results to the views of older theoreticians. We started from the acoustical phenomena of upper partial tones, combinational tones and beats. These phenomena were long well known both to musicians and acousticians, and the laws of their occurrence were, at least in their essential features, correctly recognised and enunciated. We had only to pursue these phenomena into further detail than had hitherto been done. We succeeded in finding methods for observing upper partial tones, which rendered comparatively ¶ easy an observation previously very difficult to make. And with the help of this method we endeavoured to shew that, with few exceptions, the tones of all musical instruments were compounded of partial tones, and that, in especial, those qualities of tone which are more particularly favourable for musical purposes, possess at least a series of the lower partial tones in tolerable force, while the simple tones, like those of stopped organ pipes, have a very unsatisfactory musical effect, although even these tones when loudly sounded are accompanied in the ear itself by some weak harmonic upper partials. On the other hand we found that, for the better musical qualities of tone, the higher partial tones, from the Seventh onwards, must be weak, as otherwise the quality, and every combination of tones would be too piercing. In reference to the beats, we had to discover what became of them when they grew quicker and quicker. We found that they then fell into that roughness which is the peculiar character of dissonance. The transition can be effected very gradually, and observed in all its stages, and hence it is apparent to ¶ the simplest natural observation that the essence of dissonance consists merely ⁎ in very rapid beats. The nerves of hearing feel these rapid beats as *rough* and unpleasant, because every intermittent excitement of any nervous apparatus affects us more powerfully than one that lasts unaltered. With this there is possibly associated a psychological cause. The individual pulses of tone in a dissonant combination give us certainly the same impression of separate pulses as slow beats, although we are unable to recognise them separately and count them; hence they form a *tangled* mass of tone, which cannot be analysed into its constituents. The cause of the unpleasantness of dissonance we attribute to this *roughness* and *entanglement*. The meaning of this distinction may be thus briefly stated: *Consonance is a continuous, dissonance an intermittent sensation of tone*. Two consonant tones flow on quietly side by side in an undisturbed stream; dissonant tones cut one another up into separate pulses of tone. This description of the distinction at which we have arrived agrees precisely with Euclid's old definition, ¶ 'Consonance is the blending of a higher with a lower tone. Dissonance is incapacity to mix, when two tones cannot blend, but appear rough to the ear.'†

After this principle had been once established there was nothing further to do but to inquire under what circumstances, and with what degree of strength, beats

Footnote: ⁎ [But see also Prof. Preyer, in App. XX. sect. L. art. 7, infra.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † *Euclides*, ed. Meibomius, p. 8: Ἔστι δὲ συμφωνία μὲν κρᾶσις δύο φθόγγων, ὀξυτέρου καὶ βαρυτέρου. Διαφωνία δὲ τοὐναντίον δύο φθόγγων ἀμιξία, μὴ οἵων τε κραθῆναι, ἀλλὰ τραχυνθῆναι τὴν ἀκοήν. [In translating this passage in the text, I have endeavoured to make the distinction of μίξις and κρᾶσις; the former is taken to be of the nature of a mechanical, and the latter a chemical mixture. *Mixing* and *blending* seem to convey the notion. In συμφωνία (which Euclid admitted only for the Octave, Fifth, and Fourth) he felt that the tones *blended*. But the διαφωνία (which he applies to *all* other intervals, for he used Pythagorean major and minor Thirds, which are really dissonant) he found to consist in their not even *mixing*, not even forming a mechanical, much less a chemical unit, so that he goes on to explain that this *non-mixing* of the two tones consisted in *inability to blend*, and resulted in producing a *roughness*, as contradistinguished from a *blending* in the ear. The *tones* are φθόγγοι, properly tones sung, but used even for tones of the lyre.—*Translator*.]
