page: 227

+ would arise in the various combinations of tones through either the partial or the combinational tones. This investigation had hitherto been completely worked out by Scheibler for the combinational tones of two simple tones only. The law of beats being known, it became easy to extend it to compound tones. Every theoretical conclusion on this field can be immediately checked by a proper observation, when the analysis of a mass of tone is facilitated by the use of resonators. All these beats of partial and combinational tones, of which so much has been said in the last chapter, are not inventions of empty theoretical speculation, but rather facts of observation, and can be really heard without difficulty by any practised observer who performs his experiments correctly. The knowledge of the acoustic law facilitates our discovery of the phenomena in question. But all the assertions on which we depend for establishing a theory of consonance and dissonance, such as was given in the last chapters, are founded wholly and solely ¶ on a careful analysis of the sensations of hearing, an analysis which a practised ear could have executed without any theoretical assistance, although of course the task was immensely facilitated by the guidance of theory and the assistance of appropriate instruments of observation.

For these reasons the reader is particularly requested to observe that my hypothesis concerning the sympathetic vibration of Corti's organs inside the ear has no immediate connection whatever with the explanation of consonance and dissonance. That explanation depends solely upon observed facts, on the beats of partial tones and the beats of combinational tones. Yet I thought it right not to suppress my hypothesis (which must of course be regarded solely as an hypothesis), because it gathers all the various acoustical phenomena with which we are concerned into one sheaf, and gives a clear, intelligible, and evident explanation of the whole phenomena and their connection.

The last chapters have shewn, that a correct and careful analysis of a mass of ¶ sound under the guidance of the principles cited, leads to precisely the same distinctions between consonant and dissonant intervals and chords, as have been established under the old theory of harmony. We have even shewn that these investigations give more particular information concerning individual intervals and chords than was possible with the general rules of the former theory, and that the correctness of these rules is corroborated both by observation on justly intoned instruments and the practice of the best composers.

Hence I do not hesitate to assert that the preceding investigations, founded upon a more exact analysis of the sensations of tone, and upon purely scientific, as distinct from esthetic principles, exhibit the true and sufficient cause of consonance and dissonance in music.

One circumstance may, perhaps, cause the musician to pause in accepting this assertion. We have found that from the most perfect consonance to the most decided dissonance there is a continuous series of degrees, of combinations of ¶ sound, which continually increase in roughness, so that there cannot be any sharp line drawn between consonance and dissonance, and the distinction would therefore seem to be merely arbitrary. Musicians, on the contrary, have been in the habit of drawing a sharp line between consonances and dissonances, allowing of no intermediate links, and Hauptmann advances this as a principal reason against any attempt at deducing the theory of consonance from the relations of rational numbers.⁎

As a matter of fact we have already remarked that the chords of the natural

Footnote: ⁎ *Harmonik und Metrik*, p. 4. [At the same time, by accepting equal temperament they accept as consonant a series of tones which really form only *one* consonant interval (the Octave) and only *two* others even approximatively consonant (the Fifth and Fourth), while the commonest intervals on which harmony rests, the Thirds, with their inversions the Sixths, are not merely dissonant but, on the sustained tones of the voice for example, *grossly* dissonant. It is difficult for any ear brought up among these dissonances, to understand the real distinction between consonance and dissonance. Hence the absolute necessity of testing all the above assertions by a justly intoned instrument such as the Harmonical.—*Translator*.]
