page: none

PART III.

THE RELATIONSHIP OF MUSICAL TONES.

¶ SCALES, AND TONALITY.

CHAPTER XIII.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE DIFFERENT PRINCIPLES OF MUSICAL STYLE IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF MUSIC.

Up to this point our investigation has been purely physical. We have analysed the sensations of hearing, and investigated the physical and physiological causes for the phenomena discovered,—partial tones, combinational tones, and beats. In ¶ the whole of this research we have dealt solely with natural phenomena, which present themselves mechanically, without any choice, to all living beings whose ears are constructed on the same anatomical plan as our own. In such a field, where necessity is paramount and nothing is arbitrary, science is rightfully called upon to establish constant laws of phenomena, and to demonstrate strictly a strict connection between cause and effect. As there is nothing arbitrary in the phenomena embraced by the theory, so also nothing arbitrary can be admitted into the laws which regulate the phenomena, or into the explanations given for their occurrence. As long as anything arbitrary remains in these laws and explanations, it is the duty of science (a duty which it is generally able to discharge) to exclude it, by continuing the investigations.

But in this third part of our inquiry into the theory of music we have to furnish a satisfactory foundation for the elementary rules of musical composition, and here we tread on new ground, which is no longer subject to physical laws alone, although ¶ the knowledge which we have gained of the nature of hearing, will still find numerous applications. We pass on to a problem which by its very nature belongs to the domain of esthetics. When we spoke previously, in the theory of consonance, of agreeable and disagreeable, we referred solely to the immediate impression made on the senses when an isolated combination of sounds strikes the ear, and paid no attention at all to artistic contrasts and means of expression; we thought only of sensuous pleasure, not of esthetic beauty. The two must be kept strictly apart, although the first is an important means for attaining the second.

The altered nature of the matters now to be treated betrays itself by a purely external characteristic. At every step we encounter historical and national differences of taste. Whether one combination is rougher or smoother than another, depends solely on the anatomical structure of the ear, and has nothing to do with psychological motives. But what degree of roughness a hearer is inclined to endure as a means of musical expression depends on taste and habit; hence the boundary between consonances and dissonances has been frequently changed. Simi-
