page: 236

+ powerful and most dangerous degree of pressure is exerted by the stones in the horizontal parts of the arch, where they have either no support or no obliquely placed support, and are prevented from falling solely by the greater thickness of their upper extremities. In very large arches the horizontal middle portion is consequently the most dangerous, and would be precipitated by the slightest yielding of the materials. As, then, medieval ecclesiastical structures assumed continually larger dimensions, the idea occurred of leaving out the middle horizontal part of the arch altogether, and of making the sides ascend with moderate obliquity until they met in a pointed arch. From thenceforward the pointed arch became the dominant principle. The building was divided into sections externally by the projecting buttresses. These, and the omnipresent pointed arch, made the outlines hard, and the churches became enormously high. But both characters suited the vigorous minds of the northern nations, and perhaps the very hardness of the forms, ¶ thoroughly subdued by that marvellous consistency which runs through the varied magnificence of form in a *gothic* cathedral, served to heighten the impression of immensity and power.

We see here, then, how the technical discoveries which were associated with the problems as they rose successively created three entirely distinct principles of style—the horizontal line, the circular arch, the pointed arch—and how at each new change in the main plan of construction, all the subordinate individualities, down to the smallest decorations, were altered accordingly; and hence how the individual rules of construction can only be comprehended from the general principle of construction. Although the gothic style has developed the richest, the most consistent, the mightiest and most imposing of architectural forms, just as modern music among other musical styles, no one would certainly for a moment think of asserting that the pointed arch is nature's original form of all architectural beauty, and must consequently be introduced everywhere. And at the present day ¶ it is well known that it is an artistic absurdity to put gothic windows in a Greek building. Conversely any one can unfortunately convince himself on visiting most of our gothic cathedrals how detestably unsuitable to the whole effect are those numerous little chapels of the *renaissance* period built in the Greek or Roman style. Just as little as the gothic pointed arch, should our diatonic major scale be regarded as a *natural product*. At least such an expression is quite inapplicable, except in so far as both are necessary and *natural* consequences of the principle of style selected. And just as little as we should use gothic ornamentation in a Greek temple, should we venture upon improving compositions written in ecclesiastical modes, by providing their notes with marks of sharps and flats in accordance with the scheme of our major and minor harmonies. The feeling for historical artistic conception has certainly made little progress as yet among our musicians, even among those who are at the same time musical historians. They judge old music by the rules of modern harmony, and are inclined to consider every deviation from ¶ it as mere unskilfulness in the old composer, or even as barbarous want of taste.⁎

Hence before we proceed to the construction of scales and rules for a tissue of harmony, we must endeavour to characterise the principles of style, at least for the chief phases of the development of musical art. For present purposes we may divide these into three principal periods:—

1. The *Homophonic* or Unison Music of the ancients, to which also belongs the existing music of Oriental and Asiatic nations.

2. The *Polyphonic* Music of the middle ages, with several parts, but without regard to any independent musical significance of the harmonies, extending from the tenth to the seventeenth century, when it passes into

3. *Harmonic* or *Modern* Music, characterised by the independent significance

Footnote: ⁎ Thus in R. G. Kiesewetter's historico-musical writings, which are otherwise so rich in facts industriously collected, there is evidently an exaggerated zeal to deny everything which will not fit into the modern major and minor modes.
