page: 237

+ attributed to the harmonies as such. Its sources date back from the sixteenth century.

1. ^^Homophonic Music.^^

One part music is the original form of music with all people. It still exists among the Chinese, Indians, Arabs, Turks, and modern Greeks, notwithstanding the greatly developed systems of music possessed by some of these nations.⁎ That music in the time of highest Grecian culture, neglecting perhaps individual instrumental ornamentation, cadences, and interludes, was written in one part, or that the voices at most sang in Octaves, can now be considered as established. In the problems of Aristotle we find the question: 'Why is the consonance of the Octave alone sung? For this and no other consonance is played on the magădis'. This was a harp-shaped instrument [with a bridge dividing the strings at one-third ¶ their length]. In another place he remarks that the voices of boys and men form an Octave in singing.†

One part music, considered independently and unaccompanied by words, is too poor in forms and changes, to develop any of the greater and richer forms of art. Hence purely instrumental music at this stage is necessarily limited to short dances or marches. We really find no more among nations that have no harmonic music.‡ Performers on the flute § have certainly repeatedly gained the prize in the Pythian games, but it is possible to perform feats of execution in instrumental music in concise forms of composition, as, for example, in the variations of a short melody. That the principle of varying (μεταβολή) a melody with reference to dramatical expression (μίμησις), was known to the Greeks, follows also from Aristotle. He describes the matter very plainly, and remarks that choruses must simply repeat the melodies in the antistrophes, because it is easier for one than for several to introduce variations. But public competitors (ἀγωνισταί) and actors ¶ (ὑποκριταί) are able to grapple with these difficulties.⁎⁎

Footnote: ⁎ [See App. XX. sect. K. for some of these scales.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † Διὰ τί ἡ διὰ πασῶν συμφωνία ᾄδεται μόνη; μαγαδίζουσι γὰρ ταύτην, ἄλλην δὲ οὐδεμίαν. *Prob.* xix. 18. [Translated in the text.] Διὰ τί ἥδιόν ἐστι τὸ σύμφωνον τοῦ ὁμοφώνου; Ἢ καὶ τὸ μὲν ἀντίφωνον σύμφωνόν ἐστι διὰ πασῶν; ἐκ παίδων γὰρ νέων καὶ ἀνδρῶν γίνεται τὸ ἀντίφωνον· οἳ διεστᾶσι τοῖς τόνοις, ὡς νήτη πρὸς τὴν ὑπάτην. *Prob.* xix. 39. ['Why is a consonant union of voices pleasanter than a single voice? Is the singing of voice against voice, a consonant union of voices in Octaves? This singing of voice against voice occurs when young boys and men sing together, and their tones differ as the highest from the lowest of the scale.'] Towards the end of the songs the instrumental accompaniment seems to have separated itself from the voice. Probably this is what is meant by the *krousis* in the passage τελευτῶσαις δ' εἰς ταὐτὸν, ἓν καὶ κοινὸν τὸ ἔργον συμβαίνει γίνεσθαι, καθάπερ τοῖς ὑπὸ τὴν ᾠδὴν κρούουσι· καὶ γὰρ οὗτοι τὰ ἄλλα οὐ προσαυλοῦντες, ἐὰν εἰς ταὐτὸν καταστρέφωσιν, εὐφραίνουσι μᾶλλον τῷ τέλει ἢ λυποῦσι ταῖς πρὸ τοῦ τέλους διαφοραῖς, τῷ τὸ ἐκ διαφόρων τὸ κοινὸν, ἥδιστον ἐκ τοῦ διὰ πασῶν γίνεσθαι. Arist. *Prob.* xix. 39. ['But when they end in the same, the matter is precisely similar to what occurs *when they play an accompaniment to a song*. For the accompanyists do not follow the rest, but when the singers return to the same, they please more in the end, than they displease in the differences before the end, by which means the common part in what is generally different, pleases more than anything but the Octave.'] See also Plutarch, *De Musica*, xix. xxviii. That the Greeks knew the effect of consonances and did not like it, appears by the following passage from Aristotle, *De Audibilibus*, ed. Bekker, p. 801: 'For this reason we understand a single speaker better than many who are saying the same things at the same time. And so with strings. And much less, when flute and lyre are played at the same time, because the voices are confused by the others. And this is very plain for the consonances. For both tones are concealed, one by the other.' Διὸ καὶ μᾶλλον ἑνὸς ἀκούοντες συνίεμεν, ἢ πολλῶν ἅμα ταὐτὰ λεγόντων· καθάπερ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν χορδῶν· καὶ πολὺ ἧττον, ὅταν προσαυλῇ τις ἅμα καὶ κιθαρίζῃ, διὰ τὸ συγχεῖσθαι τὰς φωνὰς ὑπὸ τῶν ἑτέρων. Οὐκ ἥκιστα δὲ τοῦτο ἐπὶ τῶν συμφωνιῶν φανερόν ἐστιν. Ἀμφοτέρους γὰρ ἀποκρύπτεσθαι συμβαίνει τοὺς ἤχους ὑπ' ἀλλήλων.

Footnote: ‡ ¶ [In Java long pieces of music in non-harmonic scales occur to accompany actions and develop the feeling of a plot. Many instruments play together, but there is no harmony.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: § The αὐλοί were perhaps more like our oboes.

Footnote: ⁎⁎ [Διὰ τί οἱ μὲν νόμοι οὐκ ἐν ἀντιστρόφοις ἐποιοῦντο· αἱ δὲ ἄλλαι ᾠδαὶ αἱ χορικαί; Ἢ ὅτι οἱ μὲν νόμοι ἀγωνιστῶν ἦσαν, ὧν ἤδη μιμεῖσθαι δυναμένων καὶ διατείνεσθαι, ἡ ᾠδὴ ἐγίνετο μακρὰ καὶ πολυειδής; καθάπερ οὖν καὶ τὰ μέλη τῇ μιμήσει ἠκολούθει ἀεὶ ἕτερα γινόμενα. Μᾶλλον γὰρ τῷ μέλει ἀνάγκη μιμεῖσθαι, ἢ τοῖς ῥήμασι. Δι' ὃ καὶ οἱ διθύραμβοι, ἐπειδὴ μιμητικοὶ ἐγένοντο, οὐκ ἔτι ἔχουσιν ἀντιστρόφους, πρότερον δὲ εἶχον. Αἴτιον δὲ, ὅτι τὸ παλαιὸν οἱ ἐλεύθεροι ἐχόρευον αὐτοί. Πολλοὺς οὖν ἀγωνιστικῶς ᾄδειν, χαλεπὸν ἦν. Ὥστε ἐναρμόνια μᾶλλον μέλη ἐνῆδον. Μεταβάλλειν γὰρ πολλὰς μεταβολὰς τῷ ἑνὶ ῥᾷον, ἢ τοῖς πολλοῖς, καὶ τῷ ἀγωνιστῇ, ἢ τοῖς τὸ ἦθος
