page: 238

Extensive works of art, in homophonic music, are only possible in connection with poetry, and this was also the way in which music was applied in classical antiquity. Not only were songs (odes) and religious hymns sung, but even tragedies and long epic poems were performed in some musical manner, and accompanied by the lyre. We are scarcely in a condition to form a conception of how this was done, because modern taste points in precisely the opposite direction, and demands from a great declaimer or public reader that he should produce a dramatic effect true to nature by the speaking voice alone, rating all approach to singing as one of the greatest of faults. Perhaps we have some echoes of the ancient spoken song in the singing tone of Italian declaimers, and the liturgical recitations (intoning) of the Roman Catholic priests. Indeed, attentive observation on ordinary conversation shews us that regular musical intervals involuntarily recur, although the singing tone of the voice is concealed under the noises ¶ which characterise the individual letters, and the pitch is not held firmly, but is frequently allowed to glide up and down. When simple sentences are spoken without being affected by feeling, a certain middle pitch is maintained, and it is only the emphatic words and the conclusions of sentences and clauses which are indicated by change of pitch.⁎ The end of an affirmative sentence followed by a pause, is usually marked by the voice falling a Fourth from the middle pitch. An interrogative ending rises, often as much as a Fifth above the middle pitch. For example a bass voice would say:

[Figure m1]

[Figure m2]

+ ¶ Emphasised words are also rendered prominent by their being spoken about a Tone higher than the rest,† and so on. In solemn declamation the alterations of pitch are more numerous and complicated. Modern recitative has arisen from attempting to imitate these alterations of pitch by musical notes. Its inventor, Giacomo Peri, in the preface to his opera of *Eurydice*, published in 1600, distinctly says as much. An attempt was then made to restore the declamation of ancient tragedies by means of recitative. Ancient recitative certainly differed somewhat from modern recitative, by preserving the metre of the poems more exactly, and by

Footnote+ φυλάττουσι. Δι' ὃ ἁπλούστερα ἐποιοῦντο αὐτοῖς ¶ τὰ μέλη. Ἡ δὲ ἀντίστροφος, ἁπλοῦν. Ἀριθμὸς γάρ ἐστι, καὶ ἑνὶ μετρεῖται. Τὸ δ' αὐτὸ αἴτιον καὶ διότι τὰ μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς σκηνῆς οὐκ ἀντίστροφα, τὰ δὲ τοῦ χοροῦ ἀντίστροφα. Ὁ μὲν γὰρ ὑποκριτὴς ἀγωνιστὴς [καὶ μιμητής·] ὁ δὲ χορὸς, ἧττον μιμεῖται. Arist. *Prob.* xix. 15. 'Why are themes (*nomoi*) not used in antistrophic singing, while all other choral singing is employed? Is it because themes belong to public performers who are already able to imitate and extend, and hence would make their song long and very figurate? For melodies, like words, follow imitation and change. It is more necessary for melody to imitate, than for words. Wherefore dithyrambic poets also when they became mimetic, disused their previous antistrophic singing. The reason is that formerly gentlemen (*eleutheroi*) used to sing the choruses themselves. It was difficult for many to sing like public performers. So they rather intoned suitable melodies. For it is easier for one to make numerous variations than for many to do so, and for a public performer than for those who retained old usage. Hence the melodies were made simpler for them. Now antistrophic singing is simple, for it depends on number, and is measured by a unit. The same reason shews why the parts of the actors are not antistrophic, but those of the chorus are so. For the actor is a public performer [and a mime], but the chorus does not imitate so well.'—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ⁎ [Prof. Helmholtz's observations on speaking must be read in reference to North German habits only.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † [By no means uniformly, even in North Germany. The habits of different nations here vary greatly. In Norway and in Sweden the voice is regularly raised on unemphatic syllables. In Scotland the emphasis is often marked by lowering the pitch.—*Translator*.]
