page: 240

+ melodies (νόμοι) which were allotted to odes and tragic choruses, were certainly freer and more independent. For odes there were also well-known melodies (the names of some of them are preserved) to which fresh poems were continually composed.

In the great artistic works just mentioned, then, music must have been entirely subordinate; independently, it could only have formed short pieces. Now this is closely connected with the development of homophonic music as a musical system. Among the nations who possess such music we always find certain degrees of pitch selected for the melodies to move in. These scales are very various in kind, partly, it would seem, very arbitrary, so that many appear to us quite strange and incomprehensible, and yet the best gifted among those nations which possess them, as the Greeks, Arabs, and Indians, have developed them in an extremely subtile and varied manner. [See App. XX. sect. K.]

¶ When speaking of these systems of tones, it becomes a question of essential importance for our present purpose, to inquire whether they are based upon any determinate reference of all the tones in the scale to one single principal and fundamental tone, the *tonic* or *key-note*. Modern music effects a purely musical internal connection among all the tones in a composition, by making their relationship to one tone as perceptible as possible to the ear. This predominance of the tonic, as the link which connects all the tones of a piece, we may, with Fétis, term the principle of *tonality*. This learned musician has properly drawn attention to the fact that tonality is developed in very different degrees and manners in the melodies of different nations. Thus in the songs of the modern Greeks, and chants of the Greek Church, and the Gregorian tones of the Roman Church, they are not developed in a manner which is easy to harmonise, whereas, according to Fétis,⁎ it is on the whole easy to add accompanying harmonies to the old melodies of the northern nations of German, Celtic, and Sclavonic ¶ origin.

It is indeed remarkable that though the musical writings of the Greeks often treat subtile points at great length, and give the most exact information about all other peculiarities of the scale, they say nothing intelligible about a relation which in our modern system stands first of all, and always makes itself most distinctly sensible. The only hints to be found concerning the existence of the tonic are not in especial musical writings, but as before in the works of Aristotle, who asks:—

'Why is it that if any one alters the tone on the middle string (μέση) after the others have been tuned, and plays, every thing sounds amiss, not merely when he comes to this middle tone, but throughout the whole melody? but if he alters the tone played by the forefinger † or any other, the difference is only perceived when that string is struck? Is there a good reason for this? All good melodies often employ the tone of the middle string, and good composers often come upon it, ¶ and if they leave it recur to it again; but this is not the case with any other tone.' Then he compares the tone of the middle string with conjunctions in language, such as 'and' [and 'then'], without which language could not exist, and proceeds to say: 'In this way the tone of the middle string is a link between tones, especially of the best tones, because its tone most frequently recurs'.‡

Footnote+ extent determined a melody. See Dionysius of Halicarnassus, περὶ συνθέσεως ὀνομάτων, chap. xi., where we also find that in his day (first century before Christ) the musical composers transgressed at pleasure the rules of both accent and quantity. But if the written accents in Greek, and the accents as determined by the rules of grammarians in Latin, are carefully examined, it will be found that every line in a Greek or Latin poem had its own distinct melody, the art of the poet being shewn by the great variability of pitch conjoined with a constant quantity or rhythm.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ⁎ Fétis, *Biographie universelle des Musiciens*, vol. i. p. 126.

Footnote: † [The forefinger is ὁ λιχανός, the note played by it is ἡ λίχανος, accent and gender both differing.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ‡ Διὰ τί, ἐὰν μέν τις τὴν μέσην κινήσῃ ἡμῶν, ἀρμόσας [δὲ] τὰς ἄλλας χορδὰς, κέχρηται τῷ ὀργάνῳ, οὐ μόνον ὅταν κατὰ τὸν τῆς μέσης γένηται φθόγγον, λυπεῖ, καὶ φαίνεται ἀνάρμοστον, ἀλλὰ καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἄλλην μελῳδίαν· ἐὰν δὲ τὴν
