page: 247

In the Roman Church also a desire arose for altering their music. The divisions of polyphonic music scattered the sense of the words, and made them unintelligible to the unpractised public, and occasioned even a learned and cultivated hearer great difficulties in endeavouring to disentangle the knot of voices. In consequence of the proceedings of the Council of Trent, and by an order of Pope Pius IV. (A.D. 1559-1565), Palestrina (A.D. 1524-1594) carried out this simplification and embellishment of ecclesiastical music, and the simple beauty of his compositions is said to have prevented the complete banishment of part music from the Roman liturgy. Palestrina, who wrote for choruses of singers practised in their art, did not entirely drop the more complicated progression of parts found in polyphonic music, but by appropriate sections and divisions he separated and connected both the mass of tones and the mass of voices, and generally distributed the latter into several distinct choirs. The voices also are more or less frequently heard together in such ¶ progressions as were used in chorales, and in this case consonant chords greatly predominated. By this means he made his pieces more comprehensible and intelligible, and in general extremely agreeable to the ear. But the deviation of ecclesiastical modes from the new modes invented in modern times for the treatment of harmonies, is nowhere so remarkable as in the compositions of Palestrina, and those of contemporary Italian composers of ecclesiastical music, among whom Giovanni Gabrieli, a Venetian, should be particularly named. Palestrina was a pupil of Claude Goudimel (a Huguenot, slain at Lyons in the massacre of St. Bartholomew), who had harmonised French psalms in a way which, when the scale was major, was but very slightly different from modern habits. These psalm melodies had been borrowed, or at least imitated from popular songs. Hence Palestrina was certainly acquainted with this mode of treatment, through his teacher, but he had to deal with themes from the Gregorian *Cantus firmus* that moved in ecclesiastical tones, which he was forced to maintain strictly even in pieces where ¶ he himself invented or adapted the melodies. Now these modes necessitated a totally different harmonic treatment, which sounds very strange to moderns. As a specimen I will only cite the commencement of his eight-part *Stabat mater*.

[Figure m1]

Here, at the commencement of a piece, just where we should require a steady ¶ characterisation of the key, we find a series of chords in the most varied keys, from *A* major to *F* major, apparently thrown together at haphazard, contrary to all our rules of modulation. What person that was ignorant of ecclesiastical modes could guess the tonic of the piece from this commencement? As such we find *D* at the end of the first strophe, and the sharpening of *C* to *C*♯ in the first chord also points to *D*. The principal melody too, which is given to the tenor, shews from the commencement that *D* is the tonic. But we do not get a minor chord of *D* till the eighth bar, whereas a modern composer would have been forced to introduce it in the first good place he could find in the first bar.

We see from these characters how greatly the nature of the whole system of ecclesiastical modes differed from our modern keys. We cannot but assume that masters like Palestrina founded their method of harmonisation upon a correct feeling for the peculiar character of those modes, and that, as they could not fail to be acquainted with the contemporary advances in Protestant ecclesiastical music, their work was neither arbitrary nor unskilful.
