page: 249

+ had to be subordinated to a melody. Hence some new means of artistic connection had to be discovered in the sound of the chords themselves. This was effected, first by making the harmonies refer their tones much more definitely to one predominant tonic than before, and secondly by giving fresh strength to the relations between the chords themselves and between all other chords and the tonic chord. In the course of our investigations we shall see that the distinctive peculiarities of the modern system of tones can be deduced from this principle, and that the principle itself is very strictly carried out in our present music. In reality the mode in which the materials of music are now worked up for artistic use, is in itself a wondrous work of art, at which the experience, ingenuity, and esthetic feeling of European nations has laboured for between two and three thousand years, since the days of Terpander and Pythagoras. But the complete formation of the essential features as we now see it, is scarcely two hundred years ¶ old in the practice of musical composers, and theoretical expression was not given to the new principle till the time of Rameau at the beginning of last century. In the historical point of view, therefore, it is wholly the product of modern times, limited nationally to the German, Roman, Celtic, and Sclavonic races.

With this tonal system, which admits great wealth of form with strictly defined artistic consistency, it has become possible to construct works of art, of much greater extent, and much richer in forms and parts, much more energetic in expression, than any producible in past ages; and hence we are by no means inclined to quarrel with modern musicians for esteeming it the best of all, and devoting their attention to it exclusively. But scientifically, when we proceed to explain its construction and display its consistency we must not forget that our modern system was not developed from a natural necessity, but from a freely chosen principle of style; that beside it, and before it, other tonal systems have been developed from other principles, and that in each such system the highest ¶ pitch of artistic beauty has been reached, by the successful solution of more limited problems.

This reference to the history of music was necessitated by our inability in this case to appeal to observation and experiment for establishing our explanations, because, educated in a modern system of music, we cannot thoroughly throw ourselves back into the condition of our ancestors, who knew nothing about what we have been familiar with from childhood, and who had to find it all out for themselves. The only observations and experiments, therefore, to which we can appeal, are those which mankind themselves have undertaken in the development of music. If our theory of the modern tonal system is correct it must also suffice to furnish the requisite explanation of the former less perfect stages of development.

As the fundamental principle for the development of the European tonal system, we shall assume *that the whole mass of tones and the connection of harmonies must stand in a close and always distinctly perceptible relationship to some ¶ arbitrarily selected tonic, and that the mass of tone which forms the whole composition, must be developed from this tonic, and must finally return to it*. The ancient world developed this principle in homophonic music, the modern world in harmonic music. But it is evident that this is merely an esthetical principle, not a natural law.

The correctness of this principle cannot be established *à priori*. It must be tested by its results. The origin of such esthetical principles should not be ascribed to a natural necessity. They are the inventions of genius, as we previously endeavoured to illustrate by a reference to the principles of architectural style.
