page: 250

CHAPTER XIV.

THE TONALITY OF HOMOPHONIC MUSIC.

Music was forced first to select artistically, and then to shape for itself, the material on which it works. Painting and sculpture find the fundamental character of their materials, form and colour, in nature itself, which they strive to imitate. Poetry finds its materials ready formed in the words of language. Architecture has, indeed, also to create its own forms; but they are partly forced upon it by technical and not by purely artistic considerations. Music alone finds an infinitely rich but totally shapeless plastic material in the tones of the human voice and artificial musical instruments, which must be shaped on purely artistic principles, unfettered by any reference to utility as in architecture, or to the imitation of ¶ nature as in the fine arts, or to the existing symbolical meaning of sounds as in poetry. There is a greater and more absolute freedom in the use of the material for music than for any other of the arts. But certainly it is more difficult to make a proper use of absolute freedom, than to advance where external irremovable landmarks limit the width of the path which the artist has to traverse. Hence also the cultivation of the tonal material of music has, as we have seen, proceeded much more slowly than the development of the other arts.

It is now our business to investigate this cultivation.

The first fact that we meet with in the music of all nations, so far as is yet known, is that *alterations of pitch in melodies take place by intervals, and not by continuous transitions*. The psychological reason of this fact would seem to be the same as that which led to rhythmic subdivision periodically repeated. All melodies are motions within extremes of pitch. The incorporeal material of tones is much more adapted for following the musician's intention in the most delicate ¶ and pliant manner for every species of motion, than any corporeal material, however light. Graceful rapidity, grave procession, quiet advance, wild leaping, all these different characters of motion and a thousand others in the most varied combinations and degrees, can be represented by successions of tones. And as music expresses these motions, it gives an expression also to those mental conditions which naturally evoke similar motions, whether of the body and the voice, or of the thinking and feeling principle itself. Every motion is an expression of the power which produces it, and we instinctively measure the motive force by the amount of motion which it produces. This holds equally and perhaps more for the motions due to the exertion of power by the human will and human impulses, than for the mechanical motions of external nature. In this way melodic progression can become the expression of the most diverse conditions of human disposition, not precisely of human *feelings*,⁎ but at least of that *state of sensitiveness* which is produced by feelings. In English the phrase *out of tune*, *unstrung*, and ¶ in German the word *stimmung*, literally *tuning*, are transferred from music to mental states. The words are meant to denote those peculiarities of mental condition which are capable of musical representation. I think we might appropriately define *gemüthsstimmung*, or *mental tune*, as representing that general character temporarily shewn by the motion of our conceptions, and correspondingly impressed on the motions of our body and voice. Our thoughts may move fast or slowly, may wander about restlessly and aimlessly in anxious excitement, or may keep a determinate aim distinctly and energetically in view; they may lounge about without care or effort in pleasant fancies, or, driven back by some sad memories, may return slowly and heavily from the spot with short weak steps. All this may be imitated and expressed by the melodic motion of the tones, and the listener may thus receive a more perfect and impressive image of the 'tune' of

Footnote: ⁎ Hanslick seems to me to have the advantage over other esthetic writers in this point, because music, unassisted by poetry, has no means of clearly characterising the object of feeling.
