page: 251

+ another person's mind, than by any other means, except perhaps by a very perfect dramatic representation of the way in which such a person really spoke and acted.

Aristotle also formed a similar conception of the effect of music. In his 29th problem he says: 'Why do rhythms and melodies, which are composed of sound, resemble the feelings; while this is not the case for tastes, colours, or smells? Can it be because they are motions, as actions are also motions? Energy itself belongs to feeling and creates feeling. But tastes and colours do not act in the same way.'⁎ And at the end of the 27th problem he says: 'These motions, i.e. rhythms and melodies, are active, and action is the sign of feeling'.†

Not merely music but even other kinds of motions may produce similar effects. Water in motion, as in cascades or sea waves, has an effect in some respects similar to music. How long and how often can we sit and look at the waves rolling in to shore! Their rhythmic motion, perpetually varied in detail, produces ¶ a peculiar feeling of pleasant repose or weariness, and the impression of a mighty orderly life, finely linked together. When the sea is quiet and smooth we can enjoy its colouring for a while, but this gives no such lasting pleasure as the rolling waves. Small undulations, on the other hand, on small surfaces of water, follow one another too rapidly, and disturb rather than please.

But the motion of tone surpasses all motion of corporeal masses in the delicacy and ease with which it can receive and imitate the most varied descriptions of expression. Hence it arrogates to itself by right the representation of states of mind, which the other arts can only indirectly touch by shewing the situations which caused the emotion, or by giving the resulting words, acts, or outward appearance of the body. The union of music to words is most important, because words can represent the cause of the frame of mind, the object to which it refers, and the feeling which lies at its root, while music expresses the kind of mental transition which is due to the feeling. When different hearers endeavour to ¶ describe the impression of instrumental music, they often adduce entirely different situations or feelings which they suppose to have been symbolised by the music. One who knows nothing of the matter is then very apt to ridicule such enthusiasts, and yet they may have been all more or less right, because music does not represent feelings and situations, but only frames of mind, which the hearer is unable to describe except by adducing such outward circumstances as he has himself noticed when experiencing the corresponding mental states. Now different feelings may occur under different circumstances and produce the same states of mind in different individuals, while the same feelings may give rise to different states of mind. Love is a feeling. But music cannot represent it directly as such. The mental states of a lover may, as we know, shew the extremest variety of change. Now music may perhaps express the dreamy longing for transcendent bliss which love

Footnote: ⁎ Διὰ τί οἱ ῥυθμοὶ καὶ τὰ μέλη φωνὴ οὖσα, ἤθεσιν ἔοικεν· οἱ δὲ χυμοὶ οὐ, ἀλλ' οὐδὲ τὰ χρώματα καὶ αἱ ὀσμαί; Ἢ ὅτι κινήσεις εἰσὶν, ὥσπερ καὶ αἱ πράξεις; ἤδη δὲ ἡ μὲν ἐνέργεια ἠθικὸν, καὶ ποιεῖ ἦθος· οἱ δὲ χυμοὶ καὶ τὰ χρώματα οὐ ποιοῦσιν ὁμοίως. Arist. *Prob.* xix. 29.

Footnote: † [The above words conclude the problem, which it seems best to cite in full. Διὰ τί τὸ ἀκουστὸν μόνον ἦθος ἔχει τῶν αἰσθητῶν; καὶ γὰρ ἐὰν ᾖ ἄνευ λόγου μέλος, ὅμως ἔχει ἦθος· ἀλλ' οὐ τὸ χρῶμα, οὐδὲ ἡ ὀσμή, οὐδὲ ὁ χυμὸς ἔχει. Ἢ ὅτι κίνησιν ἔχει μονονουχὶ, ἣν ὁ ψόφος ἡμᾶς κινεῖ; Τοιαύτη μὲν γὰρ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ὑπάρχει, κινεῖ γὰρ καὶ τὸ χρῶμα [καὶ] τὴν ὄψιν· ἀλλὰ τῆς ἑπομένης τῷ τοιούτῳ ψόφῳ αἰσθανόμεθα κινήσεως. Αὕτη δὲ ἔχει ὁμοιότητα, ἔν τε τοῖς ῥυθμοῖς καὶ ἐν τῇ τῶν φθόγγων τάξει τῶν ὀξέων καὶ βαρέων, οὐκ ἐν τῇ μίξει. Ἀλλ' ἡ συμφωνία οὐκ ἔχει ἦθος. Ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἄλλοις αἰσθητοῖς τοῦτο οὐκ ἔστιν. Αἱ δὲ κινήσεις αὗται, πρακτικαί εἰσιν. Αἱ δὲ πράξεις, ἤθους σημασία ἐστί. Arist. *Prob.* xix. 27. Which we may perhaps translate thus: 'Why is sound the only sensation which excites the feelings? Even melody without words has feeling. But ¶ this is not the case for colour, or smell, or taste. Is it because they have none of the motion which sound excites in us? For the others excite motion; thus colour moves the eye. But we feel the motion which follows sound. And this is alike, in rhythm, and alteration in pitch, but not in united sounds. Sounding notes together does not excite feeling. This is not the case for other sensations. Now these motions stimulate action, and this action is the sign of feeling.' Aristotle seems to have required motion to excite feeling, and in sounding two notes *together*, there was no motion of one towards the other. It is evident that he had not the slightest inkling of a progression of *harmonies*, and this utter blank in his mind is one of the strongest proofs that the Greeks had never tried harmony. Ἁρμονία had the modern meaning of *melody*; μελῳδία was words set to music.—*Translator.*]
