page: 252

+ may excite. But precisely the same state of mind might arise from religious enthusiasm. Hence when a piece of music expresses this mental state it is not a contradiction for one hearer to find in it the longing of love, and another the longing of enthusiastic piety. In this sense Vischer's rather paradoxical statement that the mechanics of mental emotion are perhaps best studied in their musical expression, may be not altogether incorrect. We really possess no other means of expressing them so exactly and delicately.

As we have seen, then, melody has to express a motion, in such a manner that the hearer may easily, clearly, and certainly appreciate the character of that motion by *immediate perception*. This is only possible when the steps of this motion, their rapidity and their amount, are also exactly *measurable* by immediate sensible perception. Melodic motion is change of pitch in time. To measure it perfectly, the length of time elapsed, and the distance between the pitches, must be ¶ measurable. This is possible for immediate audition only on condition that the alterations both in time and pitch should proceed by regular and determinate degrees. This is immediately clear for time, for even the scientific, as well as all other measurement of time, depends on the rhythmical recurrence of similar events, the revolution of the earth or moon, or the swings of a pendulum. Thus also the regular alternation of accentuated and unaccentuated sounds in music and poetry gives the measure of time for the composition. But whereas in poetry the construction of the verse serves only to reduce the external accidents of linguistic expression to artistic order; in music, rhythm, as the measure of time, belongs to the inmost nature of expression. Hence also a much more delicate and elaborate development of rhythm was required in music than in verse.

It was also necessary that the alteration of pitch should proceed by intervals, because motion is not measurable by immediate perception unless the amount of space to be measured is divided off into degrees. Even in scientific investigations ¶ we are unable to measure the velocity of continuous motion except by comparing the space described with the standard measure, as we compare time with the seconds pendulum.

It may be objected that architecture in its arabesques, which have been justly compared in many respects with musical figures, and which also shew a certain orderly arrangement, constantly employs curved lines and not lines broken into determinate lengths. But in the first place the art of arabesques really began with the Greek meander, which is composed of straight lines set at right angles to each other, following at exactly equal lengths, and cutting one another off in degrees. In the second place, the eye which contemplates arabesques can take in and compare all parts of the curved lines at once, and can glance to and fro, and return to its first contemplation. Hence, notwithstanding the continuous curvature of the lines, their paths are perfectly comprehensible, and it became possible to renounce the strict regularity of the Grecian arabesques in favour of ¶ the curvilinear freedom. But whilst freer forms are thus admitted for individual small decorations in architecture, the division of any great whole, whether it be a series of arabesques or a row of windows or columns, &c., throughout a building, is still tied down to the simple arithmetical law of repetition of similar parts at equal intervals.

The individual parts of a melody reach the ear in succession. We cannot perceive them all at once. We cannot observe backwards and forwards at pleasure. Hence for a clear and sure measurement of the change of pitch, no means were left but progression by determinate degrees. This series of degrees is laid down in the musical scale. When the wind howls and its pitch rises or falls in insensible gradations without any break, we have nothing to measure the variations of pitch, nothing by which we can compare the later with the earlier sounds, and comprehend the extent of the change. The whole phenomenon produces a confused, unpleasant impression. The musical scale is as it were the divided rod, by which we measure progression in pitch, as rhythm measures progression in time. Hence
