page: 253

+ the analogy between the scale of tones and rhythm naturally occurred to musical theoreticians of ancient as well as modern times.

We consequently find the most complete agreement among all nations that use music at all, from the earliest to the latest times, as to the separation of certain determinate degrees of tone from the possible mass of continuous gradations of sound, all of which are audible, and these degrees form the scale in which the melody moves. But in selecting the particular degrees of pitch, deviations of national taste become immediately apparent. The number of scales used by different nations and at different times is by no means small.

Let us inquire, then, what motive there can be for selecting one tone rather than another in its neighbourhood for the step succeeding any given tone. We remember that in sounding two tones together such a relation was observed. We found that under such circumstances certain particular intervals, namely the ¶ consonances, were distinguished from all other intervals which were nearly the same, by the absence of beats. Now some of these intervals, the Octave, Fifth, and Fourth, are found in all the musical scales known.* Recent theoreticians that have been born and bred in the system of harmonic music, have consequently supposed that they could explain the origin of the scales, by the assumption that all melodies arise from thinking of a harmony to them, and that the scale itself, considered as a melody of the key, arose from resolving the fundamental chords of the key into their separate tones. This view is certainly correct for modern scales; at least these have been modified to suit the requirements of the harmony. But scales existed long before there was any knowledge or experience of harmony at all. And when we see historically what a long period of time musicians required to learn how to accompany a melody by harmonies, and how awkward their first attempts were, we cannot feel a doubt that ancient composers had no feeling at all for harmonic accompaniment, just as even at the present day many of the more ¶ gifted Orientals are opposed to our own harmonic music. We must also not forget that many popular melodies, of older times or foreign origin, scarcely admit of any harmonic accompaniment at all, without injury to their character.

The same remark applies to Rameau's assumption of an 'understood' fundamental bass in the construction of melodies or scales for a single voice. A modern composer would certainly imagine to himself at once the fundamental bass to the melody he invents. But how could that be the case with musicians who had never heard any harmonic music, and had no idea how to compose any? Granted that an artist's genius often unconsciously 'feels out' many relations, we should be imputing too much to it if we asserted that the artist could observe relations of tones which he had never or very rarely heard, and which were destined not to be discovered and employed till many centuries after his time.

It is clear that in the period of homophonic music, the scale could not have been constructed so as to suit the requirements of chordal connections ¶ unconsciously supplied. Yet a meaning may be assigned, in a somewhat altered form, to the views and hypotheses of musicians above mentioned, by supposing that the same physical and physiological relations of the tones, which become sensible when they are sounded together and determine the magnitude of the consonant intervals, might also have had an effect in the construction of the scale, although under somewhat different circumstances.

Let us begin with the Octave, in which the relationship to the fundamental tone is most remarkable. Let any melody be executed on any instrument which has a good musical quality of tone, such as a human voice; the hearer must have heard not only the primes of the compound tones, but also their upper Octaves, and, less strongly, the remaining upper partials. When, then, a higher voice afterwards executes the same melody an Octave higher, *we hear again a part of what we heard before*, namely the evenly numbered partial tones (p. 49d) of the former

Footnote: ⁎ [It will be seen in App. XX. sect. K. that the Fourth and Fifth are often materially inexact or designedly altered.—*Translator.*]
