page: 256

+ Every one chooses the natural major Thirds. In Chapter XVI. I shall describe an instrument which will enable any one to perform experiments of this kind.⁎

Under these circumstances another principle for determining the small intervals of the scale was resorted to during the infancy of music, and seems to be still employed among the less civilised nations. This principle, which has subsequently had to yield to that of tonal relationship, consists in an endeavour to distinguish equal intervals by ear, and thus make the differences of pitch perceptibly uniform.

This attempt has never prevailed over the feeling of tonal relationship for the division of the Fourth, at least in artistically developed music. But in the division of smaller intervals we shall find it applied as an auxiliary in many of the less usual divisions of the Greek tetrachord and in the scales of Oriental nations. But arbitrary divisions which are independent of tonal relationship, disappeared ¶ everywhere in exact proportion to the higher development of the musical art.

We will now inquire what kind of a scale we should obtain by pursuing to its consequences the natural relationship of the tones. *We shall consider musical tones to be related in the first degree which have two identical partial tones; and related in the second degree, when they are both related in the first degree to some third musical tone*. The louder the coincident in proportion to the non-coincident partials of compound tones related in the first degree, the *closer* is their relationship and the more easily will both singers and hearers feel the common character of both the tones. Hence it follows that the feeling for tonal relationship ought to differ with the qualities of tone: and I believe that this states a fact in nature, because flutes and the soft stops of organs, on which chords are somewhat colourless owing to an absence of upper partials and a consequent incomplete definition of dissonances, retain much of the same colourless character in melodies. This, I think, depends upon the fact, that, for such qualities of tone, the recognition of ¶ the natural intervals of the Thirds and Sixths, and perhaps even of the Fourths and Fifths, does not result from the immediate sensation of the hearer, but at most from his recollection. When he knows that on other instruments and in singing he has been able by immediate sensation to recognise the Thirds and Sixths as naturally related tones, he acknowledges them as well-known intervals even when executed by a flute or on the soft stops of an organ. But the mere recollection of an impression cannot possibly have the same freshness and power as the immediate sensation itself.

Since the closeness of relationship depends on the loudness of the coincident upper partial tones, and those having a higher ordinal number are usually weaker than those having a lower one, the relationship of two tones is generally weaker, the greater the ordinal number of the coincident partials. These ordinal numbers, as the reader will recollect from the theory of consonant intervals, also give the ratio of the vibrational numbers of the corresponding notes.

¶ In the following table, the first horizontal line contains the ordinal numbers of the partial tones of the tonic *c*, and the first vertical column those of the corresponding tone in the scale. Where the corresponding vertical columns and horizontal lines intersect, the name of the tone of the scale is given for which this coincidence holds. Only such notes are admitted as are distant from the tonic by less than an Octave. Below each degree of the scale are placed the two ordinal numbers of the coincident partials, which will serve as a scale for measuring the closeness of the relationship.

Footnote: ⁎ [Other experimental instruments will be described in App. XX. sect. F. The Harmonical gives only the just major Third 4 : 5. Its nearest approach to the Pythagorean 64 : 81, or 408 cents, is *B*♭ : *D₁* = 63 : 80, or 413 cents, not so harsh but quite near enough to shew its character. For the intervals used by violinists, see also App. XX. sect. G. arts. 6 and 7.—*Translator*.]
