page: 287

+ ing note does not lie in the larynx, but in the difficulty we feel in fixing the voice upon it by mere volition while another tone is already in our mind, to which we desire to pass, and which by its proximity conducted us to the leading note. It is not till we reach the final tone that we feel ourselves at home and at rest, and this final tone is sung without any strain on the will.

Proximity in the scale then gives a new point of connection between two tones, which is not merely active in the case of the leading note, just considered, but also, as already mentioned, in interpolating tones between two others in the chromatic and enharmonic modes. Intervals of pitch are in this respect analogous to measurements of distance. When we have the means of determining one point (the tonic) with great exactness and certainty, we are able by its means to determine other points with certainty, when they are at a known small distance from it (the interval of a Semitone), although perhaps we could not have determined them with ¶ so much certainty independently. Thus the astronomer employs his fundamental fixed stars, of which the positions have been determined with the greatest possible accuracy, for accurately determining the positions of other stars in their neighbourhood.

We may also remark that the interval of a Semitone plays a peculiar part as the introduction (*appoggiatura*) to another note. As an appoggiatura in a melody any tone can be used, even when not in its scale, provided it makes the interval of a Semitone with a note in the scale which it introduces; but a foreign tone which makes the interval of a whole Tone with that note in the scale, cannot be so used. The only justification of this use of the Semitone is certainly its existence as a well-known interval in the diatonic scale, which the voice can sing correctly and the ear can readily appreciate, even when the relations on which its magnitude depends are not clearly sensible in the passage where it is used. Hence also no arbitrarily chosen small interval can be thus employed. Although slight changes in the ¶ interval of the leading note may be introduced by practical musicians to give a stronger expression to its tendency towards the tonic, they must never go so far as to make those changes clearly felt.⁎

Hence the major Seventh in its character of leading note to the tonic acquires a new and closer relationship to it, unattainable by the minor Seventh. And in this way the note which is most distantly related to the tonic becomes peculiarly valuable in the scale. This circumstance has continually grown in importance in modern music, which aims at referring every tone to the tonic in the clearest possible manner; and hence, in ascending passages going to the tonic, a preference has been given to the major Seventh in all modern keys, even in those to which it did not properly belong. This transformation appears to have begun in Europe during the period of polyphonic music, but not in part songs only, for we find it also in the homophonic *Cantus firmus* of the Roman Catholic Church. It was blamed in an edict of Pope John XXII., in 1322, and in consequence the sharpening of the ¶ leading note was omitted in writing, but was supplied by the singers, a practice which Winterfeld believes to have been followed by Protestant musical composers even down to the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, because it had once come into use. And this makes it impossible to determine exactly what were the steps by which this change in the old tonal modes was effected.†

Even to the present day, according to A. v. Oettingen's report,‡ the Esthonians

Footnote+ a *diesis* (Semitone or Quartertone) between them? Is it because the *hypatē* is sung with a remission of effort, and at the same time it is easy to go upwards after getting oneself together for the effort (σύστασίς)? For the same reason it is easy to sing what leads up to any note, or the *paranētē*. For the will requires not only conscious thought (σύννοια) but an inclination (κατάστασις) which is perfectly familiar to the habit of mind (ἦθος).' The passage is very difficult, and there was clearly a connection in the writer's mind between διάστασις, σύστασις, and κατάστασις, which influenced his reasoning, but evaporates in translation.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ⁎ [See App. XX. sect G. art. 6.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † *Der evangelische Kirchengesang*. Leipzig, 1843, vol. i. introduction.

Footnote: ‡ *Das Harmoniesystem in dualer Entwickelung*. Dorpat und Leipzig, 1866, p. 113.
