page: 311

+ pianofortes and bowed instruments. *C* major and the adjacent *D*♭ major have different effects. That this difference is not caused by difference of absolute pitch, can be readily determined by comparing two different instruments tuned to different pitches. The *D*♭ of the one instrument may be as high as the *C* of the other, and yet on both the *C* major retains its brighter and stronger character, and the *D*♭ its soft and veiled harmonious effect. It is scarcely possible to think of any other reason than that the method of striking the short narrow black digitals of the piano must produce a somewhat different quality of tone, and that difference of character arises from the different distribution of the stronger and gentler quality of tone among the different degrees of the scale.⁎ The difference made in the tuning of those Fifths which the tuner keeps to the last, and on which are crowded the whole of the errors in tuning the other Fifths in the circle of Fifths, may possibly be regular, and may contribute to this effect, but of this I have no personal ¶ experience. [See App. XX. sect. G. art. 17.]

In bowed instruments the more powerful quality of tone in the open strings is conspicuous, and there are also probably differences in the quality of tone of strings which are stopped at short and long lengths, and these may alter the character of the key according to the degree of the scale on which they fall. This assumption is confirmed by the inquiries I have made of musicians respecting the mode in which they recognise keys under certain conditions. The inequality of intonation will add to this effect. The Fifths of the open strings are perfect Fifths. But it is impossible that all the other Fifths should be perfect if in playing in different keys each note has the same sound throughout, as appears at least to be the intention of elementary instruction on the violin. In this way the scales of the various keys will differ in intonation, and this will necessarily have a much more important influence on the character of the melody. [See App. XX. sect. G. arts. 6 and 7.]

The differences in quality of tone of different notes on wind instruments are ¶ still more striking.

If this view is correct, the character of the keys would be very different on different instruments, and I believe this to be the case. But it is a matter to be decided by a musician with delicate ears, who directs his attention to the points here raised.

It is, however, not impossible that by a peculiarity of the human ear, already touched upon in p. 116a, certain common features may enter into the character of keys, independent of the difference of musical instruments, and dependent solely on the absolute pitch of the tonic. Since *g''''* is a proper tone of the human ear, it sounds peculiarly shrill under ordinary circumstances, and somewhat of this shrillness is common to *f''''*♯ and *a''''*♭. To a somewhat less extent those musical tones of which *g''''* is an upper partial, as *g'''*, *c'''*, and *g''*, have a brighter and more piercing tone than their neighbours. It is possible, then, that it is not indifferent for pieces in *C* major to have its high Fifth *g''* and high tonic *c'''* thus distinguished in brightness from other tones, but these differences must in all cases be very slight, ¶ and for the present I must leave it undecided whether they have any weight at all.

All or some of these reasons, then, made it necessary for musicians to have free command over the pitch of the tonic, and hence even the later Greeks transposed their scales on to all degrees of the chromatic scale. For singers these transpositions offer no difficulties. They can begin with any required pitch, and find in their vocal instrument all such of the corresponding degrees as lie within the extreme limits of their voice. But the matter becomes much more difficult for musical instruments, especially for such as only possess tones of certain definite degrees of pitch. The difficulty is not entirely removed even on bowed instruments. It is true that these can produce every required degree of pitch; but players are unable to hit the pitch, as correctly as the ear desires, without acquiring a certain

Footnote: ⁎ [Mr. H. Keatley Moore, Mus. B., thinks the difference is due to the different leverage of the black digitals. Although in well constructed digitals the black have as much action at the further end as the white ones, they gain this by a quicker motion, each arm of the lever being shorter, and short keys differing altogether from long ones in the feeling produced in the hand. See also App. XX. sect. N. No. 6.—*Translator*.]
