page: 319

In the former series, Nos. 8 and 7, we had already *b*♭ minor and *e*♭ minor, which are a comma sharper than Nos. 13 and 14. Hence the series of minor keys is also completed by the fusion of their extremities through enharmonic interchange.

In most cases it is possible to transpose the music to be played on such instruments, so as to avoid the necessity of making these enharmonic interchanges, provided the modulations do not extend too far into different keys. But if it is not possible to avoid enharmonic interchanges, they must be introduced where two unrelated⁎ chords follow each other. This is best done between dissonant chords. Naturally this enharmonic change is always necessary when a piece of music modulates through the whole circle of Fifths—from *C* major to *B*♯ major, for example. But Hauptmann is certainly right when he characterises such circular modulation as unnatural artificiality, which could only be rendered possible by the ¶ imperfections of our modern system of temperament. Such a process must certainly destroy the hearer's feeling for the unity of the tonic. For although *B*♯ has very nearly the same pitch as *C*, or can be even improperly identified with it, the hearer can only restore his feeling for the former tonic by going back on the same path that he advanced. He cannot possibly retain his recollection of the absolute pitch of the first tonic *C* after his long modulations up to *B*♯, with such a degree of exactness as to be able to recognise that they are identical. For any fine artistic feeling *B*♯ must remain a tonic far removed from *C* on the dominant side; or, more probably, after such distant modulations, the hearer's whole feeling for tonality will have become confused, and it will then be perfectly indifferent to him in what key the piece ends. Generally speaking, an immoderate use of striking modulations is a suitable and easy instrument in the hands of modern composers, to make their pieces piquant and highly coloured. But a man cannot live upon spice, and the consequence of restless modulation is almost always the ¶ obliteration of artistic connection. It must not be forgotten that modulations should be only a means of giving prominence to the tonic by contrasting it with another and then returning into it, or of attaining isolated and peculiar effects of expression.

Since harmoniums with two manuals have usually two sets of vibrators for each manual of which the above system of tuning only uses one, I have had the two others (an 8-foot and a 16-foot stop) tuned in the usual equal temperament, which renders it very easy to compare the effect of this tuning with just intonation, as I have merely to pull out or push in a stop to make the difference.†

As regards musical effect, the difference between the just and the equally tempered, or the just and the Pythagorean intonations, is very remarkable. The justly intoned chords, in favourable positions, notwithstanding the rather piercing quality of the tone of the vibrators, possess a full and as it were saturated harmoniousness; they flow on, with a full stream, calm and smooth, without tremor ¶ or beat. Equally tempered or Pythagorean chords sound beside them rough, dull, trembling, restless. The difference is so marked that every one, whether he is musically cultivated or not, observes it at once. Chords of the dominant Seventh in just intonation have nearly the same degree of roughness as a common major chord of the same pitch in tempered intonation. The difference between natural and tempered intonation is greatest and most unpleasant in the higher Octaves of the scale, because here the false combinational tones of the tempered intonation are more observable, and the number of beats for equal differences of pitch becomes larger, and hence the roughness greater.

A second circumstance of essential importance is, that the differences of effect between major and minor chords, between different inversions and positions of

Footnote: ⁎ [That is, chords not having a common tone.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † Proposals for making the series of tones in this system of intonation more complete and at the same time greatly facilitating fingering by the use of a single manual, will be found in Appendix XVII.
