page: 326

Down to the seventeenth century singers were practised by the monochord, for which Zarlino in the middle of the sixteenth century reintroduced the correct natural intonation. Singers were then practised with a degree of care of which we have at present no conception. We can even now see from the Italian music of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries that they were calculated for most perfect intonation of the chords, and that their whole effect is destroyed as soon as this intonation is executed with insufficient precision.

But it is impossible not to acknowledge that at the present day few even of our opera singers are able to execute a little piece for several voices, when either totally unaccompanied, or at most accompanied by occasional chords (as, for example, the trio for the three masks, *Protegga il giusto cielo*, from the finale to the first act of Mozart's *Don Giovanni*), in a manner suited to give the hearer a full enjoyment of its perfect harmony. The chords almost always sound a little ¶ sharp or uncertain, so that they disturb a musical hearer. But where are our singers to learn just intonation and make their ears sensitive for perfect chords? They are from the first taught to sing to the equally-tempered pianoforte. If a major chord is struck as an accompaniment, they may sing a perfect consonance with its root, its Fifth, or its Third. This gives them about the fifth part of a Semitone for their voices to choose from without decidedly singing out of harmony, and even if they sing a little sharper than consonance with the sharp Third requires, or a little flatter than consonance with the flat Fifth requires, the harmoniousness of the chord will not be really much more damaged. The singer who practises to a tempered instrument has no principle at all for exactly and certainly determining the pitch of his voice.⁎

On the other hand, we often hear four musical amateurs who have practised much together, singing quartettes in perfectly just intonation. Indeed, my own experience leads me almost to affirm that quartettes are more frequently heard ¶ with just intonation when sung by young men who scarcely sing anything else, and often and regularly practise them, than when sung by instructed solo singers who are accustomed to the accompaniment of the pianoforte or the orchestra. But correct intonation in singing is so far above all others the first condition of beauty, that a song when sung in correct intonation even by a weak and unpractised voice, always sounds agreeable, whereas the richest and most practised voice offends the hearer when it sings false, or sharpens.

The case is the same as for bowed instruments. The instruction of our present singers by means of tempered instruments is unsatisfactory, but those who possess good musical talents are ultimately able by their own practice to strike out the right path for themselves, and overcome the error of their original instruction. They even succeed the earlier, perhaps, the sooner they quit school, although, of course, I do not mean to deny that fluency in singing, and the disuse of all kinds of bad ways can only be acquired in school.

¶ It is clearly not necessary to temper the instruments to which the singer practises. A single key suffices for these exercises, and that can be correctly tuned. We do not require to use the same piano for the teaching to sing and for playing sonatas. Of course it would be better to practise the singer to a justly-intoned organ or harmonium in which by means of two manuals all keys may be used.† Sustained tones are preferable as an accompaniment because the singer himself can immediately hear the beats between the instrument and his voice when he alters the pitch slightly. Draw his attention to these beats, and he will

Footnote+ monic scales is evident from the fact that music has existed for thousands of years, but harmonic scales have been in use only a few centuries, and are far from being even yet universal.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: ⁎ See Appendix XVIII.

Footnote: † [Voices differ so much that the same pitch for the tonic, that is the same key, would not suit. Still the Harmonical, or, for modulating purposes, the just harmonium or just concertina, may prove of service. Otherwise special instruments must be used, as Mr. Colin Brown's Voice-Harmonium. The Tonic Sol-faists teach without any accompaniment, not even that of the teacher's voice, but rapidly introduce part music.—*Translator*.]
