page: 330

+ we have distinguished the key of the Twelfth. In the usual school of musical theory, the meaning of the sound of the Octave is completely identified with that of its root, and is so treated. For us, on the other hand, the Octave is only the Tone most nearly and clearly related to the root, but its relationship is the same in kind as that of the Twelfth, or the next higher major Third (Seventeenth) to the root.

Now we have shewn in p. 273a that in the particular relation of the formation of scales, that is of the determination of the key, the higher Octave introduces the same series of directly related tones as does the lower, although in a somewhat different order of strength of relationship. Only throughout the formation of the lower Octave the tones of the major scale are favoured, and in the formation of the upper Octave those of the minor scale are preferred, but not to the exclusion of those of other scales.

¶ When we proceed beyond the limits of the first Octave, the relationships of tone depending on the six first partials give only the Tenth and Twelfth. The other steps of the scales have then to be filled up with tones related in the second degree, and, among these, the relations of the Octave must have the preference, and next those of the Twelfth. Hence in the second Octave we have necessarily a repetition of the scale of the first. By this means, in the formation of scales an equivalence of Octaves is established, without any necessity for assuming a specifically different relation of similarity between them and the root, as we had to do for the other consonances. In the formation of consonant intervals, the usual theory of music also considers the Octaves as equivalent to the roots. This is within certain limits correct, because the intervals usually considered as consonant remain consonant when one of their tones is transposed by an Octave, or at least produce intervals which lie on the limits of consonance. But here the usual rule of the school really gave a very imperfect expression of the facts, since, as we ¶ have shewn in Chapters X., XI., and XII., the degree and sequence of the consonance are really materially altered by these changes, and composers who have outgrown the rules of the school, have also very clearly had regard to these alterations.

CHAPTER XVII.

OF DISCORDS.

When voices move forward melodically in part music, the general rule is that they must form consonances with each other. For it is only as long as they are consonant, that there is an uninterrupted fusion of the corresponding auditory sensations. As soon as they are dissonant the individual parts mutually disturb each ¶ other, and each is a hindrance to the free motion of the other. To this esthetic reason must be added the purely physical consideration, that consonances cause an agreeable kind of gentle and uniform excitement to the ear which is distinguished by its greater variety from that produced by a single compound tone, whereas the sensation caused by intermittent dissonances is distressing and exhausting.

However, the rule that the various parts should make consonances with each other, is not without exception. The esthetic reason for this rule is not opposed to an occasional and temporary dissonance among the various parts, provided the motion of the parts is so contrived as to make the directions of the different voices perfectly easy to follow by the ear. Hence, in addition to the general laws of scale and key, to which the direction of every part is subject, there are particular rules for the progression of voices through discords. Again, dissonances cannot be entirely excluded because consonances are physically more agreeable. That which is physically agreeable is an important adjunct and support to esthetic beauty, but
