page: 331

+ it is certainly not identical with it. On the contrary, in all arts we frequently employ its opposite, that which is physically disagreeable, partly to bring the beauty of the first into relief, by contrast, and partly to gain a more powerful means for the expression of passion. Dissonances are used for similar purposes in music. They are partly means of contrast, to give prominence to the impression made by consonances, and partly means of expression, not merely for peculiar and isolated emotional disturbances, but generally to heighten the impression of musical progress and impetuosity, because when the ear has been distressed by dissonances it longs to return to the calm current of pure consonances. It is for this last reason that dissonances are prominently employed immediately before the conclusion of a piece, where they were regularly introduced even by the old masters of medieval polyphony. But to effect this object in using them, the motion of the parts must be so conducted that the hearer can feel throughout that the parts are ¶ pressing forward through the dissonance to a following consonance, and, although this may be delayed or frustrated, the anticipation of its approach is the only motive which justifies the existence of the dissonances.

Since any relation of pitch which cannot be expressed in small numbers is dissonant, and it is only the number of the consonances which is limited, the number of possible dissonances would be infinite were it not that the individual parts composing a discord in music must necessarily obey the laws of melodic motion, that is, must lie within the scale. Consonances have an independent right to exist. Our modern scales have been formed upon them. But dissonances are allowable only as transitions between consonances. They have no independent right of existence, and the parts composing them are consequently obliged to move within the degree of the scales, by the same laws that were established in favour of the consonances.

On proceeding to a detailed consideration of the separate dissonant intervals, it ¶ should be remembered that in theoretical music the normal position of discords is taken to be that which arranges their tones as a series of Thirds. This, for example, is the rule for the chord of the dominant Seventh, which consists of the root, its Third, Fifth, and Seventh. The Fifth forms a Third with the Third, and the Seventh forms a Third with the Fifth. Hence we can consider a Fifth to be composed of two, and a Seventh of three Thirds. By inverting Thirds we obtain Sixths, by inverting Fifths we obtain Fourths, and by inverting Sevenths we obtain Seconds. In this way all the intervals in the scale are reproduced.

Using the present modification of Hauptmann's notation, it is easily seen how different intervals of the same name must differ from each other in magnitude. We have only to remember that *c¹* is a comma higher than *c*, and *c₁* two commas lower than *c¹* and one comma lower than *c*, and that the comma is about the fifth part of a Semitone.

To obtain a general view of both the magnitude and roughness of the dissonant ¶ intervals, I have constructed fig. 61 (p. 333a), in which the curve of roughness is copied from fig. 60 A (p. 193b). The base line X Y signifies the interval of an Octave, upon which the individual consonant and dissonant intervals are set off from X, according to their magnitude on this scale.* On the lower side of the base are marked the twelve equal Semitones of the equally-tempered scale [each distant from the other by 100 cents], and on the upper side the consonant and dissonant intervals which occur in justly-intoned scales. The magnitude of the interval is always to be measured on the base line from X to the corresponding vertical line. The vertical lines corresponding to the consonances have been produced to the upper margins of the diagram, and those for the dissonances have been made shorter. The length of the verticals intercepted between the base and the curve of roughness shews the comparative degree of roughness probably possessed by the interval when played in a violin quality of tone.

Footnote: ⁎ [That is, assuming X Y to represent the cents in an Octave or 1200, the distance from X of any line shewing the interval, gives the cents in that interval.—*Translator*.]
