page: 359

+ In these connections the resolution is towards the dominant side. The transition is most decisive in the first, where the Seventh becomes the root. These resolutions are on the whole less usual, because we pass more easily and frequently from chords on the dominant side into chords of the Seventh of the direct system. In the chords of the reverted system these transitions occur more frequently, because their Sevenths may enter by ascent, and hence we avoid the sequences of Fifths, which greatly embarrass the transitions from a triad to a chord of the Seventh on its dominant side.

As to the transitions from one chord of the Seventh to another, or to a dissonant triad of the direct system which may be regarded as a mutilated chord of the Seventh, all these matters are sufficiently developed in the ordinary manuals of Thorough Bass, and offer no difficulties that would justify us in dwelling upon them here.

¶ On the other hand, we have to say a few words on certain rules respecting the progression of the individual parts in polyphonic compositions. Originally, as we have already remarked, all these parts were of equal importance, and had usually to repeat the same melodic figures in succession. The harmony was a secondary consideration, the melodic progression of the individual voices was the principal matter. Hence it was necessary to take care that each voice should stand out clear and distinct from all the others. The relation between the importance of harmony and melody has certainly altered essentially in modern music; the former has attained a much higher independent significance. But, after all, perfection of harmony must arise from the simultaneous performance of several voices, each of which has its own beautiful and clear melodic progression, and each of which therefore moves in a direction that the hearer has no difficulty in understanding.

On this rests the prohibition of *consecutive Fifths and Octaves*. The meaning of this prohibition has given rise to much disputation. The meaning of ¶ prohibiting consecutive Octaves has been made clear by musical practice. In polyphonic music two voices which lie one or two Octaves apart, are forbidden to move forward in such a way that after their next step they should be also one or two Octaves apart. But precisely in the same way, two voices in a polyphonic piece are forbidden to go on in unison for several notes, while for complete musical compositions it is not forbidden that two voices, or even all the voices, should proceed in Unisons or Octaves, for the purpose of strengthening the melodic progression. It is clear that the reason of this rule must lie in the limiting the wealth of the progression of parts by Unisons and Octaves. This is allowable when it is intentionally introduced for a whole melodic phrase, but it is not suited for a few notes in the course of a piece, where it can only give the impression of reducing the richness of the harmony by an unskilful accident. The accompaniment of a lower part by a voice singing an Octave higher, merely strengthens part of the compound tone of the lower voice, and hence where variety in the progression of ¶ parts is important, does not essentially differ from a Unison.

Now in this respect the nearest to an Octave are the Twelfth, and its lower octave, the Fifth. Hence, then, consecutive Twelfths and consecutive Fifths partake of the same imperfection as consecutive Octaves. But the case is somewhat worse. It is possible to accompany a whole melody in Octaves when desirable, without committing any error, but this cannot be done for Fifths and Twelfths without changing the key. It is impossible to proceed by a single diatonic step from the tonic as root with an accompaniment of Fifths, without departing from the key. In *C* major, we ascend from the Fifth *c* ± *g* to the Fifth *d* ± *a*, but *a* does not belong to the scale, which requires the deeper *a₁*; we descend to *b₁* ± *f₁*♯, and there is no *f₁*♯ in the scale at all. The other upward steps from *d* exclusive to *a₁* can of course be accompanied by perfect Fifths in the scale, as *e₁* ± *b₁*, *f* ± *c'*, *g* ± *d'*, *a₁* ± *e₁'*. It is therefore impossible to use the Twelfth consistently for increasing the richness of the tone. But again, when the intervals of a Twelfth or Fifth are continued for a few steps in melodic progression, they have simply the
