page: 362

+ difficulty in hitting, must naturally also appear an unusual and forced skip to the hearer. By *false relations* is meant the case when two tones in consecutive chords, which belong to different voices, form false Octaves or false Fifths. For example, if one voice in the first chord sings *b₁* and another voice in the next chord sings *b*♭, or the first has *c* and the second *c₂*♯, there are false Octave relations. False Fifth relations are forbidden for the extreme voices only. Thus in the first chord the bass has *b₁*, in the second the soprano has *f*, or conversely, where *b₁*...*f* is a false Fifth. The meaning of this rule is, probably, that the singer would find it difficult to hit the new tone which is not in the scale, if he had just heard the next nearest tone of the scale given by another singer. Similarly, when he has to take the false Fifth of a tone which is prominent in present harmony as lowest or highest. There is therefore a certain sense in the prohibition, but numerous exceptions have arisen, as the ear of modern musicians, ¶ singers and hearers, has become accustomed to bolder combinations and livelier progressions. All these rules were essentially intended for the old ecclesiastical music, where a quiet, gentle, well-contrived, and well-adjusted stream of sound was aimed at, without any intentional effort or disturbance of the smoothest equilibrium. Where music has to express effort and excitement, these rules become meaningless. Hidden Fifths and Octaves and even false relations of Fifths are found in abundance in the chorales of Sebastian Bach, who is otherwise so strict in his harmonies, but it must be admitted that the motion of his voices is much more powerfully expressed than in the old Italian ecclesiastical music.

¶ CHAPTER XIX.

ESTHETICAL RELATIONS.

Let us review the results of the preceding investigation.

Compound tones of a certain class are preferred for all kinds of music, melodic or harmonic; and are almost exclusively employed for the more delicate and artistic development of music: these are the compound tones which have harmonic upper partial tones, that is compound tones in which the higher partial tones have vibrational numbers which are integral multiples of the vibrational number of the lowest partial tone, or prime. For a good musical effect we require a certain moderate degree of force in the five or six lowest partial tones, and a low degree of force in the higher partial tones.

This class of compound tones with harmonic upper partials is objectively distinguished by including all sonorous motions which are generated by a mechanical ¶ process that continues to act uniformly, and which consequently produce a uniform and sustained sensation. In the first rank among them stand the compound tones of the human voice, man's first musical instrument in time and value. The compound tones of all wind and bowed instruments belong to this class.

Among the bodies which are made to emit tones by striking, some, as strings, have also harmonic upper partials, and these can be used for artistic music.

The greater number of the rest, as membranes, rods, plates, &c., have inharmonic upper partial tones, and only such of them as have not very strong secondary tones of this kind can be singly and occasionally employed in connection with musical instruments proper.

Although sonorous bodies excited by blows may continue to sound for some time their tones do not proceed with uniform force, but diminish more or less slowly and die away. Constant power over the intensity of tone, therefore, which is indispensable for expressive performance, can only be attained on instruments of the first kind, which can be maintained in a state of excitement, and which
