page: 363

+ produce only harmonic upper partial tones. On the other hand, bodies excited by blows have a peculiar value for clearly defining the rhythm.

A second reason for preferring compound tones with harmonic upper partials is subjective and conditioned by the construction of our ear. In the ear even every simple tone, if sufficiently intense, excites feeble sensations of harmonic upper partials, and each combination of several simple tones generates combinational tones, as I have explained at the end of Chap. VII. (p. 157d-159c). A single compound tone with irrational partials, when sounded with sufficient force, thus produces the sensation of dissonance, and simple tones acquire in the ear itself something of the nature of composition out of harmonic upper partial tones.

We are justified in assuming that historically all music was developed from song. Afterwards the power of producing similar melodic effects was attained by means of other instruments, which had a quality of tone compounded in a manner ¶ resembling that of the human voice. The reason why, even when constructive art was most advanced, the choice of musical instruments was necessarily limited to those which produced compound tones with harmonic upper partials, is clear from the above conditions.

This invariable and peculiar selection of instruments makes us perfectly certain that harmonic upper partials have from all time played an essential part in musical constructions, not merely for harmony, as the second part of this book shews, but also for melody.

Again, we can at any moment convince ourselves of the essential importance of upper partial tones to melody, by the absence of all expression in melodies executed with objectively simple tones, as, for example, those of wide-stopped organ pipes, for which the harmonic upper partials are formed only subjectively and weakly in the ear.

A necessity was always felt for music of all kinds to proceed by certain definite ¶ degrees of pitch; but the choice of these degrees was long unsettled. To distinguish small differences of pitch and intonate them with certainty, requires a greater amount of technical musical power and cultivation of ear, than when the intervals are larger. Hence among almost all uncivilised people we find the Semitones neglected, and only the larger intervals retained. For some of the more cultivated nations, as the Chinese and Gaels, a scale of this kind has become established.⁎

It might perhaps have seemed most simple to make all such degrees of pitch of equal amount, that is, equally well distinguishable by our sensations. Such a graduation is possible for all our sensations, as Fechner has shewn in his investigations on psychophysical laws. We find such graduations used for the divisions of musical rhythm, and the astronomers use them in reference to the intensity of light in determining stellar magnitudes. Even in the field of musical pitch, the modern equally tempered chromatic scale presents us with a similar graduation. But although in certain of the less usual Greek scales and in modern Oriental ¶ music, cases occur where some particular small intervals have been divided on the principle of equal graduations, yet there seems at no time or place to have been a system of music in which melodies constantly moved in equal degrees of pitch, but smaller and larger intervals have always been mixed in the musical scales in a way that must appear entirely arbitrary and irregular until the relationship of compound tones is taken into consideration.⁎

On the contrary, in all known musical systems the intervals of Octave and Fifth have been decisively emphasised. Their difference is the Fourth, and the difference between this and the Fifth, is the Pythagorean major Tone 8 : 9, by which (but not by the Fourth or Fifth) the Octave might be approximatively divided.

The sole remnants that I can find in modern music of the endeavour sometimes made in homophonic music to introduce degrees depending on equality of interval and not on relationship of tone, are the chromatic intercalated notes, and

Footnote: ⁎ [See, however, App. XX. sect. K.—*Translator.*]
