page: 365

We then saw that the requirements of harmonic music reacted in a peculiar manner on the construction of scales; that properly speaking only one of the old tonal modes (our major mode) could be retained unaltered,⁎ and that the rest after undergoing peculiar modifications were fused into our minor mode, which, though most like the ancient mode of the minor Third, can at one time resemble the mode of the minor Sixth, and at another time that of the minor Seventh, but does not perfectly correspond with any one of these.

This process of the development of the elements of our modern musical system lasted down to the middle of the last century. It was not until composers ventured to put a minor chord at the close of compositions written in the minor mode, that the musical feeling of European musicians and hearers can be admitted to have become perfectly and surely habituated to the new system. The minor chord was allowed to be a real, although obscured, chord of its tonic.

¶ Whether this admission of the minor chord expressed a feeling for another mode of unifying its three tones, as A. von Oettingen† has assumed,—relying on the fact that the three tones *c* - *e¹*♭ + *g* have a common upper partial *g''*,—must be left to future experience to decide, should it be found practicable to construct long and well-connected musical compositions in *Oettingen's phonic system* (this is the name which he gives to the minor system which he has theoretically developed, and which is essentially different from the historical minor mode). At any rate, the minor mode has historically developed itself as a compromise between different kinds of claims. Thus it is only major triads which can perfectly indicate the compound tone of the tonic; minor chords contain in their Third an element which, although nearly related to the tonic and its Fifth, does not thoroughly fuse with them, and hence in their final cadence they do not so thoroughly agree with the principle of tonality which had ruled the previous development of music. I have endeavoured to make it probable that the peculiar ¶ esthetic expression of the minor mode proceeded partly from this cause and partly from the heterogeneous combinational tones of the minor chord.

In the last part of my book, I have endeavoured to shew that the construction of scales and of harmonic tissue is a product of artistic invention, and by no means furnished by the natural formation or natural function of our ear, as it has been hitherto most generally asserted. Of course the laws of the natural function of our ear play a great and influential part in this result; these laws are, as it were, the building stones with which the edifice of our musical system has been

Footnote: ⁎ [But see supra, p. 274, note ⁎, scale 1.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † *The System of Harmony Dually Developed*, Dorpat and Leipzig, 1866. Herr v. Oettingen, as already observed, p. 308, note §, regards the minor chord as representing the harmonic undertones of its Fifth, and hence as standing in place of a part of its compound tone. He calls it the 'phonic' chord, as opposed to the 'tonic' major chord which stands in place of the upper partials of its root. He proceeds to deduce the formation of the minor system from the relations of the harmonic undertones in a manner precisely analogous to that by which I have deduced the major system from the relations of the upper partial tones. The tonal mode thus constructed is, however, in our language the mode of the minor Sixth (p. 274, note ⁎, scale 7), and the usual minor, a mixed mode. Latterly Dr. Hugo Riemann has given in his adhesion to this view, and in his lately published *Musical Syntaxis* has attempted to examine and establish the consequences of this system by examples from acknowledged composers. The application of this critical method appears to me very commendable, and to be the indispensable condition to advancing in the theory of composition. For the rest this author justifies (p. 54) the assertion I have made in the text by remarking: 'I am sorry to say that I am unable to adduce a single example from the whole of our musical literature, of the carrying out of (v. Oettingen's) pure minor mode harmony even in the simplest ¶ manner'. I have not been able to convince myself of the correctness of the fact adduced on p. xiii. and p. 6, that the undertones of a tone strongly struck on the piano sound when the corresponding dampers are raised. Perhaps the author has been deceived by the circumstance that with very resonant instruments (especially older ones) any strong shake, and therefore probably a violent blow on the digitals, will cause some one or several of the deeper strings to sound its note. [The undertones have always each an upper partial tone of the pitch of the note struck; the striking of this note must then sympathetically excite those upper partials of the undertones, and thus reinforce the prime of the note struck, just as striking the undertone sympathetically excites the higher tone itself. Can this have deceived Dr. Riemann?—*Translator.*]
