page: 374

+ factures,⁎ are easily made, and are useful for most purposes. But they reinforce all the partials of their fundamental tone at the same time. Their length is about the same as that of open organ pipes of the same pitch.

Resonators with a very narrow opening generally produce a much more considerable reinforcement of the tone, but then there must be a much more precise agreement between the pitch of the tone to be heard, and the proper tone of the resonator. It is just as in microscopes; the greater the magnifying power, the smaller the field of view. Reducing the size of the orifice also deepens the pitch of the resonator, and this gives an easy means of tuning it to any required pitch. But, for the above reason, the opening must not be reduced too much.

I should also mention Herr Koenig's plan of transferring vibrations of air to gas flames, and thus making them visible. Flames of this sort act well when connected with resonators, which are then best made of a spherical form, and should have two equal openings. To one of the openings the small gas-chamber is fixed. This chamber is a small flat box, about big enough to contain two ¶ shilling pieces laid flat on one another. It is cut out of a plate of wood, and closed on the side next the resonator with a very thin membrane of india-rubber, which, while it completely separates the air of the resonator from the gas in the chamber, allows the vibrations of the air to be freely communicated to the gas. Through the plate of wood two narrow pipes enter the chamber, one introducing the inflammable gas and the other conducting it away. This last ends in a very fine point at which the gas is lighted. The vibrations of the air in the resonator being communicated to the gas cause the flame to leap up and down. These oscillations of the flame are so rapid and regular that, when viewed directly, the flame appears to be quite steady. Its altered condition, however, betrays itself by an altered form and colour. Thus to recognise the beats of two tones reinforced by the resonator, it is enough to look at the flame and observe how it alternates between its forms of rest and of oscillation. But to see the separate oscillations the flames should be viewed in a rotating glass, in which the flame at rest appears to be drawn out into a long uniform ribbon, while the oscillating flame ¶ appears as a series of separate images of flames. It is thus possible to allow a large number of persons at once to determine whether or not a given tone is reinforced by the resonator.†

An extremely sensitive means of making the vibrations of the air in a resonator visible, is a flat film of glycerined soap and water which is placed over its opening.

[Mr. Bosanquet finding that for observations on beats all these resonators imperfectly plug one ear and leave the other open, has invented another kind, for which see App. XX. sect. L. art. 4, *b*.]

APPENDIX III.

¶ ON THE MOTION OF PLUCKED STRINGS.

(See p. 52b.)

Let \(x\) be the distance of a point in the string from one of its extremities, and \(l\) the length of the string, so that for one extremity \(x = 0\), and for the other \(x = l\). It is sufficient to investigate the case for which the motion takes place in one plane passing through the position of rest. Let \(y\) be the distance of the point \(x\) from its position of rest at the time \(t\). And let \(\mu\) be the weight of the unit

Footnote: ⁎ [There is a set in the Science Collections at South Kensington Museum.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [All these instruments and appliances can be obtained of Herr Koenig, by whom they were exhibited in London at the International Exhibition of 1872. Large drawings of the appearances of the flames just described, as viewed in the rotating mirror while two octaves were sung to the French vowels, were also exhibited. See Koenig's paper on the subject, with plates, in *Philosophical Magazine*, 1873, vol. xlv. pp. 1-18, 105-14.—On the principles of the use of revolving mirrors, first experimentally used by Sir C. Wheatstone, see Donkin's *Acoustics*, 1870, p. 142.—*Translator.*]
