page: 397

+ the upper open end immediately descends to supply this vacuum, and by so doing not only bends the flat exciting stream of air outwards, but also of course produces a rarefaction in the tube, which by extending from the mouth upwards necessarily weakens the force of the outward rush of wind. The external (not the exciting) air, taking advantage of this relaxation of force, enters the tube at the lip, causing a condensation in the lower part of the pipe, and the resulting wave of condensation before it has proceeded half-way meets the former wave of rarefaction, which continued to proceed from the further end of the tube, and thus forms a node. The node is consequently always nearer the mouth than the end of the pipe. The ratio of the length of the segment further from the mouth to that nearer to it varies from 4 : 3 to 7 : 6 according to the diameter or scale of the pipe and the strength of wind (see p. 91b, and footnotes †, ‡). In the meantime the exciting stream of air rights itself, passes over the vertical, bends inwards, and a small portion of it enters the pipe with the external air, to be cast out again by the returning wave of rarefaction, and by this time the exciting stream of air has been converted into a vibrating air-reed. That the first (but momentary) effect of the upward rush of the exciting stream of air is to abstract air from the pipe Mr. Hermann Smith considers to be demonstrated by inserting on the 'languid,' just within the mouth, some filaments of cotton fluff, or down, which, in larger pipes, are shot out with energy. He supposes the air-reed afterwards to abstract and admit air in constant succession, thus producing the necessary stimulus for the sound heard, which would on this theory depend, among other conditions, upon the force of blast, its inclination to the mouth, the size and form of the mouth and ears, the interposition of obstructions between the reed and outer air (as the shading bar of the *Gamba*), the capacity and length of the pipe, and whether a node has to be formed in the pipe in the mode explained for open pipes, or in the mode used for stopped pipes, which are acknowledged to speak more readily than the former. The external air of course passes continually, but intermittently, through the mouth of the pipe.

The law of vibration of the air-reed as stated by Mr. Hermann Smith, but unobserved and possibly unobtained by Herr Schneebeli, is: '*As its arcs of vibration are less, its speed is greater*,' or '*the times* (*of vibration*) *vary with the amplitude*,' being different from the usual law of a vibrating reed in which the time is independent of the amplitude of vibration. If by extraneous influence the pitch of the pipe is flattened, as by partly shading the mouth from the external air, Mr. Hermann Smith states that the path of the air-reed is lengthened, and conversely. When an organ pipe speaks the tones of the air-reed and pipe are distinct and may be separated or combined; and when a pipe is said 'to fly off to its Octave,' he says that the air-reed leaps back to its Octave speed, compelling the pipe to follow, and that this can be made visible. The natural pitch of the air-reed is also, he states, far higher than the pitch of the tones of the pipe.

Herr Sonreck's account, although thoroughly independent, agrees with Mr. Hermann Smith's so closely as regards the origin of the motion of air in the pipe that it seems unnecessary to cite it. He calls the blade of air merely the *Anblasestrom*, i.e., 'blow-current' or 'blast'.

But so far as I have hitherto found, the first person who drew attention to the mode in which flue pipes were made to speak, was M. Aristide Cavaillé-Coll, the celebrated French organ-builder, who in a paper presented to the French Academy of Sciences on February 24, ¶ 1840 (which was never printed, owing apparently to the death of M. Savart, one of the referees), 'demonstrated,' as he states in his paper printed in the *Comptes Rendus* for 1860 (even then anterior to all the other writers), vol. l. p. 176, 'more clearly than had hitherto been done, the real function of the originator of the sound in the mouth of flue pipes, which originator he assimilated to a free aerial reed (*anche libre aérienne*)'. He also investigated the mode of blowing the flute, by the mouth or a mouthpiece. And lastly he treated of the analogy between 'the transversal vibrations of vibrating laminæ of air, and solid vibrating laminæ,' which he supposed to be governed by the same laws, and from this examination he deduced 'positive data for determining the height of mouths of flue pipes ¶ in relation to their intonation and the elastic force of air which excites them'. He informs me that he intends to publish this paper.

In conclusion, it should be observed that this blade or flat current of air acts like a metal reed only so far as it oscillates backwards and forwards, and not in other respects. It does not shut off and open out a stream of air alternately. It is moved inwards by the outward air, and outwards by the inclosed air, whereas the metal reed is moved only one way by the current of air, and the other way by its own elasticity. There is therefore simply an analogy and not a substantive similarity, so that the terms aero-plastic reed, air-reed, free aerial reed, suggesting a different operation to what actually ensues, might be disused with advantage. The action seems really to be one of alternate rarefaction and ¶ condensation. But there are numerous little points which require very careful study—the shape of the upper lip; straight (as usual) or arched (as in Renatus Harris's flue pipes), the height of the opening of the mouth, the exact direction of the blade of air in relation to that of the upper lip, the presence and shape of the ears, and the general arts of the 'voicer' whereby he makes a pipe 'speak' satisfactorily. All of these matters influence both pitch and quality of tone, and though they are daily practised, their theory is as good as unknown.

For observations on the action of reeds see App. XX. sect. N. No. 8.]
