page: 399

(one foot long), and passed a thin plated copper wire, such as is used for spinning over with silken threads, backwards and forwards (90 times) between the teeth of these combs. By this means a great length (90 feet) of this wire was brought well insulated into a comparatively small space, in such a way as not to produce any sensible secondary current. For when on breaking the primary current a secondary current would be formed in the wire, this would have a direction in the circuit formed by the electro-magnets and the thin wire, opposite to the secondary current in the electro-magnets, and the latter would be entirely or partly prevented from discharging itself through the thin wire.

For moving the forks I used two or three cells of a Grove's battery. The electro-magnets were placed in two rows beside one another. The whole arrangement is shewn in a diagram in fig. 64, below. The figures 1 to 8 shew the resonant chambers of the tuning forks; the dotted lines which lead to m₁ and m₈ are the threads which remove the cover from the opening of the resonance ¶ chambers; a₁ to a₈ are the electro-magnets which set in motion the tuning-forks

[Figure 64]

+ ¶ ¶ between their legs; b is the interrupting fork, and f its own electro-magnet. The relative position of the two last has been somewhat changed in order to make the connection of the direction of the currents more intelligible. The cells of the galvanic battery are marked e₁ and e₂; the great resistance-wire dd; the condenser c, but its plates which are rolled in a spiral are seen only in section.

The electric current passes from e₂, through all the electro-magnets in order, up to the handle of the interrupting fork g. It is sometimes more advantageous to arrange this part of the conduction so that it should be separated into two parallel branches, and that the three highest forks, which are the most difficult to set in motion, should be inserted into one branch, and the five lower forks into the other, thus allowing a stronger stream to pass through the former than the latter.

The remainder of the conduction from g to the second pole of the battery e₁ contains the interrupting apparatus, which is here so arranged that each vibration of the fork makes the current twice; once when the upper prong dips into the cup of mercury h, and once when the lower prong dips into the cup i. When the conduction is closed at h, it passes from g through the fork to h, and then
