page: 427

+ twelve years of age, that performed singing exercises in a manner that astonished me ('mich in Erstaunen setzten') by the certainty with which they read the notes, and by the accuracy of their intonation.⁎ Every year the London schools of Sol-faists are accustomed to give a concert of two or three thousand children's voices in the Crystal Palace at Sydenham, which, I have been assured by persons who understand music, makes the best impression on the audience by the harmoniousness and exactness of its execution.†

The Tonic Sol-faists, then, sing by natural, and not by tempered intervals. When their choirs are accompanied by a tempered organ, there are marked differences and disturbances, whereas they are in perfect unison with General Thompson's Enharmonic Organ. Many expressions used are very characteristic. A young girl had to sing a solo in *F* minor, and took it home to study it at her pianoforte. When she returned she said that the *A*♭ and *D*♭ on her piano were all wrong. These are the Third and Sixth of the key in which the deviation of tempered from just intonation is most marked. Another girl was so charmed with ¶ the Enharmonic Organ that she remained practising for three hours in succession, declaring that it was pleasant to be able to play *real notes*. Generally in a large number of cases, young people who have learned to sing by the Sol-fa method, find out by themselves, without any instruction, how to use the complicated manuals of the Enharmonic Organ, and always select the proper intervals.

Singers find that it is easier to sing to the accompaniment of this organ, and also that they do not hear the instrument while they are singing, because it is in perfect harmony with their voice and makes no beats.

Footnote: ⁎ [On 20 April 1864, after we had heard Gen. Perronet Thompson's organ, I had the pleasure of taking Prof. Helmholtz to hear the singing of the children in the British and Foreign School here alluded to, which was situate behind the chapel in Tottenham Court Road. The master of the school, Mr. Gardiner, was a very good Tonic Sol-fa teacher, but the children were those who ordinarily attended (about forty were then present) and had received only ordinary instruction. After hearing them sing a few tunes in parts, from the Tonic Sol-fa notation, Prof. Helmholtz himself 'pointed' out an air on the 'modulator' or scale drawn out large on a chart, from which the pupils learn to sing (that is, by means of a pointer shewed the Tonic Sol-fa names of the tones the children were to sing), and the class followed in unison at sight. Then, on the suggestion of Mr. Gardiner, the class was divided into two sections, and Prof. Helmholtz pointed a piece in two parts, one with each hand, while the class took them at sight. Of course the piece was simple, but the dissonance of a Semitone was purposely introduced in one place between the parts, and Prof. Helmholtz was delighted at the firmness and correctness with which the children took it. I recollect his saying to me afterwards, 'We could not do that in Germany!' meaning, as he subsequently explained, that there was no German system of teaching to sing which could produce such results on such materials. The following is an extract of a letter from Prof. Helmholtz to Mr. Curwen printed on p. 159 of the *Memorials*, dated 21 April 1864, the day after his visit to the class: 'We were really surprised by the readiness and surety [certainty] with which the children succeeded in reading music that they did not know before, and in following a series of notes which were indicated to them on their modulatory board [modulator]. I think that what I saw shewed the complete success of your system, and I was peculiarly interested by it, because during my researches in musical acoustics I came from theoretica reasons to the conviction that this was the natural way of learning music, but I did not know that it had been carried out in England with such beautiful results.'—*Translator*.]
Footnote: † [I am informed by the Secretary of the Tonic Sol-fa College that the first Crystal Palace Festival of the Tonic Sol-faists was ¶ held on 2 September 1857, with a choir of about 3200 children and 300 adults. These concerts have been continued year by year to the present time. For many years two concerts were given, one juvenile and one adult, the singers varying in number from 3500 to 5000. Some of these performances were so popular that a repetition was given a few weeks later. The plan of testing the great choirs in sight singing was first tried at the Festival on 14 August 1867, at which I was present, when an anthem specially written for the occasion by Mr. (now Sir) G. A. Macfarren (Professor of Music at the Universityof Cambridge, and Principal of the Royal Academy of Music) was sung by a choir of 4500 voices. Of the performance of this anthem Mr. Macfarren wrote a short time after in the *Cornhill Magazine* thus: ¶ 'A piece of music which had been composed for the occasion, and had not until then been seen by human eyes save those of the writer and the printers, was handed forth to the members of the chorus there present, and then, before an audience furnished at the same time with copies to test the accuracy of the performance, forty-five hundred singers sang it at first sight in a manner to fulfil the highest requirements of the severest judges.' Mr. Macfarren was himself present, and publicly expressed his own satisfaction.
Sight-singing tests have been given almost every year since, and always with the same success. They have become a common part of public concerts intended as 'demonstrations,' and are regarded by Tonic Sol-faists as no more extraordinary than reading the words at sight would be considered.—*Translator*.]
