page: 428

I have myself observed, that singers accustomed to a pianoforte accompaniment, when they sang a simple melody to my justly intoned harmonium, sang natural Thirds and Sixths, not tempered, nor yet Pythagorean. I accompanied the commencement of the melody, and then paused while the singer took the Third or Sixth of the key. After he had struck it, I touched on the instrument the natural, or the Pythagorean, or the tempered interval. The first was always in unison with the singer, the others gave shrill beats.

After this experience, I think that no doubt can remain, if ever any doubt existed, that *the intervals which have been theoretically determined in the preceding pages, and there called natural, are really natural for uncorrupted ears; that moreover the deviations of tempered intonation are really perceptible and unpleasant to uncorrupted ears; and lastly that, notwithstanding the delicate distinctions in particular intervals, correct singing by natural intervals is much easier than singing in tempered intonations*. The complicated calculation of intervals which the natural scale necessitates, and which undoubtedly much increases the ¶ manual difficulty of performance on instruments with fixed tones, does not exist for either singer or violinist, if the latter only lets himself be guided by his ear. For in the natural progression of correctly modulated music they have always and only to proceed by the intervals of the natural diatonic scale. It is only the theoretician who finds the calculation complicated, when at the end of numerous such progressions he sums up the result, and compares it with the starting-point.

That the natural system can be carried out by singers, is proved by the English Tonic Sol-faists. That it can also be carried out on bowed instruments, and is really carried out by distinguished players, I have no doubt at all after the experiments of Delezenne already mentioned (p. 325, note ⁎), and what I myself heard when I was listening to the violinist who accompanied the Enharmonic Organ. Among the other orchestral instruments, the brass instruments naturally play in just intonation, and can only be forced to the tempered system by being blown out of tune.⁎ The wooden instruments could have their tones slightly changed so as ¶ to bring them into tune with the rest. Hence I do not think that the difficulties of the natural system are invincible. On the contrary, I think that many of our best musical performances owe their beauty to an unconscious introduction of the natural system, and that we should oftener enjoy their charms if that system were taught pedagogically, and made the foundation of all instruction in music, in place of the tempered intonation which endeavours to prevent the human voice and bowed instruments from developing their full harmoniousness, for the sake of not interfering with the convenience of performers on the pianoforte and the organ.

Musicians have contested, in a very dogmatic manner, the correctness of the propositions here advanced. I do not doubt for a moment that many of these antagonists of mine really perform very good music, because their ear forces them to play better than they intended, better than would really be the case if they actually carried out the regulations of the school, and played exactly in Pythagorean or tempered intonation. On the other hand, it is generally possible to convince oneself from their very writings, that these writers have never taken the trouble to make a methodical comparison of just and tempered intonation. I can ¶ only once more invite them to hear, before uttering judgments, founded on an imperfect school-theory, concerning matters which are not within their own personal experience. Those who have no time for such observations, should at any rate glance over the literature of the period during which equal temperament was introduced. When the organ took the lead among musical instruments it was not yet tempered. And the pianoforte is doubtless a very useful instrument for making the acquaintance of musical literature, or for domestic amusement, or for accompanying singers. But for artistic purposes its importance is not such as to require its mechanism to be made the basis of the whole system of music.†

Footnote: ⁎ [On this sentence Mr. Blaikley observes (*Proceedings of the Musical Association*, vol. iv. p. 56): 'It seemed to me worth attention that this must be taken as being particularly and not generally true: that is, that though the ideal brass instrument has such characteristics, this ideal is not necessarily attained to in practice.' See pp. 99 and 100.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † [This last paragraph, from 'Musicians have contested' to 'the whole system of music,' is an addition to the 4th German edition. The remainder of this Appendix, which concludes the work in the 3rd German edition, was occupied with a description of the musical notation which I employed in my footnotes and Appendix to the 1st English edition; but
