page: 444

+ lower fork) with that fork, is the pitch of the lowest fork. Hence the pitch of all the forks is known. The extra high forks are for verifying by the Octaves of several low forks, and for the purpose of subsequently measuring. From such a tonometer any other can be made, and the value of each fork at another temperature calculated.

Scheibler made a 52-fork tonometer with infinite trouble, on another plan, described in his book and counted it with marvellous accuracy. This tonometer, which I have made many efforts to find, has absolutely disappeared, and his family knows nothing of it. But he left behind him a 56-fork tonometer, believed to proceed from 220 to 440 vibrations, by steps of 4 vibrations, and through the kindness of Herr Amels, an old friend of ¶ the Scheibler family, who obtained it from Scheibler's grandson, I had the use of it for a year. I had to count it as well as I could, just as if it had been a set of forks such as I have described, and I found it was not what was thought, but that only 32 sets of beats were 4 in a second, and the other 23 sets varied from 38 to 42 in 10 seconds. I found also that the extremes were probably of the same pitch as in the original 52-fork tonometer. After then counting it as well as I could, and obtaining 219·27 vibrations in place of 219·67, at 69° F., I distributed the error of 4 beats in 10 seconds, as 2 in 100 seconds, among 20 of the 23 sets which were not exactly 4 beats in 10 seconds, leaving the first 3 sets, which I had repeatedly counted and felt sure of, unaltered. Then I reduced all the values from 69° to 59° F. Finally ¶ to verify my result I measured by beats with Scheibler's forks as thus determined; first 5 large forks of various pitches, which I had had made for me in Paris, and then 4 forks of Koenig's belonging to Professor McLeod. Professor McLeod himself kindly measured all of them, also, by his machine, and Professor Mayer also obligingly measured the first 5 forks by his electrographic method, both with the greatest care and precaution. The three sets of measurements agreed to less than 1 beat in 10 seconds, and more often less than 1 beat in 20 seconds, when reduced to the same temperature. Thus the value of the tonometrical measurement by beats only, and the possibility of counting a tonometer sufficiently, was fully established. Koenig's measurements of his own forks reduced to 59° F., and of the actual ¶ Diapason Normal at the Conservatoire, Paris, intended to be used at the same temperature, also agree with mine within less than the same limits.

The pitch of all sufficiently sustained tones can thus be determined mechanically. We find two forks, whose pitch is known, with each of which the new tone beats more slowly than the forks beat with each other, and we verify the count, by seeing that the sum of the beats with both forks is the number of beats of the forks with one another. The pitch number is then that of the lower fork increased by the number of beats made with it in a second, and that of the upper fork diminished by the number of beats made with it in a second. The following notes are the result of much experience.

Tuning-forks are comparatively simple in quality of tone but always possess an audible second partial or Octave, and sometimes higher partials still, capable of being so reinforced by resonance jars properly tuned to them, that beats can be separately obtained from them and counted. This, as we have seen, is a matter of great importance in the construction of a tuning-fork tonometer. When the tone is very compound, as in the case of bass reeds (especially those of Appunn's tonometer, furnished with a bellows giving, when properly managed, a perfectly steady blast for an indefinite length of time), beats can be obtained and counted from the 20th to the 30th and even the 40th partial, without any reinforcement by a resonance jar. (See p. 176d'.)

Taking tuning-forks first, I find it advantageous to hold the beating forks over one or two resonance jars, tuned, by pouring in water, to the pitch of the partial to be observed, whether it be the prime of both or the prime of one and the second partial (or Octave) of the other. There may be small differences, but I have not found any difference appreciable by my methods of observation in the number of beats in a second, whether the resonance jar is the same or different for the two forks, and whether it is exactly or very indifferently tuned to each fork, but a tolerably accurate tuning much improves the tone and length of the beat. In that case the resonance jar practically quenches all other partial tones, and the beats are distinctly heard as loudnesses separated by silences. If no jar is used, the other partials are heard. In the case of the Octave, the low prime becomes a drone and fills up the silences. In the case of beating primes, the Octaves, which are beating twice as fast, tend to confuse the ear. Sometimes the second partial of a fork is so much stronger than the prime, that when the fork is applied to a sounding-board, only the Octave is heard, which is often inconvenient to the fork tuner. This is entirely avoided by the resonance jar. Beats being a case of interference, the amplitude of the beating partials should be equalised as much as possible. With two forks of very different size and power, it is easy to regulate the amplitude by holding the louder fork further from the jar. Otherwise the beats become blurred and indistinct. For powerful reeds or organ pipes, beating with forks, it is best to go to a considerable distance from the reed or pipe and hold the fork close to the ear or over a jar. I find 30 or 40 feet necessary for organs; in Durham Cathedral, where the pressure of wind was strong and my forks weak, I found 60 or 70 feet distance much better. As I was not able latterly to go to a distance from Appunn's reed tonometer, having to pump it myself, I found it impossible to count the primes of the upper reeds by the Octaves of my forks, which were completely drowned by the reeds.

I find beats of all kinds most easy to count when about 3 or 4 in a second. They can be counted well from 2 to 5 in a second. Above 5 they are too rapid for accuracy; below 2, and certainly below 1, they are too slow, so that it is extremely difficult to tell from what part of the swell of sound the beat should be reckoned. Partly from this reason,
