page: 445

+ perhaps, I have found great variety in counting successive sets of such slow beats. I never use beats of less than one in a second, if I can avoid it. When the beats are slow it is difficult to discover by ear which of the two beating tones is the sharper; and even fine ears are often deceived. It is easy to discover, however, by putting one of the forks under the arm for a minute. This heats and flattens it by 2 or 3 beats in 10 seconds. Hence if the beats with the heated fork are slower, that fork was sharper, because it has been brought nearer the other; if faster, it was flatter and has been brought further away. Count for 10, 20, or 40 seconds, according to the fork. Up to 20 or 30 beats in 10 seconds it is easy to count in ones, but from 30 to 50 it is best to count in twos, as one-ee, two-ee, &c., beginning with *one*, and hence throwing off one at the end. When counting for 20 seconds I always count in twos, and for 40 seconds in fours, as one-ee-ah-tee, two-ee-ah-tee, &c., because I have to divide the result by 20 or 40; and this division is avoided by the count itself. As my counting was never for more than 40 seconds, small errors of the clock or pendulum were imperceptible. I generally used a marine or pocket chronometer when making the principal count for 40 seconds, but for merely determining pitch from a fork of known pitch, 10 seconds of time, and any ordinary seconds watch suffice. For Prof. McLeod's observations, which lasted 5 minutes or more, extreme accuracy in rating an astronomical clock was necessary. Suppose a watch to gain 5 minutes or 300 seconds in 24 mean hours, which is an extreme case, so that 86,700 watch seconds = 86,400 mean seconds, then 10 watch seconds = 9·9654 mean seconds, and 40 watch seconds = 39·8616 mean seconds. Hence no perceptible error will arise from identifying watch and mean seconds. But 300 watch seconds = 298·962 mean seconds, and the error would have to be allowed for. Scheibler used a metronome corrected daily by an astronomical clock, and graduated. On this a movable weight enabled him to make one swing of the pendulum take place in the same time as 4 beats were heard, and then from the graduation he read off the rate. But counting by the seconds hand of a watch is much easier and altogether more convenient, while it is probably as accurate. Owing to difficulties in beginning and ending the count, I find the possible error per second to be 2 divided by the number of seconds through which the count extends; and that it is best to take a mean of 5 to 10 counts for each set of beats. As most persons, including myself, begin to count from *one* and not from *nought*, it must be remembered that the last number uttered on counting the last beat, is one in excess of the real number of beats. Thus if in counting for 10 seconds we end with 37, the number of beats was 36 in 10 seconds. If in counting by twos, one-ee, two-ee, &c., the last was 19, then we have counted only 18 pairs, and hence there were also 36 beats in 10 seconds. If we end with 19-ee, there were 18½ pairs or 37 beats in a second. It is best to count the same set of beats in one, twos and fours to realise these corrections, which are extremely important.

Temperature must never be neglected. Forks should not be touched with the unprotected hand; they otherwise easily flatten by 2 beats in 10 seconds. Interpose folds of paper. I use two folds of brown paper stitched between two pieces of wash-leather. Large forks are generally on resonance boxes and need not be touched, otherwise the same precautions should be used, as they are very sensitive, and retain the heat longer than small forks. Scheibler's forks are fitted with wooden handles. In tuning, the file heats and flattens; the result of tuning, therefore, can seldom be known for a day or two, when the forks have cooled and 'settled,' as they will be sure to 'jump up'. I find it best to leave off filing when the forks are two or three tenths of a vibration too flat. In sharpening there is, therefore, great danger of doing too ¶ much, as the fork remains apparently at the same pitch, the flattening by heat balancing the sharpening by filing. Hence all copies should be compared some days after, by means of a third fork about four vibrations flatter or sharper than each, to avoid the slow beats of approximate unisons. The filing also seems to interfere with the molecular arrangement of the forks.

The thermometer should be always consulted when beats are taken. But if the beats are between two forks, of which the pitch of one at a given temperature is known, and both forks may be assumed to be altered in the same ratio by heat, then the temperature need not be observed; but the unknown fork may be presumed to be as many vibrations sharper (or flatter) than the measured fork at the temperature at which the latter was ¶ measured, as beats in a second were observed to take place. This is because the alteration is very small, and would be quite inappreciable for the few vibrations between them. But for tonometrical purposes an allowance must be made.

When forks are counted without a resonance jar, they should not be applied to a sounding-board, or held one to one ear and one to the other, but should both be held about six inches from the same ear, and their strengths should be equalised by holding the weaker fork closer to the ear than the stronger.

When the forks are screwed on and off a sounding-board or resonance box, there is great danger of wrenching the prongs, unless they are held below the bend, but I have ¶ constantly seen this precaution neglected. A wrench immediately affects the pitch and duration of sound of a fork, and renders it comparatively worthless. Such cases have come within my observation. To prevent wrenching when filing forks, only one prong should be inserted in the vice. And for evenness file the same quantity off the inside of each prong, counting the number of strokes with the file, near the tips for sharpening, and near (not at) the bend for flattening.

The next enemy to be guarded against is rust. Forks should be kept dry, and occasionally oiled with gun-lock oil. Rust towards the tip affects the fork much less than rust at the bend. My observations and experiments shew that errors from rust can scarcely exceed a flattening of 1 vibration in 250, and are generally very much less. But as the amount
