page: 466

+ 17th harmonic of the dominant, and hence the line sloping down to the right indicates that it is to be 7 cents flatter. The sloping line, therefore, indicates different degrees of flattening according as it is applied to the Fourth or minor Sixth of the root expressed by the duodenal. If, therefore, we wished to have the chord *e₁'* 316 *g'* 267 *⁷b'*♭ 336 *¹⁷d¹''*♭ we must write the duodenal as *F* to get the right intonation, as in chord 19. Since the 17th harmonic of the dominant is so nearly the minor Sixth of the root, and the chord is dissonant, much of the effect would be preserved if this minor Sixth were used in place of the 17th harmonic provided only the 7th harmonic of the dominant were retained.

Equal temperament of course not recognising the difference of a comma, so far as sound is concerned, retains the same tempered duodene throughout, although there is a difference in writing it, as would be shewn in the Duodenarium (p. 463) if the indices were omitted. Such an omission reduces the Duodenarium to a table of modulations in any temperament which neglects the comma.

SECTION F.

¶ EXPERIMENTAL INSTRUMENTS FOR EXHIBITING THE EFFECTS OF JUST INTONATION.

(See notes pp. 6, 17, 217, 218, 222, 256, 329, and 346.)

	No. | No.
	Introduction, p. 466. | 5. Rev. H. Liston's Organ, p. 473.
	1. The Harmonical, p. 466. | 6. General Thompson's Organ, p. 473.
	2. The Just Harmonium, p. 470. | 7. Mr. H. W. Poole's Organ, p. 474.
	3. The Just English Concertina, p. 470. | 8. Mr. Bosanquet's Generalised Fingerboard and Harmonium, p. 479.
	4. Mr. Colin Brown's Voice Harmonium, p. 470. | 9. Mr. Paul White's Harmon, p. 481.

^^Introduction.^^

At the present day ordinary musical instruments are intended to be tuned in accordance with equal temperament (see pp. 313a, 432b, art. 10; 436b, art. 22, i.; 437c, art. 25; sect. G. arts. 11 and following). The English concertina, which has 14 keys for the Octave, is still usually tuned in the older Meantone temperament ¶ (p. 433d, art. 16, and sect. G. art. 18). But neither system gives the only intervals which will allow chords in the middle part of the scale to be played without giving rise to beats. In order, then, that the ear may learn what is the meaning of 'just intonation,' it is necessary for it to have special instruments, or at least instruments specially tuned. Prof. Helmholtz has for this purpose invented a tuning for an harmonium with two rows of ordinary keys, explained on pp. 316b to 320a. Others, as Colin Brown, Liston, Poole, and Perronet Thompson, have invented harmoniums or organs with novel fingerboards; and others, as Bosanquet and J. P. White, have invented means for using the division of the Octave into 53 parts, which, as is seen in sect. E., p. 463, is practically almost identical with just intonation. A brief account of these instruments (with the exception of Prof. Helmholtz's, which is fully described in the text) will here be given. But none of them meet the wants of the student. They are all too expensive and require so much special education to use, that (with the exception of Mr. Colin Brown's) they have remained musical curiosities, some of them entirely unique. But there are two ¶ instruments which are cheap and which can be tuned so as to illustrate almost every point of theory, though they of course remain experimental instruments intended only to shew the nature of musical intervals, chords, and scales, and not to play pieces of music except especially composed exercises. These two I shall take first. They are a specially tuned harmonium and English concertina. Reed instruments are far the best for experiments, because they give sustained notes possessing a large number of powerful upper partial tones, so that any deviations from just intonation are extremely conspicuous, painfully evident indeed on any harmonium tuned in equal temperament.

1. ^^The Harmonical.^^

The scale of the Harmonical and the number of vibrations for every note in the first four octaves will be found on p. 17, note. The instrument has been constantly referred to in the Translator's notes to the preceding pages. It is an harmonium with one row of vibrators extending over five octaves. The tuning of the fifth octave will be explained further on.
