page: 479

+ with a note one comma flatter, giving the major Thirds, and fitting into the left-hand nick of the next lower white digital. Whatever white digital the player begins with, the fingering is the same, and for major scales much like that for the key of *A* on the usual manual. For the Seventh and Ninth of the Dichordal system separate digitals must be touched. Mr. Poole can arrange for a minor on the same tonic, but thinks it an extravagance. 'The diatonic scales with the broad ivory keys (larger than on the common board) are of first importance; next the raised ebony digitals for Thirds. The Sevenths are well provided for and convenient. The leading notes to major Thirds are introduced as diatonic Semitones below these black notes, and serve them as the black ones do the white. ¶ On my model an equal space of two measures (1/4 × 9/10 inch each) was allotted.' They fill up the space on the left-hand side of the black Thirds, and are of the shape of the white digitals in fig. 69, only very much narrower, half the thin part being separated, and for example given to *A₂*♯, leading note to *B₁*, while the rest, including the wide part, is given to *⁷A*♭, harmonic Seventh to *B*♭. 'My keyboard admits of equal facility in execution and in taking the chords, with the common one of 12. I think its first utility will be for teaching singing, accompanying violin players and students of harmony. For this I recommend the simple form with less outlay of money.' This form of Mr. Poole's keyboard is therefore equivalent to Mr. Colin Brown's (No. 4) with the addition of the natural Seventh.

8. Mr. Bosanquet's Generalised Fingerboard and Harmonium.

Mr. R. H. M. Bosanquet's harmonium is partly described in the text, p. 328c, and its keyboard is figured and briefly explained in App. XIX., p. 429. In App. XX. sect. A. art. 27, the nature of Mr. Bosanquet's cycle of 53 and his notation, and the value of every one of his notes are explained. In App. XX. sect. E. art. 18, there is an elaborate comparison of this cycle with just intonation giving the number and pitch of every note, and, *ibid.* art. 25, it is shewn how such a cycle might have been suggested by just intonation. In sect. G. arts. 16 and 17, the methods of tuning the cycle of 53 adopted by Mr. Bosanquet and Mr. White are described. In the South Kensington Museum, Science Collections, Room Q, the harmonium itself may be inspected, Mr. Bosanquet having presented it to the Museum, as he generally employs for his own use an organ with the same fingerboard, and two sets of pipes, one set for 48 notes of the temperament advocated ¶ by Prof. Helmholtz (p. 432a), with perfect major Thirds and Fifths imperceptibly flattened by 1/8 Skhisma, answering to the notes written with capital letters on the digitals in the following plan; and the other set for 36 notes of the meantone temperament, brought into separate action by a stop. The pipes are stopped, with a screw plug, so that they are more readily tuned.

It remains in this place to give the plan of the fingerboard, shewing the disposition of the notes upon it both for the 53 division and meantone temperament, and to describe its arrangement, referring especially to App. XIX., p. 429, fig. 66.

In the present plan of the keyboard, all the digitals are represented as of the same length, corresponding to that from tip to tip. This is 3 inches in the original and is here only 1 inch. At each side runs a column of figures 1 to 12 continually repeated. It will be observed that in the first column the lines terminating the oblongs come against 2, and that 2 is at the head of the column. In this case the end of each oblong gives a form of *c*, and in passing from one form to another, as *c* to *c¹*, we have gained a Pythagorean comma, which results from taking 12 ¶ Fifths reduced to the same Octave. In the *g* column headed 3 the lines are opposite 3 ; in the *d* column, headed 4, opposite 4 ; and so on; each Fifth corresponding to a rise of 1/4 inch from tip to tip of the digitals, and to a vertical rise of 1/12 inch from level to level. Hence in going from one degree to another, as *c* to *c¹* or 4 to 5, we go backwards 12 × 1/4 = 3 inches, and rise 12 × 1/12 = 1 inch. Mr. Bosanquet says (*Mus. Int. and Temp.* p. 20):—

'The most important practical point about the keyboard arises from its symmetry; that is to say, from the fact that every key is surrounded by the same definite arrangement of keys, and that a pair of keys in a given relative position corresponds always to the same interval. From this it follows that any passage, chord, or combination of any kind, has exactly the same form under the fingers in whatever key it is played. And more than this, a common chord, for instance, has always the same form, no matter what view be taken of its key relationship. Some simplification of this kind is a necessity if these complex phenomena are to be brought within the reach of persons of average ability; and with this particular simplification, the child or beginner finds the work reduced to the acquirement of one thing, where twelve have to be learned on the ordinary keyboard.'
