page: 488

+ he remember the original pitch? In some cases in the above observations of Cornu and Mercadier the Octave (and hence the original pitch) will be seen to be sharpened or flattened by more than two cents. In the course of a few modulations this two cents might easily become 22 or a comma. Where is the guarantee for remembering the original pitch? Would an alteration of a whole comma in passing through a series of modulations be noticed? We know indeed that unaccompanied singers constantly 'flatten' by much more than a comma. The Duodenarium simply shews what sounds ought to be played in modulations, and would be played on instruments with fixed tones properly arranged; not what intervals are *now* played and sung, and mere memory of ear does not suffice.

Art. 8.—Scheibler's method of tuning instruments was theoretically perfect. It consisted in tuning by his fork tonometer a series of forks 4 vib. flatter than the pitches required. The string, pipe, or reed was then tuned sharper than the fork by 4 beats in a second. (See p. 446b for Koenig's forks for this purpose.) This only applied to one octave, and perhaps the octave below; the others were tuned from them by estimation of Octave. The errors thus made were a minimum, but ¶ there was the obvious disadvantage of having to tune a new set of forks for each pitch desired. This Scheibler overcame by tuning auxiliary octaves on organs, and counting beats by rather a troublesome rule, entailing the need of an accurate metronome. Even then he only taught how to tune in equal temperament. For practical purposes we require not only the equal but the meantone temperament, and also the 53 division of the octave. The only sure way is by calculating the pitch number of each note, and thus determining the beats between the note and the forks of a tuning-fork tonometer. This method may be dismissed as generally impracticable. So may any method which depends upon accurately knowing the pitch number of the tuning-note. What is required is a method of tuning at any unknown pitch which an organ or piano may happen to possess at the moment within the limits of, say *c'*256 and, *c'*270 without determining exactly what that pitch really is. This would save the great trouble of entirely altering the pitch of the piano (never very certain in its results), and the still greater trouble and expense of entirely altering the pitch of an organ or harmonium.

Art. 9.—For this purpose I invented an approximative method (given on p. 785 ¶ of the 1st edition of this translation and subsequently communicated to the *Musical Times*), which I here subjoin in an improved form. It is based on the result of Prof. Preyer's investigations, (suprà, p. 147d') that errors of ⅕ or ·2 of a vibration cannot be heard in any part of the scale, so that any attempt to tune more accurately is labour thrown away. Moreover, even at high pitches ·3, ·4, and ·5 vib. are scarcely perceptible in melody and quite inoffensive in harmony. It will be found very difficult when the beats are less than 4 in 10 seconds, that is, when the error is less than ·4 vib., to count them with any approach to accuracy. But it is only by beats that we can work effectively.

Any one who undertakes tuning should learn to estimate the meaning of 6, 10, 15, 20, 30 beats in 10 seconds. This is best done by short pendulums constructed of a piece of thread with one end tied to a curtain ring, and the other passed through a slit in a piece of ¶ firewood, round which it is ultimately tied. The stick is put under a book by the side of a table, so that the pendulum swings freely. Measure the length of the string from the centre of the ring to the beginning of the wood, which allows of an easy alteration of the length by drawing the string through the slit. Make this length 9⅞ inches. The pendulum swings backwards and forwards 120 times in 60 seconds, and hence 20 times in 10 seconds. Adjust it more accurately by a seconds watch. Counting the swings one way only there are 10 double swings in 10 seconds. By watching and counting this, say for half an hour, the tuner will learn to feel the rate of these two sets of swings. Then make another pendulum with a length of string of 4⅜ inches measured as before. This vibrates much more quickly, making 180 single and hence 90 double swings in 60 seconds, and consequently 30 single and 15 double swings in 10 seconds. Finally make the length \(27\frac{3}{16}\) inches, always from the centre of the ring to the stick, and the pendulum will make 6 double and 12 single vibrations in 10 seconds. Remember that if you begin counting with *one*, you will end with *seven* for 6, *eleven* for 10, *sixteen* for 15, and so on, so that you will always have to throw off one from your count.

Art. 10.—The rule has to be arranged in several forms according to the custom of tuning instruments. Harmoniums are best tuned from *c'* to *c''*, that is, in the two-foot octave. Organs are generally tuned in the principal stop, so that on touching the keys from *c'* to *c''*, the sounds are from *c''* to *c'''*, in the one-foot octave, and hence the beats are twice as fast. But for pianos it is the custom to tune from *f* to *f'* (see art. 5). Most tuners in England begin with *c''*, from which
