page: 526

+ our chromatic scale of 12 semitones. European musicians, indeed, persist in hearing and writing the *Salêndro* scales,
	properly 0  240  480  720  960  1200,
	as 0  200  500  700  900  1200,
	or 0  300  500  700  1000  1200
+ but this must arise from their not appreciating 240 cents, which is almost a neutral interval between a Tone, 200, and a minor Third, 300, and is hence mistaken by European ears sometimes for one and sometimes for the other. As for the Pelog scales, I cannot find that any one has ventured to put their airs into a European dress, the intervals No. 96 are so strange. I have however tried to appreciate them by having a concertina tuned with the white studs in *Salêndro* (tuning *E* and *F* and ¶ also *B* and *C* as unisons), and the black studs in Pelog, and writing them with the notes which would belong to the stud used in the ordinary tuning. For the Salêndro I used the airs in Raffles's Java, and in Crawford's paper in the Tagore collection. For the Pelog I had to invent airs myself. The characters of the two sets are quite unlike. But pentatonic Scotch airs played with the Salêndro scale are quite recognisable. Whether this scale is the primitive pentatonic scale it is quite impossible to say.

In Japan the koto tunings are all pentatonic, and according to theory the 'popular have intervals of a Semitone, a Tone, and a *major Third*, whereas the 'classical' have intervals only of a Tone and a *minor Third*, just as on the commonly received black digitals of a piano; but the classical is said to come from China. In practice probably these intervals are varied as in Nos. 111 and 112.

6. Pentatonic scales do not necessarily arise from inability to appreciate Semitones.

This is shewn by the Javese Pelog notes, which contain intervals of 137, 129, 112, 133, and 102 cents, and by the Japanese popular koto tunings, No. 110 and Nos. 113 to 123, all pentatonic, and theoretically founded on the diatonic Semitone. If in practice the diatonic Semitone sometimes grows to a Threequartertone, it also sinks to a small Semitone, see Nos. 111 and 112.

8. There is an entire absence of tonality in our sense of the term and of any attempt at harmony.

There is regard to the final cadence, at least in Meshāqah's scales, and probably in all. There is in the Indian a *ruler* note (*vádí*),
¶ see p. 243c', and *minister* notes (*samvádí*), which function as our tonic, dominant and subdominant in certain respects, and Prof. Helmholtz thinks he discovers a reference to a tonic in Aristotle (p. 241). But the European feeling of tonality is one of very late growth, and in non-harmonic scales must have been something quite different, and if we refer it to the same feeling as our own, it is from want of power to appreciate the feeling of those who use non-harmonic scales. This is parallel to what constantly happens in appreciating the intervals of these scales.

There is plenty of *ensemble* playing with notes of very different qualities of tone, but they regularly proceed in unisons and Octaves. In the Indian instruments there are sympathetic and secondary strings. The former have their partials evoked by the notes played. The latter, generally tuned in ¶ relations of an Octave Fourth or Fifth, are occasionally thrummed. But there is nothing like a chord, or a tissue of harmony. It would not be possible with the notes at command. There is also *discant* playing as in the old polyphony before harmony proper was invented. Prof. Land, speaking of the Gamelan, or band of Javese musicians sent by the independent prince of Solo to the Arnheim Industrial Exhibition in 1879, says: 'The musical treatment is this. The rabáb plays the tune in the character of leader' [at the Aquarium, the player of the gambang (wooden bar harmonium) seemed to be leader]; 'the others play the same tune, but figured, and each for himself and in his own way; the sáron (metal bar harmonium) resumes the motive or tune. All this is accompanied by a sort of *basso ostinato*, and a rhythmical movement of the drum, and the whole is divided into regular sections and subsections by the periodical strokes of the gongs and kenongs [kettles]. The variations of the same tune by the different instruments produce a sort of barbarous harmony, which has, however, its lucid moments, when the beautiful tone of the instruments yields a wonderful effect. But the principal charm is in the quality of the sound, and the rhythmical accuracy of the playing. The players know by heart a couple of hundred pieces, so as to be able to take any of the instruments in turn.'

In his report on Japanese music, Mr. Isawa, director of the Musical Institute at Tokio, distinctly claims a species of harmony for Japan, and gives an arrangement of the Greek 'Hymn to Apollo' (Chappell, p. 174), which he had directed 'a Court musician, and a member of the [Musical] Institute, to harmonise purely according to the principles of Japanese classical music.' It was set for five instruments, the Riuteki (fuye), Hichiriki, Sho, Koto, and Biwa. I possess the copy of the music in European notation, sent to the Educational Section of the Health Exhibition in 1884. Though much was in Octaves, the koto played a figured form, with dissonances, followed by consonances. A non-professional Japanese gentleman, a student of physics, acquainted with European music, in answering my questions, says: 'Anything like European [harmony] cannot be heard in Japan. If it exist, it is of the rudest possible description. We have certainly *ensemble* playing with many instruments of different sorts; but it seems to me that we have no idea of such things as chords. . . . We go generally parallel in Octaves and in Fifths, rarely in Fourths, but there are cases where two different tones, not belonging to the three consonances, are sounded, but they are not *harmonic*, but what
