page: 530

+ beat-tones extend over little more than the lower half of each group, and the upper beats and beat-tones over little more than the upper half. For a short distance in the middle of each period both sets of beats, or both beat-notes, are audible, and these beat-notes beat with each other, forming secondary beats, or are replaced by new or secondary beat-notes.

(*d*) *Beat-Notes and Differential Tones.* The lower beats, as long as they are distinctly audible, and refer to an interval less than 5 : 6, or a minor Third, agree with the beats of H. 171a, and when they have a greater frequency than from 16 to 20 there is also heard the beat-note, which then coincides in pitch with the differential tone of H. 153a. Above a minor Third, H. 171d says the beats are practically inaudible. K. however hears them—and B. vi. 235-237 also heard them—passing over into a roll and a confused rattle, as far as the major Sixth (*C* : *A₁*) for the lower beats.

In other respects K.'s beat-notes are ¶ different from H.'s differential tones. Thus for the minor Tenth 5 : 12, our first example, the beat-notes are 2 and 3, as just shewn, but the differential tone is 12 - 5 = 7, which is not obtained by K. i. 216, who says: 'These intervals, which are formed by high tones, allow the beat-notes to be heard quite loudly, but give no trace of differential tones. Thus *c'''* : *b'''* (8 : 15) gives only 1 and no trace of 7, c''' : *dⁱᵛ* (4 : 9) gives only 1 and nothing of *e'''* (5); *c'''* : *fⁱᵛ* (3 : 8) only *f* and *f''* and no *a'''* (5) at all, hence the differential tones must be extraordinarily weaker than the beat-notes. But I was able to establish the actual existence of these differential tones with certainty by forming the above intervals with deeper notes, which, lasting longer, allowed me by means of auxiliary forks to get a definite number of beats with the differential tones in ¶ question.' This experiment I have repeated several times. I made the tone of the generating forks as loud as possible by holding them over resonance jars. The auxiliary fork had to be held at a considerable distance from its jar in order to reduce its loudness to about that of the differential tone, to allow the beats to be counted. Thus the mistuned minor Tenth 223·77 : 539·18 gave the differential tone 315·41, which, although inaudible, beat with the fork 319·59 audibly 4·18, which was counted as 4·2. And so on in other cases.

In the case of a mistuned Octave, it appears to me that the lower fork acts as this auxiliary fork to catch the differential tone. Thus the mistuned Octave 223·77 : 451·14 gives the differential tone 227·37, which would possibly have been quite inaudible if it had not been caught by the lower fork, with which it made ¶ 3·6 beats in a second, as I myself counted. In this case I had to hold the higher fork far above the resonance jar. The beats were heard as low beats at the pitch of the lower fork. Also in this case, on continuing to hold the high fork over the resonance jar of the upper fork to weaken its sound, but bringing the low fork over the higher resonance jar as closely as possible, the higher Octave of that fork, or 447·54, was produced, which beat with the higher fork also 3·6 times; but now the beat was clearly and distinctly at the pitch of the upper fork. This was a beat of the 2nd partial of the lower fork with the upper fork, and was altogether distinct in character from the lower beat. Hence the beats could not be confused when heard separately, although the frequency was the same. K., so far as I can see, does not anywhere mention the pitch of the beats he heard, but B., vi. 237-9, says that in all cases he has observed, when the required partials have been removed, 'the beats . . . consist entirely of variations of intensity of the lower note,' and adds that, 'as he (K.) does not analyse the beats, we cannot tell whether the variations of the lower note were produced in his experiments'. Mr. Blaikley (*Proc. Mus. Assn.* 1881-2, p. 25) relates, however, that when K. exhibited the beats to him in Paris, K. said: 'You hear distinctly—there can be no doubt about it—that the beating note is the lower one'. This gives K.'s opinion, which Mr. Blaikley did not share.

Observe that K. does not deny the existence of tones having the pitch of differential (or summational) tones, but, as in this case, he shews their existence, and that they are distinct from his beat-notes, having frequently a different, and only occasionally the same, pitch. When, therefore, B., vi. 239, talks of second, third, and fourth combinational tones having been demonstrated directly by K., he seems to have identified beat-notes and differential tones, which, however, K. distinguishes.

The above observations of K. on differential tones are taken from the German edition of K.'s paper in 1876. In the French republication in 1882 they still appear, but in parentheses, and with a long note (ibid. p. 130), in which he states that subsequent investigations have induced him to change his opinion, as he finds that even very wide harmonic intervals between extremely weak tones may produce distinct beats. Hence (for the case where an auxiliary fork produced beats with two forks having the ratio 8 : 15, shewing a very weak tone 7, that might have arisen from 'the tone of the lower beats of 8 and 15'), in his German summary of results, K. i. 236, paragraph III. 6, admitted the actual existence of differential tones, though 'extraordinarily weaker than beat-notes'; but in his French republication (p. 147) he has altered this paragraph to: 'No experiment has yet proved with certainty the existence of differential and summational tones'. Observe that the existence of tones with the pitch of differential tones is not disputed. It is only the theoretical origin of such tones that is called in question. At present it seems impossible to decide that point.

(*e*) *Bosanquet's summary of the phenomena.* B. vi. 228. 'As two notes of equal amplitudes separate from unison, they are at first received by the ear in the
