page: 533

+ supposed actually to generate and be generated by other likewise inaudible tones'. We have an example in the first differential of a tone which, when it does not coincide with the lower beat-note, is appreciable only by beats with an auxiliary tone, and is hence very faint indeed in respect to the generators; and yet these are supposed to be the progenitors of others relatively weaker, till at last they produce one strong enough to be well heard (K. i. 186). The difficulty is surmounted by B., so far as the existence of the ultimate tone, without assuming the action of hypothetical intermediate generators. But we know nothing of the strength of these ultimate tones as determined by the formula, and we are constrained to believe that what depends upon the higher powers of the displacement, when the latter is not infinitesimal in respect to the length of the wave, must be extremely small, not at all comparable with the beat-notes actually heard, and hence must be insufficient to explain them. That is, we may admit all the differential and summational tones of H. and B. without having approached a satisfactory explanation of the main phenomenon, the beat-note.

¶ (*b*) *Can Beats generate Tones? First, Beats of Intermittence.* Now, the obvious hypothesis is that the beats coming within the frequency of musical notes are heard as tones. H. 156c, in mentioning this, states three objections, of which P. viii. 27 says that not one is at present tenable. They are: (1) that this hypothesis does not explain summational but only differential tones. On which P. remarks that summational tones, which have been heard only when at least the second partial of the generators was audible, can be explained as differential tones of the second order, as noted suprà, p. 532 *b*. (2) That 'under certain conditions the combinational tones exist objectively,' which is against art. 4, p. 531; and P. viii. 25 especially observes that the only experiment which H. has cited (Pogg. *Annal.* vol. xcix. p. 539) to prove the objective existence of summational tones by sand strewed on a membrane cannot be critically examined because the two generators are not specified. (3) That 'the only tones which the ear hears correspond to pendular vibrations of the air'. P. considers this to be disproved by the intermittence tones obtained by K., who rotated a disc perforated with 128 holes before tuning forks of different pitches, and obtained the same tone of intermittence ¶ whatever was the pitch of the fork. This tone was accompanied by two variant tones having pitch numbers equal to the sum and difference of the frequencies of the fork and intermittences.

K. i. 230, varied the experiment by constructing a disc 'with three circles, each with 96 equidistant holes, the diameters of which increased and diminished on the first circle 16 times from 1 to 6 mm. (=·04 to ·24 inch), on the second 12, and on the third 8 times. On blowing through a tube 6 mm. (=·24 inch) in diameter, and revolving the disc slowly, the separate periods of holes on each circle gave separate beats. On revolving continually more quickly, the 16 periods of the first, then the 12 of the second, and finally the 8 of the third circle, passed over into a musical tone. Finally, when the high tone of the 96 holes on revolving 8 times in a second had reached *g''* with 768 d. vib., the deep tones *c*, *G*, *C*—answering to the numbers of the periods 128, 96, 64 d. vib.—could be heard loudly and powerfully at the same time as *g''*.'

(*c*) *Can Beats generate Tones? Secondly, Beats of Interference.* Now, in reference to these tones of intermittence, K. i. 231 remarks that although they shew great similarity to beating combinations, as proving the possibility of separate ¶ maxima of intensity passing over into a continuous tone, they were in reality very different from such combinations, because in the case of beats there was a change of sign, a maximum of condensation being followed by a maximum of rarefaction.

This was precisely the objection made by Lord Rayleigh when Mr. Spottiswoode gave his account of Koenig's experiments (*Proc. Mus. Ass.* 1878-9, p. 128), and he in consequence could not understand how beats could generate tone. B. (*ibid.* p. 129) raised the same objection, which he developed in B. vi. 223-5. He there shews that in the case of two tones of equal strength, less than two commas from a unison, 'the resultant displacement' would produce a tone 'whose frequency is the arithmetical mean between the frequencies of the two primaries, and having oscillations of intensity whose frequency is defined by a pendulum vibration of frequency equal to half the difference of the frequencies of the primaries'. Then B. says that if the law held for widely separated notes, as for the 'Fifth (4 : 6), the note heard would be the major Third, which would beat rapidly . . . but as a matter of fact the note 5 is not heard at all in the above case'. Further, 'supposing that in some unexplained way the beats whose speed is' *half* the difference of the frequencies of the primaries, as just stated, 'gave rise to a note as supposed by K., then the speed of that note does not agree with that required for K.'s first [lower] beat-note, which has the same speed as H.'s difference-tone,' or the *whole* instead of *half* the difference of the frequencies.
