page: 534

Now this objection was fully realised by K. i. 232-3, which paper was before B. when he wrote the passage just cited, but was possibly overlooked by him. K. i. 232 says: 'If two tones of 80 and 96 d. vib. are sounded together, they generate a tone of \(\frac{1}{2} \cdot (80+96) = 88\) vibrations with an intensity increasing and diminishing 16 times, and at each passage from one beat to another there is a change of sign, so that the maximum of compression of the first vibration of the following beat is half a vibration behind the maximum of compression of the last vibration of the preceding beat'. To meet this case he made two experiments. In the first he divided a circle into 176 parts, and in the five points 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 he ¶ drilled five holes, gradually increasing and then diminishing in size. Similarly in the points 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, and then in the points 23, 25, 27, 29, and 30, and so on. 'When such a disc was blown upon through a pipe with the diameter of the largest opening, in addition to the tone 88 and the very powerful tone of the period 16 both of the tones 80 and 96 could be heard, but they were very weak, and, on account of the roughness of the deep tone, difficult to observe.' In this case the phase was the same throughout. To imitate the change of phase, K. i. 233 divided each of two concentric circles, running parallel to each other, into 88 parts, and 'disposed the holes which were to represent the successive beats alternately on each. As 88 holes and 16 periods give 5½ holes to each period, K. took two periods together, and pierced on the first ¶ circle the divisional points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and on the second 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, then again on the first 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and on the second 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, and so forth.' The sizes of the holes were alternately increasing and diminishing to represent beats. 'When these circles of holes were blown upon at the same time through two pipes of the diameter of the largest opening, and placed on the same radius, one circle from above and the other from below, then at each revolution of the disc there were created 88 isochronous impulses, varying 16 times in intensity, which changed sign on each transition from one period of intensity to the other. In this experiment the two tones 80 and 96 were more distinct than in the first experiment, where the circles of holes were blown upon from one side only.' On B.'s objections just quoted (suprà, p. 533), K. observes (French edition, p. 143, note): 'The change of phase of the separate vibrations of a variable amplitude, forming the beats, does not cause these maxima of intensity to be produced in contrary directions. Besides, these maxima remain isochronous, and consequently fulfil the conditions under which primary impulses are combined to form sounds. The only influence which the change of phase in question exerts on the disposition of the waves consists in these maxima of intensity not standing apart by a whole number of complete vibrations, but by an odd number of half-vibrations. The disc of the siren in which the resultant compressions of all the successive vibrations of the complex sound are represented by holes of a proper size, and, still better, the disc that has its rim cut out according to the curve of a series of successive beats [art. 5 (*e*) below], render this mechanism readily apprehensible, and allow of shewing that, notwithstanding the change of phase, the beat-note must always have the same frequency as the beats.'

(*d*) *Would a Tone generated by Beats be louder than the Primaries?* K. i. 234 then proceeded to meet Tyndall's objection (*On Sound*, 3rd ed. p. 350) that if the resultant tones (as he calls them) were formed from the beats of the primaries they would be heard when the primaries were weak, which is not the case. K. observes that beats would always be more powerful than their primary tones, 'provided that equal amplitudes of vibration produced equal intensities for all tones,' and proceeds to shew by experiment that this is not the case, and that 'deep tones must have much larger amplitudes of vibration than high tones in order to exhibit the same intensity'.

(*e*) *Experiments with the Wave Siren.* Thus the question was left till 1881, when K. applied his Wave Siren, originally exhibited in the London International Exhibition of 1872, already partly described in art. 2 (*b*), p. 529, to solve the question experimentally. The complete form (K. v. 386) was of course applicable to ¶ any pairs of tones with ratios expressible by numbers not exceeding 16. But the simplest method was to draw out the two harmonic curves, and the result of their combination, as is done above (H. 30 *b*, *c*) on a very large scale, and then reduce the drawing by photography to the required dimensions. Then the compound curve thus drawn was inverted, so that the high parts became low and the low high, cut, and affixed to the rim of the wave siren. The reason for inversion in this case was that the heights on the curve represented greater intensities, but on the siren would give less intensities.

K. iii. 345 then says: 'When a disc with such a rim is rotated before a slit fixed over it in the direction of the radius, and of a length at least equal to the greatest height of the curve, the slit will be periodically shortened and lengthened according to the law of the curve; and if wind is blown through the slit, a motion in the air must be generated corresponding to the same law. And this motion must be precisely the same as that produced by the simultaneous sounding of two really simple tones without any admixture of upper partials.' The beauty of this arrangement thus consists in our knowing precisely what tones act, and that they are undoubtedly simple. The result is thus described: 'The discs for different intervals, when the rotation was slow, gave beats, and when it was more rapid, beat-notes, exactly
