page: 537

+ for any length of time, whereas those from tuning-forks vanished so rapidly that they could be with difficulty recognised. But this did not suffice for lecture demonstrations. Hence K. invented a machine which produces beat-tones audible over a whole lecture room.

This consists (K. iv.) of pairs of glass tubes adjusted so as to give notes with definite intervals by longitudinal vibrations. These are held at the node by two clamps against the surface of a wheel bearing a thick cloth tire, which continually dips into a trough of water, and thus rubs the tubes sufficiently to produce loud tones and either one or both of the beat-notes continuously, and loud enough to be appreciated by the whole audience. A piece of paper wrapped round the node and bearing the number of the relative pitch enables the glass tubes to be selected and changed with the greatest rapidity.

Art. 6.—*Influence of difference of Phase on Quality of Tone.*

H. p. 126a finds that difference of phase has no effect on quality of tone. But, on p. 127c, H. points out 'an apparent exception,' on which K. v. 376 remarks ¶ that if quality depends on the relative intensity of the harmonic upper partials, and this relative intensity is really altered by difference of phase, the influence of this difference is 'actual, and not merely apparent'. Then observing on the difficulties attendant on H.'s rule for finding the differences of phase (suprà, p. 124c), he proceeds to describe his new experiments with the wave siren (for which reason they are mentioned in this place), which certainly admit of very much more precision. They were conducted thus: K. compounded harmonic curves of various pitches, and with various assumptions of amplitudes, under four varieties of phase: (1) the beginning of all the waves coinciding; (2) the first quarter, (3) the halves, and (4) the third quarter of each wave coinciding; briefly said to have a difference of phase of, 0, ¼, ½, ¾. These were reduced by photography, inverted, and placed on the rim of the disc of a wave siren, and then made to speak. He gives the remarkable curves which resulted in a few cases, and instructions for repeating the experiments. The following are his conclusions (K. v. 391):—

'The composition of a number of harmonic tones, including both the evenly ¶ and unevenly numbered partials, generates in all cases, quite independently of the relative intensity of these tones, the strongest and acutest quality tone for the ¼ difference of phase, and the weakest and softest for ¾ difference of phase, while the differences 0 and ½ lie between the others, both as regards intensity and acuteness.

'When unevenly numbered partials only are compounded, the differences of phase ¼ and ¾ give the same quality of tone, as do also the differences 0 and ½; but the former is stronger and acuter than the latter.

'Hence, although the quality of tone principally depends on the number and relative intensity of the harmonic tones compounded, the influence of difference of tone is not by any means so insignificant as to be entirely negligible. We may say, in general terms, that the differences in the number and relative intensity of the harmonic tones compounded produces those differences in the quality of tone which are remarked in musical instruments of different families, or in the human voice uttering different vowels. But the alteration of phase between these harmonic tones can excite at least such differences of quality of tone as are observed ¶ in musical instruments of the same family, or in different voices singing the same vowel.'

Of course, as K. v. 392 observes, the complete wave siren figured on K. v. 386 is applicable to numerous other investigations.

Art. 7.—*Influence of Combinational Tones on the consonance of Simple Tones.*

This is a brief notice of P. viii. III. It would appear from H.'s theory of consonance (see specially suprà, pp. 200d and 205b) that, if there were no upper partial or combinational tones, dissonance and consonance could not be distinguished—in the Thirds for example. P.'s experiments rendered this doubtful. He had a series of 11 forks made, very accurately tuned to—

	Vib. | 1000 | 1100 | 1200 | 1300 | 1400 | 1500 | 1600 | 1700 | 1800 | 1900 | 2000
	Cents | 165 | 151 | 138 | 129 | 119 | 112 | 105 | 99 | 93 | 89
	Sums | 0 | 165 | 316 | 454 | 583 | 702 | 814 | 919 | 1018 | 1111 | 1200

where the upper line gives the numbers of vibrations, the second the cents in the
