page: 538

+ intervals between two successive forks, and the bottom the sums of those cents, or the cents in the intervals between any fork and the lowest, from which the cents in the intervals between any two forks can be immediately deduced by subtraction; and by a reference to the table in Sect. D. the names of such intervals can be found. P. selected the difference of 100 vib. because it was small enough to allow of a sensation of roughness when two successive forks were sounded together. And he selected the pitches 1000 and 2000 because they precluded hearing upper partials, while the frequency 1000 to 2000 not being sufficient to have any effect on distinguishing consonance, the absence of power to distinguish it could not be ascribed to the high pitch.

Both practised and unpractised ears immediately recognised on them that successive forks were dissonant to each other; this was due to the small difference of 100 vib. Almost all other intervals of these 11 forks, when the forks ¶ were not too loud, were frequently considered consonant, especially by musicians—such as 10 : 13, 11 : 13, 12 : 19, 17 : 20, &c. Also the ratios expressible by small numbers (except 8 : 9 and 9 : 10), namely, 5 : 7, 5 : 9, 6 : 7, 7 : 8, 7 : 9, 7 : 10, often passed as consonances; and though the 1 : 2, 2 : 3, 3 : 4, 3 : 5, 4 : 5, 5 : 6, 5 : 8 were generally preferred, some observers found 6 : 7, 15 : 19, 11 : 13, &c., more harmonious than the pure Thirds and Sixths, 4 : 5, 5 : 6, 5 : 8, 3 : 5, especially than the minor Sixth 5 : 8. The listener was always kept in ignorance of the numerical ratios, and only one person was tried at a time. The sum of the different judgments was therefore:

'After all upper partials and combinational tones have been eliminated from a dissonant pair of sounds, it loses the disagreeable effect of dissonance'.

The Octave and Fifth were generally recognised with certainty, probably from long practice. This appears to be an excellent proof of H.'s theory. And the less care there was taken to exclude upper partials and combinational tones, the more unpleasant became the dissonance, and the easier it was for the ear alone to determine the interval immediately. But this is not all. H.'s theory that dissonances should be recognised only by beats of the partials or combinational tones implies that, if these were too far distant in pitch to produce beats, there would be no roughness, and hence no beats. This did not prove to be the case. The pair 1400 : 1600 vib. formed a dissonance, although all partials and combinational tones differed by 200. The ratio 8 : 9 was universally called a cutting dissonance, even in the 4 times and 8 times accented Octave.

¶ The explanation of the above phenomena seemed to require a remodelling of H.'s theory, and P.'s conclusions are stated thus (P. viii. 58):—

'(1) The larger the least two numbers required to express the ratio between two tones, the greater the number of combinational tones, which always form an arithmetical series, and arise, whether upper partials be present or not (H. 155c).

'(2) The greater the number of simple tones which affect the ear simultaneously, the less distinct is each single tone.

'(3) The more coincidences there are between the tones which might be and are generated by any interval, the more pleasing is the sensation; and the fewer the coincidences the more confusing, and hence unpleasant, the impression.'

And as these conclusions hold for tones which, on account of their own distance from each other and the distance of their partials and combinational tones, cannot generate sensible beats, P. considers that this is both a formal and an actual extension of H.'s theory of consonance. But if, with K., we consider these differential tones absolutely insensible, it would be difficult to see how they would affect the result, and the facts noted would still require explanation. ¶ The whole subject of combinational tones and beats evidently requires much more examination.

SECTION M.

ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS OF VOWEL SOUNDS.

(See Notes, pp. 75, 118, 124.)

	Art.
	1. Analysis of Vowel Sounds by means of the Phonograph, p. 538.
	2. Synthetical Production of Vowel Sounds, p. 542.

Art. 1.—*Analysis of Vowel Sounds by means of the Phonograph.* The following is a brief account of a paper by Prof. Fleeming Jenkin, F.R.SS. L. and E., and Mr. J. A. Ewing, B.Sc., F.R.S.E., *On the Harmonic Analysis of certain Vowel Sounds*, 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,' vol. xxviii.
