page: 544

SECTION N.

MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.

(See pp. 78, 179.)

	No.
	1. Compass of the Human Voice, p. 544.
	2. Harmonics and Partials of a Pianoforte String, struck at one-eighth of its length, p. 545.
	3. History of Mean Tone Temperament, p. 546.
	4. History of Equal Temperament, p. 548.
	5. Prof. Mayer's Analysis of Compound Sounds and Harmonic Curves, p. 549.
	No.
	6. Presumed different characters of Keys, both Major and Minor, p. 550.
	7. Dr. W. H. Stone's Restoration of 16-foot *C₁* to the Orchestra, p. 552.
	8. On the Action of Reeds, from notes by Mr. Hermann Smith, p. 553.
	9. Postscript, p. 555.

¶ 1. *Compass of the Human Voice.*

Instruments can be tuned or manufactured at almost any required pitch. The human voice is born, not manufactured. Although by skilful training its compass can generally be somewhat extended, both upwards and downwards, yet it must in general be considered to be an instrument beyond human control. The usages of Europe have, however, made it the principal instrument, and, when it is present, have reduced all others to an accompaniment. Hence it is necessary that these other instruments should have their compass and pitch regulated by that of the human voice. Now the voice, like the viol family, represents at least four different instruments—soprano, alto, tenor, and bass, with two intermediate ones, ¶ mezzo-soprano, between soprano and alto, and barytone, between tenor and bass. It is therefore as necessary to determine the average and exceptional compass of these species of voice as it is to know the compass of any other instrument, in order that composers may be certain as to what sounds can be reproduced, and not demand any other. To do this, the precise acoustic meaning of each written musical note should be ascertained. The difficulty of determining it has been shewn by the preceding history of musical pitch (pp. 494-513), from which, combined with the tables of mean-tone and equal intonation (pp. 434 and 437), it is evident that Handel's sustained *a''* in the *Hallelujah* chorus had 845 vib., but would now be sung to 904 vib.; and that Mozart's *f'''* in the *Zauberflöte* would have meant 1349 ¶ vib., but would now have to be sung at 1455 vib. The strain that this would put upon voices is evident, and no composer who wished his music to be well represented would think of making such demands on his singers. It appeared, therefore, necessary to ascertain more precisely than had been hitherto done, and to express in numbers of vibrations, the limits of the different kinds of voices. If the composer will then only translate his written notes into numbers of vibrations, by the table on p. 437, according to the pitch he employs, he will avoid all danger of straining singers.

Through the kindness and liberality of the choir conductors, Messrs. Henry Leslie, W. G. McNaught, J. Proudman, Ebenezer Prout, L. C. & G. J. Venables, and 542 members of the choirs they conducted, I was able to examine a sufficient number of singers, in January, 1880, to arrive at something like a trustworthy account of the compass of the voice. I gave each singer a paper with the words *do re mi fa sol la ti do'* printed on them in four columns up and down to the requisite extent, and then started them on *do* in 4 different pitches, 507, 522·5, 528, 540·7 vib. (representing the just *c''* corresponding to *a'* 422·5 Handel's pitch, *a'* 435·4 the French pitch, *a'* 440 Scheibler's pitch, and the equal *c''* of *a'* 454·7, the highest Philharmonic pitch of 1874, respectively). I got them to sing up and down in chorus under the direction of the conductor, and to mark with a pencil the highest and lowest note each one could reach, first *easily*, or secondly *by an effort* (falsetto of male voices being excluded in the first case, but not in the last). From these papers I determined by calculation, on the assumption of just intonation (as being most probable for unaccompanied singers), the numbers of vibrations in the limiting notes. These are contained in the following table, together with the mean height and depth of all the voices. The extreme highest limit for male voices, as it included falsetto, is a mere curiosity. For writing music, the mean should not be assumed as the limit, for perhaps half the chorus could not reach it. But it would be perfectly safe to write from the highest low easy limit to the lowest high easy limit. Thus, for sopranos it would not do to write up to *b''* 993 and down to *f* 180, but it would be quite safe to write up to *f''* 704 and down to *b* 253. Viewed in this way, my results agree more nearly with Randegger's, which I add for comparison. These last are given in a staff-notation form in his primer on *Singing* (Novello, 1879); and as he politely informed me that he assumed Broadwood's medium pitch *a'* 446·2, I was able to calculate the vibrations. All the numbers of vibrations are given to the nearest integer only, and it is to these numbers that attention should be especially paid, the names of the notes being merely guides. Those letters preceded by a turned period relate to high pitch in the column 'Actual,' and those not so preceded relate to a medium pitch, as French or German. But in the column 'Mean' no precise system at all could be selected. In Randegger's, of course, Broadwood's medium pitch is intended. If, however, the notes be played on any ordinary piano, they will seldom be in error to the extent of a quarter of a Tone.
