page: 549

+ Mr. Hipkins has been at some pains to ascertain how far that was the case, and from him I learn that Mr. Peppercorn, who tuned originally for the Philharmonic Society, was concert tuner at Broadwoods', and a great favourite of Mr. James Broadwood. His son writes to Mr. Hipkins that his father 'always tuned so that all keys can be played in, and neither he nor I [neither father nor son] ever held with making some keys sweet and others sour.' Mr. Bailey, however, who succeeded Mr. Peppercorn as concert tuner, and tuned Mr. James Broadwood's own piano at Lyne, his country house, used the meantone temperament to Mr. Hipkins's own knowledge, and no other. Not one of the old tuners Mr. Hipkins knew (and some had been favourite tuners of Mr. James Broadwood) tuned anything like equal temperament. Collard, the Wilkies, Challenger, Seymour, all tuned the meantone temperament, except that like Arnold Schlick, 1511 (see p. 546d), they raised the *G*♯ somewhat to mitigate the 'wolf' resulting from the Fifth *E*♭ : *G*♯ in place of *E*♭ : *A*♭. Hence Mr. James Broadwood did not succeed in introducing equal temperament permanently even into his own establishment, and all tradition of it died out long ago. So far runs Mr. Hipkins's interesting information.

In 1812 Dr. Crotch (*Elements of Musical Composition*, pp. 134-5) gives the proper figures for equal temperament, shews how it arose, that its Fifths are too flat and its major Thirds too sharp, adding 'this will render all keys equally imperfect,' but says nothing to recommend it. Yet in 1840 Dr. Crotch (who died in 1847) had his own chamber organ tuned in equal temperament, as I have been informed by Mr. E. J. Hopkins, author of *The Organ, &c.*

It is one thing to propose equal temperament, to calculate its ratios, and to have trial instruments approximately tuned in accordance with it, and another thing to use it commercially in all instruments sold. For pianos in England it did not become a trade usage till 1846, at about which time it was introduced into Broadwoods' under the superintendence of Mr. Hipkins himself. At least eight years more elapsed before equal temperament was generally used for organs, on which its defects are more apparent, although not to such an extent as on the harmonium.

In 1851, at the Great Exhibition, no English organ was tuned in equal temperament, but the only German organ exhibited (Schulze's) was so tuned.

In July 1852 Messrs. J. W. Walker & Sons put their Exeter Hall organ into equal temperament, but it was not used publicly till November of that year. Meanwhile, in Sept., Mr. George Herbert, a barrister and amateur, then in charge of the organ in the Roman Catholic Church in Farm Street, Berkeley Square, London, had that organ tuned equally by Mr. Hill, the builder. Though much opposed, it was visited and approved by many, and among others by Mr. Cooper, who had the organ in the hall of Christ's Hospital (the ¶ Bluecoat School) tuned equally in 1853.

In 1854 the first organ built and tuned originally in equal temperament, by Messrs. Gray & Davison, was made for Dr. Fraser's Congregational Chapel at Blackburn (both chapel and organ have since been burned). In the same year Messrs. Walker and Mr. Willis sent out their first equally tempered organs. This must therefore be considered as the commercial date for equal temperament on new organs in England. On old organs meantone temperament lingered much later. In 1880, when I wrote my *History of Musical Pitch*, from which most of these particulars have been taken, I found meantone temperament still general in Spain, and used in England on Greene's three organs, at St. George's Chapel, Windsor (since altered), at St. Katharine's, Regent's Park (see p. 484c'), and at ¶ Kew Parish Church; and while many others had only recently been altered, one (Jordan's at Maidstone Old Parish Church) was being altered when I visited it in that year. Hence, in England, equal temperament, though now (1885) firmly established, is not yet quite 40 years old on the pianoforte, and only 30 years old on the organ.

The difficulty of tuning in equal temperament led to the invention of Scheibler's tuning-fork tonometer. In Sect. G., art. 11, p. 489, will be found a practical rule for tuning in sensibly equal temperament at all usual pitches

5. *Professor Mayer's Analysis of Compound Tones and Harmonic Curves.*

The following are two of the numerous acoustical contrivances of Mr. Alfred M. Mayer, Ph.D., Member of the National (American) Academy of Sciences, and Professor of Physics in the Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, United States (see suprà, p. 417c).

1. *New Objective Analysis of Compound Sounds.* The analysis of compound sounds by resonators has two disadvantages: first, that it is subjective, inasmuch as but one observer at a time is capable of hearing the results; and, secondly, that the range of pitch reinforceable by a resonator is too great for extreme accuracy in the estimation of the actual component sound present. Both of these disadvantages were thus overcome (*Phil. Mag.* Oct. 1874, vol. xlviii. pp. 271-3, with a figure).

A Grenié's free reed pipe, of the pitch *C*=128, had part of its wooden chamber removed and replaced by morocco leather, at one point of which 8 silk cocoon fibres were attached, having their opposite extremities ¶ attached to 8 tuning-forks tuned to *C*, *c*, *g*, *c'*, *e'* *g'*, *⁷b'*♭, *c''*, at the point of the upper node in each where it divides into segments when giving its upper harmonic, so that this harmonic was eliminated. The cocoon fibres were stretched till they made no visible ventral segments when vibrating. The reed was tuned accurately to the *C* fork (of 64 vibrations) by means of the *g* fork. The forks were placed on proper resonance boxes. When the reed was sounded each fork 'sang out' loudly, but if the prongs of any fork were only slightly loaded the fork was mute, and was so rapidly affected that Prof. Mayer estimates (same vol. p. 519) that the effect of intervals such as 2000 : 2001 (or ·87 or not quite 1 cent) can be rendered sensible to the ear. On ceasing to sound the reed the forks continued to sound, and produced a tone of so nearly the same
