page: 550

+ quality as that of the reed that it was easy to feel that the difference was due to the absence of partials higher than the eighth. By this means, then, the analysis and synthesis of a compound tone can be shewn to a large audience at once, and all doubt as to its objective reality removed. At the same time the air in the resonance chamber of the reed acts on the leather cover as in hearing it would have acted on the drumskin of the ear, and the conduction of that vibration by the cocoon fibres replaces the complicated arrangements in the interior of the drum and the fluid of the labyrinth of the ear, while the forks themselves serve as the organs in the cochlea. Prof. Helmholtz's physiological theory of audition is thus perfectly exhibited in a 'working model.' ¶ The action of the resonance chambers of the forks is simply to make the effects heard at a distance.

2. *Harmonic Curves* (see p. 387d). In the *Philosophical Magazine*, Supplement for January 1875, vol. xlviii. pp. 520-525, Prof. Mayer gives curves compounded by six curves of sines (p. 23d'), representing six partial tones, where, for convenience, the amplitudes are taken to vary as the wave lengths, and to have the same initial phase. They are combined by taking the algebraical sum of their ordinates, which law would of course not hold true for the amplitudes chosen (about one-third of the length of the wave). The resulting figure bears a most remarkable resemblance to fig. 25, suprà, p. 84b. There is the same sudden rise on the left and step-like descent on the right, but the steps are more rounded, and the upper crest more pointed, and there are five steps in addition to the crest. Prof. Mayer then combines two such compound curves, and thus produces the resulting curves of two compound tones forming an Octave (with one high and one low crest, and also one high and one low trough, and the steps uneven and reduced in number), a Fifth (with four crests, two with long and two with short descents, the shorter having only one step), and a major Third (with eight crests, two extremely small, two moderate, three intermediate between the two last kinds, and one high, the ascents being abrupt as before, the descents rather wavy than stepped). These had all been drawn on a large scale with several hundred ordinates, and were reduced photographically. They form an excellent practical illustration of the nature of harmonic motions.

6. *The presumed different Characters of Keys, both Major and Minor.*

See suprà, p. 310c to 311c. It is first necessary to know what is the presumed phenomenon to account for. In the discussion of my paper 'On the Measurement and ¶ Settlement of Musical Pitch' (*Journal of the Society of Arts*, 25 May 1877, p. 686), Prof. (now Sir George) Macfarren, Principal of the Royal Academy of Music, spoke of 'the difficulty of representing the compositions of different eras, which had been written for different standards of pitch,' and added 'it was a marvellous fact that, while the pitch was felt to be changed, the impression of the character of the keys seemed to remain with reference to the nominal key, not to the number of vibrations of each particular note. Thus the key of *D* at the present day represented the same effect as was produced by the same key according to one's earliest recollections; it did not sound like the key of *E*♭, although it might be of the same pitch. If Mozart's symphony in *C* were to be played a Semitone lower, to bring it to the original pitch, it would not sound at all the ¶ same. How far this result was subjective—how much depended on the imagination of the hearer, and how much on the physical facts—was a deep, perhaps an insoluble question; but it was one which really ought to be considered.' The Chairman (Mr. William Pole, F.R.S., Mus. D. Oxon), on the contrary, said: 'In a practical point of view the French did an exceedingly good thing when they fixed on one pitch, . . . and they had practically done so, not only for France, but the Continent generally. He had the gratification some time ago of hearing Beethoven's *Sinfonia Eroica* played at a Conservatoire concert in *E*♭, as it should be, but he could not get rid of the idea, when he heard it played at the Philharmonic concerts, that it was in *E*♮.'

The mention of the performance of symphonies by Sir G. Macfarren and Dr. Pole takes the whole question out of the action of individual instruments, in which there is no doubt of considerable variety depending on the tonic, but this can be traced in every case to some defect of the instrument itself, as has been considered in the text (*loc. cit.*). The point of the long and short keys on a pianoforte, spoken of by Prof. Helmholtz, has been well worked out by Mr. G. Johnstone Stoney, D.Sc., F.R.S. Dublin, in a paper read before the Royal Dublin Society on 16 March 1883 (*Scientific Proc. R. Dublin Soc.*, p. 59), who calls attention to the fact that in *A* all the Fifths are on white digitals and the major Thirds on black digitals, while in *A*♭ the Fifths are on black and the major Thirds on white digitals, and argues that this must make considerable difference in playing. Mr. Hipkins, however, gives it as his opinion that it is impossible to tell in the performance of a first-rate player whether he is striking a white or a black key. That would relegate the difference to the degree of skill of the player. But this does not at all affect the organ, the harmonium, or the voice. And by reference to symphonies we are constrained to consider the question independently of any particular instrument, as a simple acoustical fact.

In order to ascertain what that fact is supposed to be, according to recognised musicians of high standing, I give a condensed re-arrangement of the characters attributed to different keys in Mr. Ernst Pauer's *Elements of the Beautiful in Music* (Novello), p. 23, placing the major and minor keys in opposite columns, and proceeding by intervals of a Semitone.
