page: 553

+ Two of them cross and intercept the usual *f*-shaped sound-holes, thus removing a weak place in the belly, and causing it to vibrate more homogeneously. They appeared on trial to add great power to the instrument throughout, and to remove the inequality and varying intensity of vibration which exists on most old instruments even by celebrated makers, and which musicians usually designate by the term 'wolf.' The bars are curved to an elliptical shape to fit the hollow of the belly, and to give the greatest resistance to compression with the smallest quantity of material. Even in a double bass the quantity of wood required is very small, and from its lightness when perfectly dry it hardly exceeds an ounce in weight. From their shape and function they are termed *elliptical tension bars*.

It appeared from subsequent experiments that the same system was applicable to the smaller members of the viol and violin family, giving an increased sonority and firmness to the tone. It succeeds best with violins of sweet but feeble quality, and in some of the older Italian instruments, where the progress of decay had to a certain extent diminished the volume of sound.

The contrafagotto or double bassoon as made on Dr. Stone's designs by Herr Haseneier of Coblenz, consists of a tube 16 feet 4 inches long, truly conical in its bore, and enlarging from \(\frac{1}{4}\)-inch diameter at the reed to 4 inches at the bell or lower extremity. It is curved on itself for convenience of manipulation, so that in actual length it is about equal to the ordinary bassoon. Its extreme compass is from *C,* to *c'*, but its ordinary range is to *g* only, the other notes being difficult to bring out. Haydn gives a part to such an instrument in his *Creation*, Mozart uses it occasionally, Beethoven frequently, Mendelssohn ¶ sometimes.

Both of these instruments I have heard in use. Their tone is not perfectly continuous, but is very good, and when played in conjunction with other instruments, musically effective.

8. *On the Action of Reeds.*

(See pp. 95 to 100.) Knowing the long, patient, and practical attention which Mr. Hermann Smith had paid to the action of reeds, I requested him to furnish me with an account of the results of his experience. He obligingly sent me a series of elaborate and extensive notes, which the space at my command utterly precludes me from giving at proper length, and which I am therefore forced to represent by the meagrest possible outline, with the hope that they will appear elsewhere in suitable detail. Only passages in inverted commas contain Mr. Hermann Smith's actual words, the rest is my own necessarily imperfect attempt to condense his statements.

Reeds may be classed as, 1. *single*, whether *striking* (in clarinet of cane, and reed-pipe of organ of metal) or *free* (harmonium and American organ, both of metal); 2. *paired* (bassoon and oboe, both of cane, in action compressible; horns and larynx, both membranous, in action extensible); 3. *streaming* (flutes, flageolets, flue-pipes of organ, all of rushing air, in action abstracting). The last kind has been partly considered, suprà, pp. 396-7.

In the *clarinet* the reed is straight and very thin at the tip, but the edge of the section of the wooden tube against which it strikes presents a slight curve, whereas in the organ pipe the reed is curved and the edge against which it strikes is straight (p. 96c). The time of vibration consists (1) of the time of forward motion, which may vary slightly; (2) of the time of rest, which may vary greatly; (3) of the time of recoil, which does not vary. 'When the reed is placed in the mouth, the air on both surfaces of the reed is of equal pressure, and on increase of strength in the wind, the tendency would be to separate the reed still further from the edge of the mouthpiece, were it not that a current of air quickly passing into a tube exercises suction at the orifice of entry; therefore the elastic reed yields in the direction of the place of suction, so that it is held there. The current of wind having been sent forward with impetus, leaves behind it a partial vacuum, which is strongest close upon the inner face of the tongue. There, then, is a region of least pressure, which continues to exist during the transit of the pulse of compressed air to the first found point of outlet. When that point is reached, the external air rushes in and restores equilibrium, and in doing so causes the shock of arrested motion in which the reed recoils, ¶ and forthwith the action commences as before.'

The *clarinet* should not be described as a stopped pipe, though both have unevenly numbered partials and give similar pitch for similar length, because 'in the clarinet there is a propulsive current going through the pipe; in the stopped pipe, on the contrary, there is an abstracting current acting outside by suction.' Too much has been attributed to the cylindrical bore for producing only the unevenly numbered partials. 'An oboe reed fixed on the clarinet tube gives oboe pitch of tone and oboe partials.' The Japanese *Hichi-riki* has an inverted conical bore, that is, the diameter is the smallest at the point furthest from the reed. 'Like the clarinet, it gives notes which are an Octave lower in pitch than would be calculated from its length. The first note after the fundamental is the ¶ Twelfth. The reed is broad, not single as on the clarinet, but double and as the bassoon reed, differing, however, in having an enlarged base where it fixed into the tube. . . . On substituting an oboe reed, the pitches of the notes correspond to those of the oboe and the first tone after is the Octave. . . . If the end of the pipe is placed full within the mouth, and is blown through without the use of any reed whatever (and without any action from the lips), clear and powerful sounds are elicited, varying as the openings of the holes are varied, provided one of the upper holes is left open . . . it is indifferent whether the end of the wide diameter or that of the narrow is taken into the mouth, either way sounds are in this manner readily produced.' This effect Mr. Hermann Smith attributed to a stream reed from the open hole.
