page: 554

*Bassoons* and *oboes* have paired reeds, which touch down their outer edge, and do not vibrate length-wise but cross-wise, so that a transverse section through them has alternately the form of the outer lines in fig. 63, p. 387c, when they are open, and of two parallel lines when they are closed. The reeds are sections from a small hollow reed-plant of particular growth (*arundo donax* or *sativa*), made very thin at the tip, and rendered supple by the moisture of the mouth. The player's lip restricts the size of the oval in notes of high pitch. 'The pressure of wind would keep the pair of reeds apart but for the influence of the suction when the current is thrown through. The vibration therefore is produced by the same kind of action as in the clarinet, but there is a new mechanical method for bringing it about.'

¶ The membranous reeds formed by the lips and vocal chords are reeds of *extension*, beginning to vibrate from a state of *closure*, contrary to all other reeds. In *horns* the cup acts as an exhaust chamber, and when it is too large the upper notes cannot be well produced; 'that is to say, the necessary degree of vacuum cannot be brought about in time to coincide with the reciprocating return of the column of air in the tube.' In the larynx the ventricles of Morgagni between the true and false chords probably act as exhaust chambers.

The *stream reeds* have been already considered (p. 396c'), but Mr. Hermann Smith has developed his theory of *displacement action*, or the actual tone of air under cleavage, deduced originally from observations of the different sounds of wind sweeping through the branches of leafless trees, in which tone is ¶ produced without a vibrating agent. Mr. Hermann Smith found the common doctrine of friction unsatisfactory. In 1870 he had made a series of rods about 5 ft. long, the sides of each having same smoothness and of the uniform width of \(1\frac{1}{4}\) inches, with a V-shaped or triangular section, and these he swept swiftly through the air like swords, sharp edge first. He found that, although the friction surface was similar on each, they developed different notes, which he discovered to be according to the thickness of the back, the pitches being inversely as the thickness. *C* 528 vib. requires a thickness somewhat less than half an inch. 'Covering irregularly the tips of the rods did not affect the sound. Half an inch thickness of spongy felt fixed on the back of the rod, the same width being preserved, lowered the pitch a Fourth. The felt entangled air in ¶ its pores, so that the vacuum by suction was less perfect. . . . With less speed of stroke the pitch is again lowered. . . . In organ pipes, &c., in all wind instruments, a certain displacement of air must take place immediately near the agent of vibration, in which space a right degree of vacuum is requisite, else the right note will not follow. To this result all the devices of mouthpieces tend. This work of displacement in the origination of sound raises a question distinct from the transmission of sounds in waves.'

The free reed is supposed to have been adopted from China. But the European and Chinese forms are different. The Chinese reed is stamped out in the same piece as the frame, with which it lies level. The reeds act upon tubes which (agreeing with M. W. Weber's law, though made long before its discovery) are three-quarters of the half-wave length. The harmonium reed is placed above the frame, and the end turns up from it. If it is set level with the frame it will not vibrate. To produce vibration a stream of air must pass between the tongue and the frame, producing a partial vacuum on the underside of the reed, and the amount of suction thus caused must be properly graduated or there will be no action. The chief peculiarity of the free reed is that the pitch is only slightly affected by the cavities with which it is associated, but these boxes or cavities, according to their dimensions, and governed by the operation of partial occlusion, mainly determine the *quality of tone*.

The reed is not properly compared to a vibrating rod, because the reed actually in use is not uniform. In a series, the low reeds are thickest at tip and thinnest at root; high reeds thinnest at tip and thickest at root. Hence they are affected differently by different pressures of wind, and alter their pitch differently. Expressive playing therefore becomes playing out of tune. Only with a constant blast will a free reed maintain a constant pitch. The stronger blast flattens deep reeds and sharpens high ones, and from this cause arises much of the painful dissonance of series of chords played on these instruments.

To remedy this defect the action of the wind on the tongue in the American organ is limited by making the frame very thin, which is 'dished out' underneath till the edge passed by the tongue is barely thicker than the tongue, instead of being 8 or 10 times as thick as on the harmonium. The suction in the harmonium is longer in time and stronger in degree, the tongue moves a greater distance, and more intensity of tone is produced. 'The American reed cannot make a deep excursion, for the suction is spent as soon as the tongue gets below the edge of the frame.' It is therefore not suited for expression, but produces a smooth and flexible kind of tone.

Mr. Hermann Smith considers the harshness of the free reed, resulting from its large number of partials, to be chiefly due to its proportions. 'The tongue is inordinately long in proportion to its width, and hence under the stress of the wind (which necessarily shifts its incidence during the movements of the tongue and its re-course) there is developed a diagonal strain or torsion from one corner at the tip of the tongue to the opposite corner of the root, so that a lateral irregular motion is set up accompanying the longitudinal vibration.' Hence he concludes that 'the long reed is a wrong reed,' and that, 'in view of its liability to lateral torsion, the rectangular form is about the worst. . . . Trial of various reeds shews that a long rectangular reed is strident in tone, that increase of width in reeds brings in increasing proportion smoothness of tone, and that the width may be increased till it equals the length.'

In 'voicing,' a bend is made across the tongue, turning the point upwards. This somewhat checks lateral vibration. By an early plan of his, 'reeds were yoked together by a bar across the middle of the length, and the improved quality of tone was obviously due to the fact that the two reeds were equivalent to one broad reed, and that the bar across hindered the operation of any diagonal strain or
