APPENDICES (untranslated crib -- see text_analysis.txt)

APPENDICES,

APPENDIX I.

Extract from Mr. Todhunters essay on 'Ele- mentary Geometry,' included in ' The Conflict of Studies, &c!

It has been said by a distinguished philosopher that England is " usually the last to enter into the general movement of the European mind." The author of the remark probably meant to assert that a man or a system may have become famous on the continent, while we are almost ignorant of the name of the man and the claims of his system. Perhaps, however, a wider range might be given to the assertion. An exploded theory or a disadvantageous practice, like a rebel or a patriot in distress, seeks refuge on our shores to spend its last days in comfort if not in splendour. Just when those who originally set up an idol begin to suspect that they have been too extravagant in their devotions we receive the discredited image and commence our adorations. It is a less usual but more dangerous illus- tration of the principle, if just as foreigners are learning to admire one of our peculiarities we should grow weary of it.

In teaching elementary geometry in England we have for a long time been accustomed to use the well-known Elements of Euclid. At the present moment, when we learn from the best testimony, namely, the admission of anti-Euclideans, that both in France and Italy dissatisfaction is felt with the system hitherto used, accompanied with more or less desire to adopt ours, we are urged by many persons to exchange our system for one which is falling out of favour on tlie continent.

Many assertions have been made in discussion which rest entirely on the authority of the individual advocate, and thus it is necessary to be somewhat critical in our estimate of the value of the testimony. Two witnesses who are put prominently forward are MM. Demogeot and Montucci, who drew up a report on English education for the French Government. Now I have no doubt that these gentlemen were suited in some i-espects to report on English education, as they were selected for that purpose; but I have searched in vain for any evidence of their special mathematical qualifications. No list of mathe- matical publications that I have consulted has ever presented either of these names, and I am totally at a loss to conceive on what grounds an extravagant respect has been claimed for their opinions. The following sentence has been quoted with appro- bation from these writers : "Le trait distinctif de I'enseignement des mathematiques en Augleterre c'est qu'on y fait appel plutot a la memoire qu'a I'intelligence de Televe." In the first place we ought to know on what evidence this wide generalisation is constructed. Did the writers visit some of the humbler schools in England in which the elements of arithmetic and mensuration were rudely taught, and draw from this narrow experience an inference as to the range of mathematical instruction throughout England % Or did they find on inspecting some of our larger public schools that the mathematical condition was unsatisfactory? In the latter case this might have arisen from exclusive devotion to classics, or from preference for some of the fashionable novelties of the day, or from want of attention and patience in the teachers. On the most unfavourable supposition the condemnation pro- nounced on the general matliematical training in England cannot be justified. But take some kind of experimental test. Let an inquirer carefully collect the mathematical examination papers issued throughout England in a single year, including those proposed at the Universities and the Colleges, and those set at the Military Examinations, the Civil Service Examinations, and the so-called Local Examinations. I say then, without fear of contradiction, that the original problems and examples contained in these papers will for interest, variety, and ingenuity surpass any similar set that could be found in any country of the world. Then any person practically conversant with teaching and examining can judge whether the teaching is likely to be the worst where the examining is the most excellent.

The sentence quoted from MM. Demogeot and Montucci, in order to have any valu^, ought to have proceeded from writers more nearly on a level with the distinguished mathe- matical teachers in England. So far as any foundation can be assigned for this statement, it will probably apply not to mathematics especially but to all our studies, and amount to this, that our incessant examinations lead to an over culti- vation of the memory. Then as to the practical bearing of the remark on our present subject it is obvious that the charge, if true, is quite independent of the text-book used for instruction, and might remain equally valid if Euclid were exchanged for any modern author.

The French gentlemen further on contrast what they call Euclid's verbiage with the elegant conciseness of the French methods. It is surely more than an answer to these writers to oppose the high opinion of the merits of Euclid expressed by mathematicians of European fame like Duhamel and Hoiiel. See the First Rejport of the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching^ p. lo.

When we compare the lustre of the mathematical reputation of these latter names with the obscurity of the two former, it seems that there is a great want of accuracy in the statement made in a recent circular: ' The opinion of French mathe- maticians on this question, is plainly expressed in the Report of MM. Demogeot and Montucci. . . .'

I should have to quote very kirgely indeed if I wished to draw attention to every hazardous statement wliich has been advanced ; I must therefore severely restrain myself. Consider the following: * Unquestionably the best teachers depart largely from his words, and even from his methods. That is, they use the work of Euclid, but they would teach better without it. And this is especially true of the application to problems. Everybody recollects, even if he have not the daily experience, how unavailable for problems a boy's knowledge of Euclid generally is.' The value of such a statement depends entirely on the range of the experience from which it has been derived* Suppose for instance that the writer had been for many years an examiner in a large University in which against each candidate's name the school was recorded from which he came ; suppose that the writer had also been much engaged in the numerous examinations connected with the military institutions ; suppose that he had also been for a quarter of a century in residence at one of the largest colleges at Cambridge, and actively employed in the tuition ; suppose also that it had been his duty to classify the new students for lecture purposes by examining them in Euclid and other parts of elementary mathematics; and finally suppose that he was in constant com- munication with the teachers in many of the large schools: then his opinion would have enjoyed an authority which in the absence of these circumstances cannot be claimed for it.

If I may venture to refer to my own experience, wliich I fear commenced when the writer whom I have just quoted was in his cradle, I may say that I have taught geometry both Euclidean and non-Euclidean, that my own early studies and prepossessions were towards the latter, but that my tes- timony would now be entirely in favour of the former.

I admit that to teach Euclid requires patience both from the tutor and the pupil; but I can affirm that I have known many teachers who have succeeded admirably, and have sent a large number of pupils to the University well skilled in solving deductions and examples; nor have I ever known a really able and zealous teacher to fail. I am happy to supplement my own testimony by an extract from the very interesting lecture on Geometrical Teaching by Dr. Lees, of St. Andrews. * Whatever may be the cause of failure in England, it is clear as any demonstration can be that the failure cannot be ascribed to Euclid. Because in Scotland we do employ Euclid as the text- book for our students, and in Scotland we have the teaching of Geometry attended with the most complete success; and this not only in the colleges, but in all the higher and more important schools and academies of the country, and in many of the parish schools even, where the attention "of the teacher is necessarily so much divided.' See also the remarkable Narrative-Essay on a Liberal Education, by the Rev. S. Hawtrey, A.M., Assistant- Master, Eton.

During the existence of tlie East India Company's military college at Addiscombe, it is well known that the cadets were instructed in mathematics by the aid of a course drawn up by the late Professor Cape. The geometry in this course was of the kind which our modern reformers recommend, being founded on Legendre, and adopting the principle of hypothetical con- structions which is now so emphatically praised. In certain large schools where youths were trained for the military colleges it was usual to instruct a class of candidates for "Woolwich, in Euclid, and a class of candidates for Addiscombe in Cape's adaptation of Legendre. Fairness in the procedure was secured by giving the same number of hours by the same masters to each class ; and the honour and rewards which attended success supplied an effectual stimulus both to teachers and pupils. Now consider the result. I was assured by a teacher who was for many years distinguished for the number and the success of his pupils, that the training acquired by the Euclid class was far superior to that acquired by the Legendre class. The Euclid was not more difficult to teach and was more potent and more beneficial in its influence. The testimony made the stronger impression on me because at the time I was disposed from theoretical considerations to hold an opposite opinion ; I was inclined for example to support the use of hypothetical con- structions. Such experience as I afterwards gained shewed the soundness of the judgment at which the practical teache;^ had arrived; and I have also received the emphatic evidence of others who had good opportunities of considering the question, and had come to the same conclusion. I have myself examined at Woolwich and at Addiscombe, and am confident that the teaching in both institutions was sound and zealous; but I have no hesitation in saying that the foundation obtained from Euclid was sounder than that from Legendre.

Although I have admitted that the study of Euclid is one that really demands patient attention from the beginner, yet I cannot admit that the tax is unreasonable. My own experi- ence has been gained in the following manner. Some years since on being appointed principal mathematical lecturer in my college, more systematic arrangements were introduced for the lectures of the freshmen than had been previously adopted ; and as the Euclid seemed to be one of the less popular subjects I undertook it myself. Thus for a long period the way in which this has been taught in schools, and the results of such teaching, have been brought under my notice. It need scarcely be said that while many of the students who have thus presented them- selves to me have been distinguished for mathematical taste and power, yet the majority have been of other kinds ; namely, either persons of ability whose attention was fully occupied with studies difi'erent from mathematics, or persons of scanty attainments and feeble power who could do little more than pass the ordinary examination. I can distinctly afiirm that the cases of hopeless failure in Euclid were very few ; and the advantages derived from the study, even by men of feeble ability, were most decided.

In comparing the performance in Euclid with that in Arithmetic and Algebra there could be no doubt that the Euclid had made the deepest and most beneficial impression: in fact it might be asserted that this constituted by far the most valuable part of the whole training to which such persons were subjected. Even the modes of expression in Euclid, which have been theoretically condemned as long and wearisome, seemed to be in practice well adapted to the position of beginners. As I have already stated there appears to me a decided improvement gradually taking place in the knowledge of the subject exhibited by youths on entering the University. My deliberate judgment is that our ordinary students would suffer very considerably if instead of the well-reasoned system of Euclid any of the more popular but less rigid manuals were allowed to be taken as a substitute.

Let me now make a few remarks on the demand which has been made to allow other books instead of Euclid in examina- tions. It has been said: " We demand that we should not be,— as we are now, by the fact of Euclid being set as a text-book for so many examinations,—practically obliged to adhere to one book. Surely such a request, made by men who know what they want, and are competent to form an opinion on the subject,— and made in earnest,—should induce the Universities and other examining bodies to yield their consent. The grounds of the demand then are three ; that it is made in earnest, that it is made by those who know what they want, and that it is made by those who are competent to form an opinion on the subject. I need not delay on two of the grounds ; the experience of every day shews that claimants may know what they want, and be terribly in earnest in their solicitations, and yet it may be the duty of those to whom the appeal is made to resist it. Moreover it is obvious that the adoption of Euclid as a text book is pre- scribed by those who are equally in earnest and know what they recommend. In short if no institution is to be defended when it is attacked knowingly and earnestly, it is plain that no institu- tion is safe.

I turn then to the other ground, namelj^ that the demand is made by men who are competent to form an opinion on the subject. Now it is not for me to affect to speak in the name of the University of Cambridge; mine is the opinion of only a private unofficial resident. But I have little doubt that many persons here will maintain, without questioning the competence of the claimants to form an opinion, that we ourselves are still much more competent to form an opinion.

For it will not be denied that in all which relates to mathe- matical knowledge we have an aggregate of eminence which far surpasses w^hat has yet been collected together to press the demand on the University. Moreover as inspectors and judges we occupy a central position as it were, and thus enjoy oppor- tunities which do not fall to isolated teachers however eminent and experienced. The incessant demands made upon the Uni- versity to furnish examiners for schools and for the local exami- nations keep us as a body practically familiar with the standard of excellence attained in various places of instruction. Then as college lecturers and private tutors we have the strongest motives for keenly discriminating the state of mathematical knowledge in different schools, as shewn by the performance of the candi- dates when brought under our notice. Moreover some of the residents in the University by continued intercourse w4th old pupils, now themselves occupying important positions as teachers, are enabled to prolong and enlarge the experience w^hich they may have already obtained directly or indirectly. If it is obvious that certain teachers by ability and devotion have for many years sent up well-trained pupils, the University may w^ell consider that it would be neither right nor wise to deprive its best friends of their justly earned distinction, by relaxing in any way the rigour of the examinations. Instead then of urging an instant acquiescence with demands on the ground that those who make them are well qualified to judge, the claimants should endeavour by argument to convince others who are still better qualified to judge.

Here let me invite attention to the following remark which has been made in support of the claim : " In every other subject this is freely accorded ; we are not obliged to use certain grammars or dictionaries, or one fixed treatise on arithmetic, algebra, trigonometry, chemistry, or any other branch of science. Why are we to be tied to one book in geometry alone %" Now in the first place it may be said that there are great advantages in the general use of one common book; and that when one book has long been used almost exclusively it would be rash to throw away certain good in order to grasp at phantasmal benefits. So well is this principle established that we have seen in recent times a vigorous, and it would seem successful, effort to secure the use of a common Latin Grammar in the eminent public schools. In the second place the analogy which is adduced in the remark quoted above would be rejected by many persons as involv- ing an obvious fallacy, namely that the word geometry denotes the same thing by all who use it. By the admirers of Euclid it means a system of demonstrated propositions valued more for the process of reasoning involved than for the results obtained. Whereas with some of the modern reformers the rigour of the method is of small account compared with the facts themselves. We have only to consult the modern books named in a certain list, beginning with the Essentials of Geometry, to see] that practically the object of some of our reformers is not to teach the same subject with the aid of a different text-book, but to teach something very different from what is found in Euclid, under the common name of geometry.

It may be said that I am assuming the point in question, namely, that Euclid is the best book in geometry; but this is not the case. I am not an advocate iorfinality in this matter; though I do go so far as to say that a book should be decidedly better than Euclid before we give up the advantages of uni- formity which it will be almost impossible to secure if the present system is abandoned. But, as it has been well observed by one of the most distinguished mathematicians in Cambridge,

" The demand is unreasonable to throw aside Euclid in favour of any compendium however meagre and however unsound; and this is really the demand which is made: it will be time enough to consider about the discontinuance of Euclid when a better book is deliberately offered." It may be added that the supe- riority to Euclid must be established by indisputable evidence; not by the author's own estimation, the natural but partial testimony of parental fondness ; not by the hasty prediction of some anonymous and irresponsible reviewer ; not by the authority of eminent men, unless the eminence is founded on mathematical attainments; not even by the verdict of teachers who are not conspicuous for the success of their pupils. The decision must rest with students, teachers, and examiners, of considerable repu- tation in the range of the mathematical sciences.

It must be allowed that there is diversity of opinion among the opponents of Euclid, for while the majority seem to claim freedom in the use of any text-books they please, others rather advocate the construction and general adoption of a new text- book. The former class on the whole seem to want something easier and more popular than Euclid; among the latter class there are a few whose notion seems to be that the text-book should be more rigorous and more extensive than Euclid. There are various considerations which seem to me to indicate that if a change be made it will not be in the direction qI greater rigour'y the origin of the movement, the character of the text-books which have hitherto been issued, and the pressure of more modern and more attractive studies, combine to warn us that if the traditional authority which belongs to Euclid be abandoned geometry will be compelled to occupy a position in general education much inferior to that which it now holds.

There is one very obvious mode of advancing the cause of the anti-Euclidean party, which I believe will do far more for them than the most confident assertions and predictions of the merits of the course which they advocate : let them train youths on their system to gain the highest places in the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos, and then other teachers will readily follow in the path thus opened to distinction. But it may naturally be said that as long as Euclid is prescribed for the text-book, the conditions of competition are unfair towards those who adopt some modern substitute; I will examine this point. In the Cambridge Examination for Mathematical Honours there are at present sixteen papers; a quarter of the first paper is devoted to book- work questions on Euclid. Now suppose that looo marks are assigned to the whole examination, and that about five of these fall to the book-work in Euclid. A student of any modern system would surely be able to secure some of these five marks, even from a stern Euclidean partisan. But to take the worst case, suppose the candidate deliberately rejects all chance of these five marks, and turns to the other matter on the paper, especially to the problems ; here the advantage will be irresist- ibly on his side owing to the "superiority of the modern to the ancient methods of geometry " which is confidently asserted. It must be remembered that in spite of all warning and commands to the contrary, examiners will persist in making their papers longer than can be treated fully in the assigned time, so that the sacrifice of the book-work will be in itself trifling and wall be abundantly compensated by the greater facility at the solution of problems which is claimed for the modern teaching, as com- pared with the " unsuggestiveness " of Euclid, and by the greater accuracy of reasoning, since we are told that " the logical train- ing to be got from Euclid is very imperfect and in some respects bad." Thus on the whole the disciple of the modern school will even in the first paper of the Cambridge Tripos Examination be more favourably situated than the student of Euclid ; and of course in the other papers the advantages in his favour become largely increased. For we must remember that we are expressly told that Euclid is " an unsuitable preparation for the higher mathematical training of the present day ; " and that "those who continue their mathematical reading with a view of obtaining honours at the University . . . will gain much through economy of time and the advantage of modern lights."

The final result is this; according to the promises of the geometrical reformers, one of their pupils might sacrifice five marks out of a thousand, while for all the remaining 995 his chance would be superior to that of a Euclid-trained student. It may be added that in future the Cambridge Mathematical Examinations are to be rather longer than they have been up to the date of my writing; so that the advantage of the anti- Euclidean school will be increased. Moreover we must remember that in the Smith's Prizes Examination the elementary geometry of Euclid scarcely appears, so that the modern reformers would not have here any obstacle to the triumphant vindication of their superiority as teachers of the higher mathematics. The marvellous thing is that in these days of competition for educa- cational prizes those who believe themselves to possess such a vast superiority of methods do not keep the secret to them- selves, instead of offering it to all, and pressing it on the reluc- tant and incredulous. Surely instead of mere assertion of the benefits to be secured by the modern treatment, it will be far more dignified and far more conclusive to demonstrate the pro- position by brilliant success in the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos. Suppose we were to read in the ordinary channels of information some such notice as this next January : " The first six wranglers are considered to owe much of their success to the fact that in their training the fossil geometry of Alexandria was thrown aside and recent specimens substituted ;" then opposition would be vanquished, and teachers would wonder, praise, and imitate. But until the promises of success are followed by a performance as yet never witnessed we are reminded of tlie case of a bald hairdresser who presses on his customers his infallible specific for producing redundant locks.

To those who object to Euclid as an inadequate course of plane geometry it may then be replied briefly that it is easy, if thought convenient or necessary, to supply any additional matter. But for my part I think there are grave objections to any large increase in the extent of the course of synthetical geometry which is to be prepared for examination purposes. One great drawback to our present system of mathematical instruction and examination is the monotony which prevails in many parts. When a mathematical subject has been studied so far as to master the essential principles, little more is gained by pursuing these principles into almost endless applications. On this account we may be disposed to regard with slender satisfac- tion the expenditure of much time on geometrical conic sections ; the student seems to gain only new facts, but no fresh ideas or principles. Thus after a moderate course of synthetical geo- metry such as Euclid supplies, it may be most advantageous for the student to pass on to other subjects like analytical geometry and trigonometry w^hich present him with ideas of another kind, and not mere repetitions of those with which he is already familiar.

It has been said, and apparently with great justice, that exami- nation in elementry geometry under a system of unrestricted text-books will be a very troublesome process ; for it is obvious that in different systems the demonstration of a particular pro- position may be more or less laborious, and so may be entitled to more or fewer marks. This perplexity is certainly felt by examiners as regards geometrical conic sections ; and by teachers also who may be uncertain as to the particular system which the examiners may prefer or favour. It has been asserted that the objection thus raised is imaginary, and that " the manuals of geometry will not differ from one another nearly so wddely as the manuals of algebra or chemistry : yet it is not difficult to examine in algebra and chemistry." But I am unable to feel the confidence thus expressed. It seems to me that much more variety may be expected in treatises on geometry than on algebra; certainly if we may judge from the experience of the examiners at Cambridge the subject of geometrical conies is the most embarrassing which occurs at present, and this fact suggests a conclusion very different from that which is laid down in the preceding quotation. Of course there will be no trouble in examining a single school, because the system there adopted will be known and followed by the examiner.

I have no wish to exaggerate the difficulty; but I consider it to be real and serious, more especially as it presents itself at the outset of a youth's career, and so may cause disappointment just when discriminating encouragement is most valuable. But I think the matter must be left almost entirely to the discretion of examiners; the attempts which have been made to settle it by regulation do not seem to me very happy. For example, I read: *' As the existing text-books are not very numerous, it would not be too much to require examiners to be acquainted with them sufficiently for the purpose of testing the accuracy of written, or even, if necessary, of oral answers." The language seems to me truly extraordinary. Surely examiners are in general men of more mathematical attainments than this implies ; for it would appear that all we can expect them to do is to turn to some text-book and see if the student has correctly repro- duced it. The process in a mva voce examination would be rather ignominious if when an answer had been returned by a candidate some indifferent manual had to be consulted to see if the answer was correct.

I have heard that an examining board has recently issued instructions to its executive officers to make themselves ac- quainted with the various text-books. This does not enjoin distinctly, what the above quotation implies, that the examiner is to accept all demonstrations which are in print as of nearly equal value; but it seems rather to suggest such a course. The point is important and should be settled. Suppose a candidate offered something taken from the Essentials of Geo- metry, and the examiner was convinced that the treatment was inadequate or unsound; then is the candidate nevertheless to obtain full marks % Again, it may be asked, why printed books alone are to be accepted; and why a student who has gone through a manuscript course of geometry should be precluded from following it % The regulation might be made that he should submit a copy of his manuscript course to the examiner in order that it might be ascertained whether he had reproduced it accurately. As I have already intimated, the only plan which can be adopted is to choose able and impartial men for examiners, and trust them to appreciate the merits of the papers submitted by the candidate to them.

The examiners will find many perplexing cases I have no doubt; one great source of trouble seems to me to consist in the fact that what may be a sound demonstration to one person with adequate preliminary study is not a demonstration to another person who has not gone through the discipline. To take a very simple example : let the proposition be, The, angles at the hase of an isosceles triangle are equal. Suppose a candi- date dismisses this briefly with the words, this is evident from symmetry ; the question will be, what amount of credit is to be assigned to him. It is quite possible that a well-trained mathe- matician may hold himself convinced of the truth of the pro- position by the consideration of symmetry, but it does not follow that the statement would really be a demonstration for an early student. Or suppose that another imbued with " the doctrine of the imaginary and inconceivable" says as briefly " the proposition is true, for the inequality of the angles is inconceivable and therefore false ;" then is the examiner to award full marks, even if he himself belongs to the school of metaphysics which denies that the inconceivable is necessarily the false 1

It has been urged as an objection against Euclid that the number of his propositions is too great. Thus it has been said that the 17 3 propositions of the six books might be reduced to 120, and taught in very little more than half the time required to go through the same matter in Euclid. So far as the half time is concerned this seems to be only an expression of belief as to the result of an untried experiment; it is based on the comparison of a few other books with Euclid, one of these being the Course of the late Professor Cape ; as I have already stated, actual experience suggests a conclusion directly contrary to the present prediction. As to the number of propositions we readily admit that a reduction might be made, for it is obvious that we may in many cases either combine or separate according to our taste. But the difficulty of a subject does not vary directly as the number of propositions in which it is contained ; a single proposition will in some cases require more time and attention than .half a dozen others. I have no doubt that the mixture of easy propositions with the more difficult is a great encouragement to beginners in Euclid; and instead of diminish- ing the number of propositions I should prefer to see some increase : for example I should like to have Euclid i. 26 divided into two parts, and Euclid i. 28 into two parts.

Again, it has been said that Euclid is artificial, and that he " has sacrificed to a great extent simplicity and naturalness in his demonstrations;" it is a curious instance of the difference of opinion which we may find on the same subject, for, with a much wider experience than the writer whom I quote, I believe that Euclid maintains, and does not sacrifice, simplicity and natural- ness in his system, assuming that we wish to have strictness above all things.

The exclusion of hypothetical constructions has been repre- sented as a great defect in Euclid ; and it has been said that this has made the confused order of his first book necessary. Con- fused order is rather a contradictory expression; but it may be presumed that the charge is intended to be one of confusion : I venture to deny the confusion. I admit that Euclid wished to make the sul)ject depend on as few axioms and postulates as possible; and this I regard as one of his great merits; it has been shown by one of the most distinguished mathematicians of our time how the history of science teaches in the clearest language that the struggle against self-imposed restrictioDS has been of the most signal service in the advancement of knowledge.

The use of hypothetical constructions will not present itself often enough to produce any very great saving in the demon- strations ; while the difficulty which they produce to many beginners, as shown by the experience to which I have already referred, is a fatal objection to them. Why should a beginner not assume that he can draw a circle through four given points if he finds it convenient %

Finally, I hold that Euclid, in his solution of the problems he requires, supplies matter which is simple and attractive to beginners, and which therefore adds practically nothing to their labours, while it has the advantage of rendering his treatise far more rigorous and convincing to them.

The objections against Euclid's order seem to me to spring mainly from an intrusion of natural history into the region of mathematics; I am not the first to print this remark, though it occurred to me independently. It is to the influence of the classificatory sciences that we probably owe this notion that it is desirable or essential in our geometrical course to have all the properties of triangles thrown together, then all the properties of rectangles, then perhaps all the properties of circles ; and so on. Let me quote authority in favour of Euclid, far more impressive than any which on this point has been brought against him : " Euclid . . . fortunately for us, never dreamed of a geometry of triangles as distinguished from a geometry of circles, . . . but made one help out the other as he best could."

Euclid has been blamed for his adherence to the syllogistic method ; but it is not necessary to say much on this point, because the reformers are not agreed concerning it: those who are against the syllogism may pair off with those who are for the syllogism. We are told in this connexion that, " the result is, as every one knows, that boys may have worked at Euclid for years, and may yet know next to nothing of Greometry." We may readily admit that such may be the case with boys excep- tionally stupid or indolent; but if any teacher records this as the average result of his experience, it must I think be singularly to his own discredit.

There is, I see, a notion that the syllogistic form, since it makes the demonstrations a little longer, makes them more difficult; this I cannot admit. The number of words employed is not a test of the difficulty of a demonstration. An examiner, especially if he is examining vix)a voce, can readily find out where the difficulties of the demonstrations really lie ; my own expe- rience leads me to the conclusion that the syllogistic form instead of being an impediment is really a great assistance, especially to early students.

"Unsuggestiveness" has been urged as a fault in Euclid; which is interpreted to mean that it does not produce ability to solve problems. We are told: " Everybody recollects, even if he have not the daily experience, how unavailable for problems a boy's knowledge of Euclid generally is. Yet this is the true test of geometrical knowledge; and problems and original work ought to occupy a much larger share of a boy's time than they do at present." I need not repeat what I have already said, that English mathematiciaus, hitherto trained in Euclid, are unrivalled for their ingenuity and fertility in the construction and solution of problems. But I will remark that in the im- portant mathematical examinations which are conducted at Cambridge the rapid and correct solution of problems is of paramount value, so that any teacher who can develop that power in his pupils will need no other evidence of the merits of his system.

Euclid's treatment of proportion has been especially marked out for condemnation; indeed, with the boldness which attaches to many assertions on the subject of elementary geometry, it has been pronounced already dead. In my own college it has never been laid aside; only a few montlis since one of our most influential tutors stated that he was accustomed to give a pro- position out of the fifth book of Euclid to some candidates for emoduments, and he considered it a very satisfactory constituent of the whole process of testing them.

I should exceedingly regret the omission of the fifth book of Euclid, which I hold to be one of the most important parts of the training supplied by Elementary Geometry. I do not con- sider it necessary for beginners to go through the entire book ; but the leading projDositions might be mastered, and the student -led to see how they can be developed if necessary. I may refer here to some valuable remarks which have been made on the subject by the writer of a Syllabus of Elementary Geometry . . . who himself I believe counts with the reformers. He sums up thus "... any easy and unsatisfactory short cuts (and I have sometimes seen an inclination for such) should be scouted, as a simple deception of inexjDcrienced students."

However, I must remark that I see with great satisfaction the following Resolution which was adopted at a recent meeting of the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching : " That 110 treatise on Geometry can be regarded as complete without a rigorous treatment of ratio and proportion either by Euclid's method, or by some equally rigorous method of limits." It would be injudicious to lay much stress on resolutions carried by a majority of votes; but at least we have a striking contra- diction to the confident statement that Euclid's theory of propor- tion is dead. We shall very likely see here, what has been noticed before, that a course may be j)i^oposed which differs widely from Euclid's, and then, under the guidance of superior knowledge and experience, the wanderers are brought back to the old path. Legendre's return to Euclid's treatment of parallels is a conspicuous example ; see the valuable paper by Professor Kelland on Superjwsition in the Edinburgh Transactions, Vol. XXI.

I cannot avoid noticing one objection which has been urged against Euclid in relation to his doctrine of proportion ; namel}-, that it leaves " the' half-defined impression that all profound reasoning is something far fetched and artificial, and differing altogether from good clear common sense." It appears to me that if a person imagines that " good clear common sense " will \)t sufficient for mastering jDure and mixed mathematics, to say nothing of contributing to their progress,—the sooner he is un- deceived the better. Mathematical science consists of a rich collection of investigations accumulated by the incessant labour of many years, by which results are obtained far beyond the range of unassisted common sense; of these processes Euclid's theory of proportion is a good type, and it may well be said that from the degree of reverent attention which [the student devotes to it, we may in most cases form a safe estimate of his future 2jrogress in these important subjects.

In conclusion I will say that no person can be a warmer advocate than I am for the improvement of Geometrical Teacliing : but I think that this may be obtained without the hazardous experiment of rejecting methods, the efficacy of which a long experience has abundantly demonstrated.

APPENDIX II.

Exti^act from Mr. De Morgans revieio of M7\

Wilson's Geometry, in the 'Athenceicm' for July 18, 1868.

The Schools' Inquiry Commission has raised the question whether Euclid be, as many suppose, the best elementary treatise on geometry, or whether it be a mockery, delusion, snare, hindrance, pitfall, shoal, shallow, and snake in the grass.

"We pass on to a slight examination of Mr. Wilson's book. We specially intend to separate the logician from the geometer. In the author's own interest, and that he may be as powerful a defender as can be of a cause we expect and desire to see fully argued, we recommend him to revise his notions of logic. We know that mathematicians care no more for logic than logicians for mathematics. The two eyes of exact science are mathematics and logic : the mathematical sect puts out the logical eye, the logical sect puts out the mathematical eye; each believing that it sees better with one eye than with two. The consequences are ludicrous. On the one side we have, by confusion of words, the great logician Hamilton bringing forward two quantities which are ' one and the same quantity,' Breadth and Depth, while, within a few sentences, ' the greater the Breadth, the less' the Depth.' On the other side, we have the great mathematician, Mr. Wilson, also by confusion of words, speaking of the ' invariably syllogistic form of liis [Euclid's] reasoning,' and, to show that this is not a mere slip, he afterwards talks of the * detailed syllogistic form' as a 'source of obscurity to beginners, and damaging to true geometrical freedom and power.'

Euclid a book of syllogistic form ! We stared. We never heard of such a book, except the edition of Herlinus and Dasypodius (1566), who, quite ignorant that Euclid was syllogistic already, made him so, and reckoned up the syllogi^rms. Thus i. 47 has ^ syllogismi novem' at the head. They did not get much thanks ; the book was never reprinted, and was in oblivion-dust when Hamilton mentioned the zealous but thick-headed logicians, as he called them. Prof. Mansel, in our own day, has reprinted one of their propositions as a curiosity. In 1831, Mr. De Morgan, advocating the reduction of a few propositions to detailed syllogistic form as an exercise for students, gave i. 47 as a specimen, in the Library of Useful Knowledge; this Avas reprinted, we believe, in the preface to various editions of Lardner's Euclid. A look will show the difference between Euclid and syllogistic form. Had the Elements been syllogistic, it would have been quoted in all time, as a ^^vQQi of the rapid diffusion of Aristotle's writings, that they had saturated his junior contemporary with their methods: with a controversy, most likely, raised by those who would have contended that Euclid invented syllogistic form for himself. Now it is well known that diffusion of Aristotle's writings commenced after his death, and that it was—not quite correctly—the common belief that evulgation did not take place until two hundred years after his death. Could this belief ever have existed if Euclid had invariably used ' syllogistic form' %

What could have been meant ? Craving pardon if wrong, we suspect Mr. Wilson to mean that Euclid did not deal in arguments with su2)pressed premisses. Euclid was quite right: the first reasonings presented to a beginner should be of full statement. He may be trained to suppression: but the true way to abbreviation is from the full length. Mr. "Wilson does not use the phrases of reasoning consistently. He tells the student that a corollary is ' a geometrical truth easily deducible from a theorem': and then, to the theorem that only one jDerpendicular can be drawn to a straight line, he gives as a corollary that the external angle of a triangle is greater than the internal opposite. This is not a corollary from the theorem, but a matter taken for granted in proving it.

Leavins: this, with a recommendation to the author to strengthen his armour by the study of logic, we pass on to the system. Tliere is in it one great point, which brings dov/n all the rest if it fall', and may j^erhaps—but we must see Part II. before we decide^support the rest if it stand. Tliat jDoint is the treatment of the angle, which amounts to this, that certain notions about direction, taken as self-evident, are permitted to make all about angles, parallels and all, immediate consequences. The notion of continuous change, and consequences derived from it, enters without even an express assumption: 'continually' is enough.

Mr. Wilson would not have ventured expressly to postulate that when a magnitude changes continuously, all magnitudes which change with it also change continuously. He knows that when a point moves on a line, an angle may undergo a sudden change of two right angles. He trusts to the beginner's perception of truth in the case before him : the whok truth would make that beginner feel that he is on a foundation of general principles made safe for him by selection, and only safe because the exceptions are not likely to occur to his mind. On this we write, as Newton wrote on another matter, Falsa ! Falsa ! Non est Geometria !

What ' direction' is we are not told, except that ' straight lines which meet have different directions.' Is a direction a magnitude % Is one direction greater than another ? We should suppose so; for an angle, a magnitude, a thing which is to be halved and quartered, is the ' difference of the direction' of ' two straight lines that meet one another.' A better defini- tion follows; the ' quantity of turning' by which we pass from one direction to another. But hardly any use is made of this, and none at the commencement. And why two definitions ? Is the difference of two directions the same tldny as the rotation by which we pass from one to the other ? Is the difference of position of London and Rugby a number of miles on the railroad 1 Yes, in a loosely-derived and popular and slip-slop sense: and in like manner we say that one man is a pigeon-pie, and another is a shoulder of lamb, when we describe their contributions to a pic-nic. Biit non est geometria ! Metaphor and paronomasia can draw the car of jDoetry; but they tumble the waggon of geometry into the ditch.

Parallels, of course, are lines which have the same direction. It is stated, as an immediate consequence, that two lines which meet cannot make the same angle with a third line, on the same side, for they are in different directions. Parallels are knocked over in a trice. There is a covert notion of direction, which, though only defined with reference to lines which meet, is straightway transferred to lines which do not. According to the definition, direction is a relation of lines which do meet, and yet lines which have the same direction can be lines which never meet. There is a great qiiant'ity of turning wanted; turning of implied assumption into expressed. Mr. Wilson M'ould, we have no doubt, immediately introduce and defend all we ask for; and we quite admit that his system has a right to it. How do you know, we ask, that lines which have the same direction never meef? Answer—lines which meet have different directions. We know they have; but how do we know that, under the definition given, the relation called direction has any application at all to lines which never meet % The use of the notion of limits may give an answer : but what is the system of geometry which introduces continuity and limits to the mind as yet untaught to think of space and of magnitude 1 Answer, a royal road. If the difficulty were met by expressed postulates, tke very beginner himself would be frightened.

There is a possibility that Mr. Wilson may mean that lines which make the same angle with a third on the same side are in the same direction. If this be the case, either he assumes that lines equally inclined to one straight line are equally inclined to all,—and this we believe he does, under a play on the word ' direction'; or he makes a quibble only one degree above a pun on his own arbitrary assumption of his right to the word 'same*: and this we do not believe he does. He should have been more explicit: he should have said, My system involves an assumption wliich has lain at the root of many attempts upon the question of parallels, and has always been scouted as soon as seen. He should have added, I assume Euclid's eleventh axiom : I have a notion of direction; I tell you that lines which meet have different directions; I imply that lines which make different angles v/ith a third have also different directions; and I assume that lines of different directions will meet. Mr. Wilson is so concise that it is not easy to be very positive as to how much he will admit of the above, or how he will get over or round it. When put upon his defence he must be more explicit. Mr. AYilson gives four explicit axioms about the straiglit line : and not one about the angle.

We feel confidence that no such system as Mr. Wilson has put forward will replace Euclid in this country. The old geometry is a very English subject, and the heretics of this orthodoxy are the extreme of heretics: even Bishop Colenso has written a Euclid. And the reason is of the same kind as that by which the classics have held their ground in education. There is a mixture of good sense and of what, for want of a better name, people call prejudice: but to this mixture we owe our stability. The proper word is 2>osfjudice, a clinging to past experience, often longer than is held judicious by after times. We only desire to avail ourselves of this feeling until the book is produced which is to supplant Euclid ; we regret the manner in which it has allowed the retention of the faults of Euclid; and we trust the fight against it will rage until it ends in an amended form of Euclid.

APPENDIX III.

Proof that, if any one Proposition of Table II he granted as an Axiom, the rest can he deduced from it. (See pp. 34, 40.)

" . . , and so we make it quite a merry-go-rounder." I was obliged to consider a little before I understood what Mr. Peggotty meant by this figure, expressive of a complete circle of intelligence.

It is to be proved that, if any one of the Propositions of Table II be granted, the rest can be proved.

It is assumed that the lesser of two unequal finite magnitudes of the same kind may be multiplied so as to exceed the greater.

Euclid I, 1 to 28, is assumed as j^roved.

It is assumed that, where two Propositions are Contranominals, t^o that each can be proved from the other, it is not necessary to include both in the series of proofs.

Lemma 1.

A Pair of Lines, of which one contains two points equidistant from the other, have a common perpendicular.

E 1. F u K n

Let AB contain 2 points E, F, equidistant from CD. From E, F, draw EG, FH, j_ CD; bisect GB in K, and EF in L, and join EL. hence, if the diagram be reversed, and so phiced on its former traces that G coincides witli //, and // with G, K re- taining its position, GE coincides with HF, and IIF with GE;

.*. E coincides with F, and F with E ;

.•. L retains its position ;

.-. Z GKL coincides with Z HKL, and is equal to it;

.-. Zs at A' are right.

Similarly Zs at Z are right.

Therefore a Pair of Lines, &c. Q. E. D.

(<.). II. 1.

A Pair of separatioiial Lines are eqiiaUy inclined to any transversal.

[N.B. The Contranominal of this will be proved at the end of the series.]

(/3). II. 16 {a).

Two intersecting Lines cannot both be separational from the same Line.

[Figure 16]

Let AEB, GEffhe two intersecting Lines, and CD another Line. It is to be proved that they cannot both be separational from CD.

In CD take any point F; and join EF. Now, if possible, let AB, Gil hoth be separational from CD; .'. Zs AEF, GEF are both equal to lEFD ; [(a).

.*. they are equal to each other; which is absurd. Therefore two intersecting Lines &c. Q. E. D.

(yy 11. 6. A Pair of se]}arational Lines are equidistantial from each

Either.

Let AB, CD be separational Lines : it shall be proved that they are equidistantial from each other.

In AB take any 2 points E, F; and draw EG, FH, j_ CD. Now, if FH>EG, from it cut off KH equal to EG\ and join EK; then, •.• EG=KH,

.'. EK, CD have a common perpendicular; [Lemma 1. .-. EK is separational from CD ; [Euc. I. 27.

.-. AB, EK, intersecting Lines, are both separational from CD ; which is absurd ; [(/S).

.-. FHi^noi >EG. Similarly it may be proved that EG is not >FH. Therefore EG=FH.

Similarly it may be proved that any 2 points in ^^ are equidistant from CD, and that any 2 points in CD are equi- distant from AB.

Therefore AB, CD are equidistantial from each other. Therefore a Pair &c. Q. E. D.

(a). IL 11.

A Pair of Lines, which are equally inclined to a certain transversal, are equidistantial from each other.

A Pair of Lines, which are equally inclined to a certain transversal, are separational; [Euc. L 27. also a Pair of separational Lines are equidistantial from each other; [(y).

.-. a Pair of Lines, &c. Q. E. D.

Through a given point, without a given Line, a Line may he drawn such that the two Lines are equidistantial from each other.

For, if through the given point there be drawn a transversal, there can also be drawn through it a Line such that the two Lines make equal Zs with the transversal; [Euc. L 23. and this Line will be such that the two Lines are equi- distantial from each other. [(6).

Therefore, &c. Q. E. D.

(C). 11. 17.

A Line cannot recede from and then approach another; nor can one approach and then recede from another on the same side of it.

L.^y

[Figure 17]

If possible, let ABC first recede from, and then approach, DjE; that is, let the perpendicular £G be > each of the two perpendiculars AF, CH.

From GB cut off GK > each of the two, AF, CH.

Now a Line may be drawn, through K, equidistantial from DE; ^ [(.). and the points A, C will lie on the side of it next to DE, and B on the other side;

.-. it will cut AB between A and B, and BC between B and C.

Let L, M be the points of intersection ; and join LM\

,*. the 2 Lines LBM, LKM contain a space; which is absurd.

Similarly it may be proved that ABC cannot first approach and then recede from DE on the same side of it.

Therefore a Line &c. (J. E. D.

(,). 11. 13.

A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the other, are eqiddistantial from each other.

G K H

Let A B contain two points M, F, equidistant from CD. From E, F, draw EG, FH, _l CD ; bisect GH in K, and EF in L, and join KL.

Now EG-FH', [hyjj. hence, if the diagram be reversed, and so placed on its former traces that G coincides with H, and H with G, K re- taining its position, GE coincides with HE, and HE with GE ]

.'. E coincides with F, and F with E ;

.-. L retains its position;

.*., if there be a point in LA whose distance is < LK, there is another such point in LB, and the Line AB will first recede from and then approach CD ; which is absurd. [(C).

Similarly if there be one whose distance is >LK.

:. AB \^ equidistantial from CD.

Similarly it may be proved that CD is equidistantial from AB.

Therefore a Pair of Lines, &c. Q. E. D.

Lemma 2. Through a given 2^oint may he draiv7i a common jx'^jpen- dicular to a given Pair of Lines, of which each is equidistantial from the other. a K 11

Let AB, CD be the given Pair of Lines.

Tbrougli the given point draw a Line perpendicular to AB^ and let it meet AB in L. Li AB take any 2 points E, l\ equidistant from L. From E, F, draw EG, FH, perpendicular to CD. Bisect 6^i/^ at iT; and join A''Z.

Now E, F are 2 points, in AB, equidistant from CD; and GH is bisected in A", and EF in L ;

.'. KL is a common perpendicular; [Lemma 1.

.'. it coincides with the Line drawn, through the <riveu point, perpendicular to AB, since both meet AB at L;

.'. KL is the Line required.

Q. E. F.

{&). IL9.

A Fair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the other, are equally inclined to any transversal.

Let AB contain two points equidistant from CD, and let EF be a certain transversal: it shall be proved that LAEF—LEFD.

Now AB, CD, are equidistantial from each other. \{r]).

Bisect EF at G; through G let UGK be drawn a common perpendicular to AB and CD. [Lemma 2.

Hence, in Triangles GEH, GFK, side GE and Zs EGH, GHE, are respectively equal to side GF and Zs FGK, GKF;

.'. Z GEH^L GFK. [Euc. L 26.

Therefore a Pair of Lines, &c. Q. E. D.

W. II. 3-

Through a given pointy without a given Line, a Line may he drawn such that the tioo Lines are equally inclined to any trans- versal.

Take a second point, on the same side of the given Line and at the same distance from it; and join the 2 points.

Then the Line, so drawn, and the given Line, are equally inclined to any transversal. \{6).

Therefore through a given point, &c. Q. E. D.

(X). IL 18 {h).

The angles of a Triangle are together equal to two right angles.

[Figure 18]

Let ABC be a Triangle. It is to be proved that its 3 angles are together equal to 2 right angles.

Through A let DAE be drawn, such that DAE, BC are equally inclined to any transversal. [(k).

Then IB=IDAB, and IC=Z.EAC;

.-. AsB, C, BAC=ls DAB, EAC, BAG;

= 2 rt Zs. [Euc. L 13.

Therefore the angles &c. Q. E. D.

W. II-4.

A Pair of Lines, wliich are equally inclined to a certain trans- versal, are so to any transversal.

E G ^

F H "

APPENDIX III. 25{>

Let AB, CD be equally inclined to EF; and let Gil be any other transversal. It shall be proved that they are equally inclined to GH. Join EH,

Because Zs of Triangle EFH together = 2 rt Zs, and like- wise tho^e of Triangle EGH, [(X). /. angles of Figure FG together=4 rt angles ; also, by hypothesis, Z s GEF, EFH together = 2 rt Z s ; .-. remaining Z s EGH, GHF together = 2 rt Z s ; .'. AB, CD are equally inclined to GH. Therefore a Pair of Lines, &c. Q. E. B:

CONTEANOMIXAL OF (a). IL 2.

A Pair of Lines, which make with a third Line two interior angles, on one side of it, together less than two right angles, will meet on that side if prodMced.

[Figure 19]

Let ABC, DEF be two Triangles such that Z s, A, D are equal, and DE, DF equimultiples of AB, A C.

From DE cut off successive parts equal to AB; and let the points of section be G, H. At G, H make Z s equal to Z E.

Then the Lines, so drawn, are separational from EF and from one another ; [Euc. I. 28.

.*. these Lines meet DF between D and F; call these points K, L.

At G, H make Z s equal to Z D.

Then the Lines, so drawn, are separational from DF;

.'. they respectively meet HL between H and L, and EF between E and F; call these points M, N.

[Figure 20]

Because Triangles DGK, GHM^ HEN are on equal bases and have their base-Z s respectively equal,

.-. DK, GM, HN are equal. [Euc. I. 26.

Join GL. Because DL, GM are equally inclined to BE^

:. they are equally inclined to GL ; [ (/x).

.-. Z s KLG, LGM are equal. Similarly, *.• GK^ HL are equally inclined to DE, .'. they are equally inclined to GL; .-. Z s EGL, GLM are equal. Because Triangles LGK, GLM are on same base LG and have their base-Z s respectively equal,

.-. KL = GM, i.e. = BK. [I. 26.

Similarly it may be proved that LF = HN^ i. e. = BK. Hence BE, BF are equimultiples of BG, BK, i.e. of AB, BK', but they are also equimultiples oi AB, AC;

.: BK = AC. Because Triangles ABC, BGK have Z.s A, B equal, and AB, AC respectively equal to BG, BK,

.'. Zs, B, BGK are equal, and likewise As C, BKG. [I. 4. Because GK, EF are equally inclined to BE, ' .•. they are equally inclined to BF; [(/^)i. e. Z s BKG, BFE are equal; .*. As B, C are respectively equal to As E, F. Hence, two Triangles, which have their vertical angles equal, and the 2 sides of the one respectively equimultiples of those of the other, have their base-angles respectively equal.

[Table p300]

Now let AB, CD make with AC two interior L^BAC, ACD together < 2 right Zs. It shall be proved that they will meet if produced towards B, T).

In CD take any point D. Join AB. At zl make LB AH equal to Z CBA.

Hence AH^ CB are equally inclined to all transversals ; [(/u). .-. L^ HAG, ACD together = 2 right Zs ; .-. they together > /.^ BAC, ACB-, :. AH AC > IBAC/i.e. > I BAB; .-. I CBA > A BAB. At B, in Line BA, make an Z equal to Z BAB ; then the Line, so drawn, will fall within Z CBA, and will meet CA between C and A. Call this point K.

In d produced take CL a multiple of CK, and > C^. And in CB produced take CM the same multiple of CB that CL is of CA\ And join LM.

Because Triangles CKB, CLM have a common vertical Z, and the 2 sides of the one respectively equimultiples of those of the other,

/., by what has been already proved, Z s CKB, CLM are equal.

Because AB, KB are equally inclined to AB,

.-. they are equally inclined to CL ; [ (/i).

.-. Z CAB = Z (7A'Z> i. e. = Z CZJ/; .-. AB is separational from LM; [Euc. L 28.

.-. if produced, it will meet CM. Therefore a Pair of Lines, &c. Q.E.D.

APPENDIX IV.

List of Propositions of Euc. I, II, with references to their occurrence in the manuals of his

Modern Rivals.

§ 1. Keferences to Legendre, Cuthbertson, and Henrici.

[Table p301]

§ 1. Refekences to Wilson, Pierce, and

"WlLLOCK.

[Table p302]

[Table p303]

[Table p304]

[Table p305]

[Table p306]

[Table p307]

[Table p308]

[Table p309]

§ 2. References to the other Modern Eivals.

[Table p310]

[Table p311]

[Table p312]

[Table p313]

[Table p314]

^ THE END.

^.

[Table p317]

mu ca.*?J002 00212 0942

Euclid and h.s modern rivals. scni
