Section 12: Of the Doctrine of our Priests


The entire doctrine of the Circles can be boiled down to a single motto: "Pay attention to your Configuration." Whether the subject is politics, religion, or morality, everything they teach is aimed at improving individual and collective Configuration -- with special emphasis, naturally, on the Configuration of the Circles themselves, to which all other goals take a backseat.

To their credit, the Circles have effectively stamped out those old heresies that led people to waste their energy and compassion on the foolish belief that behavior depends on willpower, effort, training, encouragement, praise, or anything other than Configuration. It was Pantocyclus -- the famous Circle I mentioned earlier, the one who crushed the Colour Revolt -- who first convinced the public that Configuration makes the man. If, for example, you're born an Isosceles with two uneven sides, you will inevitably go wrong unless you get them corrected -- which means a trip to the Isosceles Hospital. Likewise, if you're a Triangle, Square, or even a Polygon born with any Irregularity, you need to be admitted to one of the Regular Hospitals to have your condition treated. Otherwise, you'll end your days in the State Prison, or at the angle of the State Executioner.

All faults and defects, from the most minor misbehavior to the most outrageous crime, Pantocyclus traced back to some deviation from perfect Regularity in the body. These deviations might be caused (if they weren't present from birth) by getting bumped in a crowd, by not getting enough exercise, or by getting too much of it, or even by a sudden temperature change that caused some vulnerable part of the body to shrink or expand. Therefore, that distinguished Philosopher concluded, neither good behavior nor bad behavior deserves any real praise or blame. After all, why should you praise a Square for faithfully defending his client's interests when what you should really admire is the precise accuracy of his right angles? And why blame a lying, thieving Isosceles when you should really be mourning the hopeless inequality of his sides?

In theory, this doctrine is beyond question. But in practice, it has some awkward drawbacks. When you're dealing with an Isosceles, and the scoundrel claims he can't help stealing because of his unevenness, you just reply that for that very reason -- because he can't help being a menace to his neighbors -- you, the Magistrate, can't help sentencing him to be consumed. End of discussion. But in minor domestic squabbles, where the penalty of consumption -- that is, death -- is off the table, this theory of Configuration can get pretty uncomfortable. I'll confess that when one of my own Hexagonal Grandsons uses as his excuse for disobedience that a sudden change in temperature has been too much for his Perimeter, and that I really ought to blame not him but his Configuration -- which, he assures me, can only be strengthened by generous helpings of the finest sweets -- I can neither find a logical way to reject his argument nor a practical way to accept his conclusions.

For my part, I find it best to assume that a good firm scolding or punishment has some hidden, strengthening effect on my Grandson's Configuration, though I admit I have no real basis for thinking so. At any rate, I'm not alone in taking this way out of the dilemma. I've noticed that many of the highest Circles, when sitting as judges in the courts, freely use praise and blame toward both Regular and Irregular Figures. And in their own homes, I know from personal experience that when scolding their children, they talk about "right" and "wrong" just as passionately and vehemently as if they truly believed those words referred to real things, and that a person is actually capable of choosing between them.

In keeping with their constant policy of making Configuration the central idea in every mind, the Circles have actually reversed that Commandment which in Spaceland governs the relationship between parents and children. In your world, children are taught to honor their parents. In ours -- after the Circles, who are the primary object of universal reverence -- a man is taught to honor his Grandson, if he has one, or failing that, his Son. By "honor," though, they definitely don't mean "spoil." They mean a deep respect for their highest potential. The Circles teach that fathers have a duty to put their own interests below those of their descendants, and in doing so, they advance the welfare of the whole State as well as their own immediate family line.

The weak point in the Circles' system -- if a humble Square may dare to suggest that anything Circular has a weak point -- seems to me to lie in their treatment of Women.

Since it's critically important for Society that Irregular births be discouraged, it follows that no Woman with any Irregularities in her family history is a suitable wife for a man who wants his descendants to rise steadily through the social ranks.

Now, the Irregularity of a Male is something you can measure. But since all Women are straight lines -- and therefore all visibly Regular, so to speak -- you need some other way to determine what I might call their invisible Irregularity: that is, their potential for producing Irregular offspring. This is handled through carefully maintained pedigrees, which are kept and overseen by the State. Without a certified pedigree, no Woman is allowed to marry.

You might expect that a Circle -- proud of his ancestry and protective of a lineage that might someday produce a Chief Circle -- would be the most careful of all in choosing a wife with a spotless family record. But it's actually the opposite. The care taken in choosing a Regular wife seems to decrease as you go up the social ladder. Nothing would persuade an ambitious Isosceles, who dreams of fathering an Equilateral Son, to marry a wife with even a single Irregularity among her ancestors. A Square or Pentagon, confident that his family is on the rise, doesn't bother checking beyond five hundred generations back. A Hexagon or Dodecagon is even more careless about his wife's pedigree. But a Circle has been known to deliberately marry a wife whose Great-Grandfather was Irregular, and all because of some slight superiority in her complexion's shine, or because of the charms of a soft voice -- which in our world, even more than in yours, is considered "an excellent thing in a Woman."

These poorly judged marriages are, as you'd expect, childless -- when they don't actually produce Irregularity or a loss of sides. But none of these consequences have so far proven to be a strong enough deterrent. The loss of a few sides in a highly developed Polygon isn't easily noticed, and can sometimes be fixed by a successful procedure at the Neo-Therapeutic Gymnasium, as I described earlier. And the Circles are too inclined to accept infertility as simply a natural law of their superior development. Yet if this trend isn't stopped, the gradual shrinking of the Circular class could soon accelerate. The day may not be far off when, with the race no longer able to produce a Chief Circle, the Constitution of Flatland itself must collapse.

One more word of warning comes to mind, though I can't as easily suggest a remedy. This too has to do with our treatment of Women. About three hundred years ago, the Chief Circle decreed that since women are lacking in Reason but overflowing with Emotion, they should no longer be treated as rational beings, nor receive any mental education whatsoever. The result was that they were no longer taught to read, or even to learn enough arithmetic to count the angles of their husband or children. And so, generation by generation, they steadily declined in intellectual ability. This system of female non-education -- this enforced ignorance -- is still in effect today.

My fear is that, however well-intentioned, this policy has been pushed so far that it's actually backfiring on the Male Sex.

Here's why. As things stand now, we Males have to lead a kind of bilingual -- and I might almost say bimental -- existence. With Women, we talk about "love," "duty," "right," "wrong," "pity," "hope," and other irrational, emotional concepts that have no real existence. The whole fiction has no purpose except to keep feminine impulses in check. But among ourselves, and in our books, we use an entirely different vocabulary -- and really, a different way of thinking altogether. "Love" becomes "the anticipation of benefits." "Duty" becomes "necessity" or "fitness." And all other words get similarly transformed. What's more, when speaking with Women, we use language that implies the deepest respect for their Sex. They genuinely believe that the Chief Circle Himself is not more devoutly worshipped by us than they are. But behind their backs, they are both regarded and spoken of -- by everyone except the very young -- as little better than "mindless organisms."

Our theology in the Women's quarters is also completely different from our theology everywhere else.

Now, my humble concern is that this double training -- in language as well as in thought -- places too heavy a burden on the young. Especially when, at the age of three, they're taken from their mother's care and taught to unlearn the old language (except for the purpose of repeating it in the presence of Mothers and Nurses) and to learn the vocabulary and way of thinking used in science. Already I think I can detect a weakness in the grasp of mathematical truth today compared to the more powerful intellects of our ancestors three hundred years ago. I'll say nothing of the potential danger if a Woman should ever secretly learn to read and share with her Sex what she discovers in even a single popular book. Nor of the possibility that some disobedient or careless young boy might accidentally reveal to his Mother the secrets of our logical language. On the simple grounds that male intellect is being weakened, I rest this humble appeal to the highest Authorities to reconsider the rules governing Female education.




PART II
OTHER WORLDS


"O brave new worlds,
That have such people in them!"
