Section 13: How I Had a Vision of Lineland


It was the second-to-last day of the year 1999 in our era, and the first day of the Long Vacation. I'd been amusing myself well into the late hours with my favorite pastime -- Geometry -- and had gone to bed with an unsolved problem rattling around in my mind. That night, I had a dream.

I saw before me a vast crowd of small Straight Lines (which I naturally assumed to be Women) mixed in with other beings even smaller -- tiny, glowing points -- all moving back and forth along one and the same Straight Line, and, as far as I could tell, all at the same speed.

[Illustration]

A noise of confused, high-pitched chirping or twittering came from them at intervals, as long as they were moving. But sometimes they stopped, and then everything went silent.

I approached one of the largest of what I took to be Women and spoke to her, but got no answer. A second and third attempt on my part were equally useless. Losing patience at what struck me as unbearable rudeness, I moved my mouth to a position directly in front of her mouth so as to block her path, and loudly repeated my question: "Woman, what is this gathering about, and what is all this strange, confused chirping, and this monotonous back-and-forth movement along one and the same Straight Line?"

"I am no Woman," replied the small Line. "I am the Monarch of the world. But you -- where have you come from, intruding into my realm of Lineland?" Taken aback by this blunt reply, I begged his pardon if I had in any way startled or bothered his Royal Highness. Describing myself as a stranger, I asked the King to tell me something about his dominions. But I had the hardest time getting any information about the things that actually interested me. The Monarch couldn't stop assuming that whatever was familiar to him must also be known to me, and that I was just pretending to be ignorant as a joke. Still, by persisting with my questions, I managed to piece together the following facts:

It seemed that this poor, ignorant Monarch -- as he called himself -- was completely convinced that the Straight Line he called his Kingdom, the one in which he spent his entire existence, made up the whole of the world, and in fact the whole of Space. Unable to either move or see in any direction except along his Straight Line, he had no concept of anything outside of it. Although he'd heard my voice when I first spoke to him, the sounds had reached him in a way so contrary to his experience that he hadn't answered, "seeing no man," as he put it, "and hearing a voice as if from my own intestines." Until the moment I placed my mouth inside his World, he had neither seen me nor heard anything except confused sounds beating against what I would call his side, but what he called his *inside* or *stomach*. Even now, he had absolutely no concept of the region I'd come from. Outside his World -- his Line -- everything was a blank to him. No, not even a blank, because a blank implies Space. Better to say: everything outside was simply nonexistent.

His subjects -- the small Lines being men and the Points being Women -- were all equally confined in motion and vision to that single Straight Line, their entire World. It hardly needs saying that their whole horizon was limited to a Point; nobody could ever see anything but a Point. Man, woman, child, thing -- each appeared as a Point to the eye of a Linelander. Only by the sound of someone's voice could sex or age be told apart. What's more, since each individual occupied the whole of the narrow path (so to speak) that made up his Universe, and no one could move to the right or left to make way for anyone else, it followed that no Linelander could ever pass another. Once neighbors, always neighbors. Neighborhood with them was like marriage with us. Neighbors remained neighbors till death did them part.

Such a life, with all vision limited to a Point and all movement limited to a Straight Line, seemed to me impossibly dreary. I was surprised to notice the King's vivacity and good cheer. Wondering whether it was even possible, under circumstances so unfavorable to domestic relations, to enjoy the pleasures of married life, I hesitated for some time to question his Royal Highness on such a delicate subject. But at last I dove in by abruptly asking about the health of his family. "My wives and children," he replied, "are well and happy."

I was staggered by this answer -- because in the immediate vicinity of the Monarch (as I'd noticed in my dream before entering Lineland) there were none but Men. I ventured to reply, "Pardon me, but I can't imagine how your Royal Highness can at any time either see or approach their Majesties, when there are at least half a dozen people between you and them, whom you can neither see through nor get past. Is it possible that in Lineland, physical closeness isn't necessary for marriage and for having children?"

"How can you ask such an absurd question?" replied the Monarch. "If it were indeed as you suggest, the Universe would soon be depopulated. No, no -- proximity is not needed for the union of hearts, and the birth of children is far too important a matter to have been left to depend on such an accident as physical closeness. You can't possibly be ignorant of this. Yet since you insist on pretending you are, I will instruct you as though you were the most clueless baby in Lineland. Know, then, that marriages are consummated through the faculty of sound and the sense of hearing.

"You are of course aware that every Man has two mouths or voices -- just as he has two eyes -- a bass at one end and a tenor at the other of his extremities. I shouldn't need to mention this, but I have been unable to make out your tenor in the course of our conversation." I replied that I had only one voice, and that I hadn't been aware his Royal Highness had two. "That confirms my impression," said the King, "that you are not a Man, but a feminine Monstrosity with a bass voice and an utterly uneducated ear. But to continue.

"Nature having herself ordained that every Man should wed two wives --" "Why two?" I asked. "You carry your fake simplicity too far," he cried. "How can there be a completely harmonious union without the combination of the Four in One -- namely, the Bass and Tenor of the Man and the Soprano and Contralto of the two Women?" "But suppose," I said, "that a man preferred one wife or three?" "It is impossible," he said. "It is as inconceivable as two and one making five, or the human eye seeing a Straight Line." I would have interrupted him, but he went on:

"Once in the middle of each week, a Law of Nature compels us to move back and forth with a rhythmic motion of more than usual force, which continues for about the time it would take you to count to a hundred and one. In the midst of this choral dance, at the fifty-first beat, the inhabitants of the Universe pause in mid-stride, and each individual sends out his richest, fullest, sweetest note. It is in this decisive moment that all our marriages are made. So perfectly tuned is the match of Bass to Treble, of Tenor to Contralto, that the Loved Ones -- though twenty thousand leagues away -- often recognize at once the answering note of their destined Lover. And, cutting through the trivial obstacles of distance, Love unites the three. The marriage thus consummated results in a threefold offspring -- Male and Female -- which takes its place in Lineland."

"What! Always threefold?" I said. "Must one wife then always have twins?"

"Bass-voiced Monstrosity! Yes," replied the King. "How else could the balance of the Sexes be maintained, if two girls were not born for every boy? Would you ignore the very Alphabet of Nature?" He stopped, speechless with fury, and some time passed before I could coax him into resuming his story.

"You will not, of course, suppose that every bachelor among us finds his mates at the first wooing in this universal Marriage Chorus. On the contrary, the process is repeated many times by most of us. Few are the hearts whose happy lot is to immediately recognize in each other's voice the partner intended for them by Providence, and to fly into a mutual and perfectly harmonious embrace. For most of us, the courtship is long. The Wooer's voices may perhaps match one of his future wives, but not both; or at first, not either. Or the Soprano and Contralto may not quite harmonize. In such cases, Nature has provided that every weekly Chorus shall bring the three Lovers into closer harmony. Each trial of voice, each fresh discovery of discord, almost imperceptibly nudges the less perfect partner to adjust his or her singing so as to come closer to the more perfect. And after many trials and many adjustments, the result is at last achieved. There comes a day when, while the usual Marriage Chorus rings out from all of Lineland, the three far-off Lovers suddenly find themselves in exact harmony, and before they know it, the wedded Triplet is swept vocally into a double embrace -- and Nature rejoices over one more marriage and three more births."
