Section 15: Concerning a Stranger from Spaceland


From dreams, I move on to facts.

It was the last day of our 1,999th year. The patter of the rain had announced nightfall long ago, and I was sitting in the company of my Wife, reflecting on the events of the past year and the prospects of the coming one -- the coming century, the coming Millennium.

(When I say "sitting," of course I don't mean any change of posture like you in Spaceland would picture. Since we have no feet, we can no more "sit" or "stand" -- in your sense of those words -- than one of your soles or flounders could. Still, we perfectly well recognize the different mental states of intention behind "lying," "sitting," and "standing," which are to some degree visible to an observer as a slight increase in brightness corresponding to an increase in effort of will. But on this, and a thousand related subjects, time doesn't allow me to dwell.)

My four Sons and two orphan Grandchildren had retired to their separate rooms, and my Wife alone remained with me to see the old Millennium out and the new one in.

I was deep in thought, mulling over some words that had casually come from the mouth of my youngest Grandson -- a most promising young Hexagon of unusual brilliance and perfect angularity. His uncles and I had been giving him his usual hands-on lesson in Sight Recognition, spinning ourselves on our centers, sometimes quickly, sometimes more slowly, and quizzing him on our positions. His answers had been so good that I'd been moved to reward him with a few hints on Arithmetic as applied to Geometry.

Taking nine Squares, each one inch on every side, I'd put them together to make one large Square with a side of three inches. And from this I'd proved to my little Grandson that -- though it was impossible for us to *see* the inside of the Square -- we could still figure out the number of square inches in a Square by simply squaring the number of inches in the side. "And so," I told him, "we know that 3 squared, or 9, represents the number of square inches in a Square whose side is 3 inches long."

The little Hexagon thought about this for a while and then said to me, "But you've been teaching me to raise numbers to the third power. I suppose 3 cubed must mean something in Geometry. What does it mean?"

"Nothing at all," I replied, "not in Geometry, at any rate. Geometry has only Two Dimensions." And then I started showing the boy how a Point, by moving through a length of three inches, makes a Line of three inches, which can be represented by 3. And how a Line of three inches, moving parallel to itself through a length of three inches, makes a Square of three inches on every side, which can be represented by 3 squared.

At this, my Grandson returned to his earlier idea and cut in rather abruptly. "Well then," he exclaimed, "if a Point moving three inches makes a Line of three inches, represented by 3 -- and if a straight Line of three inches, moving parallel to itself, makes a Square of three inches every way, represented by 3 squared -- then it must be that a Square of three inches every way, moving somehow parallel to itself (but I don't see how), must make *Something else* (but I don't see what) of three inches every way -- and this must be represented by 3 cubed."

"Go to bed," I said, a little annoyed by this interruption. "If you talked less nonsense, you'd remember more sense."

So my Grandson disappeared in disgrace. And there I sat by my Wife's side, trying to put together a mental review of the year 1999 and the possibilities of the year 2000 -- but not quite able to shake off the thoughts sparked by my bright little Hexagon's chatter. Only a few grains of sand remained in the half-hour glass. Rousing myself from my daydream, I turned the glass Northward for the last time in the old Millennium. And as I did it, I exclaimed aloud, "The boy is a fool."

Instantly I became aware of a Presence in the room, and a chilling breath ran through my entire being. "He is no such thing," cried my Wife, "and you are breaking the Commandments by disrespecting your own Grandson." But I paid no attention to her. Looking around in every direction, I could see nothing -- and yet I *felt* a Presence, and shivered as the cold whisper came again. I jumped to my feet. "What's the matter?" said my Wife. "There's no draft. What are you looking for? There's nothing." There was nothing. And I sat back down, exclaiming again, "The boy is a fool, I say. 3 cubed can have no meaning in Geometry." At once there came a distinctly audible reply: "The boy is not a fool, and 3 cubed has an obvious Geometrical meaning."

My Wife heard the words as well as I did, though she didn't understand what they meant, and both of us sprang forward in the direction of the sound. Imagine our horror when we saw before us a Figure! At first glance it appeared to be a Woman, seen sideways. But a moment's observation showed me that its edges faded into dimness too rapidly to be one of the Female Sex. And I would have thought it was a Circle, except that it seemed to change its size in a way that was impossible for a Circle -- or for any regular Figure I had ever encountered.

But my Wife didn't have my experience, or the composure needed to notice these details. With the typical quickness to judgment and irrational jealousy of her Sex, she leapt straight to the conclusion that a Woman had entered the house through some small opening. "How did this person get in here?" she exclaimed. "You promised me, my dear, that there would be no ventilators in our new house."

"There aren't any," I said, "but what makes you think the Stranger is a Woman? I can see by my power of Sight Recognition--"

"Oh, I have no patience with your Sight Recognition," she replied. "'Feeling is believing' and 'A Straight Line to the touch is worth a Circle to the sight'" -- two proverbs very popular with the Frailer Sex in Flatland.

"Well," I said, since I was afraid of setting her off, "if it must be so, ask for an introduction." Putting on her most gracious manner, my Wife advanced toward the Stranger. "Permit me, Madam, to feel and be felt by--" Then, suddenly recoiling: "Oh! It is not a Woman, and there are no angles either. Not a trace of one. Can it be that I have so misbehaved toward a perfect Circle?"

"I am indeed, in a certain sense, a Circle," replied the Voice, "and a more perfect Circle than any in Flatland. But to speak more accurately, I am many Circles in one." Then he added more gently, "I have a message, dear Madam, for your husband, which I must not deliver in your presence. If you would allow us to step aside for a few minutes--" But my Wife would not hear of our distinguished Visitor putting himself out like that. Assuring the Circle that the hour of her own bedtime had long since passed, and with many repeated apologies for her recent blunder, she at last retreated to her room.

I glanced at the half-hour glass. The last grains of sand had fallen. The third Millennium had begun.
