Preface to the Second and Revised Edition, 1884. By the Editor


If my poor Flatland friend still had the sharpness of mind he enjoyed when he first began writing these memoirs, I wouldn't need to speak for him in this preface. He wants, first, to offer his full thanks to his readers and critics in Spaceland, whose appreciation has — with unexpected speed — required a second edition of this work; second, to apologize for certain errors and misprints (though he's not entirely to blame for those); and third, to clear up one or two misconceptions. But he is not the Square he once was. Years of imprisonment, combined with the even heavier burden of widespread disbelief and mockery, have taken their toll — as have the thoughts, ideas, and much of the terminology he picked up during his brief stay in Spaceland. He has therefore asked me to respond on his behalf to two specific objections — one intellectual, the other moral.

The first objection goes like this: a Flatlander, seeing a Line, must be seeing something that has some *thickness* as well as *length* (otherwise it wouldn't be visible at all, if it had no thickness). And therefore — so the argument goes — he ought to acknowledge that his countrymen are not only long and broad, but also (however slightly) *thick* or *high*. This is a plausible objection, and to Spacelanders it feels nearly unanswerable. I'll confess that when I first heard it, I had no idea how to respond. But my poor old friend's answer seems to me to address it completely.

"I'll admit," he said — when I brought this objection to his attention — "I admit the truth of your critic's facts, but I reject his conclusions. It's true that we really do have in Flatland a Third unrecognized Dimension called 'height,' just as it's true that you really have in Spaceland a Fourth unrecognized Dimension — one that has no name yet, but which I'll call 'extra-height.' But we can no more perceive our 'height' than you can perceive your 'extra-height.' Even I — who have been to Spaceland, who had the privilege of understanding what 'height' means for twenty-four hours — even I can't comprehend it now, can't grasp it through sight or through any process of reasoning. I can only accept it on faith.

"The reason is obvious. Dimension implies direction, implies measurement, implies *more* and *less*. Now, all our lines are *equally* and *infinitesimally* thick (or high, whichever you prefer). As a result, there's nothing about them that could lead our minds toward the concept of that Dimension. No 'delicate micrometer' — as one overeager Spaceland critic has suggested — would help us in the slightest, because we wouldn't know *what to measure, or in what direction*. When we see a Line, we see something that is long and *bright*. *Brightness*, just as much as length, is essential to a Line's existence — if the brightness vanishes, the Line disappears. So all my Flatland friends — when I try to tell them about this unrecognized Dimension that is somehow visible in a Line — just say, 'Ah, you mean *brightness*.' And when I reply, 'No, I mean a real Dimension,' they immediately shoot back, 'Then measure it, or tell us which direction it extends in.' And that shuts me up, because I can do neither. Just yesterday, when the Chief Circle (in other words, our High Priest) came to inspect the State Prison and paid me his seventh annual visit, and for the seventh time asked me, 'Are you any better?' — I tried to prove to him that he was 'high,' as well as long and broad, even though he didn't know it. But what was his response? 'You say I am "high." Measure my "highness" and I'll believe you.' What could I do? How could I meet that challenge? I was crushed. And he left the room triumphant.

"Does this still seem strange to you? Then put yourself in the same position. Suppose a being from the Fourth Dimension condescended to visit you and said, 'Every time you open your eyes, you see a Plane (which has Two Dimensions), and you *infer* a Solid (which has Three). But in reality, you also see — though you don't recognize it — a Fourth Dimension, which is not color, not brightness, not anything of the kind, but a true Dimension, even though I can't point out its direction to you, and you can't possibly measure it.' What would you say to such a visitor? Wouldn't you have him locked up? Well, that is my fate. And it's just as natural for us Flatlanders to lock up a Square for preaching the Third Dimension as it is for you Spacelanders to lock up a Cube for preaching the Fourth. How strong a family resemblance runs through blind and persecuting humanity across all Dimensions! Points, Lines, Squares, Cubes, Extra-Cubes — we are all prone to the same errors, all equally slaves of our respective dimensional prejudices, as one of your Spaceland poets has said —

'One touch of Nature makes all worlds akin.'"

[Note: The Author asked me to add that the misconceptions of some of his critics on this point led him to insert, in his dialogue with the Sphere, certain remarks that bear on the question — remarks he had previously left out as tedious and unnecessary.]

On this point, the Square's defense seems to me rock-solid. I wish I could say that his answer to the second — the moral — objection was equally clear and convincing. It has been objected that he is a woman-hater. And since this objection has been pressed with particular force by those whom Nature has made the somewhat larger half of the Spaceland population, I'd like to address it as honestly as I can. But the Square is so unused to Spaceland's moral vocabulary that I'd be doing him an injustice if I simply transcribed his defense word for word. So, acting as his interpreter and summarizer, I gather that over the course of seven years in prison, he has changed his own personal views — both about Women and about the Isosceles, or Lower Classes. Personally, he now leans toward the Sphere's opinion (expressed earlier in these pages) that Straight Lines are in many important respects superior to the Circles. But writing as a historian, he identified himself — perhaps too closely — with the views generally held by Flatland, and (as he's been told) even by Spaceland, historians, in whose pages, until very recent times, the lives of women and of ordinary people have rarely been considered worth mentioning, and never worth studying carefully.

In an even more obscure passage, he now wishes to distance himself from the pro-Circle, aristocratic leanings that some critics have naturally read into his work. While giving full credit to the intellectual power with which a few Circles have maintained their dominance over vast numbers of their countrymen for many generations, he believes that the facts of Flatland, speaking for themselves without his commentary, show that revolutions can't always be put down by slaughter, and that Nature, by sentencing the Circles to infertility, has condemned them to eventual extinction. "And in this," he says, "I see a fulfillment of the great Law of all worlds: that while the wisdom of Man thinks it's achieving one thing, the wisdom of Nature steers it toward something else entirely — something different and far better." Beyond that, he asks his readers not to assume that every tiny detail of daily life in Flatland must have a corresponding detail in Spaceland. And yet he hopes that, taken as a whole, his work may prove thought-provoking as well as entertaining to those Spacelanders of moderate and modest minds who — when speaking of things that are of the highest importance but lie beyond experience — are willing to say neither "This can never be" on the one hand, nor "It must be exactly like this, and we know everything about it" on the other.
