Book One: Matter and Void (Part 2 of 2) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 551]
	Again, if bounds have not been set against
	The breaking down of this corporeal world,
	Yet must all bodies of whatever things
	Have still endured from everlasting time
	Unto this present, as not yet assailed
	By shocks of peril. But because the same
	Are, to thy thinking, of a nature frail,
	It ill accords that thus they could remain
	(As thus they do) through everlasting time,
	Vexed through the ages (as indeed they are)
	By the innumerable blows of chance.
	So in our programme of creation, mark
	How 'tis that, though the bodies of all stuff
	Are solid to the core, we yet explain
	The ways whereby some things are fashioned soft-
	Air, water, earth, and fiery exhalations-
	And by what force they function and go on:
	The fact is founded in the void of things.
	But if the primal germs themselves be soft,
	Reason cannot be brought to bear to show
	The ways whereby may be created these
	Great crags of basalt and the during iron;
	For their whole nature will profoundly lack
	The first foundations of a solid frame.
	But powerful in old simplicity,
	Abide the solid, the primeval germs;
	And by their combinations more condensed,
	All objects can be tightly knit and bound
	And made to show unconquerable strength.
	Again, since all things kind by kind obtain
	Fixed bounds of growing and conserving life;
	Since Nature hath inviolably decreed
	What each can do, what each can never do;
	Since naught is changed, but all things so abide
	That ever the variegated birds reveal
	The spots or stripes peculiar to their kind,
	Spring after spring: thus surely all that is
	Must be composed of matter immutable.
	For if the primal germs in any wise
	Were open to conquest and to change, 'twould be
	Uncertain also what could come to birth
	And what could not, and by what law to each
	Its scope prescribed, its boundary stone that clings
	So deep in Time. Nor could the generations
	Kind after kind so often reproduce
	The nature, habits, motions, ways of life,
	Of their progenitors.

[card 599]
	And then again,
	Since there is ever an extreme bounding point
	. . . . . .
	Of that first body which our senses now
	Cannot perceive: That bounding point indeed
	Exists without all parts, a minimum
	Of nature, nor was e'er a thing apart,
	As of itself,- nor shall hereafter be,
	Since 'tis itself still parcel of another,
	A first and single part, whence other parts
	And others similar in order lie
	In a packed phalanx, filling to the full
	The nature of first body: being thus
	Not self-existent, they must cleave to that
	From which in nowise they can sundered be.
	So primal germs have solid singleness,
	Which tightly packed and closely joined cohere
	By virtue of their minim particles-
	No compound by mere union of the same;
	But strong in their eternal singleness,
	Nature, reserving them as seeds for things,
	Permitteth naught of rupture or decrease.
	Moreover, were there not a minimum,
	The smallest bodies would have infinites,
	Since then a half-of-half could still be halved,
	With limitless division less and less.
	Then what the difference 'twixt the sum and least?
	None: for however infinite the sum,
	Yet even the smallest would consist the same
	Of infinite parts. But since true reason here
	Protests, denying that the mind can think it,
	Convinced thou must confess such things there are
	As have no parts, the minimums of nature.
	And since these are, likewise confess thou must
	That primal bodies are solid and eterne.
	Again, if Nature, creatress of all things,
	Were wont to force all things to be resolved
	Unto least parts, then would she not avail
	To reproduce from out them anything;
	Because whate'er is not endowed with parts
	Cannot possess those properties required
	Of generative stuff- divers connections,
	Weights, blows, encounters, motions, whereby things
	Forevermore have being and go on.

[card 635]
	And on such grounds it is that those who held
	The stuff of things is fire, and out of fire
	Alone the cosmic sum is formed, are seen
	Mightily from true reason to have lapsed.
	Of whom, chief leader to do battle, comes
	That Heraclitus, famous for dark speech
	Among the silly, not the serious Greeks
	Who search for truth. For dolts are ever prone
	That to bewonder and adore which hides
	Beneath distorted words, holding that true
	Which sweetly tickles in their stupid ears,
	Or which is rouged in finely finished phrase.
	For how, I ask, can things so varied be,
	If formed of fire, single and pure? No whit
	'Twould help for fire to be condensed or thinned,
	If all the parts of fire did still preserve
	But fire's own nature, seen before in gross.
	The heat were keener with the parts compressed,
	Milder, again, when severed or dispersed-
	And more than this thou canst conceive of naught
	That from such causes could become; much less
	Might earth's variety of things be born
	From any fires soever, dense or rare.
	This too: if they suppose a void in things,
	Then fires can be condensed and still left rare;
	But since they see such opposites of thought
	Rising against them, and are loath to leave
	An unmixed void in things, they fear the steep
	And lose the road of truth. Nor do they see,
	That, if from things we take away the void,
	All things are then condensed, and out of all
	One body made, which has no power to dart
	Swiftly from out itself not anything-
	As throws the fire its light and warmth around,
	Giving thee proof its parts are not compact.
	But if perhaps they think, in other wise,
	Fires through their combinations can be quenched
	And change their substance, very well: behold,
	If fire shall spare to do so in no part,
	Then heat will perish utterly and all,
	And out of nothing would the world be formed.
	For change in anything from out its bounds
	Means instant death of that which was before;
	And thus a somewhat must persist unharmed
	Amid the world, lest all return to naught,
	And, born from naught, abundance thrive anew.
	Now since indeed there are those surest bodies
	Which keep their nature evermore the same,
	Upon whose going out and coming in
	And changed order things their nature change,
	And all corporeal substances transformed,
	'Tis thine to know those primal bodies, then,
	Are not of fire. For 'twere of no avail
	Should some depart and go away, and some
	Be added new, and some be changed in order,
	If still all kept their nature of old heat:
	For whatsoever they created then
	Would still in any case be only fire.
	The truth, I fancy, this: bodies there are
	Whose clashings, motions, order, posture, shapes
	Produce the fire and which, by order changed,
	Do change the nature of the thing produced,
	And are thereafter nothing like to fire
	Nor whatso else has power to send its bodies
	With impact touching on the senses' touch.
	Again, to say that all things are but fire
	And no true thing in number of all things
	Exists but fire, as this same fellow says,
	Seems crazed folly. For the man himself
	Against the senses by the senses fights,
	And hews at that through which is all belief,
	Through which indeed unto himself is known
	The thing he calls the fire. For, though he thinks
	The senses truly can perceive the fire,
	He thinks they cannot as regards all else,
	Which still are palpably as clear to sense-
	To me a thought inept and crazy too.
	For whither shall we make appeal? for what
	More certain than our senses can there be
	Whereby to mark asunder error and truth?
	Besides, why rather do away with all,
	And wish to allow heat only, then deny
	The fire and still allow all else to be?-
	Alike the madness either way it seems.

[card 705]
	Thus whosoe'er have held the stuff of things
	To be but fire, and out of fire the sum,
	And whosoever have constituted air
	As first beginning of begotten things,
	And all whoever have held that of itself
	Water alone contrives things, or that earth
	Createth all and changes things anew
	To divers natures, mightily they seem
	A long way to have wandered from the truth.
	Add, too, whoever make the primal stuff
	Twofold, by joining air to fire, and earth
	To water; add who deem that things can grow
	Out of the four- fire, earth, and breath, and rain;
	As first Empedocles of Acragas,
	Whom that three-cornered isle of all the lands
	Bore on her coasts, around which flows and flows
	In mighty bend and bay the Ionic seas,
	Splashing the brine from off their gray-green waves.
	Here, billowing onward through the narrow straits,
	Swift ocean cuts her boundaries from the shores
	Of the Italic mainland. Here the waste
	Charybdis; and here Aetna rumbles threats
	To gather anew such furies of its flames
	As with its force anew to vomit fires,
	Belched from its throat, and skyward bear anew
	Its lightnings' flash. And though for much she seem
	The mighty and the wondrous isle to men,
	Most rich in all good things, and fortified
	With generous strength of heroes, she hath ne'er
	Possessed within her aught of more renown,
	Nor aught more holy, wonderful, and dear
	Than this true man. Nay, ever so far and pure
	The lofty music of his breast divine
	Lifts up its voice and tells of glories found,
	That scarce he seems of human stock create.
	Yet he and those forementioned (known to be
	So far beneath him, less than he in all),
	Though, as discoverers of much goodly truth,
	They gave, as 'twere from out of the heart's own shrine,
	Responses holier and soundlier based
	Than ever the Pythia pronounced for men
	From out the triped and the Delphian laurel,
	Have still in matter of first-elements
	Made ruin of themselves, and, great men, great
	Indeed and heavy there for them the fall:
	First, because, banishing the void from things,
	They yet assign them motion, and allow
	Things soft and loosely textured to exist,
	As air, dew, fire, earth, animals, and grains,
	Without admixture of void amid their frame.
	Next, because, thinking there can be no end
	In cutting bodies down to less and less
	Nor pause established to their breaking up,
	They hold there is no minimum in things;
	Albeit we see the boundary point of aught
	Is that which to our senses seems its least,
	Whereby thou mayst conjecture, that, because
	The things thou canst not mark have boundary points,
	They surely have their minimums. Then, too,
	Since these philosophers ascribe to things
	Soft primal germs, which we behold to be
	Of birth and body mortal, thus, throughout,
	The sum of things must be returned to naught,
	And, born from naught, abundance thrive anew-
	Thou seest how far each doctrine stands from truth.
	And, next, these bodies are among themselves
	In many ways poisons and foes to each,
	Wherefore their congress will destroy them quite
	Or drive asunder as we see in storms
	Rains, winds, and lightnings all asunder fly.

[card 763]
	Thus too, if all things are create of four,
	And all again dissolved into the four,
	How can the four be called the primal germs
	Of things, more than all things themselves be thought,
	By retroversion, primal germs of them?
	For ever alternately are both begot,
	With interchange of nature and aspect
	From immemorial time. But if percase
	Thou think'st the frame of fire and earth, the air,
	The dew of water can in such wise meet
	As not by mingling to resign their nature,
	From them for thee no world can be create-
	No thing of breath, no stock or stalk of tree:
	In the wild congress of this varied heap
	Each thing its proper nature will display,
	And air will palpably be seen mixed up
	With earth together, unquenched heat with water.
	But primal germs in bringing things to birth
	Must have a latent, unseen quality,
	Lest some outstanding alien element
	Confuse and minish in the thing create
	Its proper being.
	But these men begin
	From heaven, and from its fires; and first they feign
	That fire will turn into the winds of air,
	Next, that from air the rain begotten is,
	And earth created out of rain, and then
	That all, reversely, are returned from earth-
	The moisture first, then air thereafter heat-
	And that these same ne'er cease in interchange,
	To go their ways from heaven to earth, from earth
	Unto the stars of the aethereal world-
	Which in no wise at all the germs can do.
	Since an immutable somewhat still must be,
	Lest all things utterly be sped to naught;
	For change in anything from out its bounds
	Means instant death of that which was before.
	Wherefore, since those things, mentioned heretofore,
	Suffer a changed state, they must derive
	From others ever unconvertible,
	Lest an things utterly return to naught.
	Then why not rather presuppose there be
	Bodies with such a nature furnished forth
	That, if perchance they have created fire,
	Can still (by virtue of a few withdrawn,
	Or added few, and motion and order changed)
	Fashion the winds of air, and thus all things
	Forevermore be interchanged with all?
	"But facts in proof are manifest," thou sayest,
	"That all things grow into the winds of air
	And forth from earth are nourished, and unless
	The season favour at propitious hour
	With rains enough to set the trees a-reel
	Under the soak of bulking thunderheads,
	And sun, for its share, foster and give heat,
	No grains, nor trees, nor breathing things can grow."
	True- and unless hard food and moisture soft
	Recruited man, his frame would waste away,
	And life dissolve from out his thews and bones;
	For out of doubt recruited and fed are we
	By certain things, as other things by others.
	Because in many ways the many germs
	Common to many things are mixed in things,
	No wonder 'tis that therefore divers things
	By divers things are nourished. And, again,
	Often it matters vastly with what others,
	In what positions the primordial germs
	Are bound together, and what motions, too,
	They give and get among themselves; for these
	Same germs do put together sky, sea, lands,
	Rivers, and sun, grains, trees, and breathing things,
	But yet commixed they are in divers modes
	With divers things, forever as they move.
	Nay, thou beholdest in our verses here
	Elements many, common to many worlds,
	Albeit thou must confess each verse, each word
	From one another differs both in sense
	And ring of sound- so much the elements
	Can bring about by change of order alone.
	But those which are the primal germs of things
	Have power to work more combinations still,
	Whence divers things can be produced in turn.

[card 830]
	Now let us also take for scrutiny
	The homeomeria of Anaxagoras,
	So called by Greeks, for which our pauper-speech
	Yieldeth no name in the Italian tongue,
	Although the thing itself is not o'erhard
	For explanation. First, then, when he speaks
	Of this homeomeria of things, he thinks
	Bones to be sprung from littlest bones minute,
	And from minute and littlest flesh all flesh,
	And blood created out of drops of blood,
	Conceiving gold compact of grains of gold,
	And earth concreted out of bits of earth,
	Fire made of fires, and water out of waters,
	Feigning the like with all the rest of stuff.
	Yet he concedes not any void in things,
	Nor any limit to cutting bodies down.
	Wherefore to me he seems on both accounts
	To err no less than those we named before.

[card 847]
	Add too: these germs he feigns are far too frail-
	If they be germs primordial furnished forth
	With but same nature as the things themselves,
	And travail and perish equally with those,
	And no rein curbs them from annihilation.
	For which will last against the grip and crush
	Under the teeth of death? the fire? the moist?
	Or else the air? which then? the blood? the bones?
	No one, methinks, when every thing will be
	At bottom as mortal as whate'er we mark
	To perish by force before our gazing eyes.
	But my appeal is to the proofs above
	That things cannot fall back to naught, nor yet
	From naught increase. And now again, since food
	Augments and nourishes the human frame,
	'Tis thine to know our veins and blood and bones
	And thews are formed of particles unlike
	To them in kind; or if they say all foods
	Are of mixed substance having in themselves
	Small bodies of thews, and bones, and also veins
	And particles of blood, then every food,
	Solid or liquid, must itself be thought
	As made and mixed of things unlike in kind-
	Of bones, of thews, of ichor and of blood.
	Again, if all the bodies which upgrow
	From earth, are first within the earth, then earth
	Must be compound of alien substances.
	Which spring and bloom abroad from out the earth.
	Transfer the argument, and thou may'st use
	The selfsame words: if flame and smoke and ash
	Still lurk unseen within the wood, the wood
	Must be compound of alien substances
	Which spring from out the wood.

[card 875]
	Right here remains
	A certain slender means to skulk from truth,
	Which Anaxagoras takes unto himself,
	Who holds that all things lurk commixed with all
	While that one only comes to view, of which
	The bodies exceed in number all the rest,
	And lie more close to hand and at the fore-
	A notion banished from true reason far.
	For then 'twere meet that kernels of the grains
	Should oft, when crunched between the might of stones,
	Give forth a sign of blood, or of aught else
	Which in our human frame is fed; and that
	Rock rubbed on rock should yield a gory ooze.
	Likewise the herbs ought oft to give forth drops
	Of sweet milk, flavoured like the uddered sheep's;
	Indeed we ought to find, when crumbling up
	The earthy clods, there herbs, and grains, and leaves,
	All sorts dispersed minutely in the soil;
	Lastly we ought to find in cloven wood
	Ashes and smoke and bits of fire there hid.
	But since fact teaches this is not the case,
	'Tis thine to know things are not mixed with things
	Thuswise; but seeds, common to many things,
	Commixed in many ways, must lurk in things.
	"But often it happens on skiey hills" thou sayest,
	"That neighbouring tops of lofty trees are rubbed
	One against other, smote by the blustering south,
	Till all ablaze with bursting flower of flame."
	Good sooth- yet fire is not ingraft in wood,
	But many are the seeds of heat, and when
	Rubbing together they together flow,
	They start the conflagrations in the forests.
	Whereas if flame, already fashioned, lay
	Stored up within the forests, then the fires
	Could not for any time be kept unseen,
	But would be laying all the wildwood waste
	And burning all the boscage. Now dost see
	(Even as we said a little space above)
	How mightily it matters with what others,
	In what positions these same primal germs
	Are bound together? And what motions, too,
	They give and get among themselves? how, hence,
	The same, if altered 'mongst themselves, can body
	Both igneous and ligneous objects forth-
	Precisely as these words themselves are made
	By somewhat altering their elements,
	Although we mark with name indeed distinct
	The igneous from the ligneous. Once again,
	If thou suppose whatever thou beholdest,
	Among all visible objects, cannot be,
	Unless thou feign bodies of matter endowed
	With a like nature,- by thy vain device
	For thee will perish all the germs of things:
	'Twill come to pass they'll laugh aloud, like men,
	Shaken asunder by a spasm of mirth,
	Or moisten with salty tear-drops cheeks and chins.

[card 921]
	Now learn of what remains! More keenly hear!
	And for myself, my mind is not deceived
	How dark it is: But the large hope of praise
	Hath strook with pointed thyrsus through my heart;
	On the same hour hath strook into my breast
	Sweet love of the Muses, wherewith now instinct,
	I wander afield, thriving in sturdy thought,
	Through unpathed haunts of the Pierides,
	Trodden by step of none before. I joy
	To come on undefiled fountains there,
	To drain them deep; I joy to pluck new flowers,
	To seek for this my head a signal crown
	From regions where the Muses never yet
	Have garlanded the temples of a man:
	First, since I teach concerning mighty things,
	And go right on to loose from round the mind
	The tightened coils of dread religion;
	Next, since, concerning themes so dark, I frame
	Songs so pellucid, touching all throughout
	Even with the Muses' charm- which, as 'twould seem,
	Is not without a reasonable ground:
	But as physicians, when they seek to give
	Young boys the nauseous wormwood, first do touch
	The brim around the cup with the sweet juice
	And yellow of the honey, in order that
	The thoughtless age of boyhood be cajoled
	As far as the lips, and meanwhile swallow down
	The wormwood's bitter draught, and, though befooled,
	Be yet not merely duped, but rather thus
	Grow strong again with recreated health:
	So now I too (since this my doctrine seems
	In general somewhat woeful unto those
	Who've had it not in hand, and since the crowd
	Starts back from it in horror) have desired
	To expound our doctrine unto thee in song
	Soft-speaking and Pierian, and, as 'twere,
	To touch it with sweet honey of the Muse-
	If by such method haply I might hold
	The mind of thee upon these lines of ours,
	Till thou see through the nature of all things,
	And how exists the interwoven frame.

[card 951]
	But since I've taught that bodies of matter, made
	Completely solid, hither and thither fly
	Forevermore unconquered through all time,
	Now come, and whether to the sum of them
	There be a limit or be none, for thee
	Let us unfold; likewise what has been found
	To be the wide inane, or room, or space
	Wherein all things soever do go on,
	Let us examine if it finite be
	All and entire, or reach unmeasured round
	And downward an illimitable profound.
	Thus, then, the All that is is limited
	In no one region of its onward paths,
	For then 'tmust have forever its beyond.
	And a beyond 'tis seen can never be
	For aught, unless still further on there be
	A somewhat somewhere that may bound the same-
	So that the thing be seen still on to where
	The nature of sensation of that thing
	Can follow it no longer. Now because
	Confess we must there's naught beside the sum,
	There's no beyond, and so it lacks all end.
	It matters nothing where thou post thyself,
	In whatsoever regions of the same;
	Even any place a man has set him down
	Still leaves about him the unbounded all
	Outward in all directions; or, supposing
	A moment the all of space finite to be,
	If some one farthest traveller runs forth
	Unto the extreme coasts and throws ahead
	A flying spear, is't then thy wish to think
	It goes, hurled off amain, to where 'twas sent
	And shoots afar, or that some object there
	Can thwart and stop it? For the one or other
	Thou must admit and take. Either of which
	Shuts off escape for thee, and does compel
	That thou concede the all spreads everywhere,
	Owning no confines. Since whether there be
	Aught that may block and check it so it comes
	Not where 'twas sent, nor lodges in its goal,
	Or whether borne along, in either view
	'Thas started not from any end. And so
	I'll follow on, and whereso'er thou set
	The extreme coasts, I'll query, "what becomes
	Thereafter of thy spear?" 'Twill come to pass
	That nowhere can a world's-end be, and that
	The chance for further flight prolongs forever
	The flight itself. Besides, were all the space
	Of the totality and sum shut in
	With fixed coasts, and bounded everywhere,
	Then would the abundance of world's matter flow
	Together by solid weight from everywhere
	Still downward to the bottom of the world,
	Nor aught could happen under cope of sky,
	Nor could there be a sky at all or sun-
	Indeed, where matter all one heap would lie,
	By having settled during infinite time.
	But in reality, repose is given
	Unto no bodies 'mongst the elements,
	Because there is no bottom whereunto
	They might, as 'twere, together flow, and where
	They might take up their undisturbed abodes.
	In endless motion everything goes on
	Forevermore; out of all regions, even
	Out of the pit below, from forth the vast,
	Are hurtled bodies evermore supplied.

[card 1002]
	The nature of room, the space of the abyss
	Is such that even the flashing thunderbolts
	Can neither speed upon their courses through,
	Gliding across eternal tracts of time,
	Nor, further, bring to pass, as on they run,
	That they may bate their journeying one whit:
	Such huge abundance spreads for things around-
	Room off to every quarter, without end.
	Lastly, before our very eyes is seen
	Thing to bound thing: air hedges hill from hill,
	And mountain walls hedge air; land ends the sea,
	And sea in turn all lands; but for the All
	Truly is nothing which outside may bound.
	That, too, the sum of things itself may not
	Have power to fix a measure of its own,
	Great nature guards, she who compels the void
	To bound all body, as body all the void,
	Thus rendering by these alternates the whole
	An infinite; or else the one or other,
	Being unbounded by the other, spreads,
	Even by its single nature, ne'ertheless
	Immeasurably forth....
	Nor sea, nor earth, nor shining vaults of sky,
	Nor breed of mortals, nor holy limbs of gods
	Could keep their place least portion of an hour:
	For, driven apart from out its meetings fit,
	The stock of stuff, dissolved, would be borne
	Along the illimitable inane afar,
	Or rather, in fact, would ne'er have once combined
	And given a birth to aught, since, scattered wide,
	It could not be united. For of truth
	Neither by counsel did the primal germs
	'Stablish themselves, as by keen act of mind,
	Each in its proper place; nor did they make,
	Forsooth, a compact how each germ should move;
	But since, being many and changed in many modes
	Along the All, they're driven abroad and vexed
	By blow on blow, even from all time of old,
	They thus at last, after attempting all
	The kinds of motion and conjoining, come
	Into those great arrangements out of which
	This sum of things established is create,
	By which, moreover, through the mighty years,
	It is preserved, when once it has been thrown
	Into the proper motions, bringing to pass
	That ever the streams refresh the greedy main
	With river-waves abounding, and that earth,
	Lapped in warm exhalations of the sun,
	Renews her broods, and that the lusty race
	Of breathing creatures bears and blooms, and that
	The gliding fires of ether are alive-
	What still the primal germs nowise could do,
	Unless from out the infinite of space
	Could come supply of matter, whence in season
	They're wont whatever losses to repair.
	For as the nature of breathing creatures wastes,
	Losing its body, when deprived of food:
	So all things have to be dissolved as soon
	As matter, diverted by what means soever
	From off its course, shall fail to be on hand.
	Nor can the blows from outward still conserve,
	On every side, whatever sum of a world
	Has been united in a whole. They can
	Indeed, by frequent beating, check a part,
	Till others arriving may fulfil the sum;
	But meanwhile often are they forced to spring
	Rebounding back, and, as they spring, to yield,
	Unto those elements whence a world derives,
	Room and a time for flight, permitting them
	To be from off the massy union borne
	Free and afar. Wherefore, again, again:
	Needs must there come a many for supply;
	And also, that the blows themselves shall be
	Unfailing ever, must there ever be
	An infinite force of matter all sides round.

[card 1052]
	And in these problems, shrink, my Memmius, far
	From yielding faith to that notorious talk:
	That all things inward to the centre press;
	And thus the nature of the world stands firm
	With never blows from outward, nor can be
	Nowhere disparted- since all height and depth
	Have always inward to the centre pressed
	(If thou art ready to believe that aught
	Itself can rest upon itself ); or that
	The ponderous bodies which be under earth
	Do all press upwards and do come to rest
	Upon the earth, in some way upside down,
	Like to those images of things we see
	At present through the waters. They contend,
	With like procedure, that all breathing things
	Head downward roam about, and yet cannot
	Tumble from earth to realms of sky below,
	No more than these our bodies wing away
	Spontaneously to vaults of sky above;
	That, when those creatures look upon the sun,
	We view the constellations of the night;
	And that with us the seasons of the sky
	They thus alternately divide, and thus
	Do pass the night coequal to our days,
	But a vain error has given these dreams to fools,
	Which they've embraced with reasoning perverse
	For centre none can be where world is still
	Boundless, nor yet, if now a centre were,
	Could aught take there a fixed position more
	Than for some other cause 'tmight be dislodged.
	For all of room and space we call the void
	Must both through centre and non-centre yield
	Alike to weights where'er their motions tend.
	Nor is there any place, where, when they've come,
	Bodies can be at standstill in the void,
	Deprived of force of weight; nor yet may void
	Furnish support to any,- nay, it must,
	True to its bent of nature, still give way.
	Thus in such manner not at all can things
	Be held in union, as if overcome
	By craving for a centre.

[card 1083]
	But besides,
	Seeing they feign that not all bodies press
	To centre inward, rather only those
	Of earth and water (liquid of the sea,
	And the big billows from the mountain slopes,
	And whatsoever are encased, as 'twere,
	In earthen body), contrariwise, they teach
	How the thin air, and with it the hot fire,
	Is borne asunder from the centre, and how,
	For this all ether quivers with bright stars,
	And the sun's flame along the blue is fed
	(Because the heat, from out the centre flying,
	All gathers there), and how, again, the boughs
	Upon the tree-tops could not sprout their leaves,
	Unless, little by little, from out the earth
	For each were nutriment...
	. . . . . .
	Lest, after the manner of the winged flames,
	The ramparts of the world should flee away,
	Dissolved amain throughout the mighty void,
	And lest all else should likewise follow after,
	Aye, lest the thundering vaults of heaven should burst
	And splinter upward, and the earth forthwith
	Withdraw from under our feet, and all its bulk,
	Among its mingled wrecks and those of heaven,
	With slipping asunder of the primal seeds,
	Should pass, along the immeasurable inane,
	Away forever, and, that instant, naught
	Of wrack and remnant would be left, beside
	The desolate space, and germs invisible.
	For on whatever side thou deemest first
	The primal bodies lacking, lo, that side
	Will be for things the very door of death:
	Wherethrough the throng of matter all will dash,
	Out and abroad.
	These points, if thou wilt ponder,
	Then, with but paltry trouble led along...
	. . . . . .
	For one thing after other will grow clear,
	Nor shall the blind night rob thee of the road,
	To hinder thy gaze on nature's Farthest-forth.
	Thus things for things shall kindle torches new.
