Book Two: The Movements and Shapes of Atoms (Part 1 of 2) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 1]
	'Tis sweet, when, down the mighty main, the winds
	Roll up its waste of waters, from the land
	To watch another's labouring anguish far,
	Not that we joyously delight that man
	Should thus be smitten, but because 'tis sweet
	To mark what evils we ourselves be spared;
	'Tis sweet, again, to view the mighty strife
	Of armies embattled yonder o'er the plains,
	Ourselves no sharers in the peril; but naught
	There is more goodly than to hold the high
	Serene plateaus, well fortressed by the wise,
	Whence thou may'st look below on other men
	And see them ev'rywhere wand'ring, all dispersed
	In their lone seeking for the road of life;
	Rivals in genius, or emulous in rank,
	Pressing through days and nights with hugest toil
	For summits of power and mastery of the world.
	O wretched minds of men! O blinded hearts!
	In how great perils, in what darks of life
	Are spent the human years, however brief!-
	O not to see that nature for herself
	Barks after nothing, save that pain keep off,
	Disjoined from the body, and that mind enjoy
	Delightsome feeling, far from care and fear!
	Therefore we see that our corporeal life
	Needs little, altogether, and only such
	As takes the pain away, and can besides
	Strew underneath some number of delights.
	More grateful 'tis at times (for nature craves
	No artifice nor luxury), if forsooth
	There be no golden images of boys
	Along the halls, with right hands holding out
	The lamps ablaze, the lights for evening feasts,
	And if the house doth glitter not with gold
	Nor gleam with silver, and to the lyre resound
	No fretted and gilded ceilings overhead,
	Yet still to lounge with friends in the soft grass
	Beside a river of water, underneath
	A big tree's boughs, and merrily to refresh
	Our frames, with no vast outlay- most of all
	If the weather is laughing and the times of the year
	Besprinkle the green of the grass around with flowers.
	Nor yet the quicker will hot fevers go,
	If on a pictured tapestry thou toss,
	Or purple robe, than if 'tis thine to lie
	Upon the poor man's bedding. Wherefore, since
	Treasure, nor rank, nor glory of a reign
	Avail us naught for this our body, thus
	Reckon them likewise nothing for the mind:
	Save then perchance, when thou beholdest forth
	Thy legions swarming round the Field of Mars,
	Rousing a mimic warfare- either side
	Strengthened with large auxiliaries and horse,
	Alike equipped with arms, alike inspired;
	Or save when also thou beholdest forth
	Thy fleets to swarm, deploying down the sea:
	For then, by such bright circumstance abashed,
	Religion pales and flees thy mind; O then
	The fears of death leave heart so free of care.
	But if we note how all this pomp at last
	Is but a drollery and a mocking sport,
	And of a truth man's dread, with cares at heels,
	Dreads not these sounds of arms, these savage swords
	But among kings and lords of all the world
	Mingles undaunted, nor is overawed
	By gleam of gold nor by the splendour bright
	Of purple robe, canst thou then doubt that this
	Is aught, but power of thinking?- when, besides
	The whole of life but labours in the dark.
	For just as children tremble and fear all
	In the viewless dark, so even we at times
	Dread in the light so many things that be
	No whit more fearsome than what children feign,
	Shuddering, will be upon them in the dark.
	This terror then, this darkness of the mind,
	Not sunrise with its flaring spokes of light,
	Nor glittering arrows of morning can disperse,
	But only nature's aspect and her law.

[card 62]
	Now come: I will untangle for thy steps
	Now by what motions the begetting bodies
	Of the world-stuff beget the varied world,
	And then forever resolve it when begot,
	And by what force they are constrained to this,
	And what the speed appointed unto them
	Wherewith to travel down the vast inane:
	Do thou remember to yield thee to my words.
	For truly matter coheres not, crowds not tight,
	Since we behold each thing to wane away,
	And we observe how all flows on and off,
	As 'twere, with age-old time, and from our eyes
	How eld withdraws each object at the end,
	Albeit the sum is seen to bide the same,
	Unharmed, because these motes that leave each thing
	Diminish what they part from, but endow
	With increase those to which in turn they come,
	Constraining these to wither in old age,
	And those to flower at the prime (and yet
	Biding not long among them). Thus the sum
	Forever is replenished, and we live
	As mortals by eternal give and take.
	The nations wax, the nations wane away;
	In a brief space the generations pass,
	And like to runners hand the lamp of life
	One unto other.

[card 80]
	But if thou believe
	That the primordial germs of things can stop,
	And in their stopping give new motions birth,
	Afar thou wanderest from the road of truth.
	For since they wander through the void inane,
	All the primordial germs of things must needs
	Be borne along, either by weight their own,
	Or haply by another's blow without.
	For, when, in their incessancy so oft
	They meet and clash, it comes to pass amain
	They leap asunder, face to face: not strange-
	Being most hard, and solid in their weights,
	And naught opposing motion, from behind.
	And that more clearly thou perceive how all
	These mites of matter are darted round about,
	Recall to mind how nowhere in the sum
	Of All exists a bottom,- nowhere is
	A realm of rest for primal bodies; since
	(As amply shown and proved by reason sure)
	Space has no bound nor measure, and extends
	Unmetered forth in all directions round.
	Since this stands certain, thus 'tis out of doubt
	No rest is rendered to the primal bodies
	Along the unfathomable inane; but rather,
	Inveterately plied by motions mixed,
	Some, at their jamming, bound aback and leave
	Huge gaps between, and some from off the blow
	Are hurried about with spaces small between.
	And all which, brought together with slight gaps,
	In more condensed union bound aback,
	Linked by their own all inter-tangled shapes,-
	These form the irrefragable roots of rocks
	And the brute bulks of iron, and what else
	Is of their kind...
	The rest leap far asunder, far recoil,
	Leaving huge gaps between: and these supply
	For us thin air and splendour-lights of the sun.
	And many besides wander the mighty void-
	Cast back from unions of existing things,
	Nowhere accepted in the universe,
	And nowise linked in motions to the rest.
	And of this fact (as I record it here)
	An image, a type goes on before our eyes
	Present each moment; for behold whenever
	The sun's light and the rays, let in, pour down
	Across dark halls of houses: thou wilt see
	The many mites in many a manner mixed
	Amid a void in the very light of the rays,
	And battling on, as in eternal strife,
	And in battalions contending without halt,
	In meetings, partings, harried up and down.
	From this thou mayest conjecture of what sort
	The ceaseless tossing of primordial seeds
	Amid the mightier void- at least so far
	As small affair can for a vaster serve,
	And by example put thee on the spoor
	Of knowledge. For this reason too 'tis fit
	Thou turn thy mind the more unto these bodies
	Which here are witnessed tumbling in the light:
	Namely, because such tumblings are a sign
	That motions also of the primal stuff
	Secret and viewless lurk beneath, behind.
	For thou wilt mark here many a speck, impelled
	By viewless blows, to change its little course,
	And beaten backwards to return again,
	Hither and thither in all directions round.
	Lo, all their shifting movement is of old,
	From the primeval atoms; for the same
	Primordial seeds of things first move of self,
	And then those bodies built of unions small
	And nearest, as it were, unto the powers
	Of the primeval atoms, are stirred up
	By impulse of those atoms' unseen blows,
	And these thereafter goad the next in size:
	Thus motion ascends from the primevals on,
	And stage by stage emerges to our sense,
	Until those objects also move which we
	Can mark in sunbeams, though it not appears
	What blows do urge them.

[card 142]
	Now what the speed to matter's atoms given
	Thou mayest in few, my Memmius, learn from this:
	When first the dawn is sprinkling with new light
	The lands, and all the breed of birds abroad
	Flit round the trackless forests, with liquid notes
	Filling the regions along the mellow air,
	We see 'tis forthwith manifest to man
	How suddenly the risen sun is wont
	At such an hour to overspread and clothe
	The whole with its own splendour; but the sun's
	Warm exhalations and this serene light
	Travel not down an empty void; and thus
	They are compelled more slowly to advance,
	Whilst, as it were, they cleave the waves of air;
	Nor one by one travel these particles
	Of the warm exhalations, but are all
	Entangled and enmassed, whereby at once
	Each is restrained by each, and from without
	Checked, till compelled more slowly to advance.
	But the primordial atoms with their old
	Simple solidity, when forth they travel
	Along the empty void, all undelayed
	By aught outside them there, and they, each one
	Being one unit from nature of its parts,
	Are borne to that one place on which they strive
	Still to lay hold, must then, beyond a doubt,
	Outstrip in speed, and be more swiftly borne
	Than light of sun, and over regions rush,
	Of space much vaster, in the self-same time
	The sun's effulgence widens round the sky.
	. . . . . .
	Nor to pursue the atoms one by one,
	To see the law whereby each thing goes on.
	But some men, ignorant of matter, think,
	Opposing this, that not without the gods,
	In such adjustment to our human ways,
	Can nature change the seasons of the years,
	And bring to birth the grains and all of else
	To which divine Delight, the guide of life,
	Persuades mortality and leads it on,
	That, through her artful blandishments of love,
	It propagate the generations still,
	Lest humankind should perish. When they feign
	That gods have stablished all things but for man,
	They seem in all ways mightily to lapse
	From reason's truth: for ev'n if ne'er I knew
	What seeds primordial are, yet would I dare
	This to affirm, ev'n from deep judgment based
	Upon the ways and conduct of the skies-
	This to maintain by many a fact besides-
	That in no wise the nature of the world
	For us was builded by a power divine-
	So great the faults it stands encumbered with:
	The which, my Memmius, later on, for thee
	We will clear up. Now as to what remains
	Concerning motions we'll unfold our thought.

[card 184]
	Now is the place, meseems, in these affairs
	To prove for thee this too: nothing corporeal
	Of its own force can e'er be upward borne,
	Or upward go- nor let the bodies of flames
	Deceive thee here: for they engendered are
	With urge to upwards, taking thus increase,
	Whereby grow upwards shining grains and trees,
	Though all the weight within them downward bears.
	Nor, when the fires will leap from under round
	The roofs of houses, and swift flame laps up
	Timber and beam, 'tis then to be supposed
	They act of own accord, no force beneath
	To urge them up. 'Tis thus that blood, discharged
	From out our bodies, spurts its jets aloft
	And spatters gore. And hast thou never marked
	With what a force the water will disgorge
	Timber and beam? The deeper, straight and down,
	We push them in, and, many though we be,
	The more we press with main and toil, the more
	The water vomits up and flings them back,
	That, more than half their length, they there emerge,
	Rebounding. Yet we never doubt, meseems,
	That all the weight within them downward bears
	Through empty void. Well, in like manner, flames
	Ought also to be able, when pressed out,
	Through winds of air to rise aloft, even though
	The weight within them strive to draw them down.
	Hast thou not seen, sweeping so far and high,
	The meteors, midnight flambeaus of the sky,
	How after them they draw long trails of flame
	Wherever Nature gives a thoroughfare?
	How stars and constellations drop to earth,
	Seest not? Nay, too, the sun from peak of heaven
	Sheds round to every quarter its large heat,
	And sows the new-ploughed intervales with light:
	Thus also sun's heat downward tends to earth.
	Athwart the rain thou seest the lightning fly;
	Now here, now there, bursting from out the clouds,
	The fires dash zig-zag- and that flaming power
	Falls likewise down to earth.

[card 216]
	In these affairs
	We wish thee also well aware of this:
	The atoms, as their own weight bears them down
	Plumb through the void, at scarce determined times,
	In scarce determined places, from their course
	Decline a little- call it, so to speak,
	Mere changed trend. For were it not their wont
	Thuswise to swerve, down would they fall, each one,
	Like drops of rain, through the unbottomed void;
	And then collisions ne'er could be nor blows
	Among the primal elements; and thus
	Nature would never have created aught.
	But, if perchance be any that believe
	The heavier bodies, as more swiftly borne
	Plumb down the void, are able from above
	To strike the lighter, thus engendering blows
	Able to cause those procreant motions, far
	From highways of true reason they retire.
	For whatsoever through the waters fall,
	Or through thin air, must quicken their descent,
	Each after its weight- on this account, because
	Both bulk of water and the subtle air
	By no means can retard each thing alike,
	But give more quick before the heavier weight;
	But contrariwise the empty void cannot,
	On any side, at any time, to aught
	Oppose resistance, but will ever yield,
	True to its bent of nature. Wherefore all,
	With equal speed, though equal not in weight,
	Must rush, borne downward through the still inane.
	Thus ne'er at all have heavier from above
	Been swift to strike the lighter, gendering strokes
	Which cause those divers motions, by whose means
	Nature transacts her work. And so I say,
	The atoms must a little swerve at times-
	But only the least, lest we should seem to feign
	Motions oblique, and fact refute us there.
	For this we see forthwith is manifest:
	Whatever the weight, it can't obliquely go,
	Down on its headlong journey from above,
	At least so far as thou canst mark; but who
	Is there can mark by sense that naught can swerve
	At all aside from off its road's straight line?
	Again, if ev'r all motions are co-linked,
	And from the old ever arise the new
	In fixed order, and primordial seeds
	Produce not by their swerving some new start
	Of motion to sunder the covenants of fate,
	That cause succeed not cause from everlasting,
	Whence this free will for creatures o'er the lands,
	Whence is it wrested from the fates,- this will
	Whereby we step right forward where desire
	Leads each man on, whereby the same we swerve
	In motions, not as at some fixed time,
	Nor at some fixed line of space, but where
	The mind itself has urged? For out of doubt
	In these affairs 'tis each man's will itself
	That gives the start, and hence throughout our limbs
	Incipient motions are diffused. Again,
	Dost thou not see, when, at a point of time,
	The bars are opened, how the eager strength
	Of horses cannot forward break as soon
	As pants their mind to do? For it behooves
	That all the stock of matter, through the frame,
	Be roused, in order that, through every joint,
	Aroused, it press and follow mind's desire;
	So thus thou seest initial motion's gendered
	From out the heart, aye, verily, proceeds
	First from the spirit's will, whence at the last
	'Tis given forth through joints and body entire.
	Quite otherwise it is, when forth we move,
	Impelled by a blow of another's mighty powers
	And mighty urge; for then 'tis clear enough
	All matter of our total body goes,
	Hurried along, against our own desire-
	Until the will has pulled upon the reins
	And checked it back, throughout our members all;
	At whose arbitrament indeed sometimes
	The stock of matter's forced to change its path,
	Throughout our members and throughout our joints,
	And, after being forward cast, to be
	Reined up, whereat it settles back again.
	So seest thou not, how, though external force
	Drive men before, and often make them move,
	Onward against desire, and headlong snatched,
	Yet is there something in these breasts of ours
	Strong to combat, strong to withstand the same?-
	Wherefore no less within the primal seeds
	Thou must admit, besides all blows and weight,
	Some other cause of motion, whence derives
	This power in us inborn, of some free act.-
	Since naught from nothing can become, we see.
	For weight prevents all things should come to pass
	Through blows, as 'twere, by some external force;
	But that man's mind itself in all it does
	Hath not a fixed necessity within,
	Nor is not, like a conquered thing, compelled
	To bear and suffer,- this state comes to man
	From that slight swervement of the elements
	In no fixed line of space, in no fixed time.

[card 294]
	Nor ever was the stock of stuff more crammed,
	Nor ever, again, sundered by bigger gaps:
	For naught gives increase and naught takes away;
	On which account, just as they move to-day,
	The elemental bodies moved of old
	And shall the same hereafter evermore.
	And what was wont to be begot of old
	Shall be begotten under selfsame terms
	And grow and thrive in power, so far as given
	To each by Nature's changeless, old decrees.
	The sum of things there is no power can change,
	For naught exists outside, to which can flee
	Out of the world matter of any kind,
	Nor forth from which a fresh supply can spring,
	Break in upon the founded world, and change
	Whole nature of things, and turn their motions about.

[card 308]
	Herein wonder not
	How 'tis that, while the seeds of things are all
	Moving forever, the sum yet seems to stand
	Supremely still, except in cases where
	A thing shows motion of its frame as whole.
	For far beneath the ken of senses lies
	The nature of those ultimates of the world;
	And so, since those themselves thou canst not see,
	Their motion also must they veil from men-
	For mark, indeed, how things we can see, oft
	Yet hide their motions, when afar from us
	Along the distant landscape. Often thus,
	Upon a hillside will the woolly flocks
	Be cropping their goodly food and creeping about
	Whither the summons of the grass, begemmed
	With the fresh dew, is calling, and the lambs,
	Well filled, are frisking, locking horns in sport:
	Yet all for us seem blurred and blent afar-
	A glint of white at rest on a green hill.
	Again, when mighty legions, marching round,
	Fill all the quarters of the plains below,
	Rousing a mimic warfare, there the sheen
	Shoots up the sky, and all the fields about
	Glitter with brass, and from beneath, a sound
	Goes forth from feet of stalwart soldiery,
	And mountain walls, smote by the shouting, send
	The voices onward to the stars of heaven,
	And hither and thither darts the cavalry,
	And of a sudden down the midmost fields
	Charges with onset stout enough to rock
	The solid earth: and yet some post there is
	Up the high mountains, viewed from which they seem
	To stand- a gleam at rest along the plains.

[card 333]
	Now come, and next hereafter apprehend
	What sorts, how vastly different in form,
	How varied in multitudinous shapes they are-
	These old beginnings of the universe;
	Not in the sense that only few are furnished
	With one like form, but rather not at all
	In general have they likeness each with each,
	No marvel: since the stock of them's so great
	That there's no end (as I have taught) nor sum,
	They must indeed not one and all be marked
	By equal outline and by shape the same.
	. . . . . .
	Moreover, humankind, and the mute flocks
	Of scaly creatures swimming in the streams,
	And joyous herds around, and all the wild,
	And all the breeds of birds- both those that teem
	In gladsome regions of the water-haunts,
	About the river-banks and springs and pools,
	And those that throng, flitting from tree to tree,
	Through trackless woods- Go, take which one thou wilt,
	In any kind: thou wilt discover still
	Each from the other still unlike in shape.
	Nor in no other wise could offspring know
	Mother, nor mother offspring- which we see
	They yet can do, distinguished one from other,
	No less than human beings, by clear signs.
	Thus oft before fair temples of the gods,
	Beside the incense-burning altars slain,
	Drops down the yearling calf, from out its breast
	Breathing warm streams of blood; the orphaned mother,
	Ranging meanwhile green woodland pastures round,
	Knows well the footprints, pressed by cloven hoofs,
	With eyes regarding every spot about,
	For sight somewhere of youngling gone from her;
	And, stopping short, filleth the leafy lanes
	With her complaints; and oft she seeks again
	Within the stall, pierced by her yearning still.
	Nor tender willows, nor dew-quickened grass,
	Nor the loved streams that glide along low banks,
	Can lure her mind and turn the sudden pain;
	Nor other shapes of calves that graze thereby
	Distract her mind or lighten pain the least-
	So keen her search for something known and hers.
	Moreover, tender kids with bleating throats
	Do know their horned dams, and butting lambs
	The flocks of sheep, and thus they patter on,
	Unfailingly each to its proper teat,
	As nature intends. Lastly, with any grain,
	Thou'lt see that no one kernel in one kind
	Is so far like another, that there still
	Is not in shapes some difference running through.
	By a like law we see how earth is pied
	With shells and conchs, where, with soft waves, the sea
	Beats on the thirsty sands of curving shores.
	Wherefore again, again, since seeds of things
	Exist by nature, nor were wrought with hands
	After a fixed pattern of one other,
	They needs must flitter to and fro with shapes
	In types dissimilar to one another.

[card 381]
	. . . . . .
	Easy enough by thought of mind to solve
	Why fires of lightning more can penetrate
	Than these of ours from pitch-pine born on earth.
	For thou canst say lightning's celestial fire,
	So subtle, is formed of figures finer far,
	And passes thus through holes which this our fire,
	Born from the wood, created from the pine,
	Cannot. Again, light passes through the horn
	On the lantern's side, while rain is dashed away.
	And why?- unless those bodies of light should be
	Finer than those of water's genial showers.
	We see how quickly through a colander
	The wines will flow; how, on the other hand,
	The sluggish olive-oil delays: no doubt,
	Because 'tis wrought of elements more large,
	Or else more crook'd and intertangled. Thus
	It comes that the primordials cannot be
	So suddenly sundered one from other, and seep,
	One through each several hole of anything.

[card 398]
	And note, besides, that liquor of honey or milk
	Yields in the mouth agreeable taste to tongue,
	Whilst nauseous wormwood, pungent centaury,
	With their foul flavour set the lips awry;
	Thus simple 'tis to see that whatsoever
	Can touch the senses pleasingly are made
	Of smooth and rounded elements, whilst those
	Which seem the bitter and the sharp, are held
	Entwined by elements more crook'd, and so
	Are wont to tear their ways into our senses,
	And rend our body as they enter in.
	In short all good to sense, all bad to touch,
	Being up-built of figures so unlike,
	Are mutually at strife- lest thou suppose
	That the shrill rasping of a squeaking saw
	Consists of elements as smooth as song
	Which, waked by nimble fingers, on the strings
	The sweet musicians fashion; or suppose
	That same-shaped atoms through men's nostrils pierce
	When foul cadavers burn, as when the stage
	Is with Cilician saffron sprinkled fresh,
	And the altar near exhales Panchaean scent;
	Or hold as of like seed the goodly hues
	Of things which feast our eyes, as those which sting
	Against the smarting pupil and draw tears,
	Or show, with gruesome aspect, grim and vile.
	For never a shape which charms our sense was made
	Without some elemental smoothness; whilst
	Whate'er is harsh and irksome has been framed
	Still with some roughness in its elements.
	Some, too, there are which justly are supposed
	To be nor smooth nor altogether hooked,
	With bended barbs, but slightly angled-out,
	To tickle rather than to wound the sense-
	And of which sort is the salt tartar of wine
	And flavours of the gummed elecampane.
	Again, that glowing fire and icy rime
	Are fanged with teeth unlike whereby to sting
	Our body's sense, the touch of each gives proof.
	For touch- by sacred majesties of Gods!-
	Touch is indeed the body's only sense-
	Be't that something in-from-outward works,
	Be't that something in the body born
	Wounds, or delighteth as it passes out
	Along the procreant paths of Aphrodite;
	Or be't the seeds by some collision whirl
	Disordered in the body and confound
	By tumult and confusion all the sense-
	As thou mayst find, if haply with the hand
	Thyself thou strike thy body's any part.
	On which account, the elemental forms
	Must differ widely, as enabled thus
	To cause diverse sensations.
	And, again,
	What seems to us the hardened and condensed
	Must be of atoms among themselves more hooked,
	Be held compacted deep within, as 'twere
	By branch-like atoms- of which sort the chief
	Are diamond stones, despisers of all blows,
	And stalwart flint and strength of solid iron,
	And brazen bars, which, budging hard in locks,
	Do grate and scream. But what are liquid, formed
	Of fluid body, they indeed must be
	Of elements more smooth and round- because
	Their globules severally will not cohere:
	To suck the poppy-seeds from palm of hand
	Is quite as easy as drinking water down,
	And they, once struck, roll like unto the same.
	But that thou seest among the things that flow
	Some bitter, as the brine of ocean is,
	Is not the least a marvel...
	For since 'tis fluid, smooth its atoms are
	And round, with painful rough ones mixed therein;
	Yet need not these be held together hooked:
	In fact, though rough, they're globular besides,
	Able at once to roll, and rasp the sense.
	And that the more thou mayst believe me here,
	That with smooth elements are mixed the rough
	(Whence Neptune's salt astringent body comes),
	There is a means to separate the twain,
	And thereupon dividedly to see
	How the sweet water, after filtering through
	So often underground, flows freshened forth
	Into some hollow; for it leaves above
	The primal germs of nauseating brine,
	Since cling the rough more readily in earth.
	Lastly, whatso thou markest to disperse
	Upon the instant- smoke, and cloud, and flame-
	Must not (even though not all of smooth and round)
	Be yet co-linked with atoms intertwined,
	That thus they can, without together cleaving,
	So pierce our body and so bore the rocks.
	Whatever we see...
	Given to senses, that thou must perceive
	They're not from linked but pointed elements.

[card 478]
	The which now having taught, I will go on
	To bind thereto a fact to this allied
	And drawing from this its proof: these primal germs
	Vary, yet only with finite tale of shapes.
	For were these shapes quite infinite, some seeds
	Would have a body of infinite increase.
	For in one seed, in one small frame of any,
	The shapes can't vary from one another much.
	Assume, we'll say, that of three minim parts
	Consist the primal bodies, or add a few:
	When, now, by placing all these parts of one
	At top and bottom, changing lefts and rights,
	Thou hast with every kind of shift found out
	What the aspect of shape of its whole body
	Each new arrangement gives, for what remains,
	If thou percase wouldst vary its old shapes,
	New parts must then be added; follows next,
	If thou percase wouldst vary still its shapes,
	That by like logic each arrangement still
	Requires its increment of other parts.
	Ergo, an augmentation of its frame
	Follows upon each novelty of forms.
	Wherefore, it cannot be thou'lt undertake
	That seeds have infinite differences in form,
	Lest thus thou forcest some indeed to be
	Of an immeasurable immensity-
	Which I have taught above cannot be proved.
	. . . . . .
	And now for thee barbaric robes, and gleam
	Of Meliboean purple, touched with dye
	Of the Thessalian shell...
	The peacock's golden generations, stained
	With spotted gaieties, would lie o'erthrown
	By some new colour of new things more bright;
	The odour of myrrh and savours of honey despised;
	The swan's old lyric, and Apollo's hymns,
	Once modulated on the many chords,
	Would likewise sink o'ermastered and be mute:
	For, lo, a somewhat, finer than the rest,
	Would be arising evermore. So, too,
	Into some baser part might all retire,
	Even as we said to better might they come:
	For, lo, a somewhat, loathlier than the rest
	To nostrils, ears, and eyes, and taste of tongue,
	Would then, by reasoning reversed, be there.
	Since 'tis not so, but unto things are given
	Their fixed limitations which do bound
	Their sum on either side, 'tmust be confessed
	That matter, too, by finite tale of shapes
	Does differ. Again, from earth's midsummer heats
	Unto the icy hoar-frosts of the year
	The forward path is fixed, and by like law
	O'ertravelled backwards at the dawn of spring.
	For each degree of hot, and each of cold,
	And the half-warm, all filling up the sum
	In due progression, lie, my Memmius, there
	Betwixt the two extremes: the things create
	Must differ, therefore, by a finite change,
	Since at each end marked off they ever are
	By fixed point- on one side plagued by flames
	And on the other by congealing frosts.

[card 522]
	The which now having taught, I will go on
	To bind thereto a fact to this allied
	And drawing from this its proof: those primal germs
	Which have been fashioned all of one like shape
	Are infinite in tale; for, since the forms
	Themselves are finite in divergences,
	Then those which are alike will have to be
	Infinite, else the sum of stuff remains
	A finite- what I've proved is not the fact,
	Showing in verse how corpuscles of stuff,
	From everlasting and to-day the same,
	Uphold the sum of things, all sides around
	By old succession of unending blows.
	For though thou view'st some beasts to be more rare,
	And mark'st in them a less prolific stock,
	Yet in another region, in lands remote,
	That kind abounding may make up the count;
	Even as we mark among the four-foot kind
	Snake-handed elephants, whose thousands wall
	With ivory ramparts India about,
	That her interiors cannot entered be-
	So big her count of brutes of which we see
	Such few examples. Or suppose, besides,
	We feign some thing, one of its kind and sole
	With body born, to which is nothing like
	In all the lands: yet now unless shall be
	An infinite count of matter out of which
	Thus to conceive and bring it forth to life,
	It cannot be created and- what's more-
	It cannot take its food and get increase.
	Yea, if through all the world in finite tale
	Be tossed the procreant bodies of one thing,
	Whence, then, and where in what mode, by what power,
	Shall they to meeting come together there,
	In such vast ocean of matter and tumult strange?-
	No means they have of joining into one.
	But, just as, after mighty ship-wrecks piled,
	The mighty main is wont to scatter wide
	The rowers' banks, the ribs, the yards, the prow,
	The masts and swimming oars, so that afar
	Along all shores of lands are seen afloat
	The carven fragments of the rended poop,
	Giving a lesson to mortality
	To shun the ambush of the faithless main,
	The violence and the guile, and trust it not
	At any hour, however much may smile
	The crafty enticements of the placid deep:
	Exactly thus, if once thou holdest true
	That certain seeds are finite in their tale,
	The various tides of matter, then, must needs
	Scatter them flung throughout the ages all,
	So that not ever can they join, as driven
	Together into union, nor remain
	In union, nor with increment can grow-
	But facts in proof are manifest for each:
	Things can be both begotten and increase.
	'Tis therefore manifest that primal germs,
	Are infinite in any class thou wilt-
	From whence is furnished matter for all things.
	Nor can those motions that bring death prevail
	Forever, nor eternally entomb
	The welfare of the world; nor, further, can
	Those motions that give birth to things and growth
	Keep them forever when created there.
	Thus the long war, from everlasting waged,
	With equal strife among the elements
	Goes on and on. Now here, now there, prevail
	The vital forces of the world- or fall.
	Mixed with the funeral is the wildered wail
	Of infants coming to the shores of light:
	No night a day, no dawn a night hath followed
	That heard not, mingling with the small birth-cries,
	The wild laments, companions old of death
	And the black rites.
