Book Two: The Movements and Shapes of Atoms (Part 2 of 2) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 581]
	This, too, in these affairs
	'Tis fit thou hold well sealed, and keep consigned
	With no forgetting brain: nothing there is
	Whose nature is apparent out of hand
	That of one kind of elements consists-
	Nothing there is that's not of mixed seed.
	And whatsoe'er possesses in itself
	More largely many powers and properties
	Shows thus that here within itself there are
	The largest number of kinds and differing shapes
	Of elements. And, chief of all, the earth
	Hath in herself first bodies whence the springs,
	Rolling chill waters, renew forevermore
	The unmeasured main; hath whence the fires arise-
	For burns in many a spot her flamed crust,
	Whilst the impetuous Aetna raves indeed
	From more profounder fires- and she, again,
	Hath in herself the seed whence she can raise
	The shining grains and gladsome trees for men;
	Whence, also, rivers, fronds, and gladsome pastures
	Can she supply for mountain-roaming beasts.
	Wherefore great mother of gods, and mother of beasts,
	And parent of man hath she alone been named.
	Her hymned the old and learned bards of Greece
	. . . . . .
	Seated in chariot o'er the realms of air
	To drive her team of lions, teaching thus
	That the great earth hangs poised and cannot lie
	Resting on other earth. Unto her car
	They've yoked the wild beasts, since a progeny,
	However savage, must be tamed and chid
	By care of parents. They have girt about
	With turret-crown the summit of her head,
	Since, fortressed in her goodly strongholds high,
	'Tis she sustains the cities; now, adorned
	With that same token, to-day is carried forth,
	With solemn awe through many a mighty land,
	The image of that mother, the divine.
	Her the wide nations, after antique rite,
	Do name Idaean Mother, giving her
	Escort of Phrygian bands, since first, they say,
	From out those regions 'twas that grain began
	Through all the world. To her do they assign
	The Galli, the emasculate, since thus
	They wish to show that men who violate
	The majesty of the mother and have proved
	Ingrate to parents are to be adjudged
	Unfit to give unto the shores of light
	A living progeny. The Galli come:
	And hollow cymbals, tight-skinned tambourines
	Resound around to bangings of their hands;
	The fierce horns threaten with a raucous bray;
	The tubed pipe excites their maddened minds
	In Phrygian measures; they bear before them knives,
	Wild emblems of their frenzy, which have power
	The rabble's ingrate heads and impious hearts
	To panic with terror of the goddess' might.
	And so, when through the mighty cities borne,
	She blesses man with salutations mute,
	They strew the highway of her journeyings
	With coin of brass and silver, gifting her
	With alms and largesse, and shower her and shade
	With flowers of roses falling like the snow
	Upon the Mother and her companion-bands.
	Here is an armed troop, the which by Greeks
	Are called the Phrygian Curetes. Since
	Haply among themselves they use to play
	In games of arms and leap in measure round
	With bloody mirth and by their nodding shake
	The terrorizing crests upon their heads,
	This is the armed troop that represents
	The arm'd Dictaean Curetes, who, in Crete,
	As runs the story, whilom did out-drown
	That infant cry of Zeus, what time their band,
	Young boys, in a swift dance around the boy,
	To measured step beat with the brass on brass,
	That Saturn might not get him for his jaws,
	And give its mother an eternal wound
	Along her heart. And 'tis on this account
	That armed they escort the mighty Mother,
	Or else because they signify by this
	That she, the goddess, teaches men to be
	Eager with armed valour to defend
	Their motherland, and ready to stand forth,
	The guard and glory of their parents' years.
	A tale, however beautifully wrought,
	That's wide of reason by a long remove:
	For all the gods must of themselves enjoy
	Immortal aeons and supreme repose,
	Withdrawn from our affairs, detached, afar:
	Immune from peril and immune from pain,
	Themselves abounding in riches of their own,
	Needing not us, they are not touched by wrath
	They are not taken by service or by gift.
	Truly is earth insensate for all time;
	But, by obtaining germs of many things,
	In many a way she brings the many forth
	Into the light of sun. And here, whoso
	Decides to call the ocean Neptune, or
	The grain-crop Ceres, and prefers to abuse
	The name of Bacchus rather than pronounce
	The liquor's proper designation, him
	Let us permit to go on calling earth
	Mother of Gods, if only he will spare
	To taint his soul with foul religion.

[card 660]
	So, too, the wooly flocks, and horned kine,
	And brood of battle-eager horses, grazing
	Often together along one grassy plain,
	Under the cope of one blue sky, and slaking
	From out one stream of water each its thirst,
	All live their lives with face and form unlike,
	Keeping the parents' nature, parents' habits,
	Which, kind by kind, through ages they repeat.
	So great in any sort of herb thou wilt,
	So great again in any river of earth
	Are the distinct diversities of matter.
	Hence, further, every creature- any one
	From out them all- compounded is the same
	Of bones, blood, veins, heat, moisture, flesh, and thews-
	All differing vastly in their forms, and built
	Of elements dissimilar in shape.
	Again, all things by fire consumed ablaze,
	Within their frame lay up, if naught besides,
	At least those atoms whence derives their power
	To throw forth fire and send out light from under,
	To shoot the sparks and scatter embers wide.
	If, with like reasoning of mind, all else
	Thou traverse through, thou wilt discover thus
	That in their frame the seeds of many things
	They hide, and divers shapes of seeds contain.
	Further, thou markest much, to which are given
	Along together colour and flavour and smell,
	Among which, chief, are most burnt offerings.
	. . . . . .
	Thus must they be of divers shapes composed.
	A smell of scorching enters in our frame
	Where the bright colour from the dye goes not;
	And colour in one way, flavour in quite another
	Works inward to our senses- so mayst see
	They differ too in elemental shapes.
	Thus unlike forms into one mass combine,
	And things exist by intermixed seed.
	But still 'tmust not be thought that in all ways
	All things can be conjoined; for then wouldst view
	Portents begot about thee every side:
	Hulks of mankind half brute astarting up,
	At times big branches sprouting from man's trunk,
	Limbs of a sea-beast to a land-beast knit,
	And nature along the all-producing earth
	Feeding those dire Chimaeras breathing flame
	From hideous jaws- Of which 'tis simple fact
	That none have been begot; because we see
	All are from fixed seed and fixed dam
	Engendered and so function as to keep
	Throughout their growth their own ancestral type.
	This happens surely by a fixed law:
	For from all food-stuff, when once eaten down,
	Go sundered atoms, suited to each creature,
	Throughout their bodies, and, conjoining there,
	Produce the proper motions; but we see
	How, contrariwise, nature upon the ground
	Throws off those foreign to their frame; and many
	With viewless bodies from their bodies fly,
	By blows impelled- those impotent to join
	To any part, or, when inside, to accord
	And to take on the vital motions there.
	But think not, haply, living forms alone
	Are bound by these laws: they distinguished all.
	. . . . . .
	For just as all things of creation are,
	In their whole nature, each to each unlike,
	So must their atoms be in shape unlike-
	Not since few only are fashioned of like form,
	But since they all, as general rule, are not
	The same as all. Nay, here in these our verses,
	Elements many, common to many words,
	Thou seest, though yet 'tis needful to confess
	The words and verses differ, each from each,
	Compounded out of different elements-
	Not since few only, as common letters, run
	Through all the words, or no two words are made,
	One and the other, from all like elements,
	But since they all, as general rule, are not
	The same as all. Thus, too, in other things,
	Whilst many germs common to many things
	There are, yet they, combined among themselves,
	Can form new wholes to others quite unlike.
	Thus fairly one may say that humankind,
	The grains, the gladsome trees, are all made up
	Of different atoms. Further, since the seeds
	Are different, difference must there also be
	In intervening spaces, thoroughfares,
	Connections, weights, blows, clashings, motions, all
	Which not alone distinguish living forms,
	But sunder earth's whole ocean from the lands,
	And hold all heaven from the lands away.

[card 730]
	Now come, this wisdom by my sweet toil sought
	Look thou perceive, lest haply thou shouldst guess
	That the white objects shining to thine eyes
	Are gendered of white atoms, or the black
	Of a black seed; or yet believe that aught
	That's steeped in any hue should take its dye
	From bits of matter tinct with hue the same.
	For matter's bodies own no hue the least-
	Or like to objects or, again, unlike.
	But, if percase it seem to thee that mind
	Itself can dart no influence of its own
	Into these bodies, wide thou wand'rest off.
	For since the blind-born, who have ne'er surveyed
	The light of sun, yet recognise by touch
	Things that from birth had ne'er a hue for them,
	'Tis thine to know that bodies can be brought
	No less unto the ken of our minds too,
	Though yet those bodies with no dye be smeared.
	Again, ourselves whatever in the dark
	We touch, the same we do not find to be
	Tinctured with any colour.
	Now that here
	I win the argument, I next will teach
	. . . . . .
	Now, every colour changes, none except,
	And every...
	Which the primordials ought nowise to do.
	Since an immutable somewhat must remain,
	Lest all things utterly be brought to naught.
	For change of anything from out its bounds
	Means instant death of that which was before.
	Wherefore be mindful not to stain with colour
	The seeds of things, lest things return for thee
	All utterly to naught.
	But now, if seeds
	Receive no property of colour, and yet
	Be still endowed with variable forms
	From which all kinds of colours they beget
	And vary (by reason that ever it matters much
	With what seeds, and in what positions joined,
	And what the motions that they give and get),
	Forthwith most easily thou mayst devise
	Why what was black of hue an hour ago
	Can of a sudden like the marble gleam,-
	As ocean, when the high winds have upheaved
	Its level plains, is changed to hoary waves
	Of marble whiteness: for, thou mayst declare,
	That, when the thing we often see as black
	Is in its matter then commixed anew,
	Some atoms rearranged, and some withdrawn,
	And added some, 'tis seen forthwith to turn
	Glowing and white. But if of azure seeds
	Consist the level waters of the deep,
	They could in nowise whiten: for however
	Thou shakest azure seeds, the same can never
	Pass into marble hue. But, if the seeds-
	Which thus produce the ocean's one pure sheen-
	Be now with one hue, now another dyed,
	As oft from alien forms and divers shapes
	A cube's produced all uniform in shape,
	'Twould be but natural, even as in the cube
	We see the forms to be dissimilar,
	That thus we'd see in brightness of the deep
	(Or in whatever one pure sheen thou wilt)
	Colours diverse and all dissimilar.
	Besides, the unlike shapes don't thwart the least
	The whole in being externally a cube;
	But differing hues of things do block and keep
	The whole from being of one resultant hue.
	Then, too, the reason which entices us
	At times to attribute colours to the seeds
	Falls quite to pieces, since white things are not
	Create from white things, nor are black from black,
	But evermore they are create from things
	Of divers colours. Verily, the white
	Will rise more readily, is sooner born
	Out of no colour, than of black or aught
	Which stands in hostile opposition thus.

[card 795]
	Besides, since colours cannot be, sans light,
	And the primordials come not forth to light,
	'Tis thine to know they are not clothed with colour-
	Truly, what kind of colour could there be
	In the viewless dark? Nay, in the light itself
	A colour changes, gleaming variedly,
	When smote by vertical or slanting ray.
	Thus in the sunlight shows the down of doves
	That circles, garlanding, the nape and throat:
	Now it is ruddy with a bright gold-bronze,
	Now, by a strange sensation it becomes
	Green-emerald blended with the coral-red.
	The peacock's tail, filled with the copious light,
	Changes its colours likewise, when it turns.
	Wherefore, since by some blow of light begot,
	Without such blow these colours can't become.
	And since the pupil of the eye receives
	Within itself one kind of blow, when said
	To feel a white hue, then another kind,
	When feeling a black or any other hue,
	And since it matters nothing with what hue
	The things thou touchest be perchance endowed,
	But rather with what sort of shape equipped,
	'Tis thine to know the atoms need not colour,
	But render forth sensations, as of touch,
	That vary with their varied forms.

[card 817]
	Besides,
	Since special shapes have not a special colour,
	And all formations of the primal germs
	Can be of any sheen thou wilt, why, then,
	Are not those objects which are of them made
	Suffused, each kind with colours of every kind?
	For then 'twere meet that ravens, as they fly,
	Should dartle from white pinions a white sheen,
	Or swans turn black from seed of black, or be
	Of any single varied dye thou wilt.
	Again, the more an object's rent to bits,
	The more thou see its colour fade away
	Little by little till 'tis quite extinct;
	As happens when the gaudy linen's picked
	Shred after shred away: the purple there,
	Phoenician red, most brilliant of all dyes,
	Is lost asunder, ravelled thread by thread;
	Hence canst perceive the fragments die away
	From out their colour, long ere they depart
	Back to the old primordials of things.
	And, last, since thou concedest not all bodies
	Send out a voice or smell, it happens thus
	That not to all thou givest sounds and smells.
	So, too, since we behold not all with eyes,
	'Tis thine to know some things there are as much
	Orphaned of colour, as others without smell,
	And reft of sound; and those the mind alert
	No less can apprehend than it can mark
	The things that lack some other qualities.

[card 842]
	But think not haply that the primal bodies
	Remain despoiled alone of colour: so,
	Are they from warmth dissevered and from cold
	And from hot exhalations; and they move,
	Both sterile of sound and dry of juice; and throw
	Not any odour from their proper bodies.
	Just as, when undertaking to prepare
	A liquid balm of myrrh and marjoram,
	And flower of nard, which to our nostrils breathes
	Odour of nectar, first of all behooves
	Thou seek, as far as find thou may and can,
	The inodorous olive-oil (which never sends
	One whiff of scent to nostrils), that it may
	The least debauch and ruin with sharp tang
	The odorous essence with its body mixed
	And in it seethed. And on the same account
	The primal germs of things must not be thought
	To furnish colour in begetting things,
	Nor sound, since pow'rless they to send forth aught
	From out themselves, nor any flavour, too,
	Nor cold, nor exhalation hot or warm.
	. . . . . .
	The rest; yet since these things are mortal all-
	The pliant mortal, with a body soft;
	The brittle mortal, with a crumbling frame;
	The hollow with a porous-all must be
	Disjoined from the primal elements,
	If still we wish under the world to lay
	Immortal ground-works, whereupon may rest
	The sum of weal and safety, lest for thee
	All things return to nothing utterly.
	Now, too: whate'er we see possessing sense
	Must yet confessedly be stablished all
	From elements insensate. And those signs,
	So clear to all and witnessed out of hand,
	Do not refute this dictum nor oppose;
	But rather themselves do lead us by the hand,
	Compelling belief that living things are born
	Of elements insensate, as I say.
	Sooth, we may see from out the stinking dung
	Live worms spring up, when, after soaking rains,
	The drenched earth rots; and all things change the same:
	Lo, change the rivers, the fronds, the gladsome pastures
	Into the cattle, the cattle their nature change
	Into our bodies, and from our body, oft
	Grow strong the powers and bodies of wild beasts
	And mighty-winged birds. Thus nature changes
	All foods to living frames, and procreates
	From them the senses of live creatures all,
	In manner about as she uncoils in flames
	Dry logs of wood and turns them all to fire.
	And seest not, therefore, how it matters much
	After what order are set the primal germs,
	And with what other germs they all are mixed,
	And what the motions that they give and get?

[card 886]
	But now, what is't that strikes thy sceptic mind,
	Constraining thee to sundry arguments
	Against belief that from insensate germs
	The sensible is gendered?- Verily,
	'Tis this: that liquids, earth, and wood, though mixed,
	Are yet unable to gender vital sense.
	And, therefore, 'twill be well in these affairs
	This to remember: that I have not said
	Senses are born, under conditions all,
	From all things absolutely which create
	Objects that feel; but much it matters here
	Firstly, how small the seeds which thus compose
	The feeling thing, then, with what shapes endowed,
	And lastly what they in positions be,
	In motions, in arrangements. Of which facts
	Naught we perceive in logs of wood and clods;
	And yet even these, when sodden by the rains,
	Give birth to wormy grubs, because the bodies
	Of matter, from their old arrangements stirred
	By the new factor, then combine anew
	In such a way as genders living things.
	Next, they who deem that feeling objects can
	From feeling objects be create, and these,
	In turn, from others that are wont to feel
	. . . . . .
	When soft they make them; for all sense is linked
	With flesh, and thews, and veins- and such, we see,
	Are fashioned soft and of a mortal frame.
	Yet be't that these can last forever on:
	They'll have the sense that's proper to a part,
	Or else be judged to have a sense the same
	As that within live creatures as a whole.
	But of themselves those parts can never feel,
	For all the sense in every member back
	To something else refers- a severed hand,
	Or any other member of our frame,
	Itself alone cannot support sensation.
	It thus remains they must resemble, then,
	Live creatures as a whole, to have the power
	Of feeling sensation concordant in each part
	With the vital sense; and so they're bound to feel
	The things we feel exactly as do we.
	If such the case, how, then, can they be named
	The primal germs of things, and how avoid
	The highways of destruction?- since they be
	Mere living things and living things be all
	One and the same with mortal. Grant they could,
	Yet by their meetings and their unions all,
	Naught would result, indeed, besides a throng
	And hurly-burly all of living things-
	Precisely as men, and cattle, and wild beasts,
	By mere conglomeration each with each
	Can still beget not anything of new.
	But if by chance they lose, inside a body,
	Their own sense and another sense take on,
	What, then, avails it to assign them that
	Which is withdrawn thereafter? And besides,
	To touch on proof that we pronounced before,
	Just as we see the eggs of feathered fowls
	To change to living chicks, and swarming worms
	To bubble forth when from the soaking rains
	The earth is sodden, sure, sensations all
	Can out of non-sensations be begot.

[card 931]
	But if one say that sense can so far rise
	From non-sense by mutation, or because
	Brought forth as by a certain sort of birth,
	'Twill serve to render plain to him and prove
	There is no birth, unless there be before
	Some formed union of the elements,
	Nor any change, unless they be unite.
	In first place, senses can't in body be
	Before its living nature's been begot,-
	Since all its stuff, in faith, is held dispersed
	About through rivers, air, and earth, and all
	That is from earth created, nor has met
	In combination, and, in proper mode,
	Conjoined into those vital motions which
	Kindle the all-perceiving senses- they
	That keep and guard each living thing soever.
	Again, a blow beyond its nature's strength
	Shatters forthwith each living thing soe'er,
	And on it goes confounding all the sense
	Of body and mind. For of the primal germs
	Are loosed their old arrangements, and, throughout,
	The vital motions blocked,- until the stuff,
	Shaken profoundly through the frame entire,
	Undoes the vital knots of soul from body
	And throws that soul, to outward wide-dispersed,
	Through all the pores. For what may we surmise
	A blow inflicted can achieve besides
	Shaking asunder and loosening all apart?
	It happens also, when less sharp the blow,
	The vital motions which are left are wont
	Oft to win out- win out, and stop and still
	The uncouth tumults gendered by the blow,
	And call each part to its own courses back,
	And shake away the motion of death which now
	Begins its own dominion in the body,
	And kindle anew the senses almost gone.
	For by what other means could they the more
	Collect their powers of thought and turn again
	From very doorways of destruction
	Back unto life, rather than pass whereto
	They be already well-nigh sped and so
	Pass quite away?
	Again, since pain is there
	Where bodies of matter, by some force stirred up,
	Through vitals and through joints, within their seats
	Quiver and quake inside, but soft delight,
	When they remove unto their place again:
	'Tis thine to know the primal germs can be
	Assaulted by no pain, nor from themselves
	Take no delight; because indeed they are
	Not made of any bodies of first things,
	Under whose strange new motions they might ache
	Or pluck the fruit of any dear new sweet.
	And so they must be furnished with no sense.

[card 973]
	Once more, if thus, that every living thing
	May have sensation, needful 'tis to assign
	Sense also to its elements, what then
	Of those fixed elements from which mankind
	Hath been, by their peculiar virtue, formed?
	Of verity, they'll laugh aloud, like men,
	Shaken asunder by a spasm of mirth,
	Or sprinkle with dewy tear-drops cheeks and chins,
	And have the cunning hardihood to say
	Much on the composition of the world,
	And in their turn inquire what elements
	They have themselves,- since, thus the same in kind
	As a whole mortal creature, even they
	Must also be from other elements,
	And then those others from others evermore-
	So that thou darest nowhere make a stop.
	Oho, I'll follow thee until thou grant
	The seed (which here thou say'st speaks, laughs, and thinks)
	Is yet derived out of other seeds
	Which in their turn are doing just the same.
	But if we see what raving nonsense this,
	And that a man may laugh, though not, forsooth,
	Compounded out of laughing elements,
	And think and utter reason with learn'd speech,
	Though not himself compounded, for a fact,
	Of sapient seeds and eloquent, why, then,
	Cannot those things which we perceive to have
	Their own sensation be composed as well
	Of intermixed seeds quite void of sense?

[card 991]
	Once more, we all from seed celestial spring,
	To all is that same father, from whom earth,
	The fostering mother, as she takes the drops
	Of liquid moisture, pregnant bears her broods-
	The shining grains, and gladsome shrubs and trees,
	And bears the human race and of the wild
	The generations all, the while she yields
	The foods wherewith all feed their frames and lead
	The genial life and propagate their kind;
	Wherefore she owneth that maternal name,
	By old desert. What was before from earth,
	The same in earth sinks back, and what was sent
	From shores of ether, that, returning home,
	The vaults of sky receive. Nor thus doth death
	So far annihilate things that she destroys
	The bodies of matter; but she dissipates
	Their combinations, and conjoins anew
	One element with others; and contrives
	That all things vary forms and change their colours
	And get sensations and straight give them o'er.
	And thus may'st know it matters with what others
	And in what structure the primordial germs
	Are held together, and what motions they
	Among themselves do give and get; nor think
	That aught we see hither and thither afloat
	Upon the crest of things, and now a birth
	And straightway now a ruin, inheres at rest
	Deep in the eternal atoms of the world.
	Why, even in these our very verses here
	It matters much with what and in what order
	Each element is set: the same denote
	Sky, and the ocean, lands, and streams, and sun;
	The same, the grains, and trees, and living things.
	And if not all alike, at least the most-
	But what distinctions by positions wrought!
	And thus no less in things themselves, when once
	Around are changed the intervals between,
	The paths of matter, its connections, weights,
	Blows, clashings, motions, order, structure, shapes,
	The things themselves must likewise changed be.
	Now to true reason give thy mind for us.
	Since here strange truth is putting forth its might
	To hit thee in thine ears, a new aspect
	Of things to show its front. Yet naught there is
	So easy that it standeth not at first
	More hard to credit than it after is;
	And naught soe'er that's great to such degree,
	Nor wonderful so far, but all mankind
	Little by little abandon their surprise.
	Look upward yonder at the bright clear sky
	And what it holds- the stars that wander o'er,
	The moon, the radiance of the splendour-sun:
	Yet all, if now they first for mortals were,
	If unforeseen now first asudden shown,
	What might there be more wonderful to tell,
	What that the nations would before have dared
	Less to believe might be?- I fancy, naught-
	So strange had been the marvel of that sight.
	The which o'erwearied to behold, to-day
	None deigns look upward to those lucent realms.
	Then, spew not reason from thy mind away,
	Beside thyself because the matter's new,
	But rather with keen judgment nicely weigh;
	And if to thee it then appeareth true,
	Render thy hands, or, if 'tis false at last,
	Gird thee to combat. For my mind-of-man
	Now seeks the nature of the vast Beyond
	There on the other side, that boundless sum
	Which lies without the ramparts of the world,
	Toward which the spirit longs to peer afar,
	Toward which indeed the swift elan of thought
	Flies unencumbered forth.

[card 1048]
	Firstly, we find,
	Off to all regions round, on either side,
	Above, beneath, throughout the universe
	End is there none- as I have taught, as too
	The very thing of itself declares aloud,
	And as from nature of the unbottomed deep
	Shines clearly forth. Nor can we once suppose
	In any way 'tis likely, (seeing that space
	To all sides stretches infinite and free,
	And seeds, innumerable in number, in sum
	Bottomless, there in many a manner fly,
	Bestirred in everlasting motion there),
	That only this one earth and sky of ours
	Hath been create and that those bodies of stuff,
	So many, perform no work outside the same;
	Seeing, moreover, this world too hath been
	By nature fashioned, even as seeds of things
	By innate motion chanced to clash and cling-
	After they'd been in many a manner driven
	Together at random, without design, in vain-
	And as at last those seeds together dwelt,
	Which, when together of a sudden thrown,
	Should alway furnish the commencements fit
	Of mighty things- the earth, the sea, the sky,
	And race of living creatures. Thus, I say,
	Again, again, 'tmust be confessed there are
	Such congregations of matter otherwhere,
	Like this our world which vasty ether holds
	In huge embrace.
	Besides, when matter abundant
	Is ready there, when space on hand, nor object
	Nor any cause retards, no marvel 'tis
	That things are carried on and made complete,
	Perforce. And now, if store of seeds there is
	So great that not whole life-times of the living
	Can count the tale...
	And if their force and nature abide the same,
	Able to throw the seeds of things together
	Into their places, even as here are thrown
	The seeds together in this world of ours,
	'Tmust be confessed in other realms there are
	Still other worlds, still other breeds of men,
	And other generations of the wild.
	Hence too it happens in the sum there is
	No one thing single of its kind in birth,
	And single and sole in growth, but rather it is
	One member of some generated race,
	Among full many others of like kind.
	First, cast thy mind abroad upon the living:
	Thou'lt find the race of mountain-ranging wild
	Even thus to be, and thus the scions of men
	To be begot, and lastly the mute flocks
	Of scaled fish, and winged frames of birds.
	Wherefore confess we must on grounds the same
	That earth, sun, moon, and ocean, and all else,
	Exist not sole and single- rather in number
	Exceeding number. Since that deeply set
	Old boundary stone of life remains for them
	No less, and theirs a body of mortal birth
	No less, than every kind which here on earth
	Is so abundant in its members found.
	Which well perceived if thou hold in mind,
	Then Nature, delivered from every haughty lord,
	And forthwith free, is seen to do all things
	Herself and through herself of own accord,
	Rid of all gods. For- by their holy hearts
	Which pass in long tranquillity of peace
	Untroubled ages and a serene life!-
	Who hath the power (I ask), who hath the power
	To rule the sum of the immeasurable,
	To hold with steady hand the giant reins
	Of the unfathomed deep? Who hath the power
	At once to roll a multitude of skies,
	At once to heat with fires ethereal all
	The fruitful lands of multitudes of worlds,
	To be at all times in all places near,
	To stablish darkness by his clouds, to shake
	The serene spaces of the sky with sound,
	And hurl his lightnings,- ha, and whelm how oft
	In ruins his own temples, and to rave,
	Retiring to the wildernesses, there
	At practice with that thunderbolt of his,
	Which yet how often shoots the guilty by,
	And slays the honourable blameless ones!

[card 1105]
	Ere since the birth-time of the world, ere since
	The risen first-born day of sea, earth, sun,
	Have many germs been added from outside,
	Have many seeds been added round about,
	Which the great All, the while it flung them on,
	Brought hither, that from them the sea and lands
	Could grow more big, and that the house of heaven
	Might get more room and raise its lofty roofs
	Far over earth, and air arise around.
	For bodies all, from out all regions, are
	Divided by blows, each to its proper thing,
	And all retire to their own proper kinds:
	The moist to moist retires; earth gets increase
	From earthy body; and fires, as on a forge,
	Beat out new fire; and ether forges ether;
	Till nature, author and ender of the world,
	Hath led all things to extreme bound of growth:
	As haps when that which hath been poured inside
	The vital veins of life is now no more
	Than that which ebbs within them and runs off.
	This is the point where life for each thing ends;
	This is the point where nature with her powers
	Curbs all increase. For whatsoe'er thou seest
	Grow big with glad increase, and step by step
	Climb upward to ripe age, these to themselves
	Take in more bodies than they send from selves,
	Whilst still the food is easily infused
	Through all the veins, and whilst the things are not
	So far expanded that they cast away
	Such numerous atoms as to cause a waste
	Greater than nutriment whereby they wax.
	For 'tmust be granted, truly, that from things
	Many a body ebbeth and runs off;
	But yet still more must come, until the things
	Have touched development's top pinnacle;
	Then old age breaks their powers and ripe strength
	And falls away into a worser part.
	For ever the ampler and more wide a thing,
	As soon as ever its augmentation ends,
	It scatters abroad forthwith to all sides round
	More bodies, sending them from out itself.
	Nor easily now is food disseminate
	Through all its veins; nor is that food enough
	To equal with a new supply on hand
	Those plenteous exhalations it gives off.
	Thus, fairly, all things perish, when with ebbing
	They're made less dense and when from blows without
	They are laid low; since food at last will fail
	Extremest eld, and bodies from outside
	Cease not with thumping to undo a thing
	And overmaster by infesting blows.

[card 1144]
	Thus, too, the ramparts of the mighty world
	On all sides round shall taken be by storm,
	And tumble to wrack and shivered fragments down.
	For food it is must keep things whole, renewing;
	'Tis food must prop and give support to all,-
	But to no purpose, since nor veins suffice
	To hold enough, nor nature ministers
	As much as needful. And even now 'tis thus:
	Its age is broken and the earth, outworn
	With many parturitions, scarce creates
	The little lives- she who created erst
	All generations and gave forth at birth
	Enormous bodies of wild beasts of old.
	For never, I fancy, did a golden cord
	From off the firmament above let down
	The mortal generations to the fields;
	Nor sea, nor breakers pounding on the rocks
	Created them; but earth it was who bore-
	The same to-day who feeds them from herself.
	Besides, herself of own accord, she first
	The shining grains and vineyards of all joy
	Created for mortality; herself
	Gave the sweet fruitage and the pastures glad,
	Which now to-day yet scarcely wax in size,
	Even when aided by our toiling arms.
	We break the ox, and wear away the strength
	Of sturdy farm-hands; iron tools to-day
	Barely avail for tilling of the fields,
	So niggardly they grudge our harvestings,
	So much increase our labour. Now to-day
	The aged ploughman, shaking of his head,
	Sighs o'er and o'er that labours of his hands
	Have fallen out in vain, and, as he thinks
	How present times are not as times of old,
	Often he praises the fortunes of his sire,
	And crackles, prating, how the ancient race,
	Fulfilled with piety, supported life
	With simple comfort in a narrow plot,
	Since, man for man, the measure of each field
	Was smaller far i' the old days. And, again,
	The gloomy planter of the withered vine
	Rails at the season's change and wearies heaven,
	Nor grasps that all of things by sure degrees
	Are wasting away and going to the tomb,
	Outworn by venerable length of life.
