Book Three: The Mind, the Soul, and the Fear of Death (Part 1 of 2) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 1]
	O thou who first uplifted in such dark
	So clear a torch aloft, who first shed light
	Upon the profitable ends of man,
	O thee I follow, glory of the Greeks,
	And set my footsteps squarely planted now
	Even in the impress and the marks of thine-
	Less like one eager to dispute the palm,
	More as one craving out of very love
	That I may copy thee!- for how should swallow
	Contend with swans or what compare could be
	In a race between young kids with tumbling legs
	And the strong might of the horse? Our father thou,
	And finder-out of truth, and thou to us
	Suppliest a father's precepts; and from out
	Those scriven leaves of thine, renowned soul
	(Like bees that sip of all in flowery wolds),
	We feed upon thy golden sayings all-
	Golden, and ever worthiest endless life.
	For soon as ever thy planning thought that sprang
	From god-like mind begins its loud proclaim
	Of nature's courses, terrors of the brain
	Asunder flee, the ramparts of the world
	Dispart away, and through the void entire
	I see the movements of the universe.
	Rises to vision the majesty of gods,
	And their abodes of everlasting calm
	Which neither wind may shake nor rain-cloud splash,
	Nor snow, congealed by sharp frosts, may harm
	With its white downfall: ever, unclouded sky
	O'er roofs, and laughs with far-diffused light.
	And nature gives to them their all, nor aught
	May ever pluck their peace of mind away.
	But nowhere to my vision rise no more
	The vaults of Acheron, though the broad earth
	Bars me no more from gazing down o'er all
	Which under our feet is going on below
	Along the void. O, here in these affairs
	Some new divine delight and trembling awe
	Takes hold through me, that thus by power of thine
	Nature, so plain and manifest at last,
	Hath been on every side laid bare to man!
	And since I've taught already of what sort
	The seeds of all things are, and how, distinct
	In divers forms, they flit of own accord,
	Stirred with a motion everlasting on,
	And in what mode things be from them create,
	Now, after such matters, should my verse, meseems,
	Make clear the nature of the mind and soul,
	And drive that dread of Acheron without,
	Headlong, which so confounds our human life
	Unto its deeps, pouring o'er all that is
	The black of death, nor leaves not anything
	To prosper- a liquid and unsullied joy.

[card 41]
	For as to what men sometimes will affirm:
	That more than Tartarus (the realm of death)
	They fear diseases and a life of shame,
	And know the substance of the soul is blood,
	Or rather wind (if haply thus their whim),
	And so need naught of this our science, then
	Thou well may'st note from what's to follow now
	That more for glory do they braggart forth
	Than for belief. For mark these very same:
	Exiles from country, fugitives afar
	From sight of men, with charges foul attaint,
	Abased with every wretchedness, they yet
	Live, and where'er the wretches come, they yet
	Make the ancestral sacrifices there,
	Butcher the black sheep, and to gods below
	Offer the honours, and in bitter case
	Turn much more keenly to religion.
	Wherefore, it's surer testing of a man
	In doubtful perils- mark him as he is
	Amid adversities; for then alone
	Are the true voices conjured from his breast,
	The mask off-stripped, reality behind.
	And greed, again, and the blind lust of honours
	Which force poor wretches past the bounds of law,
	And, oft allies and ministers of crime,
	To push through nights and days with hugest toil
	To rise untrammelled to the peaks of power-
	These wounds of life in no mean part are kept
	Festering and open by this fright of death.
	For ever we see fierce Want and foul Disgrace
	Dislodged afar from secure life and sweet,
	Like huddling Shapes before the doors of death.
	And whilst, from these, men wish to scape afar,
	Driven by false terror, and afar remove,
	With civic blood a fortune they amass,
	They double their riches, greedy, heapers-up
	Of corpse on corpse they have a cruel laugh
	For the sad burial of a brother-born,
	And hatred and fear of tables of their kin.
	Likewise, through this same terror, envy oft
	Makes them to peak because before their eyes
	That man is lordly, that man gazed upon
	Who walks begirt with honour glorious,
	Whilst they in filth and darkness roll around;
	Some perish away for statues and a name,
	And oft to that degree, from fright of death,
	Will hate of living and beholding light
	Take hold on humankind that they inflict
	Their own destruction with a gloomy heart-
	Forgetful that this fear is font of cares,
	This fear the plague upon their sense of shame,
	And this that breaks the ties of comradry
	And oversets all reverence and faith,
	Mid direst slaughter. For long ere to-day
	Often were traitors to country and dear parents
	Through quest to shun the realms of Acheron.
	For just as children tremble and fear all
	In the viewless dark, so even we at times
	Dread in the light so many things that be
	No whit more fearsome than what children feign,
	Shuddering, will be upon them in the dark.
	This terror, then, this darkness of the mind,
	Not sunrise with its flaring spokes of light,
	Nor glittering arrows of morning sun disperse,
	But only nature's aspect and her law.

[card 94]
	First, then, I say, the mind which oft we call
	The intellect, wherein is seated life's
	Counsel and regimen, is part no less
	Of man than hand and foot and eyes are parts
	Of one whole breathing creature. [But some hold]
	That sense of mind is in no fixed part seated,
	But is of body some one vital state,-
	Named "harmony" by Greeks, because thereby
	We live with sense, though intellect be not
	In any part: as oft the body is said
	To have good health (when health, however, 's not
	One part of him who has it), so they place
	The sense of mind in no fixed part of man.
	Mightily, diversly, meseems they err.
	Often the body palpable and seen
	Sickens, while yet in some invisible part
	We feel a pleasure; oft the other way,
	A miserable in mind feels pleasure still
	Throughout his body- quite the same as when
	A foot may pain without a pain in head.
	Besides, when these our limbs are given o'er
	To gentle sleep and lies the burdened frame
	At random void of sense, a something else
	Is yet within us, which upon that time
	Bestirs itself in many a wise, receiving
	All motions of joy and phantom cares of heart.
	Now, for to see that in man's members dwells
	Also the soul, and body ne'er is wont
	To feel sensation by a "harmony"
	Take this in chief: the fact that life remains
	Oft in our limbs, when much of body's gone;
	Yet that same life, when particles of heat,
	Though few, have scattered been, and through the mouth
	Air has been given forth abroad, forthwith
	Forever deserts the veins, and leaves the bones.
	Thus mayst thou know that not all particles
	Perform like parts, nor in like manner all
	Are props of weal and safety: rather those-
	The seeds of wind and exhalations warm-
	Take care that in our members life remains.
	Therefore a vital heat and wind there is
	Within the very body, which at death
	Deserts our frames. And so, since nature of mind
	And even of soul is found to be, as 'twere,
	A part of man, give over "harmony"-
	Name to musicians brought from Helicon,-
	Unless themselves they filched it otherwise,
	To serve for what was lacking name till then.
	Whate'er it be, they're welcome to it- thou,
	Hearken my other maxims.

[card 136]
	Mind and soul,
	I say, are held conjoined one with other,
	And form one single nature of themselves;
	But chief and regnant through the frame entire
	Is still that counsel which we call the mind,
	And that cleaves seated in the midmost breast.
	Here leap dismay and terror; round these haunts
	Be blandishments of joys; and therefore here
	The intellect, the mind. The rest of soul,
	Throughout the body scattered, but obeys-
	Moved by the nod and motion of the mind.
	This, for itself, sole through itself, hath thought;
	This for itself hath mirth, even when the thing
	That moves it, moves nor soul nor body at all.
	And as, when head or eye in us is smit
	By assailing pain, we are not tortured then
	Through all the body, so the mind alone
	Is sometimes smitten, or livens with a joy,
	Whilst yet the soul's remainder through the limbs
	And through the frame is stirred by nothing new.
	But when the mind is moved by shock more fierce,
	We mark the whole soul suffering all at once
	Along man's members: sweats and pallors spread
	Over the body, and the tongue is broken,
	And fails the voice away, and ring the ears,
	Mists blind the eyeballs, and the joints collapse,-
	Aye, men drop dead from terror of the mind.
	Hence, whoso will can readily remark
	That soul conjoined is with mind, and, when
	'Tis strook by influence of the mind, forthwith
	In turn it hits and drives the body too.
	And this same argument establisheth
	That nature of mind and soul corporeal is:
	For when 'tis seen to drive the members on,
	To snatch from sleep the body, and to change
	The countenance, and the whole state of man
	To rule and turn,- what yet could never be
	Sans contact, and sans body contact fails-
	Must we not grant that mind and soul consist
	Of a corporeal nature?- And besides
	Thou markst that likewise with this body of ours
	Suffers the mind and with our body feels.
	If the dire speed of spear that cleaves the bones
	And bares the inner thews hits not the life,
	Yet follows a fainting and a foul collapse,
	And, on the ground, dazed tumult in the mind,
	And whiles a wavering will to rise afoot.
	So nature of mind must be corporeal, since
	From stroke and spear corporeal 'tis in throes.
	Now, of what body, what components formed
	Is this same mind I will go on to tell.
	First, I aver, 'tis superfine, composed
	Of tiniest particles- that such the fact
	Thou canst perceive, if thou attend, from this:

[card 182]
	Nothing is seen to happen with such speed
	As what the mind proposes and begins;
	Therefore the same bestirs itself more swiftly
	Than aught whose nature's palpable to eyes.
	But what's so agile must of seeds consist
	Most round, most tiny, that they may be moved,
	When hit by impulse slight. So water moves,
	In waves along, at impulse just the least-
	Being create of little shapes that roll;
	But, contrariwise, the quality of honey
	More stable is, its liquids more inert,
	More tardy its flow; for all its stock of matter
	Cleaves more together, since, indeed, 'tis made
	Of atoms not so smooth, so fine, and round.
	For the light breeze that hovers yet can blow
	High heaps of poppy-seed away for thee
	Downward from off the top; but, contrariwise,
	A pile of stones or spiny ears of wheat
	It can't at all. Thus, in so far as bodies
	Are small and smooth, is their mobility;
	But, contrariwise, the heavier and more rough,
	The more immovable they prove. Now, then,
	Since nature of mind is movable so much,
	Consist it must of seeds exceeding small
	And smooth and round. Which fact once known to thee,
	Good friend, will serve thee opportune in else.
	This also shows the nature of the same,
	How nice its texture, in how small a space
	'Twould go, if once compacted as a pellet:
	When death's unvexed repose gets hold on man
	And mind and soul retire, thou markest there
	From the whole body nothing ta'en in form,
	Nothing in weight. Death grants ye everything,
	But vital sense and exhalation hot.
	Thus soul entire must be of smallmost seeds,
	Twined through the veins, the vitals, and the thews,
	Seeing that, when 'tis from whole body gone,
	The outward figuration of the limbs
	Is unimpaired and weight fails not a whit.
	Just so, when vanished the bouquet of wine,
	Or when an unguent's perfume delicate
	Into the winds away departs, or when
	From any body savour's gone, yet still
	The thing itself seems minished naught to eyes,
	Thereby, nor aught abstracted from its weight-
	No marvel, because seeds many and minute
	Produce the savours and the redolence
	In the whole body of the things.

[card 228]
	And so,
	Again, again, nature of mind and soul
	'Tis thine to know created is of seeds
	The tiniest ever, since at flying-forth
	It beareth nothing of the weight away.
	Yet fancy not its nature simple so.
	For an impalpable aura, mixed with heat,
	Deserts the dying, and heat draws off the air;
	And heat there's none, unless commixed with air:
	For, since the nature of all heat is rare,
	Athrough it many seeds of air must move.
	Thus nature of mind is triple; yet those all
	Suffice not for creating sense- since mind
	Accepteth not that aught of these can cause
	Sense-bearing motions, and much less the thoughts
	A man revolves in mind. So unto these
	Must added be a somewhat, and a fourth;
	That somewhat's altogether void of name;
	Than which existeth naught more mobile, naught
	More an impalpable, of elements
	More small and smooth and round. That first transmits
	Sense-bearing motions through the frame, for that
	Is roused the first, composed of little shapes;
	Thence heat and viewless force of wind take up
	The motions, and thence air, and thence all things
	Are put in motion; the blood is strook, and then
	The vitals all begin to feel, and last
	To bones and marrow the sensation comes-
	Pleasure or torment. Nor will pain for naught
	Enter so far, nor a sharp ill seep through,
	But all things be perturbed to that degree
	That room for life will fail, and parts of soul
	Will scatter through the body's every pore.
	Yet as a rule, almost upon the skin
	These motion aIl are stopped, and this is why
	We have the power to retain our life.
	Now in my eagerness to tell thee how
	They are commixed, through what unions fit
	They function so, my country's pauper-speech
	Constrains me sadly. As I can, however,
	I'll touch some points and pass.

[card 262]
	In such a wise
	Course these primordials 'mongst one another
	With inter-motions that no one can be
	From other sundered, nor its agency
	Perform, if once divided by a space;
	Like many powers in one body they work.
	As in the flesh of any creature still
	Is odour and savour and a certain warmth,
	And yet from all of these one bulk of body
	Is made complete, so, viewless force of wind
	And warmth and air, commingled, do create
	One nature, by that mobile energy
	Assisted which from out itself to them
	Imparts initial motion, whereby first
	Sense-bearing motion along the vitals springs.
	For lurks this essence far and deep and under,
	Nor in our body is aught more shut from view,
	And 'tis the very soul of all the soul.
	And as within our members and whole frame
	The energy of mind and power of soul
	Is mixed and latent, since create it is
	Of bodies small and few, so lurks this fourth,
	This essence void of name, composed of small,
	And seems the very soul of all the soul,
	And holds dominion o'er the body all.
	And by like reason wind and air and heat
	Must function so, commingled through the frame,
	And now the one subside and now another
	In interchange of dominance, that thus
	From all of them one nature be produced,
	Lest heat and wind apart, and air apart,
	Make sense to perish, by disseverment.

[card 288]
	There is indeed in mind that heat it gets
	When seething in rage, and flashes from the eyes
	More swiftly fire; there is, again, that wind,
	Much, and so cold, companion of all dread,
	Which rouses the shudder in the shaken frame;
	There is no less that state of air composed,
	Making the tranquil breast, the serene face.
	But more of hot have they whose restive hearts,
	Whose minds of passion quickly seethe in rage-
	Of which kind chief are fierce abounding lions,
	Who often with roaring burst the breast o'erwrought,
	Unable to hold the surging wrath within;
	But the cold mind of stags has more of wind,
	And speedier through their inwards rouses up
	The icy currents which make their members quake.
	But more the oxen live by tranquil air,
	Nor e'er doth smoky torch of wrath applied,
	O'erspreading with shadows of a darkling murk,
	Rouse them too far; nor will they stiffen stark,
	Pierced through by icy javelins of fear;
	But have their place half-way between the two-
	Stags and fierce lions. Thus the race of men:
	Though training make them equally refined,
	It leaves those pristine vestiges behind
	Of each mind's nature. Nor may we suppose
	Evil can e'er be rooted up so far
	That one man's not more given to fits of wrath,
	Another's not more quickly touched by fear,
	A third not more long-suffering than he should.
	And needs must differ in many things besides
	The varied natures and resulting habits
	Of humankind- of which not now can I
	Expound the hidden causes, nor find names
	Enough for all the divers shapes of those
	Primordials whence this variation springs.
	But this meseems I'm able to declare:
	Those vestiges of natures left behind
	Which reason cannot quite expel from us
	Are still so slight that naught prevents a man
	From living a life even worthy of the gods.
	So then this soul is kept by all the body,
	Itself the body's guard, and source of weal:
	For they with common roots cleave each to each,
	Nor can be torn asunder without death.
	Not easy 'tis from lumps of frankincense
	To tear their fragrance forth, without its nature
	Perishing likewise: so, not easy 'tis
	From all the body nature of mind and soul
	To draw away, without the whole dissolved.
	With seeds so intertwined even from birth,
	They're dowered conjointly with a partner-life;
	No energy of body or mind, apart,
	Each of itself without the other's power,
	Can have sensation; but our sense, enkindled
	Along the vitals, to flame is blown by both
	With mutual motions. Besides the body alone
	Is nor begot nor grows, nor after death
	Seen to endure. For not as water at times
	Gives off the alien heat, nor is thereby
	Itself destroyed, but unimpaired remains-
	Not thus, I say, can the deserted frame
	Bear the dissevering of its joined soul,
	But, rent and ruined, moulders all away.
	Thus the joint contact of the body and soul
	Learns from their earliest age the vital motions,
	Even when still buried in the mother's womb;
	So no dissevering can hap to them,
	Without their bane and ill. And thence mayst see
	That, as conjoined is their source of weal,
	Conjoined also must their nature be.

[card 350]
	If one, moreover, denies that body feel,
	And holds that soul, through all the body mixed,
	Takes on this motion which we title "sense,"
	He battles in vain indubitable facts:
	For who'll explain what body's feeling is,
	Except by what the public fact itself
	Has given and taught us? "But when soul is parted,
	Body's without all sense." True!- loses what
	Was even in its life-time not its own;
	And much beside it loses, when soul's driven
	Forth from that life-time. Or, to say that eyes
	Themselves can see no thing, but through the same
	The mind looks forth, as out of opened doors,
	Is- a hard saying; since the feel in eyes
	Says the reverse. For this itself draws on
	And forces into the pupils of our eyes
	Our consciousness. And note the case when often
	We lack the power to see refulgent things,
	Because our eyes are hampered by their light-
	With a mere doorway this would happen not;
	For, since it is our very selves that see,
	No open portals undertake the toil.
	Besides, if eyes of ours but act as doors,
	Methinks that, were our sight removed, the mind
	Ought then still better to behold a thing-
	When even the door-posts have been cleared away.
	Herein in these affairs nowise take up
	What honoured sage, Democritus, lays down-
	That proposition, that primordials
	Of body and mind, each super-posed on each,
	Vary alternately and interweave
	The fabric of our members. For not only
	Are the soul-elements smaller far than those
	Which this our body and inward parts compose,
	But also are they in their number less,
	And scattered sparsely through our frame. And thus
	This canst thou guarantee: soul's primal germs
	Maintain between them intervals as large
	At least as are the smallest bodies, which,
	When thrown against us, in our body rouse
	Sense-bearing motions.

[card 381]
	Hence it comes that we
	Sometimes don't feel alighting on our frames
	The clinging dust, or chalk that settles soft;
	Nor mists of night, nor spider's gossamer
	We feel against us, when, upon our road,
	Its net entangles us, nor on our head
	The dropping of its withered garmentings;
	Nor bird-feathers, nor vegetable down,
	Flying about, so light they barely fall;
	Nor feel the steps of every crawling thing,
	Nor each of all those footprints on our skin
	Of midges and the like. To that degree
	Must many primal germs be stirred in us
	Ere once the seeds of soul that through our frame
	Are intermingled 'gin to feel that those
	Primordials of the body have been strook,
	And ere, in pounding with such gaps between,
	They clash, combine and leap apart in turn.
	But mind is more the keeper of the gates,
	Hath more dominion over life than soul.
	For without intellect and mind there's not
	One part of soul can rest within our frame
	Least part of time; companioning, it goes
	With mind into the winds away, and leaves
	The icy members in the cold of death.
	But he whose mind and intellect abide
	Himself abides in life. However much
	The trunk be mangled, with the limbs lopped off,
	The soul withdrawn and taken from the limbs,
	Still lives the trunk and draws the vital air.
	Even when deprived of all but all the soul,
	Yet will it linger on and cleave to life,-
	Just as the power of vision still is strong,
	If but the pupil shall abide unharmed,
	Even when the eye around it's sorely rent-
	Provided only thou destroyest not
	Wholly the ball, but, cutting round the pupil,
	Leavest that pupil by itself behind-
	For more would ruin sight. But if that centre,
	That tiny part of eye, be eaten through,
	Forthwith the vision fails and darkness comes,
	Though in all else the unblemished ball be clear.
	'Tis by like compact that the soul and mind
	Are each to other bound forevermore.

[card 417]
	Now come: that thou mayst able be to know
	That minds and the light souls of all that live
	Have mortal birth and death, I will go on
	Verses to build meet for thy rule of life,
	Sought after long, discovered with sweet toil.
	But under one name I'd have thee yoke them both;
	And when, for instance, I shall speak of soul,
	Teaching the same to be but mortal, think
	Thereby I'm speaking also of the mind-
	Since both are one, a substance inter-joined.
	First, then, since I have taught how soul exists
	A subtle fabric, of particles minute,
	Made up from atoms smaller much than those
	Of water's liquid damp, or fog, or smoke,
	So in mobility it far excels,
	More prone to move, though strook by lighter cause
	Even moved by images of smoke or fog-
	As where we view, when in our sleeps we're lulled,
	The altars exhaling steam and smoke aloft-
	For, beyond doubt, these apparitions come
	To us from outward. Now, then, since thou seest,
	Their liquids depart, their waters flow away,
	When jars are shivered, and since fog and smoke
	Depart into the winds away, believe
	The soul no less is shed abroad and dies
	More quickly far, more quickly is dissolved
	Back to its primal bodies, when withdrawn
	From out man's members it has gone away.
	For, sure, if body (container of the same
	Like as a jar), when shivered from some cause,
	And rarefied by loss of blood from veins,
	Cannot for longer hold the soul, how then
	Thinkst thou it can be held by any air-
	A stuff much rarer than our bodies be?

[card 445]
	Besides we feel that mind to being comes
	Along with body, with body grows and ages.
	For just as children totter round about
	With frames infirm and tender, so there follows
	A weakling wisdom in their minds; and then,
	Where years have ripened into robust powers,
	Counsel is also greater, more increased
	The power of mind; thereafter, where already
	The body's shattered by master-powers of eld,
	And fallen the frame with its enfeebled powers,
	Thought hobbles, tongue wanders, and the mind gives way;
	All fails, all's lacking at the selfsame time.
	Therefore it suits that even the soul's dissolved,
	Like smoke, into the lofty winds of air;
	Since we behold the same to being come
	Along with body and grow, and, as I've taught,
	Crumble and crack, therewith outworn by eld.
	Then, too, we see, that, just as body takes
	Monstrous diseases and the dreadful pain,
	So mind its bitter cares, the grief, the fear;
	Wherefore it tallies that the mind no less
	Partaker is of death; for pain and disease
	Are both artificers of death,- as well
	We've learned by the passing of many a man ere now.
	Nay, too, in diseases of body, often the mind
	Wanders afield; for 'tis beside itself,
	And crazed it speaks, or many a time it sinks,
	With eyelids closing and a drooping nod,
	In heavy drowse, on to eternal sleep;
	From whence nor hears it any voices more,
	Nor able is to know the faces here
	Of those about him standing with wet cheeks
	Who vainly call him back to light and life.
	Wherefore mind too, confess we must, dissolves,
	Seeing, indeed, contagions of disease
	Enter into the same. Again, O why,
	When the strong wine has entered into man,
	And its diffused fire gone round the veins,
	Why follows then a heaviness of limbs,
	A tangle of the legs as round he reels,
	A stuttering tongue, an intellect besoaked,
	Eyes all aswim, and hiccups, shouts, and brawls,
	And whatso else is of that ilk?- Why this?-
	If not that violent and impetuous wine
	Is wont to confound the soul within the body?
	But whatso can confounded be and balked,
	Gives proof, that if a hardier cause got in,
	'Twould hap that it would perish then, bereaved
	Of any life thereafter.

[card 487]
	And, moreover,
	Often will some one in a sudden fit,
	As if by stroke of lightning, tumble down
	Before our eyes, and sputter foam, and grunt,
	Blither, and twist about with sinews taut,
	Gasp up in starts, and weary out his limbs
	With tossing round. No marvel, since distract
	Through frame by violence of disease.
	. . . . . .
	Confounds, he foams, as if to vomit soul,
	As on the salt sea boil the billows round
	Under the master might of winds. And now
	A groan's forced out, because his limbs are griped,
	But, in the main, because the seeds of voice
	Are driven forth and carried in a mass
	Outwards by mouth, where they are wont to go,
	And have a builded highway. He becomes
	Mere fool, since energy of mind and soul
	Confounded is, and, as I've shown, to-riven,
	Asunder thrown, and torn to pieces all
	By the same venom. But, again, where cause
	Of that disease has faced about, and back
	Retreats sharp poison of corrupted frame
	Into its shadowy lairs, the man at first
	Arises reeling, and gradually comes back
	To all his senses and recovers soul.
	Thus, since within the body itself of man
	The mind and soul are by such great diseases
	Shaken, so miserably in labour distraught,
	Why, then, believe that in the open air,
	Without a body, they can pass their life,
	Immortal, battling with the master winds?
	And, since we mark the mind itself is cured,
	Like the sick body, and restored can be
	By medicine, this is forewarning too
	That mortal lives the mind. For proper it is
	That whosoe'er begins and undertakes
	To alter the mind, or meditates to change
	Any another nature soever, should add
	New parts, or readjust the order given,
	Or from the sum remove at least a bit.
	But what's immortal willeth for itself
	Its parts be nor increased, nor rearranged,
	Nor any bit soever flow away:
	For change of anything from out its bounds
	Means instant death of that which was before.
	Ergo, the mind, whether in sickness fallen,
	Or by the medicine restored, gives signs,
	As I have taught, of its mortality.
	So surely will a fact of truth make head
	'Gainst errors' theories all, and so shut off
	All refuge from the adversary, and rout
	Error by two-edged confutation.
