Book Three: The Mind, the Soul, and the Fear of Death (Part 2 of 2) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 548]
	And since the mind is of a man one part,
	Which in one fixed place remains, like ears,
	And eyes, and every sense which pilots life;
	And just as hand, or eye, or nose, apart,
	Severed from us, can neither feel nor be,
	But in the least of time is left to rot,
	Thus mind alone can never be, without
	The body and the man himself, which seems,
	As 'twere the vessel of the same- or aught
	Whate'er thou'lt feign as yet more closely joined:
	Since body cleaves to mind by surest bonds.
	Again, the body's and the mind's live powers
	Only in union prosper and enjoy;
	For neither can nature of mind, alone of self
	Sans body, give the vital motions forth;
	Nor, then, can body, wanting soul, endure
	And use the senses. Verily, as the eye,
	Alone, up-rended from its roots, apart
	From all the body, can peer about at naught,
	So soul and mind it seems are nothing able,
	When by themselves. No marvel, because, commixed
	Through veins and inwards, and through bones and thews,
	Their elements primordial are confined
	By all the body, and own no power free
	To bound around through interspaces big,
	Thus, shut within these confines, they take on
	Motions of sense, which, after death, thrown out
	Beyond the body to the winds of air,
	Take on they cannot- and on this account,
	Because no more in such a way confined.
	For air will be a body, be alive,
	If in that air the soul can keep itself,
	And in that air enclose those motions all
	Which in the thews and in the body itself
	A while ago 'twas making. So for this,
	Again, again, I say confess we must,
	That, when the body's wrappings are unwound,
	And when the vital breath is forced without,
	The soul, the senses of the mind dissolve,-
	Since for the twain the cause and ground of life
	Is in the fact of their conjoined estate.
	Once more, since body's unable to sustain
	Division from the soul, without decay
	And obscene stench, how canst thou doubt but that
	The soul, uprisen from the body's deeps,
	Has filtered away, wide-drifted like a smoke,
	Or that the changed body crumbling fell
	With ruin so entire, because, indeed,
	Its deep foundations have been moved from place,
	The soul out-filtering even through the frame,
	And through the body's every winding way
	And orifice? And so by many means
	Thou'rt free to learn that nature of the soul
	Hath passed in fragments out along the frame,
	And that 'twas shivered in the very body
	Ere ever it slipped abroad and swam away
	Into the winds of air.

[card 592]
	For never a man
	Dying appears to feel the soul go forth
	As one sure whole from all his body at once,
	Nor first come up the throat and into mouth;
	But feels it failing in a certain spot,
	Even as he knows the senses too dissolve
	Each in its own location in the frame.
	But were this mind of ours immortal mind,
	Dying 'twould scarce bewail a dissolution,
	But rather the going, the leaving of its coat,
	Like to a snake. Wherefore, when once the body
	Hath passed away, admit we must that soul,
	Shivered in all that body, perished too.
	Nay, even when moving in the bounds of life,
	Often the soul, now tottering from some cause,
	Craves to go out, and from the frame entire
	Loosened to be; the countenance becomes
	Flaccid, as if the supreme hour were there;
	And flabbily collapse the members all
	Against the bloodless trunk- the kind of case
	We see when we remark in common phrase,
	"That man's quite gone," or "fainted dead away";
	And where there's now a bustle of alarm,
	And all are eager to get some hold upon
	The man's last link of life. For then the mind
	And all the power of soul are shook so sore,
	And these so totter along with all the frame,
	That any cause a little stronger might
	Dissolve them altogether.- Why, then, doubt
	That soul, when once without the body thrust,
	There in the open, an enfeebled thing,
	Its wrappings stripped away, cannot endure
	Not only through no everlasting age,
	But even, indeed, through not the least of time?
	Then, too, why never is the intellect,
	The counselling mind, begotten in the head,
	The feet, the hands, instead of cleaving still
	To one sole seat, to one fixed haunt, the breast,
	If not that fixed places be assigned
	For each thing's birth, where each, when 'tis create,
	Is able to endure, and that our frames
	Have such complex adjustments that no shift
	In order of our members may appear?
	To that degree effect succeeds to cause,
	Nor is the flame once wont to be create
	In flowing streams, nor cold begot in fire.

[card 624]
	Besides, if nature of soul immortal be,
	And able to feel, when from our frame disjoined,
	The same, I fancy, must be thought to be
	Endowed with senses five,- nor is there way
	But this whereby to image to ourselves
	How under-souls may roam in Acheron.
	Thus painters and the elder race of bards
	Have pictured souls with senses so endowed.
	But neither eyes, nor nose, nor hand, alone
	Apart from body can exist for soul,
	Nor tongue nor ears apart. And hence indeed
	Alone by self they can nor feel nor be.
	And since we mark the vital sense to be
	In the whole body, all one living thing,
	If of a sudden a force with rapid stroke
	Should slice it down the middle and cleave in twain,
	Beyond a doubt likewise the soul itself,
	Divided, dissevered, asunder will be flung
	Along with body. But what severed is
	And into sundry parts divides, indeed
	Admits it owns no everlasting nature.
	We hear how chariots of war, areek
	With hurly slaughter, lop with flashing scythes
	The limbs away so suddenly that there,
	Fallen from the trunk, they quiver on the earth,
	The while the mind and powers of the man
	Can feel no pain, for swiftness of his hurt,
	And sheer abandon in the zest of battle:
	With the remainder of his frame he seeks
	Anew the battle and the slaughter, nor marks
	How the swift wheels and scythes of ravin have dragged
	Off with the horses his left arm and shield;
	Nor other how his right has dropped away,
	Mounting again and on. A third attempts
	With leg dismembered to arise and stand,
	Whilst, on the ground hard by, the dying foot
	Twitches its spreading toes. And even the head,
	When from the warm and living trunk lopped off,
	Keeps on the ground the vital countenance
	And open eyes, until 't has rendered up
	All remnants of the soul. Nay, once again:
	If, when a serpent's darting forth its tongue,
	And lashing its tail, thou gettest chance to hew
	With axe its length of trunk to many parts,
	Thou'lt see each severed fragment writhing round
	With its fresh wound, and spattering up the sod,
	And there the fore-part seeking with the jaws
	After the hinder, with bite to stop the pain.
	So shall we say that these be souls entire
	In all those fractions?- but from that 'twould follow
	One creature'd have in body many souls.
	Therefore, the soul, which was indeed but one,
	Has been divided with the body too:
	Each is but mortal, since alike is each
	Hewn into many parts. Again, how often
	We view our fellow going by degrees,
	And losing limb by limb the vital sense;
	First nails and fingers of the feet turn blue,
	Next die the feet and legs, then o'er the rest
	Slow crawl the certain footsteps of cold death.
	And since this nature of the soul is torn,
	Nor mounts away, as at one time, entire,
	We needs must hold it mortal. But perchance
	If thou supposest that the soul itself
	Can inward draw along the frame, and bring
	Its parts together to one place, and so
	From all the members draw the sense away,
	Why, then, that place in which such stock of soul
	Collected is, should greater seem in sense.
	But since such place is nowhere, for a fact,
	As said before, 'tis rent and scattered forth,
	And so goes under. Or again, if now
	I please to grant the false, and say that soul
	Can thus be lumped within the frames of those
	Who leave the sunshine, dying bit by bit,
	Still must the soul as mortal be confessed;
	Nor aught it matters whether to wrack it go,
	Dispersed in the winds, or, gathered in a mass
	From all its parts, sink down to brutish death,
	Since more and more in every region sense
	Fails the whole man, and less and less of life
	In every region lingers.

[card 670]
	And besides,
	If soul immortal is, and winds its way
	Into the body at the birth of man,
	Why can we not remember something, then,
	Of life-time spent before? why keep we not
	Some footprints of the things we did of, old?
	But if so changed hath been the power of mind,
	That every recollection of things done
	Is fallen away, at no o'erlong remove
	Is that, I trow, from what we mean by death.
	Wherefore 'tis sure that what hath been before
	Hath died, and what now is is now create.
	Moreover, if after the body hath been built
	Our mind's live powers are wont to be put in,
	Just at the moment that we come to birth,
	And cross the sills of life, 'twould scarcely fit
	For them to live as if they seemed to grow
	Along with limbs and frame, even in the blood,
	But rather as in a cavern all alone.
	(Yet all the body duly throngs with sense.)
	But public fact declares against all this:
	For soul is so entwined through the veins,
	The flesh, the thews, the bones, that even the teeth
	Share in sensation, as proven by dull ache,
	By twinge from icy water, or grating crunch
	Upon a stone that got in mouth with bread.
	Wherefore, again, again, souls must be thought
	Nor void of birth, nor free from law of death;
	Nor, if, from outward, in they wound their way,
	Could they be thought as able so to cleave
	To these our frames, nor, since so interwove,
	Appears it that they're able to go forth
	Unhurt and whole and loose themselves unscathed
	From all the thews, articulations, bones.
	But, if perchance thou thinkest that the soul,
	From outward winding in its way, is wont
	To seep and soak along these members ours,
	Then all the more 'twill perish, being thus
	With body fused- for what will seep and soak
	Will be dissolved and will therefore die.
	For just as food, dispersed through all the pores
	Of body, and passed through limbs and all the frame,
	Perishes, supplying from itself the stuff
	For other nature, thus the soul and mind,
	Though whole and new into a body going,
	Are yet, by seeping in, dissolved away,
	Whilst, as through pores, to all the frame there pass
	Those particles from which created is
	This nature of mind, now ruler of our body,
	Born from that soul which perished, when divided
	Along the frame.

[card 711]
	Wherefore it seems that soul
	Hath both a natal and funeral hour.
	Besides are seeds of soul there left behind
	In the breathless body, or not? If there they are,
	It cannot justly be immortal deemed,
	Since, shorn of some parts lost, 'thas gone away:
	But if, borne off with members uncorrupt,
	'Thas fled so absolutely all away
	It leaves not one remainder of itself
	Behind in body, whence do cadavers, then,
	From out their putrid flesh exhale the worms,
	And whence does such a mass of living things,
	Boneless and bloodless, o'er the bloated frame
	Bubble and swarm? But if perchance thou thinkest
	That souls from outward into worms can wind,
	And each into a separate body come,
	And reckonest not why many thousand souls
	Collect where only one has gone away,
	Here is a point, in sooth, that seems to need
	Inquiry and a putting to the test:
	Whether the souls go on a hunt for seeds
	Of worms wherewith to build their dwelling places,
	Or enter bodies ready-made, as 'twere.
	But why themselves they thus should do and toil
	'Tis hard to say, since, being free of body,
	They flit around, harassed by no disease,
	Nor cold nor famine; for the body labours
	By more of kinship to these flaws of life,
	And mind by contact with that body suffers
	So many ills. But grant it be for them
	However useful to construct a body
	To which to enter in, 'tis plain they can't.
	Then, souls for self no frames nor bodies make,
	Nor is there how they once might enter in
	To bodies ready-made- for they cannot
	Be nicely interwoven with the same,
	And there'll be formed no interplay of sense
	Common to each.

[card 741]
	Again, why is't there goes
	Impetuous rage with lion's breed morose,
	And cunning with foxes, and to deer why given
	The ancestral fear and tendency to flee,
	And why in short do all the rest of traits
	Engender from the very start of life
	In the members and mentality, if not
	Because one certain power of mind that came
	From its own seed and breed waxes the same
	Along with all the body? But were mind
	Immortal, were it wont to change its bodies,
	How topsy-turvy would earth's creatures act!
	The Hyrcan hound would flee the onset oft
	Of antlered stag, the scurrying hawk would quake
	Along the winds of air at the coming dove,
	And men would dote, and savage beasts be wise;
	For false the reasoning of those that say
	Immortal mind is changed by change of body-
	For what is changed dissolves, and therefore dies.
	For parts are re-disposed and leave their order;
	Wherefore they must be also capable
	Of dissolution through the frame at last,
	That they along with body perish all.
	But should some say that always souls of men
	Go into human bodies, I will ask:
	How can a wise become a dullard soul?
	And why is never a child's a prudent soul?
	And the mare's filly why not trained so well
	As sturdy strength of steed? We may be sure
	They'll take their refuge in the thought that mind
	Becomes a weakling in a weakling frame.
	Yet be this so, 'tis needful to confess
	The soul but mortal, since, so altered now
	Throughout the frame, it loses the life and sense
	It had before. Or how can mind wax strong
	Coequally with body and attain
	The craved flower of life, unless it be
	The body's colleague in its origins?
	Or what's the purport of its going forth
	From aged limbs?- fears it, perhaps, to stay,
	Pent in a crumbled body? Or lest its house,
	Outworn by venerable length of days,
	May topple down upon it? But indeed
	For an immortal perils are there none.

[card 776]
	Again, at parturitions of the wild
	And at the rites of Love, that souls should stand
	Ready hard by seems ludicrous enough-
	Immortals waiting for their mortal limbs
	In numbers innumerable, contending madly
	Which shall be first and chief to enter in!-
	Unless perchance among the souls there be
	Such treaties stablished that the first to come
	Flying along, shall enter in the first,
	And that they make no rivalries of strength!
	Again, in ether can't exist a tree,
	Nor clouds in ocean deeps, nor in the fields
	Can fishes live, nor blood in timber be,
	Nor sap in boulders: fixed and arranged
	Where everything may grow and have its place.
	Thus nature of mind cannot arise alone
	Without the body, nor exist afar
	From thews and blood. But if 'twere possible,
	Much rather might this very power of mind
	Be in the head, the shoulders or the heels,
	And, born in any part soever, yet
	In the same man, in the same vessel abide.
	But since within this body even of ours
	Stands fixed and appears arranged sure
	Where soul and mind can each exist and grow,
	Deny we must the more that they can have
	Duration and birth, wholly outside the frame.
	For, verily, the mortal to conjoin
	With the eternal, and to feign they feel
	Together, and can function each with each,
	Is but to dote: for what can be conceived
	Of more unlike, discrepant, ill-assorted,
	Than something mortal in a union joined
	With an immortal and a secular
	To bear the outrageous tempests?
	Then, again,
	Whatever abides eternal must indeed
	Either repel all strokes, because 'tis made
	Of solid body, and permit no entrance
	Of aught with power to sunder from within
	The parts compact- as are those seeds of stuff
	Whose nature we've exhibited before;
	Or else be able to endure through time
	For this: because they are from blows exempt,
	As is the void, the which abides untouched,
	Unsmit by any stroke; or else because
	There is no room around, whereto things can,
	As 'twere, depart in dissolution all,-
	Even as the sum of sums eternal is,
	Without or place beyond whereto things may
	Asunder fly, or bodies which can smite,
	And thus dissolve them by the blows of might.

[card 819]
	But if perchance the soul's to be adjudged
	Immortal, mainly on ground 'tis kept secure
	In vital forces- either because there come
	Never at all things hostile to its weal,
	Or else because what come somehow retire,
	Repelled or ere we feel the harm they work,
	. . . . . .
	For, lo, besides that, when the frame's diseased,
	Soul sickens too, there cometh, many a time,
	That which torments it with the things to be,
	Keeps it in dread, and wearies it with cares;
	And even when evil acts are of the past,
	Still gnaw the old transgressions bitterly.
	Add, too, that frenzy, peculiar to the mind,
	And that oblivion of the things that were;
	Add its submergence in the murky waves
	Of drowse and torpor.

[card 830]
	Therefore death to us
	Is nothing, nor concerns us in the least,
	Since nature of mind is mortal evermore.
	And just as in the ages gone before
	We felt no touch of ill, when all sides round
	To battle came the Carthaginian host,
	And the times, shaken by tumultuous war,
	Under the aery coasts of arching heaven
	Shuddered and trembled, and all humankind
	Doubted to which the empery should fall
	By land and sea, thus when we are no more,
	When comes that sundering of our body and soul
	Through which we're fashioned to a single state,
	Verily naught to us, us then no more,
	Can come to pass, naught move our senses then-
	No, not if earth confounded were with sea,
	And sea with heaven. But if indeed do feel
	The nature of mind and energy of soul,
	After their severance from this body of ours,
	Yet nothing 'tis to us who in the bonds
	And wedlock of the soul and body live,
	Through which we're fashioned to a single state.
	And, even if time collected after death
	The matter of our frames and set it all
	Again in place as now, and if again
	To us the light of life were given, O yet
	That process too would not concern us aught,
	When once the self-succession of our sense
	Has been asunder broken. And now and here,
	Little enough we're busied with the selves
	We were aforetime, nor, concerning them,
	Suffer a sore distress. For shouldst thou gaze
	Backwards across all yesterdays of time
	The immeasurable, thinking how manifold
	The motions of matter are, then couldst thou well
	Credit this too: often these very seeds
	(From which we are to-day) of old were set
	In the same order as they are to-day-
	Yet this we can't to consciousness recall
	Through the remembering mind. For there hath been
	An interposed pause of life, and wide
	Have all the motions wandered everywhere
	From these our senses. For if woe and ail
	Perchance are toward, then the man to whom
	The bane can happen must himself be there
	At that same time. But death precludeth this,
	Forbidding life to him on whom might crowd
	Such irk and care; and granted 'tis to know:
	Nothing for us there is to dread in death,
	No wretchedness for him who is no more,
	The same estate as if ne'er born before,
	When death immortal hath ta'en the mortal life.

[card 870]
	Hence, where thou seest a man to grieve because
	When dead he rots with body laid away,
	Or perishes in flames or jaws of beasts,
	Know well: he rings not true, and that beneath
	Still works an unseen sting upon his heart,
	However he deny that he believes.
	His shall be aught of feeling after death.
	For he, I fancy, grants not what he says,
	Nor what that presupposes, and he fails
	To pluck himself with all his roots from life
	And cast that self away, quite unawares
	Feigning that some remainder's left behind.
	For when in life one pictures to oneself
	His body dead by beasts and vultures torn,
	He pities his state, dividing not himself
	Therefrom, removing not the self enough
	From the body flung away, imagining
	Himself that body, and projecting there
	His own sense, as he stands beside it: hence
	He grieves that he is mortal born, nor marks
	That in true death there is no second self
	Alive and able to sorrow for self destroyed,
	Or stand lamenting that the self lies there
	Mangled or burning. For if it an evil is
	Dead to be jerked about by jaw and fang
	Of the wild brutes, I see not why 'twere not
	Bitter to lie on fires and roast in flames,
	Or suffocate in honey, and, reclined
	On the smooth oblong of an icy slab,
	Grow stiff in cold, or sink with load of earth
	Down-crushing from above.

[card 894]
	"Thee now no more
	The joyful house and best of wives shall welcome,
	Nor little sons run up to snatch their kisses
	And touch with silent happiness thy heart.
	Thou shalt not speed in undertakings more,
	Nor be the warder of thine own no more.
	Poor wretch," they say, "one hostile hour hath ta'en
	Wretchedly from thee all life's many guerdons,"
	But add not, "yet no longer unto thee
	Remains a remnant of desire for them"
	If this they only well perceived with mind
	And followed up with maxims, they would free
	Their state of man from anguish and from fear.
	"O even as here thou art, aslumber in death,
	So shalt thou slumber down the rest of time,
	Released from every harrying pang. But we,
	We have bewept thee with insatiate woe,
	Standing beside whilst on the awful pyre
	Thou wert made ashes; and no day shall take
	For us the eternal sorrow from the breast."
	But ask the mourner what's the bitterness
	That man should waste in an eternal grief,
	If, after all, the thing's but sleep and rest?
	For when the soul and frame together are sunk
	In slumber, no one then demands his self
	Or being. Well, this sleep may be forever,
	Without desire of any selfhood more,
	For all it matters unto us asleep.
	Yet not at all do those primordial germs
	Roam round our members, at that time, afar
	From their own motions that produce our senses-
	Since, when he's startled from his sleep, a man
	Collects his senses. Death is, then, to us
	Much less- if there can be a less than that
	Which is itself a nothing: for there comes
	Hard upon death a scattering more great
	Of the throng of matter, and no man wakes up
	On whom once falls the icy pause of life.
	This too, O often from the soul men say,
	Along their couches holding of the cups,
	With faces shaded by fresh wreaths awry:
	"Brief is this fruit of joy to paltry man,
	Soon, soon departed, and thereafter, no,
	It may not be recalled."- As if, forsooth,
	It were their prime of evils in great death
	To parch, poor tongues, with thirst and arid drought,
	Or chafe for any lack.

[card 931]
	Once more, if Nature
	Should of a sudden send a voice abroad,
	And her own self inveigh against us so:
	"Mortal, what hast thou of such grave concern
	That thou indulgest in too sickly plaints?
	Why this bemoaning and beweeping death?
	For if thy life aforetime and behind
	To thee was grateful, and not all thy good
	Was heaped as in sieve to flow away
	And perish unavailingly, why not,
	Even like a banqueter, depart the halls,
	Laden with life? why not with mind content
	Take now, thou fool, thy unafflicted rest?
	But if whatever thou enjoyed hath been
	Lavished and lost, and life is now offence,
	Why seekest more to add- which in its turn
	Will perish foully and fall out in vain?
	O why not rather make an end of life,
	Of labour? For all I may devise or find
	To pleasure thee is nothing: all things are
	The same forever. Though not yet thy body
	Wrinkles with years, nor yet the frame exhausts
	Outworn, still things abide the same, even if
	Thou goest on to conquer all of time
	With length of days, yea, if thou never diest"-
	What were our answer, but that Nature here
	Urges just suit and in her words lays down
	True cause of action? Yet should one complain,
	Riper in years and elder, and lament,
	Poor devil, his death more sorely than is fit,
	Then would she not, with greater right, on him
	Cry out, inveighing with a voice more shrill:
	"Off with thy tears, and choke thy whines, buffoon!
	Thou wrinklest- after thou hast had the sum
	Of the guerdons of life; yet, since thou cravest ever
	What's not at hand, contemning present good,
	That life has slipped away, unperfected
	And unavailing unto thee. And now,
	Or ere thou guessed it, death beside thy head
	Stands- and before thou canst be going home
	Sated and laden with the goodly feast.
	But now yield all that's alien to thine age,-
	Up, with good grace! make room for sons: thou must."
	Justly, I fancy, would she reason thus,
	Justly inveigh and gird: since ever the old
	Outcrowded by the new gives way, and ever
	The one thing from the others is repaired.
	Nor no man is consigned to the abyss
	Of Tartarus, the black. For stuff must be,
	That thus the after-generations grow,-
	Though these, their life completed, follow thee;
	And thus like thee are generations all-
	Already fallen, or some time to fall.
	So one thing from another rises ever;
	And in fee-simple life is given to none,
	But unto all mere usufruct.
	Look back:
	Nothing to us was all fore-passed eld
	Of time the eternal, ere we had a birth.
	And Nature holds this like a mirror up
	Of time-to-be when we are dead and gone.
	And what is there so horrible appears?
	Now what is there so sad about it all?
	Is't not serener far than any sleep?

[card 978]
	And, verily, those tortures said to be
	In Acheron, the deep, they all are ours
	Here in this life. No Tantalus, benumbed
	With baseless terror, as the fables tell,
	Fears the huge boulder hanging in the air:
	But, rather, in life an empty dread of Gods
	Urges mortality, and each one fears
	Such fall of fortune as may chance to him.
	Nor eat the vultures into Tityus
	Prostrate in Acheron, nor can they find,
	Forsooth, throughout eternal ages, aught
	To pry around for in that mighty breast.
	However hugely he extend his bulk-
	Who hath for outspread limbs not acres nine,
	But the whole earth- he shall not able be
	To bear eternal pain nor furnish food
	From his own frame forever. But for us
	A Tityus is he whom vultures rend
	Prostrate in love, whom anxious anguish eats,
	Whom troubles of any unappeased desires
	Asunder rip. We have before our eyes
	Here in this life also a Sisyphus
	In him who seeketh of the populace
	The rods, the axes fell, and evermore
	Retires a beaten and a gloomy man.
	For to seek after power- an empty name,
	Nor given at all- and ever in the search
	To endure a world of toil, O this it is
	To shove with shoulder up the hill a stone
	Which yet comes rolling back from off the top,
	And headlong makes for levels of the plain.
	Then to be always feeding an ingrate mind,
	Filling with good things, satisfying never-
	As do the seasons of the year for us,
	When they return and bring their progenies
	And varied charms, and we are never filled
	With the fruits of life- O this, I fancy, 'tis
	To pour, like those young virgins in the tale,
	Waters into a sieve, unfilled forever.
	. . . . . .
	Cerberus and Furies, and that Lack of Light
	. . . . . .
	Tartarus, out-belching from his mouth the surge
	Of horrible heat- the which are nowhere, nor
	Indeed can be: but in this life is fear
	Of retributions just and expiations
	For evil acts: the dungeon and the leap
	From that dread rock of infamy, the stripes,
	The executioners, the oaken rack,
	The iron plates, bitumen, and the torch.
	And even though these are absent, yet the mind,
	With a fore-fearing conscience, plies its goads
	And burns beneath the lash, nor sees meanwhile
	What terminus of ills, what end of pine
	Can ever be, and feareth lest the same
	But grow more heavy after death. Of truth,
	The life of fools is Acheron on earth.

[card 1024]
	This also to thy very self sometimes
	Repeat thou mayst: "Lo, even good Ancus left
	The sunshine with his eyes, in divers things
	A better man than thou, O worthless hind;
	And many other kings and lords of rule
	Thereafter have gone under, once who swayed
	O'er mighty peoples. And he also, he-
	Who whilom paved a highway down the sea,
	And gave his legionaries thoroughfare
	Along the deep, and taught them how to cross
	The pools of brine afoot, and did contemn,
	Trampling upon it with his cavalry,
	The bellowings of ocean- poured his soul
	From dying body, as his light was ta'en.
	And Scipio's son, the thunderbolt of war,
	Horror of Carthage, gave his bones to earth,
	Like to the lowliest villein in the house.
	Add finders-out of sciences and arts;
	Add comrades of the Heliconian dames,
	Among whom Homer, sceptered o'er them all,
	Now lies in slumber sunken with the rest.
	Then, too, Democritus, when ripened eld
	Admonished him his memory waned away,
	Of own accord offered his head to death.
	Even Epicurus went, his light of life
	Run out, the man in genius who o'er-topped
	The human race, extinguishing all others,
	As sun, in ether arisen, all the stars.
	Wilt thou, then, dally, thou complain to go?-
	For whom already life's as good as dead,
	Whilst yet thou livest and lookest?- who in sleep
	Wastest thy life- time's major part, and snorest
	Even when awake, and ceasest not to see
	The stuff of dreams, and bearest a mind beset
	By baseless terror, nor discoverest oft
	What's wrong with thee, when, like a sotted wretch,
	Thou'rt jostled along by many crowding cares,
	And wanderest reeling round, with mind aswim."

[card 1053]
	If men, in that same way as on the mind
	They feel the load that wearies with its weight,
	Could also know the causes whence it comes,
	And why so great the heap of ill on heart,
	O not in this sort would they live their life,
	As now so much we see them, knowing not
	What 'tis they want, and seeking ever and ever
	A change of place, as if to drop the burden.
	The man who sickens of his home goes out,
	Forth from his splendid halls, and straight- returns,
	Feeling i'faith no better off abroad.
	He races, driving his Gallic ponies along,
	Down to his villa, madly,- as in haste
	To hurry help to a house afire.- At once
	He yawns, as soon as foot has touched the threshold,
	Or drowsily goes off in sleep and seeks
	Forgetfulness, or maybe bustles about
	And makes for town again. In such a way
	Each human flees himself- a self in sooth,
	As happens, he by no means can escape;
	And willy-nilly he cleaves to it and loathes,
	Sick, sick, and guessing not the cause of ail.
	Yet should he see but that, O chiefly then,
	Leaving all else, he'd study to divine
	The nature of things, since here is in debate
	Eternal time and not the single hour,
	Mortal's estate in whatsoever remains
	After great death.

[card 1076]
	And too, when all is said,
	What evil lust of life is this so great
	Subdues us to live, so dreadfully distraught
	In perils and alarms? one fixed end
	Of life abideth for mortality;
	Death's not to shun, and we must go to meet.
	Besides we're busied with the same devices,
	Ever and ever, and we are at them ever,
	And there's no new delight that may be forged
	By living on. But whilst the thing we long for
	Is lacking, that seems good above all else;
	Thereafter, when we've touched it, something else
	We long for; ever one equal thirst of life
	Grips us agape. And doubtful 'tis what fortune
	The future times may carry, or what be
	That chance may bring, or what the issue next
	Awaiting us. Nor by prolonging life
	Take we the least away from death's own time,
	Nor can we pluck one moment off, whereby
	To minish the aeons of our state of death.
	Therefore, O man, by living on, fulfil
	As many generations as thou may:
	Eternal death shall there be waiting still;
	And he who died with light of yesterday
	Shall be no briefer time in death's No-more
	Than he who perished months or years before.
