Book Four: The Senses, Sight, and Love (Part 1 of 3) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 1]
	I wander afield, thriving in sturdy thought,
	Through unpathed haunts of the Pierides,
	Trodden by step of none before. I joy
	To come on undefiled fountains there,
	To drain them deep; I joy to pluck new flowers,
	To seek for this my head a signal crown
	From regions where the Muses never yet
	Have garlanded the temples of a man:
	First, since I teach concerning mighty things,
	And go right on to loose from round the mind
	The tightened coils of dread religion;
	Next, since, concerning themes so dark, I frame
	Song so pellucid, touching all throughout
	Even with the Muses' charm- which, as 'twould seem,
	Is not without a reasonable ground:
	For as physicians, when they seek to give
	Young boys the nauseous wormwood, first do touch
	The brim around the cup with the sweet juice
	And yellow of the honey, in order that
	The thoughtless age of boyhood be cajoled
	As far as the lips, and meanwhile swallow down
	The wormwood's bitter draught, and, though befooled,
	Be yet not merely duped, but rather thus
	Grow strong again with recreated health:
	So now I too (since this my doctrine seems
	In general somewhat woeful unto those
	Who've had it not in hand, and since the crowd
	Starts back from it in horror) have desired
	To expound our doctrine unto thee in song
	Soft-speaking and Pierian, and, as 'twere,
	To touch it with sweet honey of the Muse-
	If by such method haply I might hold
	The mind of thee upon these lines of ours,
	Till thou dost learn the nature of all things
	And understandest their utility.

[card 26]
	But since I've taught already of what sort
	The seeds of all things are, and how distinct
	In divers forms they flit of own accord,
	Stirred with a motion everlasting on,
	And in what mode things be from them create,
	And since I've taught what the mind's nature is,
	And of what things 'tis with the body knit
	And thrives in strength, and by what mode uptorn
	That mind returns to its primordials,
	Now will I undertake an argument-
	One for these matters of supreme concern-
	That there exist those somewhats which we call
	The images of things: these, like to films
	Scaled off the utmost outside of the things,
	Flit hither and thither through the atmosphere,
	And the same terrify our intellects,
	Coming upon us waking or in sleep,
	When oft we peer at wonderful strange shapes
	And images of people lorn of light,
	Which oft have horribly roused us when we lay
	In slumber- that haply nevermore may we
	Suppose that souls get loose from Acheron,
	Or shades go floating in among the living,
	Or aught of us is left behind at death,
	When body and mind, destroyed together, each
	Back to its own primordials goes away.
	And thus I say that effigies of things,
	And tenuous shapes from off the things are sent,
	From off the utmost outside of the things,
	Which are like films or may be named a rind,
	Because the image bears like look and form
	With whatso body has shed it fluttering forth-
	A fact thou mayst, however dull thy wits,

[card 54]
	Well learn from this: mainly, because we see
	Even 'mongst visible objects many be
	That send forth bodies, loosely some diffused-
	Like smoke from oaken logs and heat from fires-
	And some more interwoven and condensed-
	As when the locusts in the summertime
	Put off their glossy tunics, or when calves
	At birth drop membranes from their body's surface,
	Or when, again, the slippery serpent doffs
	Its vestments 'mongst the thorns- for oft we see
	The breres augmented with their flying spoils:
	Since such takes place, 'tis likewise certain too
	That tenuous images from things are sent,
	From off the utmost outside of the things.
	For why those kinds should drop and part from things,
	Rather than others tenuous and thin,
	No power has man to open mouth to tell;
	Especially, since on outsides of things
	Are bodies many and minute which could,
	In the same order which they had before,
	And with the figure of their form preserved,
	Be thrown abroad, and much more swiftly too,
	Being less subject to impediments,
	As few in number and placed along the front.
	For truly many things we see discharge
	Their stuff at large, not only from their cores
	Deep-set within, as we have said above,
	But from their surfaces at times no less-
	Their very colours too. And commonly
	The awnings, saffron, red and dusky blue,
	Stretched overhead in mighty theatres,
	Upon their poles and cross-beams fluttering,
	Have such an action quite; for there they dye
	And make to undulate with their every hue
	The circled throng below, and all the stage,
	And rich attire in the patrician seats.
	And ever the more the theatre's dark walls
	Around them shut, the more all things within
	Laugh in the bright suffusion of strange glints,
	The daylight being withdrawn. And therefore, since
	The canvas hangings thus discharge their dye
	From off their surface, things in general must
	Likewise their tenuous effigies discharge,
	Because in either case they are off-thrown
	From off the surface. So there are indeed
	Such certain prints and vestiges of forms
	Which flit around, of subtlest texture made,
	Invisible, when separate, each and one.

[card 90]
	Again, all odour, smoke, and heat, and such
	Streams out of things diffusedly, because,
	Whilst coming from the deeps of body forth
	And rising out, along their bending path
	They're torn asunder, nor have gateways straight
	Wherethrough to mass themselves and struggle abroad.
	But contrariwise, when such a tenuous film
	Of outside colour is thrown off, there's naught
	Can rend it, since 'tis placed along the front
	Ready to hand. Lastly those images
	Which to our eyes in mirrors do appear,
	In water, or in any shining surface,
	Must be, since furnished with like look of things,
	Fashioned from images of things sent out.
	There are, then, tenuous effigies of forms,
	Like unto them, which no one can divine
	When taken singly, which do yet give back,
	When by continued and recurrent discharge
	Expelled, a picture from the mirrors' plane.
	Nor otherwise, it seems, can they be kept
	So well conserved that thus be given back
	Figures so like each object.

[card 110]
	Now then, learn
	How tenuous is the nature of an image.
	And in the first place, since primordials be
	So far beneath our senses, and much less
	E'en than those objects which begin to grow
	Too small for eyes to note, learn now in few
	How nice are the beginnings of all things-
	That this, too, I may yet confirm in proof:
	First, living creatures are sometimes so small
	That even their third part can nowise be seen;
	Judge, then, the size of any inward organ-
	What of their sphered heart, their eyes, their limbs,
	The skeleton?- How tiny thus they are!
	And what besides of those first particles
	Whence soul and mind must fashioned be?- Seest not
	How nice and how minute? Besides, whatever
	Exhales from out its body a sharp smell-
	The nauseous absinth, or the panacea,
	Strong southernwood, or bitter centaury-
	If never so lightly with thy [fingers] twain
	Perchance [thou touch] a one of them
	. . . . . .
	Then why not rather know that images
	Flit hither and thither, many, in many modes,
	Bodiless and invisible?
	But lest
	Haply thou holdest that those images
	Which come from objects are the sole that flit,
	Others indeed there be of own accord
	Begot, self-formed in earth's aery skies,
	Which, moulded to innumerable shapes,
	Are borne aloft, and, fluid as they are,
	Cease not to change appearance and to turn
	Into new outlines of all sorts of forms;
	As we behold the clouds grow thick on high
	And smirch the serene vision of the world,
	Stroking the air with motions. For oft are seen
	The giants' faces flying far along
	And trailing a spread of shadow; and at times
	The mighty mountains and mountain-sundered rocks
	Going before and crossing on the sun,
	Whereafter a monstrous beast dragging amain
	And leading in the other thunderheads.

[card 143]
	Now [hear] how easy and how swift they be
	Engendered, and perpetually flow off
	From things and gliding pass away....
	. . . . . .
	For ever every outside streams away
	From off all objects, since discharge they may;
	And when this outside reaches other things,
	As chiefly glass, it passes through; but where
	It reaches the rough rocks or stuff of wood,
	There 'tis so rent that it cannot give back
	An image. But when gleaming objects dense,
	As chiefly mirrors, have been set before it,
	Nothing of this sort happens. For it can't
	Go, as through glass, nor yet be rent- its safety,
	By virtue of that smoothness, being sure.
	'Tis therefore that from them the images
	Stream back to us; and howso suddenly
	Thou place, at any instant, anything
	Before a mirror, there an image shows;
	Proving that ever from a body's surface
	Flow off thin textures and thin shapes of things.
	Thus many images in little time
	Are gendered; so their origin is named
	Rightly a speedy. And even as the sun
	Must send below, in little time, to earth
	So many beams to keep all things so full
	Of light incessant; thus, on grounds the same,
	From things there must be borne, in many modes,
	To every quarter round, upon the moment,
	The many images of things; because
	Unto whatever face of things we turn
	The mirror, things of form and hue the same
	Respond. Besides, though but a moment since
	Serenest was the weather of the sky,
	So fiercely sudden is it foully thick
	That ye might think that round about all murk
	Had parted forth from Acheron and filled
	The mighty vaults of sky- so grievously,
	As gathers thus the storm-clouds' gruesome night,
	Do faces of black horror hang on high-
	Of which how small a part an image is
	There's none to tell or reckon out in words.

[card 176]
	Now come; with what swift motion they are borne,
	These images, and what the speed assigned
	To them across the breezes swimming on-
	So that o'er lengths of space a little hour
	Alone is wasted, toward whatever region
	Each with its divers impulse tends- I'll tell
	In verses sweeter than they many are;
	Even as the swan's slight note is better far
	Than that dispersed clamour of the cranes
	Among the southwind's aery clouds. And first,
	One oft may see that objects which are light
	And made of tiny bodies are the swift;
	In which class is the sun's light and his heat,
	Since made from small primordial elements
	Which, as it were, are forward knocked along
	And through the interspaces of the air
	To pass delay not, urged by blows behind;
	For light by light is instantly supplied
	And gleam by following gleam is spurred and driven.
	Thus likewise must the images have power
	Through unimaginable space to speed
	Within a point of time,- first, since a cause
	Exceeding small there is, which at their back
	Far forward drives them and propels, where, too,
	They're carried with such winged lightness on;
	And, secondly, since furnished, when sent off,
	With texture of such rareness that they can
	Through objects whatsoever penetrate
	And ooze, as 'twere, through intervening air.

[card 199]
	Besides, if those fine particles of things
	Which from so deep within are sent abroad,
	As light and heat of sun, are seen to glide
	And spread themselves through all the space of heaven
	Upon one instant of the day, and fly
	O'er sea and lands and flood the heaven, what then
	Of those which on the outside stand prepared,
	When they're hurled off with not a thing to check
	Their going out? Dost thou not see indeed
	How swifter and how farther must they go
	And speed through manifold the length of space
	In time the same that from the sun the rays
	O'erspread the heaven? This also seems to be
	Example chief and true with what swift speed
	The images of things are borne about:
	That soon as ever under open skies
	Is spread the shining water, all at once,
	If stars be out in heaven, upgleam from earth,
	Serene and radiant in the water there,
	The constellations of the universe-
	Now seest thou not in what a point of time
	An image from the shores of ether falls
	Unto the shores of earth? Wherefore, again,
	And yet again, 'tis needful to confess
	With wondrous...
	. . . . . .

[card 217]
	Bodies that strike the eyes, awaking sight.
	From certain things flow odours evermore,
	As cold from rivers, heat from sun, and spray
	From waves of ocean, eater-out of walls
	Around the coasts. Nor ever cease to flit
	The varied voices, sounds athrough the air.
	Then too there comes into the mouth at times
	The wet of a salt taste, when by the sea
	We roam about; and so, whene'er we watch
	The wormword being mixed, its bitter stings.
	To such degree from all things is each thing
	Borne streamingly along, and sent about
	To every region round; and nature grants
	Nor rest nor respite of the onward flow,
	Since 'tis incessantly we feeling have,
	And all the time are suffered to descry
	And smell all things at hand, and hear them sound.

[card 230]
	Besides, since shape examined by our hands
	Within the dark is known to be the same
	As that by eyes perceived within the light
	And lustrous day, both touch and sight must be
	By one like cause aroused. So, if we test
	A square and get its stimulus on us
	Within the dark, within the light what square
	Can fall upon our sight, except a square
	That images the things? Wherefore it seems
	The source of seeing is in images,
	Nor without these can anything be viewed.
	Now these same films I name are borne about
	And tossed and scattered into regions all.
	But since we do perceive alone through eyes,
	It follows hence that whitherso we turn
	Our sight, all things do strike against it there
	With form and hue. And just how far from us
	Each thing may be away, the image yields
	To us the power to see and chance to tell:
	For when 'tis sent, at once it shoves ahead
	And drives along the air that's in the space
	Betwixt it and our eyes. And thus this air
	All glides athrough our eyeballs, and, as 'twere,
	Brushes athrough our pupils and thuswise
	Passes across. Therefore it comes we see
	How far from us each thing may be away,
	And the more air there be that's driven before,
	And too the longer be the brushing breeze
	Against our eyes, the farther off removed
	Each thing is seen to be: forsooth, this work
	With mightily swift order all goes on,
	So that upon one instant we may see
	What kind the object and how far away.
	Nor over-marvellous must this be deemed
	In these affairs that, though the films which strike
	Upon the eyes cannot be singly seen,
	The things themselves may be perceived. For thus
	When the wind beats upon us stroke by stroke
	And when the sharp cold streams, 'tis not our wont
	To feel each private particle of wind
	Or of that cold, but rather all at once;
	And so we see how blows affect our body,
	As if one thing were beating on the same
	And giving us the feel of its own body
	Outside of us. Again, whene'er we thump
	With finger-tip upon a stone, we touch
	But the rock's surface and the outer hue,
	Nor feel that hue by contact- rather feel
	The very hardness deep within the rock.

[card 269]
	Now come, and why beyond a looking-glass
	An image may be seen, perceive. For seen
	It soothly is, removed far within.
	'Tis the same sort as objects peered upon
	Outside in their true shape, whene'er a door
	Yields through itself an open peering-place,
	And lets us see so many things outside
	Beyond the house. Also that sight is made
	By a twofold twin air: for first is seen
	The air inside the door-posts; next the doors,
	The twain to left and right; and afterwards
	A light beyond comes brushing through our eyes,
	Then other air, then objects peered upon
	Outside in their true shape. And thus, when first
	The image of the glass projects itself,
	As to our gaze it comes, it shoves ahead
	And drives along the air that's in the space
	Betwixt it and our eyes, and brings to pass
	That we perceive the air ere yet the glass.
	But when we've also seen the glass itself,
	Forthwith that image which from us is borne
	Reaches the glass, and there thrown back again
	Comes back unto our eyes, and driving rolls
	Ahead of itself another air, that then
	'Tis this we see before itself, and thus
	It looks so far removed behind the glass.
	Wherefore again, again, there's naught for wonder
	. . . . . .
	In those which render from the mirror's plane
	A vision back, since each thing comes to pass
	By means of the two airs. Now, in the glass
	The right part of our members is observed
	Upon the left, because, when comes the image
	Hitting against the level of the glass,
	'Tis not returned unshifted; but forced off
	Backwards in line direct and not oblique,-
	Exactly as whoso his plaster-mask
	Should dash, before 'twere dry, on post or beam,
	And it should straightway keep, at clinging there,
	Its shape, reversed, facing him who threw,
	And so remould the features it gives back:
	It comes that now the right eye is the left,
	The left the right.

[card 302]
	An image too may be
	From mirror into mirror handed on,
	Until of idol-films even five or six
	Have thus been gendered. For whatever things
	Shall hide back yonder in the house, the same,
	However far removed in twisting ways,
	May still be all brought forth through bending paths
	And by these several mirrors seen to be
	Within the house, since nature so compels
	All things to be borne backward and spring off
	At equal angles from all other things.
	To such degree the image gleams across
	From mirror unto mirror; where 'twas left
	It comes to be the right, and then again
	Returns and changes round unto the left.
	Again, those little sides of mirrors curved
	Proportionate to the bulge of our own flank
	Send back to us their idols with the right
	Upon the right; and this is so because
	Either the image is passed on along
	From mirror unto mirror, and thereafter,
	When twice dashed off, flies back unto ourselves;
	Or else the image wheels itself around,
	When once unto the mirror it has come,
	Since the curved surface teaches it to turn
	To usward. Further, thou might'st well believe
	That these film-idols step along with us
	And set their feet in unison with ours
	And imitate our carriage, since from that
	Part of a mirror whence thou hast withdrawn
	Straightway no images can be returned.
	Further, our eye-balls tend to flee the bright
	And shun to gaze thereon; the sun even blinds,
	If thou goest on to strain them unto him,
	Because his strength is mighty, and the films
	Heavily downward from on high are borne
	Through the pure ether and the viewless winds,
	And strike the eyes, disordering their joints.
	So piecing lustre often burns the eyes,
	Because it holdeth many seeds of fire
	Which, working into eyes, engender pain.
	Again, whatever jaundiced people view
	Becomes wan-yellow, since from out their bodies
	Flow many seeds wan-yellow forth to meet
	The films of things, and many too are mixed
	Within their eye, which by contagion paint
	All things with sallowness.

[card 337]
	Again, we view
	From dark recesses things that stand in light,
	Because, when first has entered and possessed
	The open eyes this nearer darkling air,
	Swiftly the shining air and luminous
	Followeth in, which purges then the eyes
	And scatters asunder of that other air
	The sable shadows, for in large degrees
	This air is nimbler, nicer, and more strong.
	And soon as ever 'thas filled and oped with light
	The pathways of the eyeballs, which before
	Black air had blocked, there follow straightaway
	Those films of things out-standing in the light,
	Provoking vision- what we cannot do
	From out the light with objects in the dark,
	Because that denser darkling air behind
	Followeth in, and fills each aperture
	And thus blockades the pathways of the eyes
	That there no images of any things
	Can be thrown in and agitate the eyes.
	And when from far away we do behold
	The squared towers of a city, oft
	Rounded they seem,- on this account because
	Each distant angle is perceived obtuse,
	Or rather it is not perceived at all;
	And perishes its blow nor to our gaze
	Arrives its stroke, since through such length of air
	Are borne along the idols that the air
	Makes blunt the idol of the angle's point
	By numerous collidings. When thuswise
	The angles of the tower each and all
	Have quite escaped the sense, the stones appear
	As rubbed and rounded on a turner's wheel-
	Yet not like objects near and truly round,
	But with a semblance to them, shadowily.
	Likewise, our shadow in the sun appears
	To move along and follow our own steps
	And imitate our carriage- if thou thinkest
	Air that is thus bereft of light can walk,
	Following the gait and motion of mankind.
	For what we use to name a shadow, sure
	Is naught but air deprived of light. No marvel:
	Because the earth from spot to spot is reft
	Progressively of light of sun, whenever
	In moving round we get within its way,
	While any spot of earth by us abandoned
	Is filled with light again, on this account
	It comes to pass that what was body's shadow
	Seems still the same to follow after us
	In one straight course. Since, evermore pour in
	New lights of rays, and perish then the old,
	Just like the wool that's drawn into the flame.
	Therefore the earth is easily spoiled of light
	And easily refilled and from herself
	Washeth the black shadows quite away.

[card 379]
	And yet in this we don't at all concede
	That eyes be cheated. For their task it is
	To note in whatsoever place be light,
	In what be shadow: whether or no the gleams
	Be still the same, and whether the shadow which
	Just now was here is that one passing thither,
	Or whether the facts be what we said above,
	'Tis after all the reasoning of mind
	That must decide; nor can our eyeballs know
	The nature of reality. And so
	Attach thou not this fault of mind to eyes,
	Nor lightly think our senses everywhere
	Are tottering. The ship in which we sail
	Is borne along, although it seems to stand;
	The ship that bides in roadstead is supposed
	There to be passing by. And hills and fields
	Seem fleeing fast astern, past which we urge
	The ship and fly under the bellying sails.
	The stars, each one, do seem to pause, affixed
	To the ethereal caverns, though they all
	Forever are in motion, rising out
	And thence revisiting their far descents
	When they have measured with their bodies bright
	The span of heaven. And likewise sun and moon
	Seem biding in a roadstead,- objects which,
	As plain fact proves, are really borne along.
	Between two mountains far away aloft
	From midst the whirl of waters open lies
	A gaping exit for the fleet, and yet
	They seem conjoined in a single isle.
	When boys themselves have stopped their spinning round,
	The halls still seem to whirl and posts to reel,
	Until they now must almost think the roofs
	Threaten to ruin down upon their heads.
	And now, when nature begins to lift on high
	The sun's red splendour and the tremulous fires,
	And raise him o'er the mountain-tops, those mountains-
	O'er which he seemeth then to thee to be,
	His glowing self hard by atingeing them
	With his own fire- are yet away from us
	Scarcely two thousand arrow-shots, indeed
	Oft scarce five hundred courses of a dart;
	Although between those mountains and the sun
	Lie the huge plains of ocean spread beneath
	The vasty shores of ether, and intervene
	A thousand lands, possessed by many a folk
	And generations of wild beasts. Again,
