Book Four: The Senses, Sight, and Love (Part 2 of 3) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 414]
	A pool of water of but a finger's depth,
	Which lies between the stones along the pave,
	Offers a vision downward into earth
	As far, as from the earth o'erspread on high
	The gulfs of heaven; that thus thou seemest to view
	Clouds down below and heavenly bodies plunged
	Wondrously in heaven under earth.
	Then too, when in the middle of the stream
	Sticks fast our dashing horse, and down we gaze
	Into the river's rapid waves, some force
	Seems then to bear the body of the horse,
	Though standing still, reversely from his course,
	And swiftly push up-stream. And wheresoe'er
	We cast our eyes across, all objects seem
	Thus to be onward borne and flow along
	In the same way as we. A portico,
	Albeit it stands well propped from end to end
	On equal columns, parallel and big,
	Contracts by stages in a narrow cone,
	When from one end the long, long whole is seen,-
	Until, conjoining ceiling with the floor,
	And the whole right side with the left, it draws
	Together to a cone's nigh-viewless point.
	To sailors on the main the sun he seems
	From out the waves to rise, and in the waves
	To set and bury his light- because indeed
	They gaze on naught but water and the sky.
	Again, to gazers ignorant of the sea,
	Vessels in port seem, as with broken poops,
	To lean upon the water, quite agog;
	For any portion of the oars that's raised
	Above the briny spray is straight, and straight
	The rudders from above. But other parts,
	Those sunk, immersed below the water-line,
	Seem broken all and bended and inclined
	Sloping to upwards, and turned back to float
	Almost atop the water. And when the winds
	Carry the scattered drifts along the sky
	In the night-time, then seem to glide along
	The radiant constellations 'gainst the clouds
	And there on high to take far other course
	From that whereon in truth they're borne. And then,

[card 447]
	If haply our hand be set beneath one eye
	And press below thereon, then to our gaze
	Each object which we gaze on seems to be,
	By some sensation twain- then twain the lights
	Of lampions burgeoning in flowers of flame,
	And twain the furniture in all the house,
	Two-fold the visages of fellow-men,
	And twain their bodies. And again, when sleep
	Has bound our members down in slumber soft
	And all the body lies in deep repose,
	Yet then we seem to self to be awake
	And move our members; and in night's blind gloom
	We think to mark the daylight and the sun;
	And, shut within a room, yet still we seem
	To change our skies, our oceans, rivers, hills,
	To cross the plains afoot, and hear new sounds,
	Though still the austere silence of the night
	Abides around us, and to speak replies,
	Though voiceless. Other cases of the sort
	Wondrously many do we see, which all
	Seek, so to say, to injure faith in sense-
	In vain, because the largest part of these
	Deceives through mere opinions of the mind,
	Which we do add ourselves, feigning to see
	What by the senses are not seen at all.
	For naught is harder than to separate
	Plain facts from dubious, which the mind forthwith
	Adds by itself.

[card 469]
	Again, if one suppose
	That naught is known, he knows not whether this
	Itself is able to be known, since he
	Confesses naught to know. Therefore with him
	I waive discussion- who has set his head
	Even where his feet should be. But let me grant
	That this he knows,- I question: whence he knows
	What 'tis to know and not-to-know in turn,
	And what created concept of the truth,
	And what device has proved the dubious
	To differ from the certain?- since in things
	He's heretofore seen naught of true. Thou'lt find
	That from the senses first hath been create
	Concept of truth, nor can the senses be
	Rebutted. For criterion must be found
	Worthy of greater trust, which shall defeat
	Through own authority the false by true;
	What, then, than these our senses must there be
	Worthy a greater trust? Shall reason, sprung
	From some false sense, prevail to contradict
	Those senses, sprung as reason wholly is
	From out the senses?- For lest these be true,
	All reason also then is falsified.
	Or shall the ears have power to blame the eyes,
	Or yet the touch the ears? Again, shall taste
	Accuse this touch or shall the nose confute
	Or eyes defeat it? Methinks not so it is:
	For unto each has been divided off
	Its function quite apart, its power to each;
	And thus we're still constrained to perceive
	The soft, the cold, the hot apart, apart
	All divers hues and whatso things there be
	Conjoined with hues. Likewise the tasting tongue
	Has its own power apart, and smells apart
	And sounds apart are known. And thus it is
	That no one sense can e'er convict another.
	Nor shall one sense have power to blame itself,
	Because it always must be deemed the same,
	Worthy of equal trust. And therefore what
	At any time unto these senses showed,
	The same is true.

[card 500]
	And if the reason be
	Unable to unravel us the cause
	Why objects, which at hand were square, afar
	Seemed rounded, yet it more availeth us,
	Lacking the reason, to pretend a cause
	For each configuration, than to let
	From out our hands escape the obvious things
	And injure primal faith in sense, and wreck
	All those foundations upon which do rest
	Our life and safety. For not only reason
	Would topple down; but even our very life
	Would straightaway collapse, unless we dared
	To trust our senses and to keep away
	From headlong heights and places to be shunned
	Of a like peril, and to seek with speed
	Their opposites! Again, as in a building,
	If the first plumb-line be askew, and if
	The square deceiving swerve from lines exact,
	And if the level waver but the least
	In any part, the whole construction then
	Must turn out faulty- shelving and askew,
	Leaning to back and front, incongruous,
	That now some portions seem about to fall,
	And falls the whole ere long- betrayed indeed
	By first deceiving estimates: so too
	Thy calculations in affairs of life
	Must be askew and false, if sprung for thee
	From senses false. So all that troop of words
	Marshalled against the senses is quite vain.

[card 522]
	And now remains to demonstrate with ease
	How other senses each their things perceive.
	Firstly, a sound and every voice is heard,
	When, getting into ears, they strike the sense
	With their own body. For confess we must
	Even voice and sound to be corporeal,
	Because they're able on the sense to strike.
	Besides voice often scrapes against the throat,
	And screams in going out do make more rough
	The wind-pipe- naturally enough, methinks,
	When, through the narrow exit rising up
	In larger throng, these primal germs of voice
	Have thus begun to issue forth. In sooth,
	Also the door of the mouth is scraped against
	[By air blown outward] from distended [cheeks].
	. . . . . .
	And thus no doubt there is, that voice and words
	Consist of elements corporeal,
	With power to pain. Nor art thou unaware
	Likewise how much of body's ta'en away,
	How much from very thews and powers of men
	May be withdrawn by steady talk, prolonged
	Even from the rising splendour of the morn
	To shadows of black evening,- above all
	If 't be outpoured with most exceeding shouts.
	Therefore the voice must be corporeal,
	Since the long talker loses from his frame
	A part.
	Moreover, roughness in the sound
	Comes from the roughness in the primal germs,
	As a smooth sound from smooth ones is create;
	Nor have these elements a form the same
	When the trump rumbles with a hollow roar,
	As when barbaric Berecynthian pipe
	Buzzes with raucous boomings, or when swans
	By night from icy shores of Helicon
	With wailing voices raise their liquid dirge.

[card 549]
	Thus, when from deep within our frame we force
	These voices, and at mouth expel them forth,
	The mobile tongue, artificer of words,
	Makes them articulate, and too the lips
	By their formations share in shaping them.
	Hence when the space is short from starting-point
	To where that voice arrives, the very words
	Must too be plainly heard, distinctly marked.
	For then the voice conserves its own formation,
	Conserves its shape. But if the space between
	Be longer than is fit, the words must be
	Through the much air confounded, and the voice
	Disordered in its flight across the winds-
	And so it haps, that thou canst sound perceive,
	Yet not determine what the words may mean;
	To such degree confounded and encumbered
	The voice approaches us. Again, one word,
	Sent from the crier's mouth, may rouse all ears
	Among the populace. And thus one voice
	Scatters asunder into many voices,
	Since it divides itself for separate ears,
	Imprinting form of word and a clear tone.
	But whatso part of voices fails to hit
	The ears themselves perishes, borne beyond,
	Idly diffused among the winds. A part,
	Beating on solid porticoes, tossed back
	Returns a sound; and sometimes mocks the ear
	With a mere phantom of a word.

[card 572]
	When this
	Thou well hast noted, thou canst render count
	Unto thyself and others why it is
	Along the lonely places that the rocks
	Give back like shapes of words in order like,
	When search we after comrades wandering
	Among the shady mountains, and aloud
	Call unto them, the scattered. I have seen
	Spots that gave back even voices six or seven
	For one thrown forth- for so the very hills,
	Dashing them back against the hills, kept on
	With their reverberations. And these spots
	The neighbouring country-side doth feign to be
	Haunts of the goat-foot satyrs and the nymphs;
	And tells ye there be fauns, by whose night noise
	And antic revels yonder they declare
	The voiceless silences are broken oft,
	And tones of strings are made and wailings sweet
	Which the pipe, beat by players' finger-tips,
	Pours out; and far and wide the farmer-race
	Begins to hear, when, shaking the garmentings
	Of pine upon his half-beast head, god-Pan
	With puckered lip oft runneth o'er and o'er
	The open reeds,- lest flute should cease to pour
	The woodland music! Other prodigies
	And wonders of this ilk they love to tell,
	Lest they be thought to dwell in lonely spots
	And even by gods deserted. This is why
	They boast of marvels in their story-tellings;
	Or by some other reason are led on-
	Greedy, as all mankind hath ever been,
	To prattle fables into ears.

[card 595]
	Again,
	One need not wonder how it comes about
	That through those places (through which eyes cannot
	View objects manifest) sounds yet may pass
	And assail the ears. For often we observe
	People conversing, though the doors be closed;
	No marvel either, since all voice unharmed
	Can wind through bended apertures of things,
	While idol-films decline to- for they're rent,
	Unless along straight apertures they swim,
	Like those in glass, through which all images
	Do fly across. And yet this voice itself,
	In passing through shut chambers of a house,
	Is dulled, and in a jumble enters ears,
	And sound we seem to hear far more than words.
	Moreover, a voice is into all directions
	Divided up, since off from one another
	New voices are engendered, when one voice
	Hath once leapt forth, outstarting into many-
	As oft a spark of fire is wont to sprinkle
	Itself into its several fires. And so,
	Voices do fill those places hid behind,
	Which all are in a hubbub round about,
	Astir with sound. But idol-films do tend,
	As once sent forth, in straight directions all;
	Wherefore one can inside a wall see naught,
	Yet catch the voices from beyond the same.

[card 615]
	Nor tongue and palate, whereby we flavour feel,
	Present more problems for more work of thought.
	Firstly, we feel a flavour in the mouth,
	When forth we squeeze it, in chewing up our food,-
	As any one perchance begins to squeeze
	With hand and dry a sponge with water soaked.
	Next, all which forth we squeeze is spread about
	Along the pores and intertwined paths
	Of the loose-textured tongue. And so, when smooth
	The bodies of the oozy flavour, then
	Delightfully they touch, delightfully
	They treat all spots, around the wet and trickling
	Enclosures of the tongue. And contrariwise,
	They sting and pain the sense with their assault,
	According as with roughness they're supplied.
	Next, only up to palate is the pleasure
	Coming from flavour; for in truth when down
	'Thas plunged along the throat, no pleasure is,
	Whilst into all the frame it spreads around;
	Nor aught it matters with what food is fed
	The body, if only what thou take thou canst
	Distribute well digested to the frame
	And keep the stomach in a moist career.
	Now, how it is we see some food for some,
	Others for others....
	. . . . . .
	I will unfold, or wherefore what to some
	Is foul and bitter, yet the same to others
	Can seem delectable to eat,- why here
	So great the distance and the difference is
	That what is food to one to some becomes
	Fierce poison, as a certain snake there is
	Which, touched by spittle of a man, will waste
	And end itself by gnawing up its coil.
	Again, fierce poison is the hellebore
	To us, but puts the fat on goats and quails.
	That thou mayst know by what devices this
	Is brought about, in chief thou must recall
	What we have said before, that seeds are kept
	Commixed in things in divers modes. Again,
	As all the breathing creatures which take food
	Are outwardly unlike, and outer cut
	And contour of their members bounds them round,
	Each differing kind by kind, they thus consist
	Of seeds of varying shape. And furthermore,
	Since seeds do differ, divers too must be
	The interstices and paths (which we do call
	The apertures) in all the members, even
	In mouth and palate too. Thus some must be
	More small or yet more large, three-cornered some
	And others squared, and many others round,
	And certain of them many-angled too
	In many modes. For, as the combination
	And motion of their divers shapes demand,
	The shapes of apertures must be diverse
	And paths must vary according to their walls
	That bound them. Hence when what is sweet to some,
	Becomes to others bitter, for him to whom
	'Tis sweet, the smoothest particles must needs
	Have entered caressingly the palate's pores.
	And, contrariwise, with those to whom that sweet
	Is sour within the mouth, beyond a doubt
	The rough and barbed particles have got
	Into the narrows of the apertures.
	Now easy it is from these affairs to know
	Whatever...
	. . . . . .
	Indeed, where one from o'er-abundant bile
	Is stricken with fever, or in other wise
	Feels the roused violence of some malady,
	There the whole frame is now upset, and there
	All the positions of the seeds are changed,-
	So that the bodies which before were fit
	To cause the savour, now are fit no more,
	And now more apt are others which be able
	To get within the pores and gender sour.
	Both sorts, in sooth, are intermixed in honey-
	What oft we've proved above to thee before.

[card 673]
	Now come, and I will indicate what wise
	Impact of odour on the nostrils touches.
	And first, 'tis needful there be many things
	From whence the streaming flow of varied odours
	May roll along, and we're constrained to think
	They stream and dart and sprinkle themselves about
	Impartially. But for some breathing creatures
	One odour is more apt, to others another-
	Because of differing forms of seeds and pores.
	Thus on and on along the zephyrs bees
	Are led by odour of honey, vultures too
	By carcasses. Again, the forward power
	Of scent in dogs doth lead the hunter on
	Whithersoever the splay-foot of wild beast
	Hath hastened its career; and the white goose,
	The saviour of the Roman citadel,
	Forescents afar the odour of mankind.
	Thus, diversly to divers ones is given
	Peculiar smell that leadeth each along
	To his own food or makes him start aback
	From loathsome poison, and in this wise are
	The generations of the wild preserved.
	Yet is this pungence not alone in odours
	Or in the class of flavours; but, likewise,
	The look of things and hues agree not all
	So well with senses unto all, but that
	Some unto some will be, to gaze upon,
	More keen and painful. Lo, the raving lions,
	They dare not face and gaze upon the cock
	Who's wont with wings to flap away the night
	From off the stage, and call the beaming morn
	With clarion voice- and lions straightway thus
	Bethink themselves of flight, because, ye see,
	Within the body of the cocks there be
	Some certain seeds, which, into lions' eyes
	Injected, bore into the pupils deep
	And yield such piercing pain they can't hold out
	Against the cocks, however fierce they be-
	Whilst yet these seeds can't hurt our gaze the least,
	Either because they do not penetrate,
	Or since they have free exit from the eyes
	As soon as penetrating, so that thus
	They cannot hurt our eyes in any part
	By there remaining.
	To speak once more of odour;
	Whatever assail the nostrils, some can travel
	A longer way than others. None of them,
	However, 's borne so far as sound or voice-
	While I omit all mention of such things
	As hit the eyesight and assail the vision.
	For slowly on a wandering course it comes
	And perishes sooner, by degrees absorbed
	Easily into all the winds of air;-
	And first, because from deep inside the thing
	It is discharged with labour (for the fact
	That every object, when 'tis shivered, ground,
	Or crumbled by the fire, will smell the stronger
	Is sign that odours flow and part away
	From inner regions of the things). And next,
	Thou mayest see that odour is create
	Of larger primal germs than voice, because
	It enters not through stony walls, wherethrough
	Unfailingly the voice and sound are borne;
	Wherefore, besides, thou wilt observe 'tis not
	So easy to trace out in whatso place
	The smelling object is. For, dallying on
	Along the winds, the particles cool off,
	And then the scurrying messengers of things
	Arrive our senses, when no longer hot.
	So dogs oft wander astray, and hunt the scent.

[card 722]
	Now mark, and hear what objects move the mind,
	And learn, in few, whence unto intellect
	Do come what come. And first I tell thee this:
	That many images of objects rove
	In many modes to every region round-
	So thin that easily the one with other,
	When once they meet, uniteth in mid-air,
	Like gossamer or gold-leaf. For, indeed,
	Far thinner are they in their fabric than
	Those images which take a hold on eyes
	And smite the vision, since through body's pores
	They penetrate, and inwardly stir up
	The subtle nature of mind and smite the sense.
	Thus, Centaurs and the limbs of Scyllas, thus
	The Cerberus-visages of dogs we see,
	And images of people gone before-
	Dead men whose bones earth bosomed long ago;
	Because the images of every kind
	Are everywhere about us borne- in part
	Those which are gendered in the very air
	Of own accord, in part those others which
	From divers things do part away, and those
	Which are compounded, made from out their shapes.
	For soothly from no living Centaur is
	That phantom gendered, since no breed of beast
	Like him was ever; but, when images
	Of horse and man by chance have come together,
	They easily cohere, as aforesaid,
	At once, through subtle nature and fabric thin.
	In the same fashion others of this ilk
	Created are. And when they're quickly borne
	In their exceeding lightness, easily
	(As earlier I showed) one subtle image,
	Compounded, moves by its one blow the mind,
	Itself so subtle and so strangely quick.
	That these things come to pass as I record,
	From this thou easily canst understand:
	So far as one is unto other like,
	Seeing with mind as well as with the eyes
	Must come to pass in fashion not unlike.
	Well, now, since I have shown that I perceive
	Haply a lion through those idol-films
	Such as assail my eyes, 'tis thine to know
	Also the mind is in like manner moved,
	And sees, nor more nor less than eyes do see
	(Except that it perceives more subtle films)
	The lion and aught else through idol-films.
	And when the sleep has overset our frame,
	The mind's intelligence is now awake,
	Still for no other reason, save that these-
	The self-same films as when we are awake-
	Assail our minds, to such degree indeed
	That we do seem to see for sure the man
	Whom, void of life, now death and earth have gained
	Dominion over. And nature forces this
	To come to pass because the body's senses
	Are resting, thwarted through the members all,
	Unable now to conquer false with true;
	And memory lies prone and languishes
	In slumber, nor protests that he, the man
	Whom the mind feigns to see alive, long since
	Hath been the gain of death and dissolution.
	And further, 'tis no marvel idols move
	And toss their arms and other members round
	In rhythmic time- and often in men's sleeps
	It haps an image this is seen to do;
	In sooth, when perishes the former image,
	And other is gendered of another pose,
	That former seemeth to have changed its gestures.
	Of course the change must be conceived as speedy;
	So great the swiftness and so great the store
	Of idol-things, and (in an instant brief
	As mind can mark) so great, again, the store
	Of separate idol-parts to bring supplies.
	It happens also that there is supplied
	Sometimes an image not of kind the same;
	But what before was woman, now at hand
	Is seen to stand there, altered into male;
	Or other visage, other age succeeds;
	But slumber and oblivion take care
	That we shall feel no wonder at the thing.

[card 777]
	And much in these affairs demands inquiry,
	And much, illumination- if we crave
	With plainness to exhibit facts. And first,
	Why doth the mind of one to whom the whim
	To think has come behold forthwith that thing?
	Or do the idols watch upon our will,
	And doth an image unto us occur,
	Directly we desire- if heart prefer
	The sea, the land, or after all the sky?
	Assemblies of the citizens, parades,
	Banquets, and battles, these and all doth she,
	Nature, create and furnish at our word?-
	Maugre the fact that in same place and spot
	Another's mind is meditating things
	All far unlike. And what, again, of this:
	When we in sleep behold the idols step,
	In measure, forward, moving supple limbs,
	Whilst forth they put each supple arm in turn
	With speedy motion, and with eyeing heads
	Repeat the movement, as the foot keeps time?
	Forsooth, the idols they are steeped in art,
	And wander to and fro well taught indeed,-
	Thus to be able in the time of night
	To make such games! Or will the truth be this:
	Because in one least moment that we mark-
	That is, the uttering of a single sound-
	There lurk yet many moments, which the reason
	Discovers to exist, therefore it comes
	That, in a moment how so brief ye will,
	The divers idols are hard by, and ready
	Each in its place diverse? So great the swiftness,
	So great, again, the store of idol-things,
	And so, when perishes the former image,
	And other is gendered of another pose,
	The former seemeth to have changed its gestures.
	And since they be so tenuous, mind can mark
	Sharply alone the ones it strains to see;
	And thus the rest do perish one and all,
	Save those for which the mind prepares itself.
	Further, it doth prepare itself indeed,
	And hopes to see what follows after each-
	Hence this result. For hast thou not observed
	How eyes, essaying to perceive the fine,
	Will strain in preparation, otherwise
	Unable sharply to perceive at all?
	Yet know thou canst that, even in objects plain,
	If thou attendest not, 'tis just the same
	As if 'twere all the time removed and far.
	What marvel, then, that mind doth lose the rest,
	Save those to which 'thas given up itself?
	So 'tis that we conjecture from small signs
	Things wide and weighty, and involve ourselves
	In snarls of self-deceit.

[card 823]
	In these affairs
	We crave that thou wilt passionately flee
	The one offence, and anxiously wilt shun
	The error of presuming the clear lights
	Of eyes created were that we might see;
	Or thighs and knees, aprop upon the feet,
	Thuswise can bended be, that we might step
	With goodly strides ahead; or forearms joined
	Unto the sturdy uppers, or serving hands
	On either side were given, that we might do
	Life's own demands. All such interpretation
	Is aft-for-fore with inverse reasoning,
	Since naught is born in body so that we
	May use the same, but birth engenders use:
	No seeing ere the lights of eyes were born,
	No speaking ere the tongue created was;
	But origin of tongue came long before
	Discourse of words, and ears created were
	Much earlier than any sound was heard;
	And all the members, so meseems, were there
	Before they got their use: and therefore, they
	Could not be gendered for the sake of use.
	But contrariwise, contending in the fight
	With hand to hand, and rending of the joints,
	And fouling of the limbs with gore, was there,
	O long before the gleaming spears ere flew;
	And nature prompted man to shun a wound,
	Before the left arm by the aid of art
	Opposed the shielding targe. And, verily,
	Yielding the weary body to repose,
	Far ancienter than cushions of soft beds,
	And quenching thirst is earlier than cups.
	These objects, therefore, which for use and life
	Have been devised, can be conceived as found
	For sake of using. But apart from such
	Are all which first were born and afterwards
	Gave knowledge of their own utility-
	Chief in which sort we note the senses, limbs:
	Wherefore, again, 'tis quite beyond thy power
	To hold that these could thus have been create
	For office of utility.
