Book Four: The Senses, Sight, and Love (Part 3 of 3) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 858]
	Likewise,
	'Tis nothing strange that all the breathing creatures
	Seek, even by nature of their frame, their food.
	Yes, since I've taught thee that from off the things
	Stream and depart innumerable bodies
	In modes innumerable too; but most
	Must be the bodies streaming from the living-
	Which bodies, vexed by motion evermore,
	Are through the mouth exhaled innumerable,
	When weary creatures pant, or through the sweat
	Squeezed forth innumerable from deep within.
	Thus body rarefies, so undermined
	In all its nature, and pain attends its state.
	And so the food is taken to underprop
	The tottering joints, and by its interfusion
	To re-create their powers, and there stop up
	The longing, open-mouthed through limbs and veins,
	For eating. And the moist no less departs
	Into all regions that demand the moist;
	And many heaped-up particles of hot,
	Which cause such burnings in these bellies of ours,
	The liquid on arriving dissipates
	And quenches like a fire, that parching heat
	No longer now can scorch the frame. And so,
	Thou seest how panting thirst is washed away
	From off our body, how the hunger-pang
	It, too, appeased.

[card 877]
	Now, how it comes that we,
	Whene'er we wish, can step with strides ahead,
	And how 'tis given to move our limbs about,
	And what device is wont to push ahead
	This the big load of our corporeal frame,
	I'll say to thee- do thou attend what's said.
	I say that first some idol-films of walking
	Into our mind do fall and smite the mind,
	As said before. Thereafter will arises;
	For no one starts to do a thing, before
	The intellect previsions what it wills;
	And what it there pre-visioneth depends
	On what that image is. When, therefore, mind
	Doth so bestir itself that it doth will
	To go and step along, it strikes at once
	That energy of soul that's sown about
	In all the body through the limbs and frame-
	And this is easy of performance, since
	The soul is close conjoined with the mind.
	Next, soul in turn strikes body, and by degrees
	Thus the whole mass is pushed along and moved.
	Then too the body rarefies, and air,
	Forsooth as ever of such nimbleness,
	Comes on and penetrates aboundingly
	Through opened pores, and thus is sprinkled round
	Unto all smallest places in our frame.
	Thus then by these twain factors, severally,
	Body is borne like ship with oars and wind.
	Nor yet in these affairs is aught for wonder
	That particles so fine can whirl around
	So great a body and turn this weight of ours;
	For wind, so tenuous with its subtle body,
	Yet pushes, driving on the mighty ship
	Of mighty bulk; one hand directs the same,
	Whatever its momentum, and one helm
	Whirls it around, whither ye please; and loads,
	Many and huge, are moved and hoisted high
	By enginery of pulley-blocks and wheels,
	With but light strain.

[card 907]
	Now, by what modes this sleep
	Pours through our members waters of repose
	And frees the breast from cares of mind, I'll tell
	In verses sweeter than they many are;
	Even as the swan's slight note is better far
	Than that dispersed clamour of the cranes
	Among the southwind's aery clouds. Do thou
	Give me sharp ears and a sagacious mind,-
	That thou mayst not deny the things to be
	Whereof I'm speaking, nor depart away
	With bosom scorning these the spoken truths,
	Thyself at fault unable to perceive.
	Sleep chiefly comes when energy of soul
	Hath now been scattered through the frame, and part
	Expelled abroad and gone away, and part
	Crammed back and settling deep within the frame-
	Whereafter then our loosened members droop.
	For doubt is none that by the work of soul
	Exist in us this sense, and when by slumber
	That sense is thwarted, we are bound to think
	The soul confounded and expelled abroad-
	Yet not entirely, else the frame would lie
	Drenched in the everlasting cold of death.
	In sooth, where no one part of soul remained
	Lurking among the members, even as fire
	Lurks buried under many ashes, whence
	Could sense amain rekindled be in members,
	As flame can rise anew from unseen fire?

[card 929]
	By what devices this strange state and new
	May be occasioned, and by what the soul
	Can be confounded and the frame grow faint,
	I will untangle: see to it, thou, that I
	Pour forth my words not unto empty winds.
	In first place, body on its outer parts-
	Since these are touched by neighbouring aery gusts-
	Must there be thumped and strook by blows of air
	Repeatedly. And therefore almost all
	Are covered either with hides, or else with shells,
	Or with the horny callus, or with bark.
	Yet this same air lashes their inner parts,
	When creatures draw a breath or blow it out.
	Wherefore, since body thus is flogged alike
	Upon the inside and the out, and blows
	Come in upon us through the little pores
	Even inward to our body's primal parts
	And primal elements, there comes to pass
	By slow degrees, along our members then,
	A kind of overthrow; for then confounded
	Are those arrangements of the primal germs
	Of body and of mind. It comes to pass
	That next a part of soul's expelled abroad,
	A part retreateth in recesses hid,
	A part, too, scattered all about the frame,
	Cannot become united nor engage
	In interchange of motion. Nature now
	So hedges off approaches and the paths;
	And thus the sense, its motions all deranged,
	Retires down deep within; and since there's naught,
	As 'twere, to prop the frame, the body weakens,
	And all the members languish, and the arms
	And eyelids fall, and, as ye lie abed,
	Even there the houghs will sag and loose their powers.
	Again, sleep follows after food, because
	The food produces same result as air,
	Whilst being scattered round through all the veins;
	And much the heaviest is that slumber which,
	Full or fatigued, thou takest; since 'tis then
	That the most bodies disarrange themselves,
	Bruised by labours hard. And in same wise,
	This three-fold change: a forcing of the soul
	Down deeper, more a casting-forth of it,
	A moving more divided in its parts
	And scattered more.

[card 962]
	And to whate'er pursuit
	A man most clings absorbed, or what the affairs
	On which we theretofore have tarried much,
	And mind hath strained upon the more, we seem
	In sleep not rarely to go at the same.
	The lawyers seem to plead and cite decrees,
	Commanders they to fight and go at frays,
	Sailors to live in combat with the winds,
	And we ourselves indeed to make this book,
	And still to seek the nature of the world
	And set it down, when once discovered, here
	In these my country's leaves. Thus all pursuits,
	All arts in general seem in sleeps to mock
	And master the minds of men. And whosoever
	Day after day for long to games have given
	Attention undivided, still they keep
	(As oft we note), even when they've ceased to grasp
	Those games with their own senses, open paths
	Within the mind wherethrough the idol-films
	Of just those games can come. And thus it is
	For many a day thereafter those appear
	Floating before the eyes, that even awake
	They think they view the dancers moving round
	Their supple limbs, and catch with both the ears
	The liquid song of harp and speaking chords,
	And view the same assembly on the seats,
	And manifold bright glories of the stage-
	So great the influence of pursuit and zest,
	And of the affairs wherein 'thas been the wont
	Of men to be engaged-nor only men,
	But soothly all the animals. Behold,
	Thou'lt see the sturdy horses, though outstretched,
	Yet sweating in their sleep, and panting ever,
	And straining utmost strength, as if for prize,
	As if, with barriers opened now...
	And hounds of huntsmen oft in soft repose
	Yet toss asudden all their legs about,
	And growl and bark, and with their nostrils sniff
	The winds again, again, as though indeed
	They'd caught the scented foot-prints of wild beasts,
	And, even when wakened, often they pursue
	The phantom images of stags, as though
	They did perceive them fleeing on before,
	Until the illusion's shaken off and dogs
	Come to themselves again. And fawning breed
	Of house-bred whelps do feel the sudden urge
	To shake their bodies and start from off the ground,
	As if beholding stranger-visages.
	And ever the fiercer be the stock, the more
	In sleep the same is ever bound to rage.
	But flee the divers tribes of birds and vex
	With sudden wings by night the groves of gods,
	When in their gentle slumbers they have dreamed
	Of hawks in chase, aswooping on for fight.
	Again, the minds of mortals which perform
	With mighty motions mighty enterprises,
	Often in sleep will do and dare the same
	In manner like. Kings take the towns by storm,
	Succumb to capture, battle on the field,
	Raise a wild cry as if their throats were cut
	Even then and there. And many wrestle on
	And groan with pains, and fill all regions round
	With mighty cries and wild, as if then gnawed
	By fangs of panther or of lion fierce.
	Many amid their slumbers talk about
	Their mighty enterprises, and have often
	Enough become the proof of their own crimes.
	Many meet death; many, as if headlong
	From lofty mountains tumbling down to earth
	With all their frame, are frenzied in their fright;
	And after sleep, as if still mad in mind,
	They scarce come to, confounded as they are
	By ferment of their frame. The thirsty man,
	Likewise, he sits beside delightful spring
	Or river and gulpeth down with gaping throat
	Nigh the whole stream. And oft the innocent young,
	By sleep o'ermastered, think they lift their dress
	By pail or public jordan and then void
	The water filtered down their frame entire
	And drench the Babylonian coverlets,
	Magnificently bright. Again, those males
	Into the surging channels of whose years
	Now first has passed the seed (engendered
	Within their members by the ripened days)
	Are in their sleep confronted from without
	By idol-images of some fair form-
	Tidings of glorious face and lovely bloom,
	Which stir and goad the regions turgid now
	With seed abundant; so that, as it were
	With all the matter acted duly out,
	They pour the billows of a potent stream
	And stain their garment.

[card 1037]
	And as said before,
	That seed is roused in us when once ripe age
	Has made our body strong...
	As divers causes give to divers things
	Impulse and irritation, so one force
	In human kind rouses the human seed
	To spurt from man. As soon as ever it issues,
	Forced from its first abodes, it passes down
	In the whole body through the limbs and frame,
	Meeting in certain regions of our thews,
	And stirs amain the genitals of man.
	The goaded regions swell with seed, and then
	Comes the delight to dart the same at what
	The mad desire so yearns, and body seeks
	That object, whence the mind by love is pierced.
	For well-nigh each man falleth toward his wound,
	And our blood spurts even toward the spot from whence
	The stroke wherewith we are strook, and if indeed
	The foe be close, the red jet reaches him.
	Thus, one who gets a stroke from Venus' shafts-
	Whether a boy with limbs effeminate
	Assault him, or a woman darting love
	From all her body- that one strains to get
	Even to the thing whereby he's hit, and longs
	To join with it and cast into its frame
	The fluid drawn even from within its own.
	For the mute craving doth presage delight.

[card 1058]
	This craving 'tis that's Venus unto us:
	From this, engender all the lures of love,
	From this, O first hath into human hearts
	Trickled that drop of joyance which ere long
	Is by chill care succeeded. Since, indeed,
	Though she thou lovest now be far away,
	Yet idol-images of her are near
	And the sweet name is floating in thy ear.
	But it behooves to flee those images;
	And scare afar whatever feeds thy love;
	And turn elsewhere thy mind; and vent the sperm,
	Within thee gathered, into sundry bodies,
	Nor, with thy thoughts still busied with one love,
	Keep it for one delight, and so store up
	Care for thyself and pain inevitable.
	For, lo, the ulcer just by nourishing
	Grows to more life with deep inveteracy,
	And day by day the fury swells aflame,
	And the woe waxes heavier day by day-
	Unless thou dost destroy even by new blows
	The former wounds of love, and curest them
	While yet they're fresh, by wandering freely round
	After the freely-wandering Venus, or
	Canst lead elsewhere the tumults of thy mind.

[card 1073]
	Nor doth that man who keeps away from love
	Yet lack the fruits of Venus; rather takes
	Those pleasures which are free of penalties.
	For the delights of Venus, verily,
	Are more unmixed for mortals sane-of-soul
	Than for those sick-at-heart with love-pining.
	Yea, in the very moment of possessing,
	Surges the heat of lovers to and fro,
	Restive, uncertain; and they cannot fix
	On what to first enjoy with eyes and hands.
	The parts they sought for, those they squeeze so tight,
	And pain the creature's body, close their teeth
	Often against her lips, and smite with kiss
	Mouth into mouth,- because this same delight
	Is not unmixed; and underneath are stings
	Which goad a man to hurt the very thing,
	Whate'er it be, from whence arise for him
	Those germs of madness. But with gentle touch
	Venus subdues the pangs in midst of love,
	And the admixture of a fondling joy
	Doth curb the bites of passion. For they hope
	That by the very body whence they caught
	The heats of love their flames can be put out.
	But nature protests 'tis all quite otherwise;
	For this same love it is the one sole thing
	Of which, the more we have, the fiercer burns
	The breast with fell desire. For food and drink
	Are taken within our members; and, since they
	Can stop up certain parts, thus, easily
	Desire of water is glutted and of bread.
	But, lo, from human face and lovely bloom
	Naught penetrates our frame to be enjoyed
	Save flimsy idol-images and vain-
	A sorry hope which oft the winds disperse.
	As when the thirsty man in slumber seeks
	To drink, and water ne'er is granted him
	Wherewith to quench the heat within his members,
	But after idols of the liquids strives
	And toils in vain, and thirsts even whilst he gulps
	In middle of the torrent, thus in love
	Venus deludes with idol-images
	The lovers. Nor they cannot sate their lust
	By merely gazing on the bodies, nor
	They cannot with their palms and fingers rub
	Aught from each tender limb, the while they stray
	Uncertain over all the body. Then,
	At last, with members intertwined, when they
	Enjoy the flower of their age, when now
	Their bodies have sweet presage of keen joys,
	And Venus is about to sow the fields
	Of woman, greedily their frames they lock,
	And mingle the slaver of their mouths, and breathe
	Into each other, pressing teeth on mouths-
	Yet to no purpose, since they're powerless
	To rub off aught, or penetrate and pass
	With body entire into body- for oft
	They seem to strive and struggle thus to do;
	So eagerly they cling in Venus' bonds,
	Whilst melt away their members, overcome
	By violence of delight. But when at last
	Lust, gathered in the thews, hath spent itself,
	There come a brief pause in the raging heat-
	But then a madness just the same returns
	And that old fury visits them again,
	When once again they seek and crave to reach
	They know not what, all powerless to find
	The artifice to subjugate the bane.
	In such uncertain state they waste away
	With unseen wound.

[card 1121]
	To which be added too,
	They squander powers and with the travail wane;
	Be added too, they spend their futile years
	Under another's beck and call; their duties
	Neglected languish and their honest name
	Reeleth sick, sick; and meantime their estates
	Are lost in Babylonian tapestries;
	And unguents and dainty Sicyonian shoes
	Laugh on her feet; and (as ye may be sure)
	Big emeralds of green light are set in gold;
	And rich sea-purple dress by constant wear
	Grows shabby and all soaked with Venus' sweat;
	And the well-earned ancestral property
	Becometh head-bands, coifs, and many a time
	The cloaks, or garments Alidensian
	Or of the Cean isle. And banquets, set
	With rarest cloth and viands, are prepared-
	And games of chance, and many a drinking cup,
	And unguents, crowns and garlands. All in vain,
	Since from amid the well-spring of delights
	Bubbles some drop of bitter to torment
	Among the very flowers- when haply mind
	Gnaws into self, now stricken with remorse
	For slothful years and ruin in baudels,
	Or else because she's left him all in doubt
	By launching some sly word, which still like fire
	Lives wildly, cleaving to his eager heart;
	Or else because he thinks she darts her eyes
	Too much about and gazes at another,-
	And in her face sees traces of a laugh.

[card 1141]
	These ills are found in prospering love and true;
	But in crossed love and helpless there be such
	As through shut eyelids thou canst still take in-
	Uncounted ills; so that 'tis better far
	To watch beforehand, in the way I've shown,
	And guard against enticements. For to shun
	A fall into the hunting-snares of love
	Is not so hard, as to get out again,
	When tangled in the very nets, and burst
	The stoutly-knotted cords of Aphrodite.
	Yet even when there enmeshed with tangled feet,
	Still canst thou scape the danger-lest indeed
	Thou standest in the way of thine own good,
	And overlookest first all blemishes
	Of mind and body of thy much preferred,
	Desirable dame. For so men do,
	Eyeless with passion, and assign to them
	Graces not theirs in fact. And thus we see
	Creatures in many a wise crooked and ugly
	The prosperous sweethearts in a high esteem;
	And lovers gird each other and advise
	To placate Venus, since their friends are smit
	With a base passion- miserable dupes
	Who seldom mark their own worst bane of all.
	The black-skinned girl is "tawny like the honey";
	The filthy and the fetid's "negligee";
	The cat-eyed she's "a little Pallas," she;
	The sinewy and wizened's "a gazelle";
	The pudgy and the pigmy is "piquant,
	One of the Graces sure"; the big and bulky
	O she's "an Admiration, imposante";
	The stuttering and tongue-tied "sweetly lisps";
	The mute girl's "modest"; and the garrulous,
	The spiteful spit-fire, is "a sparkling wit";
	And she who scarcely lives for scrawniness
	Becomes "a slender darling"; "delicate"
	Is she who's nearly dead of coughing-fit;
	The pursy female with protuberant breasts
	She is "like Ceres when the goddess gave
	Young Bacchus suck"; the pug-nosed lady-love
	"A Satyress, a feminine Silenus";
	The blubber-lipped is "all one luscious kiss"-
	A weary while it were to tell the whole.
	But let her face possess what charm ye will,
	Let Venus' glory rise from all her limbs,-
	Forsooth there still are others; and forsooth
	We lived before without her; and forsooth
	She does the same things- and we know she does-
	All, as the ugly creature, and she scents,
	Yes she, her wretched self with vile perfumes;
	Whom even her handmaids flee and giggle at
	Behind her back. But he, the lover, in tears
	Because shut out, covers her threshold o'er
	Often with flowers and garlands, and anoints
	Her haughty door-posts with the marjoram,
	And prints, poor fellow, kisses on the doors-
	Admitted at last, if haply but one whiff
	Got to him on approaching, he would seek
	Decent excuses to go out forthwith;
	And his lament, long pondered, then would fall
	Down at his heels; and there he'd damn himself
	For his fatuity, observing how
	He had assigned to that same lady more-
	Than it is proper to concede to mortals.
	And these our Venuses are 'ware of this.
	Wherefore the more are they at pains to hide
	All the-behind-the-scenes of life from those
	Whom they desire to keep in bonds of love-
	In vain, since ne'ertheless thou canst by thought
	Drag all the matter forth into the light
	And well search out the cause of all these smiles;
	And if of graceful mind she be and kind,
	Do thou, in thy turn, overlook the same,
	And thus allow for poor mortality.

[card 1192]
	Nor sighs the woman always with feigned love,
	Who links her body round man's body locked
	And holds him fast, making his kisses wet
	With lips sucked into lips; for oft she acts
	Even from desire, and, seeking mutual joys,
	Incites him there to run love's race-course through.
	Nor otherwise can cattle, birds, wild beasts,
	And sheep and mares submit unto the males,
	Except that their own nature is in heat,
	And burns abounding and with gladness takes
	Once more the Venus of the mounting males.
	And seest thou not how those whom mutual pleasure
	Hath bound are tortured in their common bonds?
	How often in the cross-roads dogs that pant
	To get apart strain eagerly asunder
	With utmost might?- When all the while they're fast
	In the stout links of Venus. But they'd ne'er
	So pull, except they knew those mutual joys-
	So powerful to cast them unto snares
	And hold them bound. Wherefore again, again,
	Even as I say, there is a joint delight.

[card 1209]
	And when perchance, in mingling seed with his,
	The female hath o'erpowered the force of male
	And by a sudden fling hath seized it fast,
	Then are the offspring, more from mothers' seed,
	More like their mothers; as, from fathers' seed,
	They're like to fathers. But whom seest to be
	Partakers of each shape, one equal blend
	Of parents' features, these are generate
	From fathers' body and from mothers' blood,
	When mutual and harmonious heat hath dashed
	Together seeds, aroused along their frames
	By Venus' goads, and neither of the twain
	Mastereth or is mastered. Happens too
	That sometimes offspring can to being come
	In likeness of their grandsires, and bring back
	Often the shapes of grandsires' sires, because
	Their parents in their bodies oft retain
	Concealed many primal germs, commixed
	In many modes, which, starting with the stock,
	Sire handeth down to son, himself a sire;
	Whence Venus by a variable chance
	Engenders shapes, and diversely brings back
	Ancestral features, voices too, and hair.
	A female generation rises forth
	From seed paternal, and from mother's body
	Exist created males: since sex proceeds
	No more from singleness of seed than faces
	Or bodies or limbs of ours: for every birth
	Is from a twofold seed; and what's created
	Hath, of that parent which it is more like,
	More than its equal share; as thou canst mark,-
	Whether the breed be male or female stock.

[card 1233]
	Nor do the powers divine grudge any man
	The fruits of his seed-sowing, so that never
	He be called "father" by sweet children his,
	And end his days in sterile love forever.
	What many men suppose; and gloomily
	They sprinkle the altars with abundant blood,
	And make the high platforms odorous with burnt gifts,
	To render big by plenteous seed their wives-
	And plague in vain godheads and sacred lots.
	For sterile are these men by seed too thick,
	Or else by far too watery and thin.
	Because the thin is powerless to cleave
	Fast to the proper places, straightaway
	It trickles from them, and, returned again,
	Retires abortively. And then since seed
	More gross and solid than will suit is spent
	By some men, either it flies not forth amain
	With spurt prolonged enough, or else it fails
	To enter suitably the proper places,
	Or, having entered, the seed is weakly mixed
	With seed of the woman: harmonies of Venus
	Are seen to matter vastly here; and some
	Impregnate some more readily, and from some
	Some women conceive more readily and become
	Pregnant. And many women, sterile before
	In several marriage-beds, have yet thereafter
	Obtained the mates from whom they could conceive
	The baby-boys, and with sweet progeny
	Grow rich. And even for husbands (whose own wives,
	Although of fertile wombs, have borne for them
	No babies in the house) are also found
	Concordant natures so that they at last
	Can bulwark their old age with goodly sons.
	A matter of great moment 'tis in truth,
	That seeds may mingle readily with seeds
	Suited for procreation, and that thick
	Should mix with fluid seeds, with thick the fluid.
	And in this business 'tis of some import
	Upon what diet life is nourished:
	For some foods thicken seeds within our members,
	And others thin them out and waste away.
	And in what modes the fond delight itself
	Is carried on- this too importeth vastly.
	For commonly 'tis thought that wives conceive
	More readily in manner of wild-beasts,
	After the custom of the four-foot breeds,
	Because so postured, with the breasts beneath
	And buttocks then upreared, the seeds can take
	Their proper places. Nor is need the least
	For wives to use the motions of blandishment;
	For thus the woman hinders and resists
	Her own conception, if too joyously
	Herself she treats the Venus of the man
	With haunches heaving, and with all her bosom
	Now yielding like the billows of the sea-
	Aye, from the ploughshare's even course and track
	She throws the furrow, and from proper places
	Deflects the spurt of seed. And courtesans
	Are thuswise wont to move for their own ends,
	To keep from pregnancy and lying in,
	And all the while to render Venus more
	A pleasure for the men- the which meseems
	Our wives have never need of.

[card 1278]
	Sometimes too
	It happens- and through no divinity
	Nor arrows of Venus- that a sorry chit
	Of scanty grace will be beloved by man;
	For sometimes she herself by very deeds,
	By her complying ways, and tidy habits,
	Will easily accustom thee to pass
	With her thy life-time- and, moreover, lo,
	Long habitude can gender human love,
	Even as an object smitten o'er and o'er
	By blows, however lightly, yet at last
	Is overcome and wavers. Seest thou not,
	Besides, how drops of water falling down
	Against the stones at last bore through the stones?
