Book Five: The World, Its Making, and the Rise of Mankind (Part 1 of 3) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 1]
	O who can build with puissant breast a song
	Worthy the majesty of these great finds?
	Or who in words so strong that he can frame
	The fit laudations for deserts of him
	Who left us heritors of such vast prizes,
	By his own breast discovered and sought out?-
	There shall be none, methinks, of mortal stock.
	For if must needs be named for him the name
	Demanded by the now known majesty
	Of these high matters, then a god was he,-
	Hear me, illustrious Memmius- a god;
	Who first and chief found out that plan of life
	Which now is called philosophy, and who
	By cunning craft, out of such mighty waves,
	Out of such mighty darkness, moored life
	In havens so serene, in light so clear.
	Compare those old discoveries divine
	Of others: lo, according to the tale,
	Ceres established for mortality
	The grain, and Bacchus juice of vine-born grape,
	Though life might yet without these things abide,
	Even as report saith now some peoples live.
	But man's well-being was impossible
	Without a breast all free. Wherefore the more
	That man doth justly seem to us a god,
	From whom sweet solaces of life, afar
	Distributed o'er populous domains,
	Now soothe the minds of men. But if thou thinkest
	Labours of Hercules excel the same,
	Much farther from true reasoning thou farest.
	For what could hurt us now that mighty maw
	Of Nemeaean Lion, or what the Boar
	Who bristled in Arcadia? Or, again,
	O what could Cretan Bull, or Hydra, pest
	Of Lerna, fenced with vipers venomous?
	Or what the triple-breasted power of her
	The three-fold Geryon...
	The sojourners in the Stymphalian fens
	So dreadfully offend us, or the Steeds
	Of Thracian Diomedes breathing fire
	From out their nostrils off along the zones
	Bistonian and Ismarian? And the Snake,
	The dread fierce gazer, guardian of the golden
	And gleaming apples of the Hesperides,
	Coiled round the tree-trunk with tremendous bulk,
	O what, again, could he inflict on us
	Along the Atlantic shore and wastes of sea?-
	Where neither one of us approacheth nigh
	Nor no barbarian ventures. And the rest
	Of all those monsters slain, even if alive,
	Unconquered still, what injury could they do?
	None, as I guess. For so the glutted earth
	Swarms even now with savage beasts, even now
	Is filled with anxious terrors through the woods
	And mighty mountains and the forest deeps-
	Quarters 'tis ours in general to avoid.
	But lest the breast be purged, what conflicts then,
	What perils, must bosom, in our own despite!
	O then how great and keen the cares of lust
	That split the man distraught! How great the fears!
	And lo, the pride, grim greed, and wantonness-
	How great the slaughters in their train! and lo,
	Debaucheries and every breed of sloth!
	Therefore that man who subjugated these,
	And from the mind expelled, by words indeed,
	Not arms, O shall it not be seemly him
	To dignify by ranking with the gods?-
	And all the more since he was wont to give,
	Concerning the immortal gods themselves,
	Many pronouncements with a tongue divine,
	And to unfold by his pronouncements all
	The nature of the world.

[card 55]
	And walking now
	In his own footprints, I do follow through
	His reasonings, and with pronouncements teach
	The covenant whereby all things are framed,
	How under that covenant they must abide
	Nor ever prevail to abrogate the aeons'
	Inexorable decrees,- how (as we've found),
	In class of mortal objects, o'er all else,
	The mind exists of earth-born frame create
	And impotent unscathed to abide
	Across the mighty aeons, and how come
	In sleep those idol-apparitions,
	That so befool intelligence when we
	Do seem to view a man whom life has left.
	Thus far we've gone; the order of my plan
	Hath brought me now unto the point where I
	Must make report how, too, the universe
	Consists of mortal body, born in time,
	And in what modes that congregated stuff
	Established itself as earth and sky,
	Ocean, and stars, and sun, and ball of moon;
	And then what living creatures rose from out
	The old telluric places, and what ones
	Were never born at all; and in what mode
	The human race began to name its things
	And use the varied speech from man to man;
	And in what modes hath bosomed in their breasts
	That awe of gods, which halloweth in all lands
	Fanes, altars, groves, lakes, idols of the gods.
	Also I shall untangle by what power
	The steersman nature guides the sun's courses,
	And the meanderings of the moon, lest we,
	Percase, should fancy that of own free will
	They circle their perennial courses round,
	Timing their motions for increase of crops
	And living creatures, or lest we should think
	They roll along by any plan of gods.
	For even those men who have learned full well
	That godheads lead a long life free of care,
	If yet meanwhile they wonder by what plan
	Things can go on (and chiefly yon high things
	Observed o'erhead on the ethereal coasts),
	Again are hurried back unto the fears
	Of old religion and adopt again
	Harsh masters, deemed almighty,- wretched men,
	Unwitting what can be and what cannot,
	And by what law to each its scope prescribed,
	Its boundary stone that clings so deep in Time.

[card 91]
	But for the rest,- lest we delay thee here
	Longer by empty promises- behold,
	Before all else, the seas, the lands, the sky:
	O Memmius, their threefold nature, lo,
	Their bodies three, three aspects so unlike,
	Three frames so vast, a single day shall give
	Unto annihilation! Then shall crash
	That massive form and fabric of the world
	Sustained so many aeons! Nor do I
	Fail to perceive how strange and marvellous
	This fact must strike the intellect of man,-
	Annihilation of the sky and earth
	That is to be,- and with what toil of words
	'Tis mine to prove the same; as happens oft
	When once ye offer to man's listening ears
	Something before unheard of, but may not
	Subject it to the view of eyes for him
	Nor put it into hand- the sight and touch,
	Whereby the opened highways of belief
	Lead most directly into human breast
	And regions of intelligence. But yet
	I will speak out. The fact itself, perchance,
	Will force belief in these my words, and thou
	Mayst see, in little time, tremendously
	With risen commotions of the lands all things
	Quaking to pieces- which afar from us
	May she, the steersman Nature, guide: and may
	Reason, O rather than the fact itself,
	Persuade us that all things can be o'erthrown
	And sink with awful-sounding breakage down!

[card 110]
	But ere on this I take a step to utter
	Oracles holier and soundlier based
	Than ever the Pythian pronounced for men
	From out the tripod and the Delphian laurel,
	I will unfold for thee with learned words
	Many a consolation, lest perchance,
	Still bridled by religion, thou suppose
	Lands, sun, and sky, sea, constellations, moon,
	Must dure forever, as of frame divine-
	And so conclude that it is just that those,
	(After the manner of the Giants), should all
	Pay the huge penalties for monstrous crime,
	Who by their reasonings do overshake
	The ramparts of the universe and wish
	There to put out the splendid sun of heaven,
	Branding with mortal talk immortal things-
	Though these same things are even so far removed
	From any touch of deity and seem
	So far unworthy of numbering with the gods,
	That well they may be thought to furnish rather
	A goodly instance of the sort of things
	That lack the living motion, living sense.
	For sure 'tis quite beside the mark to think
	That judgment and the nature of the mind
	In any kind of body can exist-
	Just as in ether can't exist a tree,
	Nor clouds in the salt sea, nor in the fields
	Can fishes live, nor blood in timber be,
	Nor sap in boulders: fixed and arranged
	Where everything may grow and have its place.
	Thus nature of mind cannot arise alone
	Without the body, nor have its being far
	From thews and blood. Yet if 'twere possible?-
	Much rather might this very power of mind
	Be in the head, the shoulders, or the heels,
	And, born in any part soever, yet
	In the same man, in the same vessel abide
	But since within this body even of ours
	Stands fixed and appears arranged sure
	Where soul and mind can each exist and grow,
	Deny we must the more that they can dure
	Outside the body and the breathing form
	In rotting clods of earth, in the sun's fire,
	In water, or in ether's skiey coasts.
	Therefore these things no whit are furnished
	With sense divine, since never can they be
	With life-force quickened.

[card 146]
	Likewise, thou canst ne'er
	Believe the sacred seats of gods are here
	In any regions of this mundane world;
	Indeed, the nature of the gods, so subtle,
	So far removed from these our senses, scarce
	Is seen even by intelligence of mind.
	And since they've ever eluded touch and thrust
	Of human hands, they cannot reach to grasp
	Aught tangible to us. For what may not
	Itself be touched in turn can never touch.
	Wherefore, besides, also their seats must be
	Unlike these seats of ours,- even subtle too,
	As meet for subtle essence- as I'll prove
	Hereafter unto thee with large discourse.
	Further, to say that for the sake of men
	They willed to prepare this world's magnificence,
	And that 'tis therefore duty and behoof
	To praise the work of gods as worthy praise,
	And that 'tis sacrilege for men to shake
	Ever by any force from out their seats
	What hath been stablished by the Forethought old
	To everlasting for races of mankind,
	And that 'tis sacrilege to assault by words
	And overtopple all from base to beam,-
	Memmius, such notions to concoct and pile,
	Is verily- to dote. Our gratefulness,
	O what emoluments could it confer
	Upon Immortals and upon the Blessed
	That they should take a step to manage aught
	For sake of us? Or what new factor could,
	After so long a time, inveigle them-
	The hitherto reposeful- to desire
	To change their former life? For rather he
	Whom old things chafe seems likely to rejoice
	At new; but one that in fore-passed time
	Hath chanced upon no ill, through goodly years,
	O what could ever enkindle in such an one
	Passion for strange experiment? Or what
	The evil for us, if we had ne'er been born?-
	As though, forsooth, in darkling realms and woe
	Our life were lying till should dawn at last
	The day-spring of creation! Whosoever
	Hath been begotten wills perforce to stay
	In life, so long as fond delight detains;
	But whoso ne'er hath tasted love of life,
	And ne'er was in the count of living things,
	What hurts it him that he was never born?
	Whence, further, first was planted in the gods
	The archetype for gendering the world
	And the fore-notion of what man is like,
	So that they knew and pre-conceived with mind
	Just what they wished to make? Or how were known
	Ever the energies of primal germs,
	And what those germs, by interchange of place,
	Could thus produce, if nature's self had not
	Given example for creating all?
	For in such wise primordials of things,
	Many in many modes, astir by blows
	From immemorial aeons, in motion too
	By their own weights, have evermore been wont
	To be so borne along and in all modes
	To meet together and to try all sorts
	Which, by combining one with other, they
	Are powerful to create, that thus it is
	No marvel now, if they have also fallen
	Into arrangements such, and if they've passed
	Into vibrations such, as those whereby
	This sum of things is carried on to-day
	By fixed renewal.

[card 195]
	But knew I never what
	The seeds primordial were, yet would I dare
	This to affirm, even from deep judgments based
	Upon the ways and conduct of the skies-
	This to maintain by many a fact besides-
	That in no wise the nature of all things
	For us was fashioned by a power divine-
	So great the faults it stands encumbered with.
	First, mark all regions which are overarched
	By the prodigious reaches of the sky:
	One yawning part thereof the mountain-chains
	And forests of the beasts do have and hold;
	And cliffs, and desert fens, and wastes of sea
	(Which sunder afar the beaches of the lands)
	Possess it merely; and, again, thereof
	Well-nigh two-thirds intolerable heat
	And a perpetual fall of frost doth rob
	From mortal kind. And what is left to till,
	Even that the force of nature would o'errun
	With brambles, did not human force oppose,-
	Long wont for livelihood to groan and sweat
	Over the two-pronged mattock and to cleave
	The soil in twain by pressing on the plough.
	. . . . . .
	Unless, by the ploughshare turning the fruitful clods
	And kneading the mould, we quicken into birth,
	[The crops] spontaneously could not come up
	Into the free bright air. Even then sometimes,
	When things acquired by the sternest toil
	Are now in leaf, are now in blossom all,
	Either the skiey sun with baneful heats
	Parches, or sudden rains or chilling rime
	Destroys, or flaws of winds with furious whirl
	Torment and twist. Beside these matters, why
	Doth nature feed and foster on land and sea
	The dreadful breed of savage beasts, the foes
	Of the human clan? Why do the seasons bring
	Distempers with them? Wherefore stalks at large
	Death, so untimely? Then, again, the babe,
	Like to the castaway of the raging surf,
	Lies naked on the ground, speechless, in want
	Of every help for life, when nature first
	Hath poured him forth upon the shores of light
	With birth-pangs from within the mother's womb,
	And with a plaintive wail he fills the place,-
	As well befitting one for whom remains
	In life a journey through so many ills.
	But all the flocks and herds and all wild beasts
	Come forth and grow, nor need the little rattles,
	Nor must be treated to the humouring nurse's
	Dear, broken chatter; nor seek they divers clothes
	To suit the changing skies; nor need, in fine,
	Nor arms, nor lofty ramparts, wherewithal
	Their own to guard- because the earth herself
	And nature, artificer of the world, bring forth
	Aboundingly all things for all.

[card 235]
	And first,
	Since body of earth and water, air's light breath,
	And fiery exhalations (of which four
	This sum of things is seen to be compact)
	So all have birth and perishable frame,
	Thus the whole nature of the world itself
	Must be conceived as perishable too.
	For, verily, those things of which we see
	The parts and members to have birth in time
	And perishable shapes, those same we mark
	To be invariably born in time
	And born to die. And therefore when I see
	The mightiest members and the parts of this
	Our world consumed and begot again,
	'Tis mine to know that also sky above
	And earth beneath began of old in time
	And shall in time go under to disaster.
	And lest in these affairs thou deemest me
	To have seized upon this point by sleight to serve
	My own caprice- because I have assumed
	That earth and fire are mortal things indeed,
	And have not doubted water and the air
	Both perish too and have affirmed the same
	To be again begotten and wax big-
	Mark well the argument: in first place, lo,
	Some certain parts of earth, grievously parched
	By unremitting suns, and trampled on
	By a vast throng of feet, exhale abroad
	A powdery haze and flying clouds of dust,
	Which the stout winds disperse in the whole air.
	A part, moreover, of her sod and soil
	Is summoned to inundation by the rains;
	And rivers graze and gouge the banks away.
	Besides, whatever takes a part its own
	In fostering and increasing [aught]...
	. . . . . .
	Is rendered back; and since, beyond a doubt,
	Earth, the all-mother, is beheld to be
	Likewise the common sepulchre of things,
	Therefore thou seest her minished of her plenty,
	And then again augmented with new growth.

[card 261]
	And for the rest, that sea, and streams, and springs
	Forever with new waters overflow,
	And that perennially the fluids well,
	Needeth no words- the mighty flux itself
	Of multitudinous waters round about
	Declareth this. But whatso water first
	Streams up is ever straightway carried off,
	And thus it comes to pass that all in all
	There is no overflow; in part because
	The burly winds (that over-sweep amain)
	And skiey sun (that with his rays dissolves)
	Do minish the level seas; in part because
	The water is diffused underground
	Through all the lands. The brine is filtered off,
	And then the liquid stuff seeps back again
	And all regathers at the river-heads,
	Whence in fresh-water currents on it flows
	Over the lands, adown the channels which
	Were cleft erstwhile and erstwhile bore along
	The liquid-footed floods.

[card 273]
	Now, then, of air
	I'll speak, which hour by hour in all its body
	Is changed innumerably. For whatso'er
	Streams up in dust or vapour off of things,
	The same is all and always borne along
	Into the mighty ocean of the air;
	And did not air in turn restore to things
	Bodies, and thus recruit them as they stream,
	All things by this time had resolved been
	And changed into air. Therefore it never
	Ceases to be engendered off of things
	And to return to things, since verily
	In constant flux do all things stream.

[card 281]
	Likewise,
	The abounding well-spring of the liquid light,
	The ethereal sun, doth flood the heaven o'er
	With constant flux of radiance ever new,
	And with fresh light supplies the place of light,
	Upon the instant. For whatever effulgence
	Hath first streamed off, no matter where it falls,
	Is lost unto the sun. And this 'tis thine
	To know from these examples: soon as clouds
	Have first begun to under-pass the sun,
	And, as it were, to rend the rays of light
	In twain, at once the lower part of them
	Is lost entire, and earth is overcast
	Where'er the thunderheads are rolled along-
	So know thou mayst that things forever need
	A fresh replenishment of gleam and glow,
	And each effulgence, foremost flashed forth,
	Perisheth one by one. Nor otherwise
	Can things be seen in sunlight, lest alway
	The fountain-head of light supply new light.
	Indeed your earthly beacons of the night,
	The hanging lampions and the torches, bright
	With darting gleams and dense with livid soot,
	Do hurry in like manner to supply
	With ministering heat new light amain;
	Are all alive to quiver with their fires,-
	Are so alive, that thus the light ne'er leaves
	The spots it shines on, as if rent in twain:
	So speedily is its destruction veiled
	By the swift birth of flame from all the fires.
	Thus, then, we must suppose that sun and moon
	And stars dart forth their light from under-births
	Ever and ever new, and whatso flames
	First rise do perish always one by one-
	Lest, haply, thou shouldst think they each endure
	Inviolable.

[card 306]
	Again, perceivest not
	How stones are also conquered by Time?-
	Not how the lofty towers ruin down,
	And boulders crumble?- Not how shrines of gods
	And idols crack outworn?- Nor how indeed
	The holy Influence hath yet no power
	There to postpone the Terminals of Fate,
	Or headway make 'gainst Nature's fixed decrees?
	Again, behold we not the monuments
	Of heroes, now in ruins, asking us,
	In their turn likewise, if we don't believe
	They also age with eld? Behold we not
	The rended basalt ruining amain
	Down from the lofty mountains, powerless
	To dure and dree the mighty forces there
	Of finite time?- for they would never fall
	Rended asudden, if from infinite Past
	They had prevailed against all engin'ries
	Of the assaulting aeons, with no crash.

[card 318]
	Again, now look at This, which round, above,
	Contains the whole earth in its one embrace:
	If from itself it procreates all things-
	As some men tell- and takes them to itself
	When once destroyed, entirely must it be
	Of mortal birth and body; for whate'er
	From out itself giveth to other things
	Increase and food, the same perforce must be
	Minished, and then recruited when it takes
	Things back into itself.

[card 324]
	Besides all this,
	If there had been no origin-in-birth
	Of lands and sky, and they had ever been
	The everlasting, why, ere Theban war
	And obsequies of Troy, have other bards
	Not also chanted other high affairs?
	Whither have sunk so oft so many deeds
	Of heroes? Why do those deeds live no more,
	Ingrafted in eternal monuments
	Of glory? Verily, I guess, because
	The Sum is new, and of a recent date
	The nature of our universe, and had
	Not long ago its own exordium.
	Wherefore, even now some arts are being still
	Refined, still increased: now unto ships
	Is being added many a new device;
	And but the other day musician-folk
	Gave birth to melic sounds of organing;
	And, then, this nature, this account of things
	Hath been discovered latterly, and I
	Myself have been discovered only now,
	As first among the first, able to turn
	The same into ancestral Roman speech.
	Yet if, percase, thou deemest that ere this
	Existed all things even the same, but that
	Perished the cycles of the human race
	In fiery exhalations, or cities fell
	By some tremendous quaking of the world,
	Or rivers in fury, after constant rains,
	Had plunged forth across the lands of earth
	And whelmed the towns- then, all the more must thou
	Confess, defeated by the argument,
	That there shall be annihilation too
	Of lands and sky. For at a time when things
	Were being taxed by maladies so great,
	And so great perils, if some cause more fell
	Had then assailed them, far and wide they would
	Have gone to disaster and supreme collapse.
	And by no other reasoning are we
	Seen to be mortal, save that all of us
	Sicken in turn with those same maladies
	With which have sickened in the past those men
	Whom nature hath removed from life.

[card 351]
	Again,
	Whatever abides eternal must indeed
	Either repel all strokes, because 'tis made
	Of solid body, and permit no entrance
	Of aught with power to sunder from within
	The parts compact- as are those seeds of stuff
	Whose nature we've exhibited before;
	Or else be able to endure through time
	For this: because they are from blows exempt,
	As is the void, the which abides untouched,
	Unsmit by any stroke; or else because
	There is no room around, whereto things can,
	As 'twere, depart in dissolution all,-
	Even as the sum of sums eternal is,
	Without or place beyond whereto things may
	Asunder fly, or bodies which can smite,
	And thus dissolve them by the blows of might.
	But not of solid body, as I've shown,
	Exists the nature of the world, because
	In things is intermingled there a void;
	Nor is the world yet as the void, nor are,
	Moreover, bodies lacking which, percase,
	Rising from out the infinite, can fell
	With fury-whirlwinds all this sum of things,
	Or bring upon them other cataclysm
	Of peril strange; and yonder, too, abides
	The infinite space and the profound abyss-
	Whereinto, lo, the ramparts of the world
	Can yet be shivered. Or some other power
	Can pound upon them till they perish all.
	Thus is the door of doom, O nowise barred
	Against the sky, against the sun and earth
	And deep-sea waters, but wide open stands
	And gloats upon them, monstrous and agape.
	Wherefore, again, 'tis needful to confess
	That these same things are born in time; for things
	Which are of mortal body could indeed
	Never from infinite past until to-day
	Have spurned the multitudinous assaults
	Of the immeasurable aeons old.

[card 380]
	Again, since battle so fiercely one with other
	The four most mighty members the world,
	Aroused in an all unholy war,
	Seest not that there may be for them an end
	Of the long strife?- Or when the skiey sun
	And all the heat have won dominion o'er
	The sucked-up waters all?- And this they try
	Still to accomplish, though as yet they fail,-
	For so aboundingly the streams supply
	New store of waters that 'tis rather they
	Who menace the world with inundations vast
	From forth the unplumbed chasms of the sea.
	But vain- since winds (that over-sweep amain)
	And skiey sun (that with his rays dissolves)
	Do minish the level seas and trust their power
	To dry up all, before the waters can
	Arrive at the end of their endeavouring.
	Breathing such vasty warfare, they contend
	In balanced strife the one with other still
	Concerning mighty issues,- though indeed
	The fire was once the more victorious,
	And once- as goes the tale- the water won
	A kingdom in the fields. For fire o'ermastered
	And licked up many things and burnt away,
	What time the impetuous horses of the Sun
	Snatched Phaethon headlong from his skiey road
	Down the whole ether and over all the lands.
	But the omnipotent Father in keen wrath
	Then with the sudden smite of thunderbolt
	Did hurl the mighty-minded hero off
	Those horses to the earth. And Sol, his sire,
	Meeting him as he fell, caught up in hand
	The ever-blazing lampion of the world,
	And drave together the pell-mell horses there
	And yoked them all a-tremble, and amain,
	Steering them over along their own old road,
	Restored the cosmos,- as forsooth we hear
	From songs of ancient poets of the Greeks-
	A tale too far away from truth, meseems.
	For fire can win when from the infinite
	Has risen a larger throng of particles
	Of fiery stuff; and then its powers succumb,
	Somehow subdued again, or else at last
	It shrivels in torrid atmospheres the world.
	And whilom water too began to win-
	As goes the story- when it overwhelmed
	The lives of men with billows; and thereafter,
	When all that force of water-stuff which forth
	From out the infinite had risen up
	Did now retire, as somehow turned aside,
	The rain-storms stopped, and streams their fury checked.

[card 416]
	But in what modes that conflux of first-stuff
	Did found the multitudinous universe
	Of earth, and sky, and the unfathomed deeps
	Of ocean, and courses of the sun and moon,
	I'll now in order tell. For of a truth
	Neither by counsel did the primal germs
	'Stablish themselves, as by keen act of mind,
	Each in its proper place; nor did they make,
	Forsooth, a compact how each germ should move;
	But, lo, because primordials of things,
	Many in many modes, astir by blows
	From immemorial aeons, in motion too
	By their own weights, have evermore been wont
	To be so borne along and in all modes
	To meet together and to try all sorts
	Which, by combining one with other, they
	Are powerful to create: because of this
	It comes to pass that those primordials,
	Diffused far and wide through mighty aeons,
	The while they unions try, and motions too,
	Of every kind, meet at the last amain,
	And so become oft the commencements fit
	Of mighty things- earth, sea, and sky, and race
	Of living creatures.

[card 432]
	In that long-ago
	The wheel of the sun could nowhere be discerned
	Flying far up with its abounding blaze,
	Nor constellations of the mighty world,
	Nor ocean, nor heaven, nor even earth nor air.
	Nor aught of things like unto things of ours
	Could then be seen- but only some strange storm
	And a prodigious hurly-burly mass
	Compounded of all kinds of primal germs,
	Whose battling discords in disorder kept
	Interstices, and paths, coherencies,
	And weights, and blows, encounterings, and motions,
	Because, by reason of their forms unlike
	And varied shapes, they could not all thuswise
	Remain conjoined nor harmoniously
	Have interplay of movements. But from there
	Portions began to fly asunder, and like
	With like to join, and to block out a world,
	And to divide its members and dispose
	Its mightier parts- that is, to set secure
	The lofty heavens from the lands, and cause
	The sea to spread with waters separate,
	And fires of ether separate and pure
	Likewise to congregate apart.

[card 449]
	For, lo,
	First came together the earthy particles
	(As being heavy and intertangled) there
	In the mid-region, and all began to take
	The lowest abodes; and ever the more they got
	One with another intertangled, the more
	They pressed from out their mass those particles
	Which were to form the sea, the stars, the sun,
	And moon, and ramparts of the mighty world-
	For these consist of seeds more smooth and round
	And of much smaller elements than earth.
	And thus it was that ether, fraught with fire,
	First broke away from out the earthen parts,
	Athrough the innumerable pores of earth,
	And raised itself aloft, and with itself
	Bore lightly off the many starry fires;
	And not far otherwise we often see
	. . . . . .
	And the still lakes and the perennial streams
	Exhale a mist, and even as earth herself
	Is seen at times to smoke, when first at dawn
	The light of the sun, the many-rayed, begins
	To redden into gold, over the grass
	Begemmed with dew. When all of these are brought
	Together overhead, the clouds on high
	With now concreted body weave a cover
	Beneath the heavens. And thuswise ether too,
	Light and diffusive, with concreted body
	On all sides spread, on all sides bent itself
	Into a dome, and, far and wide diffused
	On unto every region on all sides,
	Thus hedged all else within its greedy clasp.
	Hard upon ether came the origins
	Of sun and moon, whose globes revolve in air
	Midway between the earth and mightiest ether,-
	For neither took them, since they weighed too little
	To sink and settle, but too much to glide
	Along the upmost shores; and yet they are
	In such a wise midway between the twain
	As ever to whirl their living bodies round,
	And ever to dure as parts of the wide Whole;
	In the same fashion as certain members may
	In us remain at rest, whilst others move.
	When, then, these substances had been withdrawn,
	Amain the earth, where now extend the vast
	Cerulean zones of all the level seas,
	Caved in, and down along the hollows poured
	The whirlpools of her brine; and day by day
	The more the tides of ether and rays of sun
	On every side constrained into one mass
	The earth by lashing it again, again,
	Upon its outer edges (so that then,
	Being thus beat upon, 'twas all condensed
	About its proper centre), ever the more
	The salty sweat, from out its body squeezed,
	Augmented ocean and the fields of foam
	By seeping through its frame, and all the more
	Those many particles of heat and air
	Escaping, began to fly aloft, and form,
	By condensation there afar from earth,
	The high refulgent circuits of the heavens.
	The plains began to sink, and windy slopes
	Of the high mountains to increase; for rocks
	Could not subside, nor all the parts of ground
	Settle alike to one same level there.
