Book Five: The World, Its Making, and the Rise of Mankind (Part 2 of 3) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 495]
	Thus, then, the massy weight of earth stood firm
	With now concreted body, when (as 'twere)
	All of the slime of the world, heavy and gross,
	Had run together and settled at the bottom,
	Like lees or bilge. Then ocean, then the air,
	Then ether herself, the fraught-with-fire, were all
	Left with their liquid bodies pure and free,
	And each more lighter than the next below;
	And ether, most light and liquid of the three,
	Floats on above the long aerial winds,
	Nor with the brawling of the winds of air
	Mingles its liquid body. It doth leave
	All there- those under-realms below her heights-
	There to be overset in whirlwinds wild,-
	Doth leave all there to brawl in wayward gusts,
	Whilst, gliding with a fixed impulse still,
	Itself it bears its fires along. For, lo,
	That ether can flow thus steadily on, on,
	With one unaltered urge, the Pontus proves-
	That sea which floweth forth with fixed tides,
	Keeping one onward tenor as it glides.

[card 509]
	Now let us sing what makes the stars to move.
	In first place, if the mighty sphere of heaven
	Revolveth round, then needs we must aver
	That on the upper and the under pole
	Presses a certain air, and from without
	Confines them and encloseth at each end;
	And that, moreover, another air above
	Streams on athwart the top of the sphere and tends
	In same direction as are rolled along
	The glittering stars of the eternal world;
	Or that another still streams on below
	To whirl the sphere from under up and on
	In opposite direction- as we see
	The rivers turn the wheels and water-scoops.
	It may be also that the heavens do all
	Remain at rest, whilst yet are borne along
	The lucid constellations; either because
	Swift tides of ether are by sky enclosed,
	And whirl around, seeking a passage out,
	And everywhere make roll the starry fires
	Through the Summanian regions of the sky;
	Or else because some air, streaming along
	From an eternal quarter off beyond,
	Whileth the driven fires, or, then, because
	The fires themselves have power to creep along,
	Going wherever their food invites and calls,
	And feeding their flaming bodies everywhere
	Throughout the sky. Yet which of these is cause
	In this our world 'tis hard to say for sure;
	But what can be throughout the universe,
	In divers worlds on divers plan create,
	This only do I show, and follow on
	To assign unto the motions of the stars
	Even several causes which 'tis possible
	Exist throughout the universal All;
	Of which yet one must be the cause even here
	Which maketh motion for our constellations.
	Yet to decide which one of them it be
	Is not the least the business of a man
	Advancing step by cautious step, as I.

[card 534]
	And that the earth may there abide at rest
	In the mid-region of the world, it needs
	Must vanish bit by bit in weight and lessen,
	And have another substance underneath,
	Conjoined to it from its earliest age
	In linked unison with the vasty world's
	Realms of the air in which it roots and lives.
	On this account, the earth is not a load,
	Nor presses down on winds of air beneath;
	Even as unto a man his members be
	Without all weight- the head is not a load
	Unto the neck; nor do we feel the whole
	Weight of the body to centre in the feet.
	But whatso weights come on us from without,
	Weights laid upon us, these harass and chafe,
	Though often far lighter. For to such degree
	It matters always what the innate powers
	Of any given thing may be. The earth
	Was, then, no alien substance fetched amain,
	And from no alien firmament cast down
	On alien air; but was conceived, like air,
	In the first origin of this the world,
	As a fixed portion of the same, as now
	Our members are seen to be a part of us.
	Besides, the earth, when of a sudden shook
	By the big thunder, doth with her motion shake
	All that's above her- which she ne'er could do
	By any means, were earth not bounden fast
	Unto the great world's realms of air and sky:
	For they cohere together with common roots,
	Conjoined both, even from their earliest age,
	In linked unison. Aye, seest thou not
	That this most subtle energy of soul
	Supports our body, though so heavy a weight,-
	Because, indeed, 'tis with it so conjoined
	In linked unison? What power, in sum,
	Can raise with agile leap our body aloft,
	Save energy of mind which steers the limbs?
	Now seest thou not how powerful may be
	A subtle nature, when conjoined it is
	With heavy body, as air is with the earth
	Conjoined, and energy of mind with us?

[card 564]
	Nor can the sun's wheel larger be by much
	Nor its own blaze much less than either seems
	Unto our senses. For from whatso spaces
	Fires have the power on us to cast their beams
	And blow their scorching exhalations forth
	Against our members, those same distances
	Take nothing by those intervals away
	From bulk of flames; and to the sight the fire
	Is nothing shrunken. Therefore, since the heat
	And the outpoured light of skiey sun
	Arrive our senses and caress our limbs,
	Form too and bigness of the sun must look
	Even here from earth just as they really be,
	So that thou canst scarce nothing take or add.
	And whether the journeying moon illuminate
	The regions round with bastard beams, or throw
	From off her proper body her own light,-
	Whichever it be, she journeys with a form
	Naught larger than the form doth seem to be
	Which we with eyes of ours perceive. For all
	The far removed objects of our gaze
	Seem through much air confused in their look
	Ere minished in their bigness. Wherefore, moon,
	Since she presents bright look and clear-cut form,
	May there on high by us on earth be seen
	Just as she is with extreme bounds defined,
	And just of the size. And lastly, whatso fires
	Of ether thou from earth beholdest, these
	Thou mayst consider as possibly of size
	The least bit less, or larger by a hair
	Than they appear- since whatso fires we view
	Here in the lands of earth are seen to change
	From time to time their size to less or more
	Only the least, when more or less away,
	So long as still they bicker clear, and still
	Their glow's perceived.

[card 592]
	Nor need there be for men
	Astonishment that yonder sun so small
	Can yet send forth so great a light as fills
	Oceans and all the lands and sky aflood,
	And with its fiery exhalations steeps
	The world at large. For it may be, indeed,
	That one vast-flowing well-spring of the whole
	Wide world from here hath opened and out-gushed,
	And shot its light abroad; because thuswise
	The elements of fiery exhalations
	From all the world around together come,
	And thuswise flow into a bulk so big
	That from one single fountain-head may stream
	This heat and light. And seest thou not, indeed,
	How widely one small water-spring may wet
	The meadow-lands at times and flood the fields?
	'Tis even possible, besides, that heat
	From forth the sun's own fire, albeit that fire
	Be not a great, may permeate the air
	With the fierce hot- if but, perchance, the air
	Be of condition and so tempered then
	As to be kindled, even when beat upon
	Only by little particles of heat-
	Just as we sometimes see the standing grain
	Or stubble straw in conflagration all
	From one lone spark. And possibly the sun,
	Agleam on high with rosy lampion,
	Possesses about him with invisible heats
	A plenteous fire, by no effulgence marked,
	So that he maketh, he, the Fraught-with-fire,
	Increase to such degree the force of rays.

[card 614]
	Nor is there one sure cause revealed to men
	How the sun journeys from his summer haunts
	On to the mid-most winter turning-points
	In Capricorn, the thence reverting veers
	Back to solstitial goals of Cancer; nor
	How 'tis the moon is seen each month to cross
	That very distance which in traversing
	The sun consumes the measure of a year.
	I say, no one clear reason hath been given
	For these affairs. Yet chief in likelihood
	Seemeth the doctrine which the holy thought
	Of great Democritus lays down: that ever
	The nearer the constellations be to earth
	The less can they by whirling of the sky
	Be borne along, because those skiey powers
	Of speed aloft do vanish and decrease
	In under-regions, and the sun is thus
	Left by degrees behind amongst those signs
	That follow after, since the sun he lies
	Far down below the starry signs that blaze;
	And the moon lags even tardier than the sun:
	In just so far as is her course removed
	From upper heaven and nigh unto the lands,
	In just so far she fails to keep the pace
	With starry signs above; for just so far
	As feebler is the whirl that bears her on,
	(Being, indeed, still lower than the sun),
	In just so far do all the starry signs,
	Circling around, o'ertake her and o'erpass.
	Therefore it happens that the moon appears
	More swiftly to return to any sign
	Along the Zodiac, than doth the sun,
	Because those signs do visit her again
	More swiftly than they visit the great sun.
	It can be also that two streams of air
	Alternately at fixed periods
	Blow out from transverse regions of the world,
	Of which the one may thrust the sun away
	From summer-signs to mid-most winter goals
	And rigors of the cold, and the other then
	May cast him back from icy shades of chill
	Even to the heat-fraught regions and the signs
	That blaze along the Zodiac. So, too,
	We must suppose the moon and all the stars,
	Which through the mighty and sidereal years
	Roll round in mighty orbits, may be sped
	By streams of air from regions alternate.
	Seest thou not also how the clouds be sped
	By contrary winds to regions contrary,
	The lower clouds diversely from the upper?
	Then, why may yonder stars in ether there
	Along their mighty orbits not be borne
	By currents opposite the one to other?

[card 650]
	But night o'erwhelms the lands with vasty murk
	Either when sun, after his diurnal course,
	Hath walked the ultimate regions of the sky
	And wearily hath panted forth his fires,
	Shivered by their long journeying and wasted
	By traversing the multitudinous air,
	Or else because the self-same force that drave
	His orb along above the lands compels
	Him then to turn his course beneath the lands.
	Matuta also at a fixed hour
	Spreadeth the roseate morning out along
	The coasts of heaven and deploys the light,
	Either because the self-same sun, returning
	Under the lands, aspires to seize the sky,
	Striving to set it blazing with his rays
	Ere he himself appear, or else because
	Fires then will congregate and many seeds
	Of heat are wont, even at a fixed time,
	To stream together- gendering evermore
	New suns and light. Just so the story goes
	That from the Idaean mountain-tops are seen
	Dispersed fires upon the break of day
	Which thence combine, as 'twere, into one ball
	And form an orb. Nor yet in these affairs
	Is aught for wonder that these seeds of fire
	Can thus together stream at time so fixed
	And shape anew the splendour of the sun.
	For many facts we see which come to pass
	At fixed time in all things: burgeon shrubs
	At fixed time, and at a fixed time
	They cast their flowers; and Eld commands the teeth,
	At time as surely fixed, to drop away,
	And Youth commands the growing boy to bloom
	With the soft down and let from both his cheeks
	The soft beard fall. And lastly, thunder-bolts,
	Snow, rains, clouds, winds, at seasons of the year
	Nowise unfixed, all do come to pass.
	For where, even from their old primordial start
	Causes have ever worked in such a way,
	And where, even from the world's first origin,
	Thuswise have things befallen, so even now
	After a fixed order they come round
	In sequence also.

[card 680]
	Likewise, days may wax
	Whilst the nights wane, and daylight minished be
	Whilst nights do take their augmentations,
	Either because the self-same sun, coursing
	Under the lands and over in two arcs,
	A longer and a briefer, doth dispart
	The coasts of ether and divides in twain
	His orbit all unequally, and adds,
	As round he's borne, unto the one half there
	As much as from the other half he's ta'en,
	Until he then arrives that sign of heaven
	Where the year's node renders the shades of night
	Equal unto the periods of light.
	For when the sun is midway on his course
	Between the blasts of northwind and of south,
	Heaven keeps his two goals parted equally,
	By virtue of the fixed position old
	Of the whole starry Zodiac, through which
	That sun, in winding onward, takes a year,
	Illumining the sky and all the lands
	With oblique light- as men declare to us
	Who by their diagrams have charted well
	Those regions of the sky which be adorned
	With the arranged signs of Zodiac.
	Or else, because in certain parts the air
	Under the lands is denser, the tremulous
	Bright beams of fire do waver tardily,
	Nor easily can penetrate that air
	Nor yet emerge unto their rising-place:
	For this it is that nights in winter time
	Do linger long, ere comes the many-rayed
	Round Badge of the day. Or else because, as said,
	In alternating seasons of the year
	Fires, now more quick, and now more slow, are wont
	To stream together,- the fires which make the sun
	To rise in some one spot- therefore it is
	That those men seem to speak the truth [who hold
	A new sun is with each new daybreak born].

[card 705]
	The moon she possibly doth shine because
	Strook by the rays of sun, and day by day
	May turn unto our gaze her light, the more
	She doth recede from orb of sun, until,
	Facing him opposite across the world,
	She hath with full effulgence gleamed abroad,
	And, at her rising as she soars above,
	Hath there observed his setting; thence likewise
	She needs must hide, as 'twere, her light behind
	By slow degrees, the nearer now she glides,
	Along the circle of the Zodiac,
	From her far place toward fires of yonder sun,-
	As those men hold who feign the moon to be
	Just like a ball and to pursue a course
	Betwixt the sun and earth. There is, again,
	Some reason to suppose that moon may roll
	With light her very own, and thus display
	The varied shapes of her resplendence there.
	For near her is, percase, another body,
	Invisible, because devoid of light,
	Borne on and gliding all along with her,
	Which in three modes may block and blot her disk.
	Again, she may revolve upon herself,
	Like to a ball's sphere- if perchance that be-
	One half of her dyed o'er with glowing light,
	And by the revolution of that sphere
	She may beget for us her varying shapes,
	Until she turns that fiery part of her
	Full to the sight and open eyes of men;
	Thence by slow stages round and back she whirls,
	Withdrawing thus the luminiferous part
	Of her sphered mass and ball, as, verily,
	The Babylonian doctrine of Chaldees,
	Refuting the art of Greek astrologers,
	Labours, in opposition, to prove sure-
	As if, forsooth, the thing for which each fights,
	Might not alike be true,- or aught there were
	Wherefore thou mightest risk embracing one
	More than the other notion. Then, again,
	Why a new moon might not forevermore
	Created be with fixed successions there
	Of shapes and with configurations fixed,
	And why each day that bright created moon
	Might not miscarry and another be,
	In its stead and place, engendered anew,
	'Tis hard to show by reason, or by words
	To prove absurd- since, lo, so many things
	Can be create with fixed successions:
	Spring-time and Venus come, and Venus' boy,
	The winged harbinger, steps on before,
	And hard on Zephyr's foot-prints Mother Flora,
	Sprinkling the ways before them, filleth all
	With colours and with odours excellent;
	Whereafter follows arid Heat, and he
	Companioned is by Ceres, dusty one,
	And by the Etesian Breezes of the north;
	Then cometh Autumn on, and with him steps
	Lord Bacchus, and then other Seasons too
	And other Winds do follow- the high roar
	Of great Volturnus, and the Southwind strong
	With thunder-bolts. At last earth's Shortest-Day
	Bears on to men the snows and brings again
	The numbing cold. And Winter follows her,
	His teeth with chills a-chatter. Therefore, 'tis
	The less a marvel, if at fixed time
	A moon is thus begotten and again
	At fixed time destroyed, since things so many
	Can come to being thus at fixed time.
	Likewise, the sun's eclipses and the moon's
	Far occultations rightly thou mayst deem

[card 751]
	As due to several causes. For, indeed,
	Why should the moon be able to shut out
	Earth from the light of sun, and on the side
	To earthward thrust her high head under sun,
	Opposing dark orb to his glowing beams-
	And yet, at same time, one suppose the effect
	Could not result from some one other body
	Which glides devoid of light forevermore?
	Again, why could not sun, in weakened state,
	At fixed time for-lose his fires, and then,
	When he has passed on along the air
	Beyond the regions, hostile to his flames,
	That quench and kill his fires, why could not he
	Renew his light? And why should earth in turn
	Have power to rob the moon of light, and there,
	Herself on high, keep the sun hid beneath,
	Whilst the moon glideth in her monthly course
	Athrough the rigid shadows of the cone?-
	And yet, at same time, some one other body
	Not have the power to under-pass the moon,
	Or glide along above the orb of sun,
	Breaking his rays and outspread light asunder?
	And still, if moon herself refulgent be
	With her own sheen, why could she not at times
	In some one quarter of the mighty world
	Grow weak and weary, whilst she passeth through
	Regions unfriendly to the beams her own?

[card 772]
	And now to what remains!- Since I've resolved
	By what arrangements all things come to pass
	Through the blue regions of the mighty world,-
	How we can know what energy and cause
	Started the various courses of the sun
	And the moon's goings, and by what far means
	They can succumb, the while with thwarted light,
	And veil with shade the unsuspecting lands,
	When, as it were, they blink, and then again
	With open eye survey all regions wide,
	Resplendent with white radiance- I do now
	Return unto the world's primeval age
	And tell what first the soft young fields of earth
	With earliest parturition had decreed
	To raise in air unto the shores of light
	And to entrust unto the wayward winds.
	In the beginning, earth gave forth, around
	The hills and over all the length of plains,
	The race of grasses and the shining green;
	The flowery meadows sparkled all aglow
	With greening colour, and thereafter, lo,
	Unto the divers kinds of trees was given
	An emulous impulse mightily to shoot,
	With a free rein, aloft into the air.
	As feathers and hairs and bristles are begot
	The first on members of the four-foot breeds
	And on the bodies of the strong-y-winged,
	Thus then the new Earth first of all put forth
	Grasses and shrubs, and afterward begat
	The mortal generations, there upsprung-
	Innumerable in modes innumerable-
	After diverging fashions. For from sky
	These breathing-creatures never can have dropped,
	Nor the land-dwellers ever have come up
	Out of sea-pools of salt. How true remains,
	How merited is that adopted name
	Of earth- "The Mother!"- since from out the earth
	Are all begotten. And even now arise
	From out the loams how many living things-
	Concreted by the rains and heat of the sun.
	Wherefore 'tis less a marvel, if they sprang
	In Long Ago more many, and more big,
	Matured of those days in the fresh young years
	Of earth and ether. First of all, the race
	Of the winged ones and parti-coloured birds,
	Hatched out in spring-time, left their eggs behind;
	As now-a-days in summer tree-crickets
	Do leave their shiny husks of own accord,
	Seeking their food and living. Then it was
	This earth of thine first gave unto the day
	The mortal generations; for prevailed
	Among the fields abounding hot and wet.
	And hence, where any fitting spot was given,
	There 'gan to grow womb-cavities, by roots
	Affixed to earth. And when in ripened time
	The age of the young within (that sought the air
	And fled earth's damps) had burst these wombs, O then
	Would Nature thither turn the pores of earth
	And make her spurt from open veins a juice
	Like unto milk; even as a woman now
	Is filled, at child-bearing, with the sweet milk,
	Because all that swift stream of aliment
	Is thither turned unto the mother-breasts.
	There earth would furnish to the children food;
	Warmth was their swaddling cloth, the grass their bed
	Abounding in soft down. Earth's newness then
	Would rouse no dour spells of the bitter cold,
	Nor extreme heats nor winds of mighty powers-
	For all things grow and gather strength through time
	In like proportions; and then earth was young.

[card 821]
	Wherefore, again, again, how merited
	Is that adopted name of Earth- The Mother!-
	Since she herself begat the human race,
	And at one well-nigh fixed time brought forth
	Each breast that ranges raving round about
	Upon the mighty mountains and all birds
	Aerial with many a varied shape.
	But, lo, because her bearing years must end,
	She ceased, like to a woman worn by eld.
	For lapsing aeons change the nature of
	The whole wide world, and all things needs must take
	One status after other, nor aught persists
	Forever like itself. All things depart;
	Nature she changeth all, compelleth all
	To transformation. Lo, this moulders down,
	A-slack with weary eld, and that, again,
	Prospers in glory, issuing from contempt.
	In suchwise, then, the lapsing aeons change
	The nature of the whole wide world, and earth
	Taketh one status after other. And what
	She bore of old, she now can bear no longer,
	And what she never bore, she can to-day.
	In those days also the telluric world
	Strove to beget the monsters that upsprung
	With their astounding visages and limbs-
	The Man-woman- a thing betwixt the twain,
	Yet neither, and from either sex remote-
	Some gruesome Boggles orphaned of the feet,
	Some widowed of the hands, dumb Horrors too
	Without a mouth, or blind Ones of no eye,
	Or Bulks all shackled by their legs and arms
	Cleaving unto the body fore and aft,
	Thuswise, that never could they do or go,
	Nor shun disaster, nor take the good they would.
	And other prodigies and monsters earth
	Was then begetting of this sort- in vain,
	Since Nature banned with horror their increase,
	And powerless were they to reach unto
	The coveted flower of fair maturity,
	Or to find aliment, or to intertwine
	In works of Venus. For we see there must
	Concur in life conditions manifold,
	If life is ever by begetting life
	To forge the generations one by one:
	First, foods must be; and, next, a path whereby
	The seeds of impregnation in the frame
	May ooze, released from the members all;
	Last, the possession of those instruments
	Whereby the male with female can unite,
	The one with other in mutual ravishments.

[card 855]
	And in the ages after monsters died,
	Perforce there perished many a stock, unable
	By propagation to forge a progeny.
	For whatsoever creatures thou beholdest
	Breathing the breath of life, the same have been
	Even from their earliest age preserved alive
	By cunning, or by valour, or at least
	By speed of foot or wing. And many a stock
	Remaineth yet, because of use to man,
	And so committed to man's guardianship.
	Valour hath saved alive fierce lion-breeds
	And many another terrorizing race,
	Cunning the foxes, flight the antlered stags.
	Light-sleeping dogs with faithful heart in breast,
	However, and every kind begot from seed
	Of beasts of draft, as, too, the woolly flocks
	And horned cattle, all, my Memmius,
	Have been committed to guardianship of men.
	For anxiously they fled the savage beasts,
	And peace they sought and their abundant foods,
	Obtained with never labours of their own,
	Which we secure to them as fit rewards
	For their good service. But those beasts to whom
	Nature has granted naught of these same things-
	Beasts quite unfit by own free will to thrive
	And vain for any service unto us
	In thanks for which we should permit their kind
	To feed and be in our protection safe-
	Those, of a truth, were wont to be exposed,
	Enshackled in the gruesome bonds of doom,
	As prey and booty for the rest, until
	Nature reduced that stock to utter death.

[card 878]
	But Centaurs ne'er have been, nor can there be
	Creatures of twofold stock and double frame,
	Compact of members alien in kind,
	Yet formed with equal function, equal force
	In every bodily part- a fact thou mayst,
	However dull thy wits, well learn from this:
	The horse, when his three years have rolled away,
	Flowers in his prime of vigour; but the boy
	Not so, for oft even then he gropes in sleep
	After the milky nipples of the breasts,
	An infant still. And later, when at last
	The lusty powers of horses and stout limbs,
	Now weak through lapsing life, do fail with age,
	Lo, only then doth youth with flowering years
	Begin for boys, and clothe their ruddy cheeks
	With the soft down. So never deem, percase,
	That from a man and from the seed of horse,
	The beast of draft, can Centaurs be composed
	Or e'er exist alive, nor Scyllas be-
	The half-fish bodies girdled with mad dogs-
	Nor others of this sort, in whom we mark
	Members discordant each with each; for ne'er
	At one same time they reach their flower of age
	Or gain and lose full vigour of their frame,
	And never burn with one same lust of love,
	And never in their habits they agree,
	Nor find the same foods equally delightsome-
	Sooth, as one oft may see the bearded goats
	Batten upon the hemlock which to man
	Is violent poison. Once again, since flame
	Is wont to scorch and burn the tawny bulks
	Of the great lions as much as other kinds
	Of flesh and blood existing in the lands,
	How could it be that she, Chimaera lone,
	With triple body- fore, a lion she;
	And aft, a dragon; and betwixt, a goat-
	Might at the mouth from out the body belch
	Infuriate flame? Wherefore, the man who feigns
	Such beings could have been engendered
	When earth was new and the young sky was fresh
	(Basing his empty argument on new)
	May babble with like reason many whims
	Into our ears: he'll say, perhaps, that then
	Rivers of gold through every landscape flowed,
	That trees were wont with precious stones to flower,
	Or that in those far aeons man was born
	With such gigantic length and lift of limbs
	As to be able, based upon his feet,
	Deep oceans to bestride or with his hands
	To whirl the firmament around his head.
	For though in earth were many seeds of things
	In the old time when this telluric world
	First poured the breeds of animals abroad,
	Still that is nothing of a sign that then
	Such hybrid creatures could have been begot
	And limbs of all beasts heterogeneous
	Have been together knit; because, indeed,
	The divers kinds of grasses and the grains
	And the delightsome trees- which even now
	Spring up abounding from within the earth-
	Can still ne'er be begotten with their stems
	Begrafted into one; but each sole thing
	Proceeds according to its proper wont
	And all conserve their own distinctions based
	In nature's fixed decree.

[card 925]
	But mortal man
	Was then far hardier in the old champaign,
	As well he should be, since a hardier earth
	Had him begotten; builded too was he
	Of bigger and more solid bones within,
	And knit with stalwart sinews through the flesh,
	Nor easily seized by either heat or cold,
	Or alien food or any ail or irk.
	And whilst so many lustrums of the sun
	Rolled on across the sky, men led a life
	After the roving habit of wild beasts.
	Not then were sturdy guiders of curved ploughs,
	And none knew then to work the fields with iron,
	Or plant young shoots in holes of delved loam,
	Or lop with hooked knives from off high trees
	The boughs of yester-year. What sun and rains
	To them had given, what earth of own accord
	Created then, was boon enough to glad
	Their simple hearts. Mid acorn-laden oaks
	Would they refresh their bodies for the nonce;
	And the wild berries of the arbute-tree,
	Which now thou seest to ripen purple-red
	In winter time, the old telluric soil
	Would bear then more abundant and more big.
	And many coarse foods, too, in long ago
	The blooming freshness of the rank young world
	Produced, enough for those poor wretches there.
	And rivers and springs would summon them of old
	To slake the thirst, as now from the great hills
	The water's down-rush calls aloud and far
	The thirsty generations of the wild.
	So, too, they sought the grottos of the Nymphs-
	The woodland haunts discovered as they ranged-
	From forth of which they knew that gliding rills
	With gush and splash abounding laved the rocks,
	The dripping rocks, and trickled from above
	Over the verdant moss; and here and there
	Welled up and burst across the open flats.
	As yet they knew not to enkindle fire
	Against the cold, nor hairy pelts to use
	And clothe their bodies with the spoils of beasts;
	But huddled in groves, and mountain-caves, and woods,
	And 'mongst the thickets hid their squalid backs,
	When driven to flee the lashings of the winds
	And the big rains. Nor could they then regard
	The general good, nor did they know to use
	In common any customs, any laws:
	Whatever of booty fortune unto each
	Had proffered, each alone would bear away,
	By instinct trained for self to thrive and live.
	And Venus in the forests then would link
	The lovers' bodies; for the woman yielded
	Either from mutual flame, or from the man's
	Impetuous fury and insatiate lust,
	Or from a bribe- as acorn-nuts, choice pears,
	Or the wild berries of the arbute-tree.
	And trusting wondrous strength of hands and legs,
	They'd chase the forest-wanderers, the beasts;
	And many they'd conquer, but some few they fled,
	A-skulk into their hiding-places...
	. . . . . .
	With the flung stones and with the ponderous heft
	Of gnarled branch. And by the time of night
	O'ertaken, they would throw, like bristly boars,
	Their wildman's limbs naked upon the earth,
	Rolling themselves in leaves and fronded boughs.
	Nor would they call with lamentations loud
	Around the fields for daylight and the sun,
	Quaking and wand'ring in shadows of the night;
	But, silent and buried in a sleep, they'd wait
	Until the sun with rosy flambeau brought
	The glory to the sky. From childhood wont
	Ever to see the dark and day begot
	In times alternate, never might they be
	Wildered by wild misgiving, lest a night
	Eternal should possess the lands, with light
	Of sun withdrawn forever. But their care
	Was rather that the clans of savage beasts
	Would often make their sleep-time horrible
	For those poor wretches; and, from home y-driven,
	They'd flee their rocky shelters at approach
	Of boar, the spumy-lipped, or lion strong,
	And in the midnight yield with terror up
	To those fierce guests their beds of out-spread leaves.
