Book Six: Storms, Earthquakes, Magnets, and the Plague at Athens (Part 1 of 3) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 1]
	'Twas Athens first, the glorious in name,
	That whilom gave to hapless sons of men
	The sheaves of harvest, and re-ordered life,
	And decreed laws; and she the first that gave
	Life its sweet solaces, when she begat
	A man of heart so wise, who whilom poured
	All wisdom forth from his truth-speaking mouth;
	The glory of whom, though dead, is yet to-day,
	Because of those discoveries divine
	Renowned of old, exalted to the sky.
	For when saw he that well-nigh everything
	Which needs of man most urgently require
	Was ready to hand for mortals, and that life,
	As far as might be, was established safe,
	That men were lords in riches, honour, praise,
	And eminent in goodly fame of sons,
	And that they yet, O yet, within the home,
	Still had the anxious heart which vexed life
	Unpausingly with torments of the mind,
	And raved perforce with angry plaints, then he,
	Then he, the master, did perceive that 'twas
	The vessel itself which worked the bane, and all,
	However wholesome, which from here or there
	Was gathered into it, was by that bane
	Spoilt from within,- in part, because he saw
	The vessel so cracked and leaky that nowise
	'T could ever be filled to brim; in part because
	He marked how it polluted with foul taste
	Whate'er it got within itself. So he,
	The master, then by his truth-speaking words,
	Purged the breasts of men, and set the bounds
	Of lust and terror, and exhibited
	The supreme good whither we all endeavour,
	And showed the path whereby we might arrive
	Thereunto by a little cross-cut straight,
	And what of ills in all affairs of mortals
	Upsprang and flitted deviously about
	(Whether by chance or force), since nature thus
	Had destined; and from out what gates a man
	Should sally to each combat. And he proved
	That mostly vainly doth the human race
	Roll in its bosom the grim waves of care.
	For just as children tremble and fear all
	In the viewless dark, so even we at times
	Dread in the light so many things that be
	No whit more fearsome than what children feign,
	Shuddering, will be upon them in the dark.
	This terror then, this darkness of the mind,
	Not sunrise with its flaring spokes of light,
	Nor glittering arrows of morning can disperse,
	But only nature's aspect and her law.
	Wherefore the more will I go on to weave
	In verses this my undertaken task.

[card 43]
	And since I've taught thee that the world's great vaults
	Are mortal and that sky is fashioned
	Of frame e'en born in time, and whatsoe'er
	Therein go on and must perforce go on
	. . . . . .
	The most I have unravelled; what remains
	Do thou take in, besides; since once for all
	To climb into that chariot' renowned
	. . . . . .
	Of winds arise; and they appeased are
	So that all things again...
	. . . . . .
	Which were, are changed now, with fury stilled;
	All other movements through the earth and sky
	Which mortals gaze upon (O anxious oft
	In quaking thoughts!), and which abase their minds
	With dread of deities and press them crushed
	Down to the earth, because their ignorance
	Of cosmic causes forces them to yield
	All things unto the empery of gods
	And to concede the kingly rule to them.
	For even those men who have learned full well
	That godheads lead a long life free of care,
	If yet meanwhile they wonder by what plan
	Things can go on (and chiefly yon high things
	Observed o'erhead on the ethereal coasts),
	Again are hurried back unto the fears
	Of old religion and adopt again
	Harsh masters, deemed almighty,- wretched men,
	Unwitting what can be and what cannot,
	And by what law to each its scope prescribed,
	Its boundary stone that clings so deep in Time.
	Wherefore the more are they borne wandering on
	By blindfold reason. And, Memmius, unless
	From out thy mind thou spuest all of this
	And casteth far from thee all thoughts which be
	Unworthy gods and alien to their peace,
	Then often will the holy majesties
	Of the high gods be harmful unto thee,
	As by thy thought degraded,- not, indeed,
	That essence supreme of gods could be by this
	So outraged as in wrath to thirst to seek
	Revenges keen; but even because thyself
	Thou plaguest with the notion that the gods,
	Even they, the Calm Ones in serene repose,
	Do roll the mighty waves of wrath on wrath;
	Nor wilt thou enter with a serene breast
	Shrines of the gods; nor wilt thou able be
	In tranquil peace of mind to take and know
	Those images which from their holy bodies
	Are carried into intellects of men,
	As the announcers of their form divine.
	What sort of life will follow after this
	'Tis thine to see. But that afar from us
	Veriest reason may drive such life away,
	Much yet remains to be embellished yet
	In polished verses, albeit hath issued forth
	So much from me already; lo, there is
	The law and aspect of the sky to be
	By reason grasped; there are the tempest times
	And the bright lightnings to be hymned now-
	Even what they do and from what cause soe'er
	They're borne along- that thou mayst tremble not,
	Marking off regions of prophetic skies
	For auguries, O foolishly distraught
	Even as to whence the flying flame hath come,
	Or to which half of heaven it turns, or how
	Through walled places it hath wound its way,
	Or, after proving its dominion there,
	How it hath speeded forth from thence amain-
	Whereof nowise the causes do men know,
	And think divinities are working there.
	Do thou, Calliope, ingenious Muse,
	Solace of mortals and delight of gods,
	Point out the course before me, as I race
	On to the white line of the utmost goal,
	That I may get with signal praise the crown,
	With thee my guide!

[card 96]
	And so in first place, then,
	With thunder are shaken the blue deeps of heaven,
	Because the ethereal clouds, scudding aloft,
	Together clash, what time 'gainst one another
	The winds are battling. For never a sound there comes
	From out the serene regions of the sky;
	But wheresoever in a host more dense
	The clouds foregather, thence more often comes
	A crash with mighty rumbling. And, again,
	Clouds cannot be of so condensed a frame
	As stones and timbers, nor again so fine
	As mists and flying smoke; for then perforce
	They'd either fall, borne down by their brute weight,
	Like stones, or, like the smoke, they'd powerless be
	To keep their mass, or to retain within
	Frore snows and storms of hail. And they give forth
	O'er skiey levels of the spreading world
	A sound on high, as linen-awning, stretched
	O'er mighty theatres, gives forth at times
	A cracking roar, when much 'tis beaten about
	Betwixt the poles and cross-beams. Sometimes, too,
	Asunder rent by wanton gusts, it raves
	And imitates the tearing sound of sheets
	Of paper- even this kind of noise thou mayst
	In thunder hear- or sound as when winds whirl
	With lashings and do buffet about in air
	A hanging cloth and flying paper-sheets.
	For sometimes, too, it chances that the clouds
	Cannot together crash head-on, but rather
	Move side-wise and with motions contrary
	Graze each the other's body without speed,
	From whence that dry sound grateth on our ears,
	So long drawn-out, until the clouds have passed
	From out their close positions.

[card 121]
	And, again,
	In following wise all things seem oft to quake
	At shock of heavy thunder, and mightiest walls
	Of the wide reaches of the upper world
	There on the instant to have sprung apart,
	Riven asunder, what time a gathered blast
	Of the fierce hurricane hath all at once
	Twisted its way into a mass of clouds,
	And, there enclosed, ever more and more
	Compelleth by its spinning whirl the cloud
	To grow all hollow with a thickened crust
	Surrounding; for thereafter, when the force
	And the keen onset of the wind have weakened
	That crust, lo, then the cloud, to-split in twain,
	Gives forth a hideous crash with bang and boom.
	No marvel this; since oft a bladder small,
	Filled up with air, will, when of sudden burst,
	Give forth a like large sound.
	There's reason, too,
	Why clouds make sounds, as through them blow the winds:
	We see, borne down the sky, oft shapes of clouds
	Rough-edged or branched many forky ways;
	And 'tis the same, as when the sudden flaws
	Of north-west wind through the dense forest blow,
	Making the leaves to sough and limbs to crash.
	It happens too at times that roused force
	Of the fierce hurricane to-rends the cloud,
	Breaking right through it by a front assault;
	For what a blast of wind may do up there
	Is manifest from facts when here on earth
	A blast more gentle yet uptwists tall trees
	And sucks them madly from their deepest roots.
	Besides, among the clouds are waves, and these
	Give, as they roughly break, a rumbling roar;
	As when along deep streams or the great sea
	Breaks the loud surf. It happens, too, whenever
	Out from one cloud into another falls
	The fiery energy of thunderbolt,
	That straightaway the cloud, if full of wet,
	Extinguishes the fire with mighty noise;
	As iron, white from the hot furnaces,
	Sizzles, when speedily we've plunged its glow
	Down the cold water. Further, if a cloud
	More dry receive the fire, 'twill suddenly
	Kindle to flame and burn with monstrous sound,
	As if a flame with whirl of winds should range
	Along the laurel-tressed mountains far,
	Upburning with its vast assault those trees;
	Nor is there aught that in the crackling flame
	Consumes with sound more terrible to man
	Than Delphic laurel of Apollo lord.
	Oft, too, the multitudinous crash of ice
	And down-pour of swift hail gives forth a sound
	Among the mighty clouds on high; for when
	The wind hath packed them close, each mountain mass
	Of rain-cloud, there congealed utterly
	And mixed with hail-stones, breaks and booms...
	. . . . . .

[card 160]
	Likewise, it lightens, when the clouds have struck,
	By their collision, forth the seeds of fire:
	As if a stone should smite a stone or steel,
	For light then too leaps forth and fire then scatters
	The shining sparks. But with our ears we get
	The thunder after eyes behold the flash,
	Because forever things arrive the ears
	More tardily than the eyes- as thou mayst see
	From this example too: when markest thou
	Some man far yonder felling a great tree
	With double-edged ax, it comes to pass
	Thine eye beholds the swinging stroke before
	The blow gives forth a sound athrough thine ears:
	Thus also we behold the flashing ere
	We hear the thunder, which discharged is
	At same time with the fire and by same cause,
	Born of the same collision.

[card 173]
	In following wise
	The clouds suffuse with leaping light the lands,
	And the storm flashes with tremulous elan:
	When the wind hath invaded a cloud, and, whirling there,
	Hath wrought (as I have shown above) the cloud
	Into a hollow with a thickened crust,
	It becomes hot of own velocity:
	Just as thou seest how motion will o'erheat
	And set ablaze all objects,- verily
	A leaden ball, hurtling through length of space,
	Even melts. Therefore, when this same wind a-fire
	Hath split black cloud, it scatters the fire-seeds,
	Which, so to say, have been pressed out by force
	Of sudden from the cloud;- and these do make
	The pulsing flashes of flame; thence followeth
	The detonation which attacks our ears
	More tardily than aught which comes along
	Unto the sight of eyeballs. This takes place-
	As know thou mayst- at times when clouds are dense
	And one upon the other piled aloft
	With wonderful upheavings- nor be thou
	Deceived because we see how broad their base
	From underneath, and not how high they tower.
	For make thine observations at a time
	When winds shall bear athwart the horizon's blue
	Clouds like to mountain-ranges moving on,
	Or when about the sides of mighty peaks
	Thou seest them one upon the other massed
	And burdening downward, anchored in high repose,
	With the winds sepulchred on all sides round:
	Then canst thou know their mighty masses, then
	Canst view their caverns, as if builded there
	Of beetling crags; which, when the hurricanes
	In gathered storm have filled utterly,
	Then, prisoned in clouds, they rave around
	With mighty roarings, and within those dens
	Bluster like savage beasts, and now from here,
	And now from there, send growlings through the clouds,
	And seeking an outlet, whirl themselves about,
	And roll from 'mid the clouds the seeds of fire,
	And heap them multitudinously there,
	And in the hollow furnaces within
	Wheel flame around, until from bursted cloud
	In forky flashes they have gleamed forth.

[card 204]
	Again, from following cause it comes to pass
	That yon swift golden hue of liquid fire
	Darts downward to the earth: because the clouds
	Themselves must hold abundant seeds of fire;
	For, when they be without all moisture, then
	They be for most part of a flamy hue
	And a resplendent. And, indeed, they must
	Even from the light of sun unto themselves
	Take multitudinous seeds, and so perforce
	Redden and pour their bright fires all abroad.
	And therefore, when the wind hath driven and thrust,
	Hath forced and squeezed into one spot these clouds,
	They pour abroad the seeds of fire pressed out,
	Which make to flash these colours of the flame.
	Likewise, it lightens also when the clouds
	Grow rare and thin along the sky; for, when
	The wind with gentle touch unravels them
	And breaketh asunder as they move, those seeds
	Which make the lightnings must by nature fall;
	At such an hour the horizon lightens round
	Without the hideous terror of dread noise
	And skiey uproar.

[card 219]
	To proceed apace,
	What sort of nature thunderbolts possess
	Is by their strokes made manifest and by
	The brand-marks of their searing heat on things,
	And by the scorched scars exhaling round
	The heavy fumes of sulphur. For all these
	Are marks, O not of wind or rain, but fire.
	Again, they often enkindle even the roofs
	Of houses and inside the very rooms
	With swift flame hold a fierce dominion.
	Know thou that nature fashioned this fire
	Subtler than fires all other, with minute
	And dartling bodies,- a fire 'gainst which there's naught
	Can in the least hold out: the thunderbolt,
	The mighty, passes through the hedging walls
	Of houses, like to voices or a shout,-
	Through stones, through bronze it passes, and it melts
	Upon the instant bronze and gold; and makes,
	Likewise, the wines sudden to vanish forth,
	The wine-jars intact,- because, ye see,
	Its heat arriving renders loose and porous
	Readily all the wine- jar's earthen sides,
	And winding its way within, it scattereth
	The elements primordial of the wine
	With speedy dissolution- process which
	Even in an age the fiery steam of sun
	Could not accomplish, however puissant he
	With his hot coruscations: so much more
	Agile and overpowering is this force.
	. . . . . .
	Now in what manner engendered are these things,
	How fashioned of such impetuous strength
	As to cleave towers asunder, and houses all
	To overtopple, and to wrench apart
	Timbers and beams, and heroes' monuments
	To pile in ruins and upheave amain,
	And to take breath forever out of men,
	And to o'erthrow the cattle everywhere,-
	Yes, by what force the lightnings do all this,
	All this and more, I will unfold to thee,
	Nor longer keep thee in mere promises.

[card 246]
	The bolts of thunder, then, must be conceived
	As all begotten in those crasser clouds
	Up-piled aloft; for, from the sky serene
	And from the clouds of lighter density,
	None are sent forth forever. That 'tis so
	Beyond a doubt, fact plain to sense declares:
	To wit, at such a time the densed clouds
	So mass themselves through all the upper air
	That we might think that round about all murk
	Had parted forth from Acheron and filled
	The mighty vaults of sky- so grievously,
	As gathers thus the storm-clouds' gruesome might,
	Do faces of black horror hang on high-
	When tempest begins its thunderbolts to forge.
	Besides, full often also out at sea
	A blackest thunderhead, like cataract
	Of pitch hurled down from heaven, and far away
	Bulging with murkiness, down on the waves
	Falls with vast uproar, and draws on amain
	The darkling tempests big with thunderbolts
	And hurricanes, itself the while so crammed
	Tremendously with fires and winds, that even
	Back on the lands the people shudder round
	And seek for cover. Therefore, as I said,
	The storm must be conceived as o'er our head
	Towering most high; for never would the clouds
	O'erwhelm the lands with such a massy dark,
	Unless up-builded heap on lofty heap,
	To shut the round sun off. Nor could the clouds,
	As on they come, engulf with rain so vast
	As thus to make the rivers overflow
	And fields to float, if ether were not thus
	Furnished with lofty-piled clouds. Lo, then,
	Here be all things fulfilled with winds and fires-
	Hence the long lightnings and the thunders loud.
	For, verily, I've taught thee even now
	How cavernous clouds hold seeds innumerable
	Of fiery exhalations, and they must
	From off the sunbeams and the heat of these
	Take many still. And so, when that same wind
	(Which, haply, into one region of the sky
	Collects those clouds) hath pressed from out the same
	The many fiery seeds, and with that fire
	Hath at the same time inter-mixed itself,
	O then and there that wind, a whirlwind now,
	Deep in the belly of the cloud spins round
	In narrow confines, and sharpens there inside
	In glowing furnaces the thunderbolt.
	For in a two-fold manner is that wind
	Enkindled all: it trembles into heat
	Both by its own velocity and by
	Repeated touch of fire. Thereafter, when
	The energy of wind is heated through
	And the fierce impulse of the fire hath sped
	Deeply within, O then the thunderbolt,
	Now ripened, so to say, doth suddenly
	Splinter the cloud, and the aroused flash
	Leaps onward, lumining with forky light
	All places round. And followeth anon
	A clap so heavy that the skiey vaults,
	As if asunder burst, seem from on high
	To engulf the earth. Then fearfully a quake
	Pervades the lands, and 'long the lofty skies
	Run the far rumblings. For at such a time
	Nigh the whole tempest quakes, shook through and through,
	And roused are the roarings,- from which shock
	Comes such resounding and abounding rain,
	That all the murky ether seems to turn
	Now into rain, and, as it tumbles down,
	To summon the fields back to primeval floods:
	So big the rains that be sent down on men
	By burst of cloud and by the hurricane,
	What time the thunder-clap, from burning bolt
	That cracks the cloud, flies forth along. At times
	The force of wind, excited from without,
	Smiteth into a cloud already hot
	With a ripe thunderbolt.

[card 295]
	And when that wind
	Hath splintered that cloud, then down there cleaves forthwith
	Yon fiery coil of flame which still we call,
	Even with our fathers' word, a thunderbolt.
	The same thing haps toward every other side
	Whither that force hath swept. It happens, too,
	That sometimes force of wind, though hurtled forth
	Without all fire, yet in its voyage through space
	Igniteth, whilst it comes along, along,-
	Losing some larger bodies which cannot
	Pass, like the others, through the bulks of air,-
	And, scraping together out of air itself
	Some smaller bodies, carries them along,
	And these, commingling, by their flight make fire:
	Much in the manner as oft a leaden ball
	Grows hot upon its aery course, the while
	It loseth many bodies of stark cold
	And taketh into itself along the air
	New particles of fire. It happens, too,
	That force of blow itself arouses fire,
	When force of wind, a-cold and hurtled forth
	Without all fire, hath strook somewhere amain-
	No marvel, because, when with terrific stroke
	'Thas smitten, the elements of fiery-stuff
	Can stream together from out the very wind
	And, simultaneously, from out that thing
	Which then and there receives the stroke: as flies
	The fire when with the steel we hack the stone;
	Nor yet, because the force of steel's a-cold,
	Rush the less speedily together there
	Under the stroke its seeds of radiance hot.
	And therefore, thuswise must an object too
	Be kindled by a thunderbolt, if haply
	'Thas been adapt and suited to the flames.
	Yet force of wind must not be rashly deemed
	As altogether and entirely cold-
	That force which is discharged from on high
	With such stupendous power; but if 'tis not
	Upon its course already kindled with fire,
	It yet arriveth warmed and mixed with heat.

[card 323]
	And, now, the speed and stroke of thunderbolt
	Is so tremendous, and with glide so swift
	Those thunderbolts rush on and down, because
	Their roused force itself collects itself
	First always in the clouds, and then prepares
	For the huge effort of their going-forth;
	Next, when the cloud no longer can retain
	The increment of their fierce impetus,
	Their force is pressed out, and therefore flies
	With impetus so wondrous, like to shots
	Hurled from the powerful Roman catapults.
	Note, too, this force consists of elements
	Both small and smooth, nor is there aught that can
	With ease resist such nature. For it darts
	Between and enters through the pores of things;
	And so it never falters in delay
	Despite innumerable collisions, but
	Flies shooting onward with a swift elan.
	Next, since by nature always every weight
	Bears downward, doubled is the swiftness then
	And that elan is still more wild and dread,
	When, verily, to weight are added blows,
	So that more madly and more fiercely then
	The thunderbolt shakes into shivers all
	That blocks its path, following on its way.
	Then, too, because it comes along, along
	With one continuing elan, it must
	Take on velocity anew, anew,
	Which still increases as it goes, and ever
	Augments the bolt's vast powers and to the blow
	Gives larger vigour; for it forces all,
	All of the thunder's seeds of fire, to sweep
	In a straight line unto one place, as 'twere,-
	Casting them one by other, as they roll,
	Into that onward course. Again, perchance,
	In coming along, it pulls from out the air
	Some certain bodies, which by their own blows
	Enkindle its velocity. And, lo,
	It comes through objects leaving them unharmed,
	It goes through many things and leaves them whole,
	Because the liquid fire flieth along
	Athrough their pores. And much it does transfix,
	When these primordial atoms of the bolt
	Have fallen upon the atoms of these things
	Precisely where the intertwined atoms
	Are held together. And, further, easily
	Brass it unbinds and quickly fuseth gold,
	Because its force is so minutely made
	Of tiny parts and elements so smooth
	That easily they wind their way within,
	And, when once in, quickly unbind all knots
	And loosen all the bonds of union there.

[card 357]
	And most in autumn is shaken the house of heaven,
	The house so studded with the glittering stars,
	And the whole earth around- most too in spring
	When flowery times unfold themselves: for, lo,
	In the cold season is there lack of fire,
	And winds are scanty in the hot, and clouds
	Have not so dense a bulk. But when, indeed,
	The seasons of heaven are betwixt these twain,
	The divers causes of the thunderbolt
	Then all concur; for then both cold and heat
	Are mixed in the cross-seas of the year,
	So that a discord rises among things
	And air in vast tumultuosity
	Billows, infuriate with the fires and winds-
	Of which the both are needed by the cloud
	For fabrication of the thunderbolt.
	For the first part of heat and last of cold
	Is the time of spring; wherefore must things unlike
	Do battle one with other, and, when mixed,
	Tumultuously rage. And when rolls round
	The latest heat mixed with the earliest chill-
	The time which bears the name of autumn- then
	Likewise fierce cold-spells wrestle with fierce heats.
	On this account these seasons of the year
	Are nominated "cross-seas."- And no marvel
	If in those times the thunderbolts prevail
	And storms are roused turbulent in heaven,
	Since then both sides in dubious warfare rage
	Tumultuously, the one with flames, the other
	With winds and with waters mixed with winds.

[card 379]
	This, this it is, O Memmius, to see through
	The very nature of fire-fraught thunderbolt;
	O this it is to mark by what blind force
	It maketh each effect, and not, O not
	To unwind Etrurian scrolls oracular,
	Inquiring tokens of occult will of gods,
	Even as to whence the flying flame hath come,
	Or to which half of heaven it turns, or how
	Through walled places it hath wound its way,
	Or, after proving its dominion there,
	How it hath speeded forth from thence amain,
	Or what the thunderstroke portends of ill
	From out high heaven. But if Jupiter
	And other gods shake those refulgent vaults
	With dread reverberations and hurl fire
	Whither it pleases each, why smite they not
	Mortals of reckless and revolting crimes,
	That such may pant from a transpierced breast
	Forth flames of the red levin- unto men
	A drastic lesson?- why is rather he-
	O he self-conscious of no foul offence-
	Involved in flames, though innocent, and clasped
	Up-caught in skiey whirlwind and in fire?
	Nay, why, then, aim they at eternal wastes,
	And spend themselves in vain?- perchance, even so
	To exercise their arms and strengthen shoulders?
	Why suffer they the Father's javelin
	To be so blunted on the earth? And why
	Doth he himself allow it, nor spare the same
	Even for his enemies? O why most oft
	Aims he at lofty places? Why behold we
	Marks of his lightnings most on mountain tops?
	Then for what reason shoots he at the sea?-
	What sacrilege have waves and bulk of brine
	And floating fields of foam been guilty of?
	Besides, if 'tis his will that we beware
	Against the lightning-stroke, why feareth he
	To grant us power for to behold the shot?
	And, contrariwise, if wills he to o'erwhelm us,
	Quite off our guard, with fire, why thunders he
	Off in yon quarter, so that we may shun?
	Why rouseth he beforehand darkling air
	And the far din and rumblings? And O how
	Canst thou believe he shoots at one same time
	Into diverse directions? Or darest thou
	Contend that never hath it come to pass
	That divers strokes have happened at one time?
	But oft and often hath it come to pass,
	And often still it must, that, even as showers
	And rains o'er many regions fall, so too
	Dart many thunderbolts at one same time.
	Again, why never hurtles Jupiter
	A bolt upon the lands nor pours abroad
	Clap upon clap, when skies are cloudless all?
	Or, say, doth he, so soon as ever the clouds
	Have come thereunder, then into the same
	Descend in person, that from thence he may
	Near-by decide upon the stroke of shaft?
	And, lastly, why, with devastating bolt
	Shakes he asunder holy shrines of gods
	And his own thrones of splendour, and to-breaks
	The well-wrought idols of divinities,
	And robs of glory his own images
	By wound of violence?
