Book Six: Storms, Earthquakes, Magnets, and the Plague at Athens (Part 2 of 3) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 423]
	But to return apace,
	Easy it is from these same facts to know
	In just what wise those things (which from their sort
	The Greeks have named "bellows") do come down,
	Discharged from on high, upon the seas.
	For it haps that sometimes from the sky descends
	Upon the seas a column, as if pushed,
	Round which the surges seethe, tremendously
	Aroused by puffing gusts; and whatso'er
	Of ships are caught within that tumult then
	Come into extreme peril, dashed along.
	This haps when sometimes wind's aroused force
	Can't burst the cloud it tries to, but down-weighs
	That cloud, until 'tis like a column from sky
	Upon the seas pushed downward- gradually,
	As if a Somewhat from on high were shoved
	By fist and nether thrust of arm, and lengthened
	Far to the waves. And when the force of wind
	Hath rived this cloud, from out the cloud it rushes
	Down on the seas, and starts among the waves
	A wondrous seething, for the eddying whirl
	Descends and downward draws along with it
	That cloud of ductile body. And soon as ever
	'Thas shoved unto the levels of the main
	That laden cloud, the whirl suddenly then
	Plunges its whole self into the waters there
	And rouses all the sea with monstrous roar,
	Constraining it to seethe. It happens too
	That very vortex of the wind involves
	Itself in clouds, scraping from out the air
	The seeds of cloud, and counterfeits, as 'twere,
	The "bellows" pushed from heaven. And when this shape
	Hath dropped upon the lands and burst apart,
	It belches forth immeasurable might
	Of whirlwind and of blast. Yet since 'tis formed
	At most but rarely, and on land the hills
	Must block its way, 'tis seen more oft out there
	On the broad prospect of the level main
	Along the free horizons.

[card 443]
	Into being
	The clouds condense, when in this upper space
	Of the high heaven have gathered suddenly,
	As round they flew, unnumbered particles-
	World's rougher ones, which can, though interlinked
	With scanty couplings, yet be fastened firm,
	The one on other caught. These particles
	First cause small clouds to form; and, thereupon,
	These catch the one on other and swarm in a flock
	And grow by their conjoining, and by winds
	Are borne along, along, until collects
	The tempest fury. Happens, too, the nearer
	The mountain summits neighbour to the sky,
	The more unceasingly their far crags smoke
	With the thick darkness of swart cloud, because
	When first the mists do form, ere ever the eyes
	Can there behold them (tenuous as they be),
	The carrier-winds will drive them up and on
	Unto the topmost summits of the mountain;
	And then at last it happens, when they be
	In vaster throng upgathered, that they can
	By this very condensation lie revealed,
	And that at same time they are seen to surge
	From very vertex of the mountain up
	Into far ether. For very fact and feeling,
	As we up-climb high mountains, proveth clear
	That windy are those upward regions free.

[card 470]
	Besides, the clothes hung-out along the shore,
	When in they take the clinging moisture, prove
	That nature lifts from over all the sea
	Unnumbered particles. Whereby the more
	'Tis manifest that many particles
	Even from the salt upheavings of the main
	Can rise together to augment the bulk
	Of massed clouds. For moistures in these twain
	Are near akin. Besides, from out all rivers,
	As well as from the land itself, we see
	Up-rising mists and steam, which like a breath
	Are forced out from them and borne aloft,
	To curtain heaven with their murk, and make,
	By slow foregathering, the skiey clouds.
	For, in addition, lo, the heat on high
	Of constellated ether burdens down
	Upon them, and by sort of condensation
	Weaveth beneath the azure firmament
	The reek of darkling cloud. It happens, too,
	That hither to the skies from the Beyond
	Do come those particles which make the clouds
	And flying thunderheads. For I have taught
	That this their number is innumerable
	And infinite the sum of the Abyss,
	And I have shown with what stupendous speed
	Those bodies fly and how they're wont to pass
	Amain through incommunicable space.
	Therefore, 'tis not exceeding strange, if oft
	In little time tempest and darkness cover
	With bulking thunderheads hanging on high
	The oceans and the lands, since everywhere
	Through all the narrow tubes of yonder ether,
	Yea, so to speak, through all the breathing-holes
	Of the great upper-world encompassing,
	There be for the primordial elements
	Exits and entrances.

[card 495]
	Now come, and how
	The rainy moisture thickens into being
	In the lofty clouds, and how upon the lands
	'Tis then discharged in down-pour of large showers,
	I will unfold. And first triumphantly
	Will I persuade thee that up-rise together,
	With clouds themselves, full many seeds of water
	From out all things, and that they both increase-
	Both clouds and water which is in the clouds-
	In like proportion, as our frames increase
	In like proportion with our blood, as well
	As sweat or any moisture in our members.
	Besides, the clouds take in from time to time
	Much moisture risen from the broad marine,-
	Whilst the winds bear them o'er the mighty sea,
	Like hanging fleeces of white wool. Thuswise,
	Even from all rivers is there lifted up
	Moisture into the clouds. And when therein
	The seeds of water so many in many ways
	Have come together, augmented from all sides,
	The close-jammed clouds then struggle to discharge
	Their rain-storms for a two-fold reason: lo,
	The wind's force crowds them, and the very excess
	Of storm-clouds (massed in a vaster throng)
	Giveth an urge and pressure from above
	And makes the rains out-pour. Besides when, too,
	The clouds are winnowed by the winds, or scattered
	Smitten on top by heat of sun, they send
	Their rainy moisture, and distil their drops,
	Even as the wax, by fiery warmth on top,
	Wasteth and liquefies abundantly.
	But comes the violence of the bigger rains
	When violently the clouds are weighted down
	Both by their cumulated mass and by
	The onset of the wind. And rains are wont
	To endure awhile and to abide for long,
	When many seeds of waters are aroused,
	And clouds on clouds and racks on racks outstream
	In piled layers and are borne along
	From every quarter, and when all the earth
	Smoking exhales her moisture. At such a time
	When sun with beams amid the tempest-murk
	Hath shone against the showers of black rains,
	Then in the swart clouds there emerges bright
	The radiance of the bow.
	And as to things
	Not mentioned here which of themselves do grow
	Or of themselves are gendered, and all things
	Which in the clouds condense to being- all,
	Snow and the winds, hail and the hoar-frosts chill,
	And freezing, mighty force- of lakes and pools
	The mighty hardener, and mighty check
	Which in the winter curbeth everywhere
	The rivers as they go- 'tis easy still,
	Soon to discover and with mind to see
	How they all happen, whereby gendered,
	When once thou well hast understood just what
	Functions have been vouchsafed from of old
	Unto the procreant atoms of the world.

[card 535]
	Now come, and what the law of earthquakes is
	Hearken, and first of all take care to know
	That the under-earth, like to the earth around us,
	Is full of windy caverns all about;
	And many a pool and many a grim abyss
	She bears within her bosom, ay, and cliffs
	And jagged scarps; and many a river, hid
	Beneath her chine, rolls rapidly along
	Its billows and plunging boulders. For clear fact
	Requires that earth must be in every part
	Alike in constitution. Therefore, earth,
	With these things underneath affixed and set,
	Trembleth above, jarred by big down-tumblings,
	When time hath undermined the huge caves,
	The subterranean. Yea, whole mountains fall,
	And instantly from spot of that big jar
	There quiver the tremors far and wide abroad.
	And with good reason: since houses on the street
	Begin to quake throughout, when jarred by a cart
	Of no large weight; and, too, the furniture
	Within the house up-bounds, when a paving-block
	Gives either iron rim of the wheels a jolt.
	It happens, too, when some prodigious bulk
	Of age-worn soil is rolled from mountain slopes
	Into tremendous pools of water dark,
	That the reeling land itself is rocked about
	By the water's undulations; as a basin
	Sometimes won't come to rest until the fluid
	Within it ceases to be rocked about
	In random undulations.
	And besides,
	When subterranean winds, up-gathered there
	In the hollow deeps, bulk forward from one spot,
	And press with the big urge of mighty powers
	Against the lofty grottos, then the earth
	Bulks to that quarter whither push amain
	The headlong winds. Then all the builded houses
	Above ground- and the more, the higher up-reared
	Unto the sky- lean ominously, careening
	Into the same direction; and the beams,
	Wrenched forward, over-hang, ready to go.
	Yet dread men to believe that there awaits
	The nature of the mighty world a time
	Of doom and cataclysm, albeit they see
	So great a bulk of lands to bulge and break!
	And lest the winds blew back again, no force
	Could rein things in nor hold from sure career
	On to disaster. But now because those winds
	Blow back and forth in alternation strong,
	And, so to say, rallying charge again,
	And then repulsed retreat, on this account
	Earth oftener threatens than she brings to pass
	Collapses dire. For to one side she leans,
	Then back she sways; and after tottering
	Forward, recovers then her seats of poise.
	Thus, this is why whole houses rock, the roofs
	More than the middle stories, middle more
	Than lowest, and the lowest least of all.

[card 577]
	Arises, too, this same great earth-quaking,
	When wind and some prodigious force of air,
	Collected from without or down within
	The old telluric deeps, have hurled themselves
	Amain into those caverns sub-terrene,
	And there at first tumultuously chafe
	Among the vasty grottos, borne about
	In mad rotations, till their lashed force
	Aroused out-bursts abroad, and then and there,
	Riving the deep earth, makes a mighty chasm-
	What once in Syrian Sidon did befall,
	And once in Peloponnesian Aegium,
	Twain cities which such out-break of wild air
	And earth's convulsion, following hard upon,
	O'erthrew of old. And many a walled town,
	Besides, hath fall'n by such omnipotent
	Convulsions on the land, and in the sea
	Engulfed hath sunken many a city down
	With all its populace. But if, indeed,
	They burst not forth, yet is the very rush
	Of the wild air and fury-force of wind
	Then dissipated, like an ague-fit,
	Through the innumerable pores of earth,
	To set her all a-shake- even as a chill,
	When it hath gone into our marrow-bones,
	Sets us convulsively, despite ourselves,
	A-shivering and a-shaking. Therefore, men
	With two-fold terror bustle in alarm
	Through cities to and fro: they fear the roofs
	Above the head; and underfoot they dread
	The caverns, lest the nature of the earth
	Suddenly rend them open, and she gape,
	Herself asunder, with tremendous maw,
	And, all confounded, seek to chock it full
	With her own ruins. Let men, then, go on
	Feigning at will that heaven and earth shall be
	Inviolable, entrusted evermore
	To an eternal weal: and yet at times
	The very force of danger here at hand
	Prods them on some side with this goad of fear-
	This among others- that the earth, withdrawn
	Abruptly from under their feet, be hurried down,
	Down into the abyss, and the Sum-of-Things
	Be following after, utterly fordone,
	Till be but wrack and wreckage of a world.
	. . . . . .

[card 608]
	In chief, men marvel nature renders not
	Bigger and bigger the bulk of ocean, since
	So vast the down-rush of the waters be,
	And every river out of every realm
	Cometh thereto; and add the random rains
	And flying tempests, which spatter every sea
	And every land bedew; add their own springs:
	Yet all of these unto the ocean's sum
	Shall be but as the increase of a drop.
	Wherefore 'tis less a marvel that the sea,
	The mighty ocean, increaseth not. Besides,
	Sun with his heat draws off a mighty part:
	Yea, we behold that sun with burning beams
	To dry our garments dripping all with wet;
	And many a sea, and far out-spread beneath,
	Do we behold. Therefore, however slight
	The portion of wet that sun on any spot
	Culls from the level main, he still will take
	From off the waves in such a wide expanse
	Abundantly. Then, further, also winds,
	Sweeping the level waters, can bear off
	A mighty part of wet, since we behold
	Oft in a single night the highways dried
	By winds, and soft mud crusted o'er at dawn.
	Again, I've taught thee that the clouds bear off
	Much moisture too, up-taken from the reaches
	Of the mighty main, and sprinkle it about
	O'er all the zones, when rain is on the lands
	And winds convey the aery racks of vapour.
	Lastly, since earth is porous through her frame,
	And neighbours on the seas, girdling their shores,
	The water's wet must seep into the lands
	From briny ocean, as from lands it comes
	Into the seas. For brine is filtered off,
	And then the liquid stuff seeps back again
	And all re-poureth at the river-heads,
	Whence in fresh-water currents it returns
	Over the lands, adown the channels which
	Were cleft erstwhile and erstwhile bore along
	The liquid-footed floods.

[card 639]
	And now the cause
	Whereby athrough the throat of Aetna's Mount
	Such vast tornado-fires out-breathe at times,
	I will unfold: for with no middling might
	Of devastation the flamy tempest rose
	And held dominion in Sicilian fields:
	Drawing upon itself the upturned faces
	Of neighbouring clans, what time they saw afar
	The skiey vaults a-fume and sparkling all,
	And filled their bosoms with dread anxiety
	Of what new thing nature were travailing at.
	In these affairs it much behooveth thee
	To look both wide and deep, and far abroad
	To peer to every quarter, that thou mayst
	Remember how boundless is the Sum-of-Things,
	And mark how infinitely small a part
	Of the whole Sum is this one sky of ours-
	O not so large a part as is one man
	Of the whole earth. And plainly if thou viewest
	This cosmic fact, placing it square in front,
	And plainly understandest, thou wilt leave
	Wondering at many things. For who of us
	Wondereth if some one gets into his joints
	A fever, gathering head with fiery heat,
	Or any other dolorous disease
	Along his members? For anon the foot
	Grows blue and bulbous; often the sharp twinge
	Seizes the teeth, attacks the very eyes;
	Out-breaks the sacred fire, and, crawling on
	Over the body, burneth every part
	It seizeth on, and works its hideous way
	Along the frame. No marvel this, since, lo,
	Of things innumerable be seeds enough,
	And this our earth and sky do bring to us
	Enough of bane from whence can grow the strength
	Of maladies uncounted. Thuswise, then,
	We must suppose to all the sky and earth
	Are ever supplied from out the infinite
	All things, O all in stores enough whereby
	The shaken earth can of a sudden move,
	And fierce typhoons can over sea and lands
	Go tearing on, and Aetna's fires o'erflow,
	And heaven become a flame-burst. For that, too,
	Happens at times, and the celestial vaults
	Glow into fire, and rainy tempests rise
	In heavier congregation, when, percase,
	The seeds of water have foregathered thus
	From out the infinite. "Aye, but passing huge
	The fiery turmoil of that conflagration!"
	So sayst thou; well, huge many a river seems
	To him that erstwhile ne'er a larger saw;
	Thus, huge seems tree or man; and everything
	Which mortal sees the biggest of each class,
	That he imagines to be "huge"; though yet
	All these, with sky and land and sea to boot,
	Are all as nothing to the sum entire
	Of the all-Sum.

[card 680]
	But now I will unfold
	At last how yonder suddenly angered flame
	Out-blows abroad from vasty furnaces
	Aetnaean. First, the mountain's nature is
	All under-hollow, propped about, about
	With caverns of basaltic piers. And, lo,
	In all its grottos be there wind and air-
	For wind is made when air hath been uproused
	By violent agitation. When this air
	Is heated through and through, and, raging round,
	Hath made the earth and all the rocks it touches
	Horribly hot, and hath struck off from them
	Fierce fire of swiftest flame, it lifts itself
	And hurtles thus straight upwards through its throat
	Into high heav'n, and thus bears on afar
	Its burning blasts and scattereth afar
	Its ashes, and rolls a smoke of pitchy murk
	And heaveth the while boulders of wondrous weight-
	Leaving no doubt in thee that 'tis the air's
	Tumultuous power. Besides, in mighty part,
	The sea there at the roots of that same mount
	Breaks its old billows and sucks back its surf.
	And grottos from the sea pass in below
	Even to the bottom of the mountain's throat.
	Herethrough thou must admit there go...
	. . . . . .
	And the conditions force [the water and air]
	Deeply to penetrate from the open sea,
	And to out-blow abroad, and to up-bear
	Thereby the flame, and to up-cast from deeps
	The boulders, and to rear the clouds of sand.
	For at the top be "bowls," as people there
	Are wont to name what we at Rome do call
	The throats and mouths.

[card 703]
	There be, besides, some thing
	Of which 'tis not enough one only cause
	To state- but rather several, whereof one
	Will be the true: lo, if thou shouldst espy
	Lying afar some fellow's lifeless corse,
	'Twere meet to name all causes of a death,
	That cause of his death might thereby be named:
	For prove thou mayst he perished not by steel,
	By cold, nor even by poison nor disease,
	Yet somewhat of this sort hath come to him
	We know- And thus we have to say the same
	In divers cases.
	Toward the summer, Nile
	Waxeth and overfloweth the champaign,
	Unique in all the landscape, river sole
	Of the Aegyptians. In mid-season heats
	Often and oft he waters Aegypt o'er,
	Either because in summer against his mouths
	Come those northwinds which at that time of year
	Men name the Etesian blasts, and, blowing thus
	Upstream, retard, and, forcing back his waves,
	Fill him o'erfull and force his flow to stop.
	For out of doubt these blasts which driven be
	From icy constellations of the pole
	Are borne straight up the river. Comes that river
	From forth the sultry places down the south,
	Rising far up in midmost realm of day,
	Among black generations of strong men
	With sun-baked skins. 'Tis possible, besides,
	That a big bulk of piled sand may bar
	His mouths against his onward waves, when sea,
	Wild in the winds, tumbles the sand to inland;
	Whereby the river's outlet were less free,
	Likewise less headlong his descending floods.
	It may be, too, that in this season rains
	Are more abundant at its fountain head,
	Because the Etesian blasts of those northwinds
	Then urge all clouds into those inland parts.
	And, soothly, when they're thus foregathered there,
	Urged yonder into midmost realm of day,
	Then, crowded against the lofty mountain sides,
	They're massed and powerfully pressed. Again,
	Perchance, his waters wax, O far away,
	Among the Aethiopians' lofty mountains,
	When the all-beholding sun with thawing beams
	Drives the white snows to flow into the vales.

[card 738]
	Now come; and unto thee I will unfold,
	As to the Birdless spots and Birdless tarns,
	What sort of nature they are furnished with.
	First, as to name of "birdless,"- that derives
	From very fact, because they noxious be
	Unto all birds. For when above those spots
	In horizontal flight the birds have come,
	Forgetting to oar with wings, they furl their sails,
	And, with down-drooping of their delicate necks,
	Fall headlong into earth, if haply such
	The nature of the spots, or into water,
	If haply spreads thereunder Birdless tarn.
	Such spot's at Cumae, where the mountains smoke,
	Charged with the pungent sulphur, and increased
	With steaming springs. And such a spot there is
	Within the walls of Athens, even there
	On summit of Acropolis, beside
	Fane of Tritonian Pallas bountiful,
	Where never cawing crows can wing their course,
	Not even when smoke the altars with good gifts,-
	But evermore they flee- yet not from wrath
	Of Pallas, grieved at that espial old,
	As poets of the Greeks have sung the tale;
	But very nature of the place compels.
	In Syria also- as men say- a spot
	Is to be seen, where also four-foot kinds,
	As soon as ever they've set their steps within,
	Collapse, o'ercome by its essential power,
	As if there slaughtered to the under-gods.
	Lo, all these wonders work by natural law,
	And from what causes they are brought to pass
	The origin is manifest; so, haply,
	Let none believe that in these regions stands
	The gate of Orcus, nor us then suppose,
	Haply, that thence the under-gods draw down
	Souls to dark shores of Acheron- as stags,
	The wing-footed, are thought to draw to light,
	By sniffing nostrils, from their dusky lairs
	The wriggling generations of wild snakes.
	How far removed from true reason is this,
	Perceive thou straight; for now I'll try to say
	Somewhat about the very fact.

[card 769]
	And, first,
	This do I say, as oft I've said before:
	In earth are atoms of things of every sort;
	And know, these all thus rise from out the earth-
	Many life-giving which be good for food,
	And many which can generate disease
	And hasten death, O many primal seeds
	Of many things in many modes- since earth
	Contains them mingled and gives forth discrete.
	And we have shown before that certain things
	Be unto certain creatures suited more
	For ends of life, by virtue of a nature,
	A texture, and primordial shapes, unlike
	For kinds alike. Then too 'tis thine to see
	How many things oppressive be and foul
	To man, and to sensation most malign:
	Many meander miserably through ears;
	Many in-wind athrough the nostrils too,
	Malign and harsh when mortal draws a breath;
	Of not a few must one avoid the touch;
	Of not a few must one escape the sight;
	And some there be all loathsome to the taste;
	And many, besides, relax the languid limbs
	Along the frame, and undermine the soul
	In its abodes within. To certain trees
	There hath been given so dolorous a shade
	That often they gender achings of the head,
	If one but be beneath, outstretched on the sward.
	There is, again, on Helicon's high hills
	A tree that's wont to kill a man outright
	By fetid odour of its very flower.
	And when the pungent stench of the night-lamp,
	Extinguished but a moment since, assails
	The nostrils, then and there it puts to sleep
	A man afflicted with the falling sickness
	And foamings at the mouth. A woman, too,
	At the heavy castor drowses back in chair,
	And from her delicate fingers slips away
	Her gaudy handiwork, if haply she
	Hath got the whiff at menstruation-time.
	Once more, if thou delayest in hot baths,
	When thou art over-full, how readily
	From stool in middle of the steaming water
	Thou tumblest in a fit! How readily
	The heavy fumes of charcoal wind their way
	Into the brain, unless beforehand we
	Of water 've drunk. But when a burning fever,
	O'ermastering man, hath seized upon his limbs,
	Then odour of wine is like a hammer-blow.
	And seest thou not how in the very earth
	Sulphur is gendered and bitumen thickens
	With noisome stench?- What direful stenches, too,
	Scaptensula out-breathes from down below,
	When men pursue the veins of silver and gold,
	With pick-axe probing round the hidden realms
	Deep in the earth?- Or what of deadly bane
	The mines of gold exhale? O what a look,
	And what a ghastly hue they give to men!
	And seest thou not, or hearest, how they're wont
	In little time to perish, and how fail
	The life-stores in those folk whom mighty power
	Of grim necessity confineth there
	In such a task? Thus, this telluric earth
	Out-streams with all these dread effluvia
	And breathes them out into the open world
	And into the visible regions under heaven.

[card 818]
	Thus, too, those Birdless places must up-send
	An essence bearing death to winged things,
	Which from the earth rises into the breezes
	To poison part of skiey space, and when
	Thither the winged is on pennons borne,
	There, seized by the unseen poison, 'tis ensnared,
	And from the horizontal of its flight
	Drops to the spot whence sprang the effluvium.
	And when 'thas there collapsed, then the same power
	Of that effluvium takes from all its limbs
	The relics of its life. That power first strikes
	The creatures with a wildering dizziness,
	And then thereafter, when they're once down-fallen
	Into the poison's very fountains, then
	Life, too, they vomit out perforce, because
	So thick the stores of bane around them fume.
	Again, at times it happens that this power,
	This exhalation of the Birdless places,
	Dispels the air betwixt the ground and birds,
	Leaving well-nigh a void. And thither when
	In horizontal flight the birds have come,
	Forthwith their buoyancy of pennons limps,
	All useless, and each effort of both wings
	Falls out in vain. Here, when without all power
	To buoy themselves and on their wings to lean,
	Lo, nature constrains them by their weight to slip
	Down to the earth, and lying prostrate there
	Along the well-nigh empty void, they spend
	Their souls through all the openings of their frame.
	. . . . . .
