Book Six: Storms, Earthquakes, Magnets, and the Plague at Athens (Part 3 of 3) -- Leonard's verse, crib only

[card 840]
	Further, the water of wells is colder then
	At summer time, because the earth by heat
	Is rarefied, and sends abroad in air
	Whatever seeds it peradventure have
	Of its own fiery exhalations.
	The more, then, the telluric ground is drained
	Of heat, the colder grows the water hid
	Within the earth. Further, when all the earth
	Is by the cold compressed, and thus contracts
	And, so to say, concretes, it happens, lo,
	That by contracting it expresses then
	Into the wells what heat it bears itself.
	'Tis said at Hammon's fane a fountain is,
	In daylight cold and hot in time of night.
	This fountain men be-wonder over-much,
	And think that suddenly it seethes in heat
	By intense sun, the subterranean, when
	Night with her terrible murk hath cloaked the lands-
	What's not true reasoning by a long remove:
	I' faith when sun o'erhead, touching with beams
	An open body of water, had no power
	To render it hot upon its upper side,
	Though his high light possess such burning glare,
	How, then, can he, when under the gross earth,
	Make water boil and glut with fiery heat?-
	And, specially, since scarcely potent he
	Through hedging walls of houses to inject
	His exhalations hot, with ardent rays.
	What, then's, the principle? Why, this, indeed:
	The earth about that spring is porous more
	Than elsewhere the telluric ground, and be
	Many the seeds of fire hard by the water;
	On this account, when night with dew-fraught shades
	Hath whelmed the earth, anon the earth deep down
	Grows chill, contracts; and thuswise squeezes out
	Into the spring what seeds she holds of fire
	(As one might squeeze with fist), which render hot
	The touch and steam of the fluid. Next, when sun,
	Up-risen, with his rays has split the soil
	And rarefied the earth with waxing heat,
	Again into their ancient abodes return
	The seeds of fire, and all the Hot of water
	Into the earth retires; and this is why
	The fountain in the daylight gets so cold.
	Besides, the water's wet is beat upon
	By rays of sun, and, with the dawn, becomes
	Rarer in texture under his pulsing blaze;
	And, therefore, whatso seeds it holds of fire
	It renders up, even as it renders oft
	The frost that it contains within itself
	And thaws its ice and looseneth the knots.

[card 879]
	There is, moreover, a fountain cold in kind
	That makes a bit of tow (above it held)
	Take fire forthwith and shoot a flame; so, too,
	A pitch-pine torch will kindle and flare round
	Along its waves, wherever 'tis impelled
	Afloat before the breeze. No marvel, this:
	Because full many seeds of heat there be
	Within the water; and, from earth itself
	Out of the deeps must particles of fire
	Athrough the entire fountain surge aloft,
	And speed in exhalations into air
	Forth and abroad (yet not in numbers enow
	As to make hot the fountain). And, moreo'er,
	Some force constrains them, scattered through the water,
	Forthwith to burst abroad, and to combine
	In flame above. Even as a fountain far
	There is at Aradus amid the sea,
	Which bubbles out sweet water and disparts
	From round itself the salt waves; and, behold,
	In many another region the broad main
	Yields to the thirsty mariners timely help,
	Belching sweet waters forth amid salt waves.
	Just so, then, can those seeds of fire burst forth
	Athrough that other fount, and bubble out
	Abroad against the bit of tow; and when
	They there collect or cleave unto the torch,
	Forthwith they readily flash aflame, because
	The tow and torches, also, in themselves
	Have many seeds of latent fire. Indeed,
	And seest thou not, when near the nightly lamps
	Thou bringest a flaxen wick, extinguished
	A moment since, it catches fire before
	'Thas touched the flame, and in same wise a torch?
	And many another object flashes aflame
	When at a distance, touched by heat alone,
	Before 'tis steeped in veritable fire.
	This, then, we must suppose to come to pass
	In that spring also.

[card 906]
	Now to other things!
	And I'll begin to treat by what decree
	Of nature it came to pass that iron can be
	By that stone drawn which Greeks the magnet call
	After the country's name (its origin
	Being in country of Magnesian folk).
	This stone men marvel at; and sure it oft
	Maketh a chain of rings, depending, lo,
	From off itself! Nay, thou mayest see at times
	Five or yet more in order dangling down
	And swaying in the delicate winds, whilst one
	Depends from other, cleaving to under-side,
	And ilk one feels the stone's own power and bonds-
	So over-masteringly its power flows down.
	In things of this sort, much must be made sure
	Ere thou account of the thing itself canst give,
	And the approaches roundabout must be;
	Wherefore the more do I exact of thee
	A mind and ears attent.
	First, from all things
	We see soever, evermore must flow,
	Must be discharged and strewn about, about,
	Bodies that strike the eyes, awaking sight.
	From certain things flow odours evermore,
	As cold from rivers, heat from sun, and spray
	From waves of ocean, eater-out of walls
	Along the coasts. Nor ever cease to seep
	The varied echoings athrough the air.
	Then, too, there comes into the mouth at times
	The wet of a salt taste, when by the sea
	We roam about; and so, whene'er we watch
	The wormwood being mixed, its bitter stings.
	To such degree from all things is each thing
	Borne streamingly along, and sent about
	To every region round; and nature grants
	Nor rest nor respite of the onward flow,
	Since 'tis incessantly we feeling have,
	And all the time are suffered to descry
	And smell all things at hand, and hear them sound.

[card 936]
	Now will I seek again to bring to mind
	How porous a body all things have- a fact
	Made manifest in my first canto, too.
	For, truly, though to know this doth import
	For many things, yet for this very thing
	On which straightway I'm going to discourse,
	'Tis needful most of all to make it sure
	That naught's at hand but body mixed with void.
	A first ensample: in grottos, rocks o'erhead
	Sweat moisture and distil the oozy drops;
	Likewise, from all our body seeps the sweat;
	There grows the beard, and along our members all
	And along our frame the hairs. Through all our veins
	Disseminates the foods, and gives increase
	And aliment down to the extreme parts,
	Even to the tiniest finger-nails. Likewise,
	Through solid bronze the cold and fiery heat
	We feel to pass; likewise, we feel them pass
	Through gold, through silver, when we clasp in hand
	The brimming goblets. And, again, there flit
	Voices through houses' hedging walls of stone;
	Odour seeps through, and cold, and heat of fire
	That's wont to penetrate even strength of iron.
	Again, where corselet of the sky girds round
	. . . . . .
	And at same time, some Influence of bane,
	When from Beyond 'thas stolen into [our world].
	And tempests, gathering from the earth and sky,
	Back to the sky and earth absorbed retire-
	With reason, since there's naught that's fashioned not
	With body porous.

[card 959]
	Furthermore, not all
	The particles which be from things thrown off
	Are furnished with same qualities for sense,
	Nor be for all things equally adapt.
	A first ensample: the sun doth bake and parch
	The earth; but ice he thaws, and with his beams
	Compels the lofty snows, up-reared white
	Upon the lofty hills, to waste away;
	Then, wax, if set beneath the heat of him,
	Melts to a liquid. And the fire, likewise,
	Will melt the copper and will fuse the gold,
	But hides and flesh it shrivels up and shrinks.
	The water hardens the iron just off the fire,
	But hides and flesh (made hard by heat) it softens.
	The oleaster-tree as much delights
	The bearded she-goats, verily as though
	'Twere nectar-steeped and shed ambrosia;
	Than which is naught that burgeons into leaf
	More bitter food for man. A hog draws back
	For marjoram oil, and every unguent fears
	Fierce poison these unto the bristled hogs,
	Yet unto us from time to time they seem,
	As 'twere, to give new life. But, contrariwise,
	Though unto us the mire be filth most foul,
	To hogs that mire doth so delightsome seem
	That they with wallowing from belly to back
	Are never cloyed.

[card 979]
	A point remains, besides,
	Which best it seems to tell of, ere I go
	To telling of the fact at hand itself.
	Since to the varied things assigned be
	The many pores, those pores must be diverse
	In nature one from other, and each have
	Its very shape, its own direction fixed.
	And so, indeed, in breathing creatures be
	The several senses, of which each takes in
	Unto itself, in its own fashion ever,
	Its own peculiar object. For we mark
	How sounds do into one place penetrate,
	Into another flavours of all juice,
	And savour of smell into a third. Moreover,
	One sort through rocks we see to seep, and, lo,
	One sort to pass through wood, another still
	Through gold, and others to go out and off
	Through silver and through glass. For we do see
	Through some pores form-and-look of things to flow,
	Through others heat to go, and some things still
	To speedier pass than others through same pores.
	Of verity, the nature of these same paths,
	Varying in many modes (as aforesaid)
	Because of unlike nature and warp and woof
	Of cosmic things, constrains it so to be.
	Wherefore, since all these matters now have been
	Established and settled well for us
	As premises prepared, for what remains
	'Twill not be hard to render clear account
	By means of these, and the whole cause reveal
	Whereby the magnet lures the strength of iron.

[card 1002]
	First, stream there must from off the lode-stone seeds
	Innumerable, a very tide, which smites
	By blows that air asunder lying betwixt
	The stone and iron. And when is emptied out
	This space, and a large place between the two
	Is made a void, forthwith the primal germs
	Of iron, headlong slipping, fall conjoined
	Into the vacuum, and the ring itself
	By reason thereof doth follow after and go
	Thuswise with all its body. And naught there is
	That of its own primordial elements
	More thoroughly knit or tighter linked coheres
	Than nature and cold roughness of stout iron.
	Wherefore, 'tis less a marvel what I said,
	That from such elements no bodies can
	From out the iron collect in larger throng
	And be into the vacuum borne along,
	Without the ring itself do follow after.
	And this it does, and followeth on until
	'Thath reached the stone itself and cleaved to it
	By links invisible. Moreover, likewise,
	The motion's assisted by a thing of aid
	(Whereby the process easier becomes),-
	Namely, by this: as soon as rarer grows
	That air in front of the ring, and space between
	Is emptied more and made a void, forthwith
	It happens all the air that lies behind
	Conveys it onward, pushing from the rear.
	For ever doth the circumambient air
	Drub things unmoved, but here it pushes forth
	The iron, because upon one side the space
	Lies void and thus receives the iron in.
	This air, whereof I am reminding thee,
	Winding athrough the iron's abundant pores
	So subtly into the tiny parts thereof,
	Shoves it and pushes, as wind the ship and sails.
	The same doth happen in all directions forth:
	From whatso side a space is made a void,
	Whether from crosswise or above, forthwith
	The neighbour particles are borne along
	Into the vacuum; for of verity,
	They're set a-going by poundings from elsewhere,
	Nor by themselves of own accord can they
	Rise upwards into the air. Again, all things
	Must in their framework hold some air, because
	They are of framework porous, and the air
	Encompasses and borders on all things.
	Thus, then, this air in iron so deeply stored
	Is tossed evermore in vexed motion,
	And therefore drubs upon the ring sans doubt
	And shakes it up inside....
	. . . . . .
	In sooth, that ring is thither borne along
	To where 'thas once plunged headlong- thither, lo,
	Unto the void whereto it took its start.

[card 1042]
	It happens, too, at times that nature of iron
	Shrinks from this stone away, accustomed
	By turns to flee and follow. Yea, I've seen
	Those Samothracian iron rings leap up,
	And iron filings in the brazen bowls
	Seethe furiously, when underneath was set
	The magnet stone. So strongly iron seems
	To crave to flee that rock. Such discord great
	Is gendered by the interposed brass,
	Because, forsooth, when first the tide of brass
	Hath seized upon and held possession of
	The iron's open passage-ways, thereafter
	Cometh the tide of the stone, and in that iron
	Findeth all spaces full, nor now hath holes
	To swim through, as before. 'Tis thus constrained
	With its own current 'gainst the iron's fabric
	To dash and beat; by means whereof it spues
	Forth from itself- and through the brass stirs up-
	The things which otherwise without the brass
	It sucks into itself. In these affairs
	Marvel thou not that from this stone the tide
	Prevails not likewise other things to move
	With its own blows: for some stand firm by weight,
	As gold; and some cannot be moved forever,
	Because so porous in their framework they
	That there the tide streams through without a break,
	Of which sort stuff of wood is seen to be.
	Therefore, when iron (which lies between the two)
	Hath taken in some atoms of the brass,
	Then do the streams of that Magnesian rock
	Move iron by their smitings.

[card 1065]
	Yet these things
	Are not so alien from others, that I
	Of this same sort am ill prepared to name
	Ensamples still of things exclusively
	To one another adapt. Thou seest, first,
	How lime alone cementeth stones: how wood
	Only by glue-of-bull with wood is joined-
	So firmly too that oftener the boards
	Crack open along the weakness of the grain
	Ere ever those taurine bonds will lax their hold.
	The vine-born juices with the water-springs
	Are bold to mix, though not the heavy pitch
	With the light oil-of-olive. And purple dye
	Of shell-fish so uniteth with the wool's
	Body alone that it cannot be ta'en
	Away forever- nay, though thou gavest toil
	To restore the same with the Neptunian flood,
	Nay, though all ocean willed to wash it out
	With all its waves. Again, gold unto gold
	Doth not one substance bind, and only one?
	And is not brass by tin joined unto brass?
	And other ensamples how many might one find!
	What then? Nor is there unto thee a need
	Of such long ways and roundabout, nor boots it
	For me much toil on this to spend. More fit
	It is in few words briefly to embrace
	Things many: things whose textures fall together
	So mutually adapt, that cavities
	To solids correspond, these cavities
	Of this thing to the solid parts of that,
	And those of that to solid parts of this-
	Such joinings are the best. Again, some things
	Can be the one with other coupled and held,
	Linked by hooks and eyes, as 'twere; and this
	Seems more the fact with iron and this stone.

[card 1090]
	Now, of diseases what the law, and whence
	The Influence of bane upgathering can
	Upon the race of man and herds of cattle
	Kindle a devastation fraught with death,
	I will unfold. And, first, I've taught above
	That seeds there be of many things to us
	Life-giving, and that, contrariwise, there must
	Fly many round bringing disease and death.
	When these have, haply, chanced to collect
	And to derange the atmosphere of earth,
	The air becometh baneful. And, lo, all
	That Influence of bane, that pestilence,
	Or from Beyond down through our atmosphere,
	Like clouds and mists, descends, or else collects
	From earth herself and rises, when, a-soak
	And beat by rains unseasonable and suns,
	Our earth hath then contracted stench and rot.
	Seest thou not, also, that whoso arrive
	In region far from fatherland and home
	Are by the strangeness of the clime and waters
	Distempered?- since conditions vary much.
	For in what else may we suppose the clime
	Among the Britons to differ from Aegypt's own
	(Where totters awry the axis of the world),
	Or in what else to differ Pontic clime
	From Gades' and from climes adown the south,
	On to black generations of strong men
	With sun-baked skins? Even as we thus do see
	Four climes diverse under the four main-winds
	And under the four main-regions of the sky,
	So, too, are seen the colour and face of men
	Vastly to disagree, and fixed diseases
	To seize the generations, kind by kind:
	There is the elephant-disease which down
	In midmost Aegypt, hard by streams of Nile,
	Engendered is- and never otherwhere.
	In Attica the feet are oft attacked,
	And in Achaean lands the eyes. And so
	The divers spots to divers parts and limbs
	Are noxious; 'tis a variable air
	That causes this. Thus when an atmosphere,
	Alien by chance to us, begins to heave,
	And noxious airs begin to crawl along,
	They creep and wind like unto mist and cloud,
	Slowly, and everything upon their way
	They disarrange and force to change its state.
	It happens, too, that when they've come at last
	Into this atmosphere of ours, they taint
	And make it like themselves and alien.
	Therefore, asudden this devastation strange,
	This pestilence, upon the waters falls,
	Or settles on the very crops of grain
	Or other meat of men and feed of flocks.
	Or it remains a subtle force, suspense
	In the atmosphere itself; and when therefrom
	We draw our inhalations of mixed air,
	Into our body equally its bane
	Also we must suck in. In manner like,
	Oft comes the pestilence upon the kine,
	And sickness, too, upon the sluggish sheep.
	Nor aught it matters whether journey we
	To regions adverse to ourselves and change
	The atmospheric cloak, or whether nature
	Herself import a tainted atmosphere
	To us or something strange to our own use
	Which can attack us soon as ever it come.

[card 1138]
	'Twas such a manner of disease, 'twas such
	Mortal miasma in Cecropian lands
	Whilom reduced the plains to dead men's bones,
	Unpeopled the highways, drained of citizens
	The Athenian town. For coming from afar,
	Rising in lands of Aegypt, traversing
	Reaches of air and floating fields of foam,
	At last on all Pandion's folk it swooped;
	Whereat by troops unto disease and death
	Were they o'er-given. At first, they'd bear about
	A skull on fire with heat, and eyeballs twain
	Red with suffusion of blank glare. Their throats,
	Black on the inside, sweated oozy blood;
	And the walled pathway of the voice of man
	Was clogged with ulcers; and the very tongue,
	The mind's interpreter, would trickle gore,
	Weakened by torments, tardy, rough to touch.
	Next when that Influence of bane had chocked,
	Down through the throat, the breast, and streamed had
	E'en into sullen heart of those sick folk,
	Then, verily, all the fences of man's life
	Began to topple. From the mouth the breath
	Would roll a noisome stink, as stink to heaven
	Rotting cadavers flung unburied out.
	And, lo, thereafter, all the body's strength
	And every power of mind would languish, now
	In very doorway of destruction.
	And anxious anguish and ululation (mixed
	With many a groan) companioned alway
	The intolerable torments. Night and day,
	Recurrent spasms of vomiting would rack
	Alway their thews and members, breaking down
	With sheer exhaustion men already spent.
	And yet on no one's body couldst thou mark
	The skin with o'er-much heat to burn aglow,
	But rather the body unto touch of hands
	Would offer a warmish feeling, and thereby
	Show red all over, with ulcers, so to say,
	Inbranded, like the "sacred fires" o'erspread
	Along the members. The inward parts of men,
	In truth, would blaze unto the very bones;
	A flame, like flame in furnaces, would blaze
	Within the stomach. Nor couldst aught apply
	Unto their members light enough and thin
	For shift of aid- but coolness and a breeze
	Ever and ever. Some would plunge those limbs
	On fire with bane into the icy streams,
	Hurling the body naked into the waves;

[card 1174]
	Many would headlong fling them deeply down
	The water-pits, tumbling with eager mouth
	Already agape. The insatiable thirst
	That whelmed their parched bodies, lo, would make
	A goodly shower seem like to scanty drops.
	Respite of torment was there none. Their frames
	Forspent lay prone. With silent lips of fear
	Would Medicine mumble low, the while she saw
	So many a time men roll their eyeballs round,
	Staring wide-open, unvisited of sleep,
	The heralds of old death. And in those months
	Was given many another sign of death:
	The intellect of mind by sorrow and dread
	Deranged, the sad brow, the countenance
	Fierce and delirious, the tormented ears
	Beset with ringings, the breath quick and short
	Or huge and intermittent, soaking sweat
	A-glisten on neck, the spittle in fine gouts
	Tainted with colour of crocus and so salt,
	The cough scarce wheezing through the rattling throat.
	Aye, and the sinews in the fingered hands
	Were sure to contract, and sure the jointed frame
	To shiver, and up from feet the cold to mount
	Inch after inch: and toward the supreme hour
	At last the pinched nostrils, nose's tip
	A very point, eyes sunken, temples hollow,
	Skin cold and hard, the shuddering grimace,
	The pulled and puffy flesh above the brows!-
	O not long after would their frames lie prone
	In rigid death. And by about the eighth
	Resplendent light of sun, or at the most
	On the ninth flaming of his flambeau, they
	Would render up the life. If any then
	Had 'scaped the doom of that destruction, yet
	Him there awaited in the after days
	A wasting and a death from ulcers vile
	And black discharges of the belly, or else
	Through the clogged nostrils would there ooze along
	Much fouled blood, oft with an aching head:
	Hither would stream a man's whole strength and flesh.

[card 1205]
	And whoso had survived that virulent flow
	Of the vile blood, yet into thews of him
	And into his joints and very genitals
	Would pass the old disease. And some there were,
	Dreading the doorways of destruction
	So much, lived on, deprived by the knife
	Of the male member; not a few, though lopped
	Of hands and feet, would yet persist in life,
	And some there were who lost their eyeballs: O
	So fierce a fear of death had fallen on them!
	And some, besides, were by oblivion
	Of all things seized, that even themselves they knew
	No longer. And though corpse on corpse lay piled
	Unburied on ground, the race of birds and beasts
	Would or spring back, scurrying to escape
	The virulent stench, or, if they'd tasted there,
	Would languish in approaching death. But yet
	Hardly at all during those many suns
	Appeared a fowl, nor from the woods went forth
	The sullen generations of wild beasts-
	They languished with disease and died and died.
	In chief, the faithful dogs, in all the streets
	Outstretched, would yield their breath distressfully
	For so that Influence of bane would twist
	Life from their members. Nor was found one sure
	And universal principle of cure:
	For what to one had given the power to take
	The vital winds of air into his mouth,
	And to gaze upward at the vaults of sky,
	The same to others was their death and doom.

[card 1230]
	In those affairs, O awfullest of all,
	O pitiable most was this, was this:
	Whoso once saw himself in that disease
	Entangled, ay, as damned unto death,
	Would lie in wanhope, with a sullen heart,
	Would, in fore-vision of his funeral,
	Give up the ghost, O then and there. For, lo,
	At no time did they cease one from another
	To catch contagion of the greedy plague,-
	As though but woolly flocks and horned herds;
	And this in chief would heap the dead on dead:
	For who forbore to look to their own sick,
	O these (too eager of life, of death afeard)
	Would then, soon after, slaughtering Neglect
	Visit with vengeance of evil death and base-
	Themselves deserted and forlorn of help.
	But who had stayed at hand would perish there
	By that contagion and the toil which then
	A sense of honour and the pleading voice
	Of weary watchers, mixed with voice of wail
	Of dying folk, forced them to undergo.
	This kind of death each nobler soul would meet.
	The funerals, uncompanioned, forsaken,
	Like rivals contended to be hurried through.
	. . . . . .
	And men contending to ensepulchre
	Pile upon pile the throng of their own dead:
	And weary with woe and weeping wandered home;
	And then the most would take to bed from grief.
	Nor could be found not one, whom nor disease
	Nor death, nor woe had not in those dread times
	Attacked.

[card 1247]
	By now the shepherds and neatherds all,
	Yea, even the sturdy guiders of curved ploughs,
	Began to sicken, and their bodies would lie
	Huddled within back-corners of their huts,
	Delivered by squalor and disease to death.
	O often and often couldst thou then have seen
	On lifeless children lifeless parents prone,
	Or offspring on their fathers', mothers' corpse
	Yielding the life. And into the city poured
	O not in least part from the countryside
	That tribulation, which the peasantry
	Sick, sick, brought thither, thronging from every quarter,
	Plague-stricken mob. All places would they crowd,
	All buildings too; whereby the more would death
	Up-pile a-heap the folk so crammed in town.
	Ah, many a body thirst had dragged and rolled
	Along the highways there was lying strewn
	Besides Silenus-headed water-fountains,-
	The life-breath choked from that too dear desire
	Of pleasant waters. Ah, everywhere along
	The open places of the populace,
	And along the highways, O thou mightest see
	Of many a half-dead body the sagged limbs,
	Rough with squalor, wrapped around with rags,
	Perish from very nastiness, with naught
	But skin upon the bones, well-nigh already
	Buried- in ulcers vile and obscene filth.
	All holy temples, too, of deities
	Had Death becrammed with the carcasses;
	And stood each fane of the Celestial Ones
	Laden with stark cadavers everywhere-
	Places which warders of the shrines had crowded
	With many a guest. For now no longer men
	Did mightily esteem the old Divine,
	The worship of the gods: the woe at hand
	Did over-master. Nor in the city then
	Remained those rites of sepulture, with which
	That pious folk had evermore been wont
	To buried be. For it was wildered all
	In wild alarms, and each and every one
	With sullen sorrow would bury his own dead,
	As present shift allowed. And sudden stress
	And poverty to many an awful act
	Impelled; and with a monstrous screaming they
	Would, on the frames of alien funeral pyres,
	Place their own kin, and thrust the torch beneath
	Oft brawling with much bloodshed round about
	Rather than quit dead bodies loved in life.
