Book IV

(Part 5 of 6)

Chapter 6

Now let me try to explain how Socrates developed this skill in dialectic among his companions. He was firmly convinced that a man who knows what each thing really is can explain that knowledge to others — and that a man who lacks it will, unsurprisingly, stumble himself and trip up everyone else along with him. That is why he never stopped examining, together with his companions, what each thing that exists truly is. It would be a long business to go through all the definitions he arrived at, so I will give just enough examples to show his method. Take, first, his investigation of piety. The inquiry ran, fairly represented, something like this.

"Tell me, Euthydemus," he said, "what sort of thing do you take piety to be?"

"Something supremely fine and excellent, surely," Euthydemus answered.

"And can you tell me what sort of person the pious man is?"

"I would say he is a man who honors the gods."

"And may a man honor the gods in any style he happens to like?"

"No — there are laws that govern how it must be done."

"Then whoever knows those laws will know how he must honor the gods?"

"I think so."

"And a man who knows how he must honor the gods — does he think he ought to do it any way other than the way he knows? Isn't that so?"

"That is so."

"And does anyone honor the gods otherwise than he thinks he ought?"

"I think not."

"So it comes to this: the man who knows what the law requires concerning the gods will honor the gods lawfully?"

"Certainly."

"And the man who honors them lawfully honors them as he ought?"

"I see no alternative."

"And the man who honors them as he ought is a pious man?"

"Certainly."

"Then we shall have a correct definition if we define the pious man as the man who knows what the law requires concerning the gods?"

"So it seems to me, at any rate."

"Now, about human beings: may a man deal with other people in any way he pleases?"

"No. There too, the law-abiding man is the one who knows what is lawful in our dealings with one another — the rules by which those dealings must be conducted."

"Then people who conduct their dealings with one another according to those rules deal with each other as they ought?"

"Obviously."

"And people who deal with each other as they ought deal well and nobly?"

"Certainly."

"And people who deal well and nobly with mankind handle human affairs well?"

"That would seem to follow."

"And I take it that those who obey the laws do what is just?"

"Without a doubt."

"And do you know what sort of things are called just?"

"What the laws command."

"So those who do what the laws command do what is just, and do what they ought?"

"I see no alternative."

"Now, could anyone obey the laws without knowing what the laws command?"

"No."

"And do you suppose anyone who knows what he ought to do believes he ought not to do it?"

"No, I suppose not."

"And do you know of anyone who does other than what he believes he ought to do?"

"I do not."

"Then the man who knows what is lawful concerning human beings does what is just?"

"Without a doubt."

"And the man who does what is just is a just man?"

"Who else could be, if not he?"

"So we shall have reached a correct definition if we define the just as those who know what is lawful concerning human beings?"

"That is my opinion."

"And what shall we say wisdom is? Tell me — do you think the wise are wise in what they know, or are some people wise in what they do not know?"

"In what they know, obviously. How could a man be wise in something he doesn't know?"

"So the wise are wise by knowledge?"

"By what else could a man be wise, if not by knowledge?"

"And do you think wisdom is anything other than that by which a man is wise?"

"No — that and nothing else."

"Then it follows that knowledge and wisdom are the same thing?"

"So it seems to me."

"Now, do you think it possible for a man to know everything that exists?"

"Good heavens, no — not the hundredth part of it."

"Then it is impossible for a man to be wise in everything?"

"Quite impossible."

"So it would seem that each man is wise only in what he knows — his wisdom reaches exactly as far as his knowledge?"

"That is my opinion."

"Well now, Euthydemus, what about the good? Should we search for it this way?"

"What way?"

"Does the same thing seem to you equally advantageous to everyone?"

"No, I should say not."

"You would say that what benefits one man is sometimes harmful to another?"

"Decidedly."

"And would you say anything is good except what is beneficial?"

"Nothing else."

"Then it follows that the beneficial is good — for the person it benefits?"

"So it appears to me."

"And the beautiful — can we speak of a thing as beautiful in any way except relatively? Can you name anything — a body, a vessel, anything at all — that you know to be beautiful for every purpose whatever?"

"I confess I cannot."

"Then to use a thing for the purpose it serves is to use it beautifully?"

"Undoubtedly."

"And is any particular thing beautiful for anything else except the purpose for which it can be beautifully used?"

"For nothing else."

"So the useful is beautiful — relative to whatever it is useful for?"

"So it appears to me."

"And courage, Euthydemus? I take it you rank courage among the beautiful things — a noble quality?"

"One of the noblest," he answered.

"So you consider courage useful for no small ends?"

"For the greatest of all ends, God knows."

"Well, in the face of terrors and dangers, do you think it an advantage to be ignorant of them?"

"Certainly not."

"So people who feel no fear before dangers simply because they don't know what they are facing are not courageous?"

"Most true — otherwise a large share of madmen and cowards would count as courageous."

"And what about people who are terrified of things that aren't even dangerous?"

"Courageous, Socrates? Still less so, goodness knows."

"Then perhaps you would call those who are good in the face of terrors and dangers courageous, and those who are bad in the face of the same things cowards?"

"Certainly I would."

"And can you count anyone good in the face of such things except those who are able to handle them and turn them to noble account?"

"No — those and those alone."

"And those who are the sort to handle them badly are bad?"

"Who else, if not they?"

"Now, doesn't each group deal with these situations as it thinks it must and should?"

"How else would they deal with them?"

"And can those who are unable to handle them well know how they must and should deal with them?"

"I presume not."

"Then it follows that those who know how to behave in the face of danger are exactly those who have the power to do it?"

"Yes — those and those alone."

"Well then: what about the men who have made no serious blunder in such matters? Do they handle them badly?"

"I think not."

"And, conversely, those who handle them badly have blundered seriously?"

"Probably — indeed, it seems to follow."

"Then those who know how to deal with terrors and dangers well and nobly are courageous, and those who fail utterly at it are cowards?"

"So I judge them to be."

Kingship and tyranny were both, in his opinion, forms of government — but forms that differed from one another. Kingship was government over willing subjects, in accordance with the laws of the state; tyranny was government over unwilling subjects, not according to law, but according to whatever suited the whims of the ruler.

There were also, he held, three forms of citizen government. Where the magistrates are drawn from those who fulfill what the law prescribes, the constitution is an aristocracy — rule of the best. Where the qualification for office is property, it is a plutocracy — rule of wealth. And where all the citizens without distinction may hold office, that is a democracy — rule of the people.

Let me also explain how he answered a disputant who had no clear argument to offer, but simply insisted, without any attempt at proof, that some person of his own choosing was wiser, or more of a statesman, or braver than someone else. When that happened, Socrates would step back and bring the whole discussion to its underlying starting point, like this:

"You say the man you admire is a better citizen than the man I admire?"

"Yes — I say it again."

"Then wouldn't it have been better to ask first what the work of a good citizen is?"

"Let's do that."

"To start with public finance, then: he shows his superiority by increasing the state's resources and lightening its expenses?"

"Certainly."

"And in war, by making his state stronger than her rivals?"

"Clearly."

"And on an embassy, by making friends for her in place of enemies?"

"I should imagine so."

"And in public debate, by putting a stop to faction and fostering harmony among the citizens?"

"That is my opinion."

By carrying the argument back to its starting point this way, the truth became plain even to the disputant himself.

His own way of conducting a discussion was to proceed step by step, from one point of general agreement to the next. "There," he would say, "lies the real security of reasoning." And for that reason he was more successful at winning the assent of his hearers than anyone I have ever known. He used to say that Homer gave Odysseus the title of a safe speaker precisely because he had the gift of leading a discussion from one commonly accepted opinion to another.

Chapter 7

That Socrates declared his own opinions frankly and simply to those who kept his company is, I think, proved well enough by the instances I have already recorded. But he was just as eager to make his companions independent — able to stand on their own feet in every undertaking their abilities suited them for — and that is what I hope to show now.

Of all the men I have ever known, he took the greatest care to find out what each of his companions really knew. Everything a beautiful and good man ought to know, he was most zealous to teach, so far as his own knowledge reached; and where it did not reach, he would introduce his friends to those who knew. And he did not fail to teach them how far an educated man should carry his practical knowledge of any given subject.

Take geometry. Everyone, he said, should learn geometry at least far enough to be able, when the need arises, to take over a piece of land or hand one on, to divide it up, or to assign a portion of it for cultivation — and to do it all by accurate measurement. That much geometry was so simple, so easy to pick up, that a man had only to put his mind to the business of measuring and he could learn the size of a field and walk away knowing exactly how it was reckoned. But he could not approve of pursuing geometry all the way to its unintelligible diagrams. What use those might be, he said, he failed to see — and he was not ignorant of these deep matters himself. Such studies, he said, were enough to eat up a man's whole life and keep him from many other, more useful things.

Astronomy was the same. He strongly urged everyone to learn a certain practical skill with the stars — enough to be able to tell the hour of the night, the season of the month and of the year, for the purposes of travel by land or sea: the march, the voyage, the setting of the watch. For everything connected with the night, the month, and the year, it was good to have reliable signs for telling one time and season from another. And these things, again, were easily learned from men who hunt by night, from ships' pilots, and from plenty of others whose business it is to know them. But pushing astronomy further — studying the bodies that wander outside our own course, the planets and the erratic stars, and wearing yourself out trying to discover their distances from the earth, their orbits, and their causes — this he strongly discouraged. He saw no more advantage in it, he said, than in the deep end of geometry. And yet he was not ignorant of astronomy's subtleties either; these studies too, he insisted, could use up a lifetime and keep a man from much that was more useful.

Speaking generally, when it came to the heavens he set his face against speculating about the machinery by which the divine power works its several operations. These matters, he believed, were beyond human discovery — and besides, he supposed the gods could hardly be pleased by a man prying into what they had chosen not to reveal. Indeed, the man who racked his brains over such questions ran a fair risk of losing his wits altogether — just as Anaxagoras, the headiest speculator of them all, had somewhat lost his in his attempt to explain the mechanisms of the gods. Anaxagoras took it on himself to declare that the sun and fire are the same thing. He ignored the fact that human beings can look at fire easily, while no one can gaze steadily into the face of the sun; and that the sun's rays darken the skin, while fire's do not. He forgot that nothing that grows from the earth can grow healthily without sunlight, while the effect of fire is to parch everything up and destroy it. And when he called the sun a "red-hot stone," he ignored yet another fact: a stone in a fire neither glows nor lasts, while the sun abides forever, the brightest of all things, undimmed.

Socrates also urged the study of arithmetic — but here, as everywhere, he warned the learner against empty and idle over-elaboration. Up to the limit set by usefulness, he was ready to join in any inquiry and follow out any argument with his companions; but there he stopped.

He particularly pressed his companions to take the utmost care of their health. They should learn all they could from the experts; and beyond that, each man should watch his own case throughout his life and discover for himself what food, what drink, and what kind of work suited him best, and how to use them so as to live the healthiest possible life. A man who studied his own constitution that way, he said, would be hard put to find a doctor who could better diagnose or prescribe what his health required.

And when anyone wanted help of a kind no human wisdom could supply, he advised him to turn to divination. The man who knows the means by which the gods give signs to men concerning their affairs, he said, will never find himself without divine guidance.
