The Slough of Despond

Now I saw in my dream that, just as they had finished this talk, they came up to a very muddy bog in the middle of the plain; and being careless, they both fell suddenly into it. The name of the bog was Despond. So there they floundered for a while, plastered all over with the filth of it; and Christian, because of the burden on his back, began to sink.

Pliable. Then Pliable said: Well, neighbour Christian — where are you now?

Christian. Truly, said Christian, I do not know.

Pliable. At that Pliable began to take offence, and said angrily to his companion: Is this the happiness you have been telling me about all this while? If we come off this badly at the very start, what can we expect between here and the end of the journey? If I get out of this alive, you can have your fine country to yourself. And with that he gave a couple of desperate heaves and got out of the mud on the side of the bog nearest his own house — and off he went, and Christian never saw him again.

So Christian was left floundering in the Slough of Despond alone. Still he kept struggling towards the side of the bog furthest from his own house and nearest the gate; and he reached it, but he could not climb out, because of the burden on his back. But I saw in my dream that a man came to him, whose name was Help, and asked him what he was doing there.

Christian. Sir, said Christian, I was told to come this way by a man called Evangelist, who also directed me to that gate over there, so that I might escape the wrath to come. And as I was going towards it, I fell in here.

Help. But why did you not look for the steps?

Christian. Fear was after me so hard that I ran the nearest way, and fell in.

Help. Then he said: Give me your hand. So Christian gave him his hand, and he pulled him out, and set him on solid ground, and told him to go on his way.

Then I went over to the man who had pulled him out and said: Sir — since the road from the City of Destruction to that gate runs across this place, why has this patch never been repaired, so that poor travellers might get across more safely?

And he said to me: This muddy bog is the kind of place that cannot be repaired. It is the low ground into which all the scum and filth that comes with the conviction of sin drains continually, and that is why it is called the Slough of Despond. For as often as a sinner wakes up to the state he is in, there rise up in him a great many fears and doubts and discouraging thoughts, and all of them run together and settle here. That is the reason this ground is so bad.

It is not the King's wish that the place should stay this bad. His workmen, following the instructions of his Majesty's surveyors, have been at work on this patch of ground for more than sixteen hundred years now, to see whether it could be mended. To my own knowledge, said he, there have been at least twenty thousand cartloads swallowed up here — yes, and millions of sound and healthy instructions besides, brought in every season from every corner of the King's territory. And those who know say they are the best material there is for making good ground of the place, if it could be made good at all. But it is the Slough of Despond still, and it will still be the Slough of Despond when they have done everything they can.

It is true that the Lawgiver has had a set of good, solid stepping stones laid right across the middle of the bog. But at the times when the place is throwing up its filth worst — as it does when the weather is on the turn — the steps can hardly be seen; and when they can, men get dizzy in the head and put a foot down beside them, and then they go in properly, steps or no steps. But the ground is good once they have got in at the gate.

Now I saw in my dream that by this time Pliable had got home again, and his neighbours came round to see him. Some of them called him a wise man for turning back, and some called him a fool for risking himself with Christian at all; and others jeered at him for being a coward, saying, "Well, if I had once set out, I would not have been so feeble as to give up over a few difficulties." So Pliable sat there among them, sheepish. But eventually he got his confidence back, and then they all changed their tune, and started sneering at poor Christian behind his back.

And that is all there is to say about Pliable.
