Mr. Worldly-Wiseman

Now as Christian was walking along by himself, he caught sight of somebody a good way off, coming across the field towards him; and it happened that they met just where their paths crossed. The gentleman's name was Mr. Worldly-Wiseman, and he lived in the town of Carnal Policy — a very large town, and close to the one Christian had come from. This man, meeting Christian, had some idea who he was, because Christian's setting out from the City of Destruction had been much talked about, not only in the town where he lived but in a few other places as well, where it was becoming the talk of the town. So Master Worldly-Wiseman, having a fair guess about him from the labouring way he walked, and from his sighs and groans and the like, opened a conversation with him.

Worldly-Wiseman. Well now, my good fellow — where are you off to, loaded up like that?

Christian. Loaded up indeed, as heavily as any poor creature ever was, I think. And since you ask me where I am off to: I am going to that little gate ahead of me, sir, because there, so I am told, I shall be set on a road that will rid me of this heavy burden.

Worldly-Wiseman. Have you a wife and children?

Christian. Yes. But I am so weighed down with this burden that I cannot take the pleasure in them that I used to. It feels as though I had none.

Worldly-Wiseman. Will you listen to me, if I give you some advice?

Christian. If it is good advice, I will. I am badly in need of good advice.

Worldly-Wiseman. Then my advice is this: get rid of that burden as fast as you possibly can. You will never have any peace of mind until you do, and until you do you cannot enjoy any of the good things God has given you.

Christian. But that is exactly what I am after — to be rid of this heavy burden. Only I cannot get it off myself, and there is nobody in our part of the country who can lift it off my shoulders. That is why I am going this way, as I told you: so that I can be rid of my burden.

Worldly-Wiseman. And who told you to go this way to be rid of it?

Christian. A man who seemed to me a very great and honourable person. His name, as I recall, was Evangelist.

Worldly-Wiseman. Curse him for the advice! There is not a more dangerous or troublesome road in the world than the one he has pointed you down, as you will find out if you go on doing what he tells you. You have run into something already, I see — that is the mud of the Slough of Despond on you. And that bog is only the beginning of the sorrows that wait for people who keep on down that road. Listen to me; I am older than you. On the road you are taking you can expect exhaustion, pain, hunger, danger, nakedness, the sword, lions, dragons, darkness — and in a word, death, and heaven knows what else. All this is perfectly true; there is plenty of testimony to confirm it. So why should a man throw himself away so carelessly, just because he listened to a stranger?

Christian. Why, sir, this burden on my back is more terrible to me than everything you have just listed. In fact I hardly care what I meet on the road, so long as I also meet with deliverance from my burden.

Worldly-Wiseman. How did you come by the burden in the first place?

Christian. By reading this book in my hand.

Worldly-Wiseman. I thought as much. The same thing has happened to you as happens to other weak men who go meddling with matters too far above them, and fall suddenly into just this sort of derangement. And that derangement does not only unman a man, as I can see it has unmanned you — it drives him off on desperate ventures to get hold of he knows not what.

Christian. I know exactly what I want to get hold of. Relief from this heavy burden.

Worldly-Wiseman. But why look for relief along this road, with so many dangers waiting on it? — especially when, if you would only be patient and hear me out, I could direct you to exactly what you want without any of the dangers you are running into this way. And the remedy is close at hand. I will add this, too: instead of those dangers you will meet with a great deal of safety, and friendship, and contentment.

Christian. Please, sir, let me in on this secret.

Worldly-Wiseman. Well then. In that village over there — the village is called Morality — there lives a gentleman named Legality: a very shrewd man, and one with an excellent reputation, who has the skill to get burdens like yours off men's shoulders. To my own knowledge he has done a great deal of good that way. And what is more, he also has the skill to cure people whose wits have gone a little astray under the weight of their burdens. You may go to him, as I say, and be helped at once. His house is not quite a mile from here; and if he should not be at home himself, he has a fine young son named Civility who can do the job, to be honest, quite as well as the old gentleman. There, I tell you, you may be relieved of your burden. And if you would rather not go back to your old house — as indeed I would not advise you to — you can send for your wife and children to join you in this village. There are houses standing empty there now, and you could have one of them at a reasonable rent. Food is cheap there too, and good. And what will make your life happier still is that you will be living among honest neighbours, respectable and well thought of.

Now Christian was brought up short for a moment; but before long he decided that if what this gentleman had said was true, the wisest thing he could do was take his advice. So he spoke again.

Christian. Sir, which is my road to this honest man's house?

Worldly-Wiseman. Do you see that hill over there?

Christian. Yes, very clearly.

Worldly-Wiseman. You must go past that hill, and the first house you come to is his.

So Christian turned off his road to go to Mr. Legality's house for help. But when he had got close up to the hill, it seemed so high, and the side of it nearest the road hung out over him so far, that Christian was afraid to go any further in case the hill should come down on his head. So he stood still, and had no idea what to do. And his burden now felt heavier to him than it had while he was on his proper road. There were flashes of fire coming out of the hill, too, that made Christian afraid he would be burned. So he stood there sweating and shaking with fear, and he began to be sorry that he had ever taken Mr. Worldly-Wiseman's advice.

And then he saw Evangelist coming to meet him — and at the sight of him he began to go red with shame. Evangelist came nearer and nearer; and coming up to him, he looked at him with a hard and terrible expression, and began to reason with him.

Evangelist. What are you doing here, Christian?

At these words Christian had no idea what to answer, and for the moment stood there without a word. Then Evangelist went on: Are you not the man I found crying outside the walls of the City of Destruction?

Christian. Yes, dear sir, I am the man.

Evangelist. Did I not point you the way to the little gate?

Christian. Yes, dear sir, said Christian.

Evangelist. How is it, then, that you have turned aside so quickly? Because you are off the road now.

Christian. I met a gentleman as soon as I had got across the Slough of Despond, and he persuaded me that in the village ahead I could find a man who would take my burden off.

Evangelist. What sort of man was he?

Christian. He looked like a gentleman, and he talked to me at length, and in the end he got me to give in. So I came here. But when I saw this hill, and the way it hangs out over the road, I stopped short, in case it should fall on my head.

Evangelist. What did this gentleman say to you?

Christian. Why, he asked me where I was going, and I told him.

Evangelist. And what did he say then?

Christian. He asked me whether I had a family, and I told him. But, I said, I am so loaded down by this burden on my back that I cannot take pleasure in them as I used to.

Evangelist. And what did he say then?

Christian. He told me to get rid of my burden quickly. And I told him that relief was exactly what I was looking for — and that I was therefore going to that gate over there, to get further directions about how to reach the place where I could be delivered. So he said that he would show me a better way, a shorter one, without so many difficulties on it as the road you had set me in, sir; and that this way would bring me to a gentleman's house, a man with the skill to take these burdens off. So I believed him, and turned off that road onto this one, hoping I might be quickly relieved of my burden. But when I got to this place and saw how things really were, I stopped for fear of the danger, as I said — and now I do not know what to do.

Evangelist. Then Evangelist said: Stand still a moment, and let me show you the words of God.

So he stood there trembling. Then Evangelist said: "See that you do not refuse him who speaks. For if they did not escape who refused him that spoke on earth, much less shall we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven." And he said further: "Now the just shall live by faith; but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him."

And he applied the words like this: You are the man who is running headlong into this misery. You have begun to reject the counsel of the Most High, and to draw your foot back out of the way of peace — very nearly to the point of risking your own damnation.

Then Christian fell down at his feet like a dead man, crying, "I am finished — there is no hope for me!" At the sight of that, Evangelist caught him by the right hand and said, "Every kind of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven to men," and "Do not be faithless, but believing." Then Christian revived a little and stood up, still shaking, as he had at first, in front of Evangelist.

Then Evangelist went on: Pay close attention now to what I am going to tell you. I am going to show you who it was that fooled you, and who it was he sent you to.

The man who met you is one Worldly-Wiseman, and he is rightly named. Partly it is because he has a taste for nothing but the teaching of this world — which is why he always goes to church in the town of Morality — and partly because it is that teaching he likes best, since it is the one that best saves him from the cross. And because his temper is of that earthbound kind, he sets himself to head off my ways, right though they are.

Now there are three things in this man's advice that you must utterly detest.

First, that he turned you off the road. Second, that he worked to make the cross look hateful to you. And third, that he set your feet on the road that leads to the ministry of death.

First, you must detest his turning you off the road — and your own agreeing to it — because it means rejecting the counsel of God in favour of the counsel of a Worldly-Wiseman. The Lord says, "Strive to enter in at the narrow gate" — the gate I am sending you to; for "narrow is the gate that leads to life, and there are few that find it." It is from this little gate, and from the road to it, that this wicked man has turned you, and very nearly to your destruction. So hate him for turning you off the road, and hate yourself for listening to him.

Second, you must detest his working to make the cross look hateful to you; because you are to value the cross "above the treasures of Egypt." Besides, the King of glory has told you that whoever "will save his life shall lose it," and that "he who comes after me, and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, and his own life as well, cannot be my disciple." So when a man works to persuade you that a thing will be the death of you, when the Truth himself has said that without it you cannot have eternal life — that teaching you must detest.

Third, you must hate his setting your feet on the road that leads to the ministry of death. And for this, consider who it was he sent you to, and how completely unable that person was to deliver you from your burden.

The man you were sent to for relief, whose name is Legality, is the son of the slave woman who exists now, and who is in slavery along with her children; and in the hidden sense of the thing, she is this Mount Sinai that you have been afraid would fall on your head. Now if she and her children are slaves, how can you expect to be made free by them? So this Legality is not able to set you free from your burden. No man has ever yet been rid of his burden by him, and no man ever will be. You cannot be made right with God by the works of the law; by keeping the law's rules, no living man can get rid of his burden. Therefore Mr. Worldly-Wiseman is a stranger to the truth, and Mr. Legality is a fraud; and as for his son Civility, for all his simpering looks, he is nothing but a hypocrite and cannot help you. Believe me, there is nothing in all this racket you have heard from these stupid men but a scheme to cheat you out of your salvation by turning you off the road I had set you on.

After this, Evangelist called aloud to the heavens to confirm what he had said; and with that there came words and fire out of the mountain that poor Christian was standing under, which made the hair stand up on his body. The words were these: "As many as are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is everyone that does not continue in all the things which are written in the book of the law, to do them."

Now Christian expected nothing but death, and began to cry out miserably, cursing the hour when he ever met Mr. Worldly-Wiseman, and calling himself a thousand kinds of fool for listening to his advice. He was deeply ashamed, too, to think that this gentleman's arguments — which came from nowhere but human self-interest — should have had enough weight with him to make him abandon the right road. Then he turned to Evangelist again, and this is what he said.

Christian. Sir, what do you think? Is there hope? May I go back now, and go up to the gate? Am I going to be cast off for this, and sent back from there in disgrace? I am sorry I listened to that man's advice. But can my sin be forgiven?

Evangelist. Then Evangelist said to him: Your sin is very great, because by it you have done two wrong things — you have abandoned the good road in order to walk in forbidden paths. And yet the man at the gate will still receive you, because he has goodwill towards people. Only, said he, take care that you do not turn aside again, "in case you perish from the way, when his anger is kindled but a little."

Then Christian set himself to go back; and Evangelist, after he had kissed him, gave him one smile and wished him godspeed. So he hurried on, and did not speak to anybody on the road; nor, if anyone asked him a question, would he give them so much as an answer. He walked like a man who was treading the whole way on forbidden ground, and who could not think himself safe by any means until he had got back onto the road he had left to follow Mr. Worldly-Wiseman's advice.

So in the course of time Christian came up to the gate. And over the gate was written: "Knock, and it shall be opened to you."
