The Hill Difficulty

Then I watched them all go on until they came to the foot of the Hill Difficulty, at the bottom of which there was a spring. There were also two other roads in that same place, besides the one that came straight from the gate: one turned off to the left and the other to the right at the bottom of the hill. But the narrow road went straight up the hill, and the name of the climb up the hillside is Difficulty. Christian now went to the spring and drank from it to refresh himself, and then began to go up the hill, saying:

	The hill is high, and still I want to climb;
	the difficulty will not put me off,
	because I see the road to life runs here.
	Come, take heart — let us neither faint nor fear.
	Better the right road, hard as it may be,
	than the wrong easy one that ends in misery.

The other two came to the foot of the hill as well. But when they saw how steep and high it was, and that there were two other roads to take — and supposing that these two roads might join up again with the one Christian was climbing, on the other side of the hill — they decided to go those ways instead. Now the name of one of those roads was Danger and the name of the other was Destruction. So one of them took the road called Danger, which led him into a great wood; and the other went straight up the road to Destruction, which led him into a wide field full of dark mountains, where he stumbled and fell, and never got up again.

Then I looked after Christian, to watch him go up the hill; and I saw him drop from running to walking, and from walking to scrambling on his hands and knees, because the slope was so steep. Now about halfway up the hill there was a pleasant shelter, built by the Lord of the hill for the refreshment of weary travellers. Christian reached it, and sat down there to rest. Then he pulled his scroll out of his coat and read in it for comfort; and he also began looking over again the coat that had been given him as he stood by the cross. And pleasing himself like this for a while, he at last drifted into a doze, and from that into a deep sleep, which kept him there until it was almost night; and while he slept, his scroll fell out of his hand.

Now while he was sleeping, somebody came to him and woke him, saying, "Go to the ant, you sluggard; look at how she goes about things, and be wise." And at that Christian jumped up and hurried off on his way, and went at a good pace until he came to the top of the hill.

Now when he had got to the top, two men came running to meet him at full speed. One was called Timorous and the other Mistrust. Christian said to them: Gentlemen, what is the matter? You are running the wrong way.

Timorous answered that they had been going to the City of Zion and had got up that difficult stretch; but, he said, the further we go the more danger we run into, so we turned round and are going back.

Yes, said Mistrust — because just ahead of us there are a couple of lions in the road. Whether they were asleep or awake we could not tell, but we could not see how, if we came within reach of them, they would fail to tear us to pieces on the spot.

Christian. Then Christian said: You are frightening me — but where am I to run to, to be safe? If I go back to my own country, which is set aside for fire and brimstone, I shall certainly die there. If I can get to the Celestial City, I am certain to be safe there. I have to take the risk. Going back is nothing but death; going forward is the fear of death, and everlasting life beyond it. I am going on.

So Mistrust and Timorous ran off down the hill, and Christian went on his way. But thinking again about what he had heard from the two men, he felt inside his coat for his scroll, so that he could read in it and take comfort — and he felt, and could not find it.

Then Christian was badly shaken and had no idea what to do; because he had lost the thing that used to relieve him, and the thing that was meant to be his pass into the Celestial City. So there he stood, thoroughly confused, not knowing what to do. At last it occurred to him that he had fallen asleep in the shelter on the hillside; and going down on his knees, he asked God's forgiveness for that foolish act, and then went back to look for his scroll.

But who could possibly describe the misery in Christian's heart all the way back! Sometimes he sighed, sometimes he cried, and over and over again he told himself off for being fool enough to fall asleep in a place that had been put up only for a little refreshment when he was tired. So back he went, searching carefully to this side and that the whole way, hoping he might find the scroll that had comforted him so many times on his journey.

He went on like that until he came in sight of the shelter where he had sat down and slept — and the sight of it only renewed his misery, by bringing the wrong he had done in sleeping freshly back into his mind. So he came on, lamenting his sinful sleep, and saying: What a wretched man I am! To sleep in the daytime! To sleep in the middle of a hard climb! To indulge myself so far as to use for the ease of my own body a rest that the Lord of the hill put up only for the relief of pilgrims' spirits!

How many steps I have taken for nothing! It is what happened to Israel for their sin: they were sent back again by the way of the Red Sea. And I am made to walk in sorrow over ground I could have walked over with delight, if it had not been for this sinful sleep. How far along the road I could have been by now! I am made to walk the same stretch three times over when I need only have walked it once. And now night is going to catch me, too, because the day is nearly gone. Oh, if only I had not slept!

Now by this time he had come back to the shelter, where he sat down for a while and wept. But at last, as Christian's luck would have it, looking sorrowfully down under the bench, he spotted his scroll; and he snatched it up, trembling and hurried, and put it inside his coat.

But who can say how glad this man was to have his scroll again! Because this scroll was his assurance of life, and of being accepted when he reached the harbour he was making for. So he tucked it inside his coat, thanked God for turning his eye to the place where it lay, and with joy and tears set off on his journey again.

But how nimbly he went up the rest of that hill now! And yet, before he had got to the top, the sun went down on Christian; and that made him remember all over again how pointless his sleeping had been, and he began to feel sorry for himself once more.

Oh, you sinful sleep! Because of you I am going to be caught by the dark on my journey. I have to walk without the sun; darkness will cover the path under my feet; and I shall have to listen to the noise of the dismal creatures — all because of my sinful sleep.

And now he remembered too the story Mistrust and Timorous had told him, and how frightened they had been by the sight of the lions. So Christian said to himself again: These animals hunt at night. And if they were to come across me in the dark, how would I get away from them? How would I escape being torn to pieces by them?

So he went on his way. But while he was still lamenting his unhappy mistake, he lifted up his eyes — and there in front of him was a very grand palace, whose name was Beautiful, standing right beside the road.
