The House Beautiful

So I saw in my dream that he hurried forward, hoping he might be able to get a bed there. Now before he had gone far he came into a very narrow passage, about a couple of hundred yards short of the porter's lodge; and looking sharply ahead as he went, he spotted two lions in the road. Now, he thought, I see the dangers that drove Mistrust and Timorous back. (The lions were chained, but he could not see the chains.) Then he was afraid, and he thought of turning back after them himself, because it seemed to him there was nothing but death ahead.

But the porter at the lodge, whose name is Watchful, seeing that Christian had stopped as though he meant to go back, called out to him: Is your strength as small as that? Do not be afraid of the lions — they are chained, and they are put there to test faith where there is any, and to expose those who have none. Keep to the middle of the path, and no harm will come to you.

Then I saw that he went on, shaking with fear of the lions but keeping careful hold of the porter's instructions. He heard them roar, but they did him no harm. Then he clapped his hands, and went on until he came and stood in front of the gate where the porter was.

Then Christian said to the porter: Sir, what house is this? And may I stay here tonight?

The porter answered: This house was built by the Lord of the hill, and he built it for the relief and protection of pilgrims. And the porter also asked him where he was from, and where he was going.

Christian. I have come from the City of Destruction, and I am going to Mount Zion. But since the sun has now gone down, I would like to stay here tonight, if I may.

Porter. What is your name?

Christian. My name now is Christian, but at first my name was Graceless. I come of the line of Japheth, whom God will persuade to live in the tents of Shem.

Porter. But how does it happen that you come so late? The sun has set.

Christian. I would have been here sooner, except that — wretched man that I am — I fell asleep in the shelter that stands on the hillside. And even so I would have been here a good deal sooner, except that while I slept I lost my evidence, and came to the brow of the hill without it; and then, feeling for it and not finding it, I was forced to go back, sick at heart, to the place where I had slept my sleep. I found it there, and here I am.

Porter. Well, I will call out one of the young women of this house, who will, if she likes what you say, bring you in to meet the rest of the household, according to the rules here.

So Watchful the porter rang a bell, and at the sound of it there came out of the door of the house a serious and beautiful young woman named Discretion, who asked why she had been called.

The porter answered: This man is on a journey from the City of Destruction to Mount Zion; but being tired, and caught by the dark, he asked me if he might stay here tonight. So I told him I would call you, and that after you had talked with him you could do as you thought best, according to the rule of the house.

Then she asked him where he was from, and where he was going, and he told her. She also asked him how he had got onto the road, and he told her. Then she asked him what he had seen and met with along the way, and he told her. And last of all she asked him his name; and he said: It is Christian — and I want all the more to stay here tonight because, from what I understand, this place was built by the Lord of the hill for the relief and protection of pilgrims.

So she smiled, but there were tears in her eyes; and after a short pause she said: I will call out two or three more of the household. So she ran to the door and called out Prudence, Piety and Charity; and after a little more conversation with him, they brought him in to the household. Many of them met him on the doorstep, saying, "Come in, you who are blessed of the Lord" — this house was built by the Lord of the hill on purpose to take in pilgrims like you. Then he bowed his head and followed them into the house.

So when he had come in and sat down, they gave him something to drink, and agreed among themselves that until supper was ready some of them should have a proper conversation with Christian, to make the best use of the time. They appointed Piety, Prudence and Charity to talk with him, and this is how they began.

Piety. Come, good Christian, since we have been kind enough to take you into our house tonight, let us talk with you about everything that has happened to you on your pilgrimage — perhaps we may be the better for it ourselves.

Christian. Very willingly; and I am glad you are so well disposed.

Piety. What first moved you to take up a pilgrim's life?

Christian. I was driven out of my own country by a terrible sound in my ears — that unavoidable destruction was waiting for me if I stayed in the place where I was.

Piety. But how did it happen that you came out of your country this way?

Christian. It was as God would have it. When I was under the fear of destruction I did not know where to go; but as it happened a man came right up to me, while I stood there trembling and crying, whose name is Evangelist. He directed me to the little gate, which otherwise I should never have found, and so set me on the road that has brought me straight to this house.

Piety. But did you not come past the house of the Interpreter?

Christian. Yes, and I saw such things there that the memory of them will stay with me as long as I live — three of them especially: how Christ keeps up his work of grace in the heart in spite of Satan; how the man had sinned himself right out of any hope of God's mercy; and the dream of the man who thought in his sleep that the day of judgment had come.

Piety. Why — did you hear him tell his dream?

Christian. Yes, and a terrible one it was. I thought it made my heart ache to hear him telling it; and yet I am glad I heard it.

Piety. Was that all you saw at the house of the Interpreter?

Christian. No. He took me and showed me a magnificent palace, and the people inside it dressed in gold; and how a daring man came and cut his way through the armed men standing in the door to keep him out; and how he was called to come in and win eternal glory. I thought those things carried my heart away. I could have stayed at that good man's house a whole year, except that I knew I had further to go.

Piety. And what else did you see on the way?

Christian. See! Why, I went only a little further and I saw one — as I thought in my own mind — hanging bleeding on the tree. And the very sight of him made my burden fall off my back; because I was groaning under a very heavy burden, and then it dropped clean off me. It was a strange thing to me, because I had never seen anything like it before. And while I stood there looking up — for I could not stop looking — three Shining Ones came to me. One of them declared that my sins were forgiven; another stripped off my rags and gave me this embroidered coat that you can see; and the third set the mark you can see on my forehead, and gave me this sealed scroll. (And with that he pulled it out of his coat.)

Piety. But you saw more than that, did you not?

Christian. The things I have told you were the best of it. Still, I did see some other things. I saw three men — Simple, Sloth and Presumption — lying asleep a little off the road as I came, with irons on their heels; but do you think I could wake them? I also saw Formalist and Hypocrisy come tumbling over the wall, meaning to go to Zion, so they claimed; but they were soon lost, exactly as I told them they would be, though they would not believe it. But above all, I found it hard work getting up this hill, and just as hard getting past the lions' mouths. And truly, if it had not been for the good man, the porter who stands at the gate, I do not know but that after everything I might have turned back again. But now, thank God, I am here — and I thank you for taking me in.

Then Prudence thought it good to ask him a few questions, and asked him to answer them.

Prudence. Do you not sometimes think about the country you came from?

Christian. Yes — but with a great deal of shame and disgust. "Truly, if I had kept my mind on the country I came out of, I might have had the chance to go back; but as it is I want a better country, that is, a heavenly one."

Prudence. Do you still carry about with you some of the things you used to be caught up in back then?

Christian. Yes, but very much against my will — my inward and bodily thoughts above all, the ones that all my countrymen delighted in, and I along with them. But now every one of those things is a grief to me; and if I could have things my own way I would choose never to think about them again. And yet when I want to be doing what is best, what is worst is right there with me.

Prudence. Do you not find sometimes that those things seem beaten, though at other times they are your torment?

Christian. Yes, but only rarely. Still, they are golden hours to me, when it happens.

Prudence. Can you remember by what means you find your troubles beaten, at those times?

Christian. Yes. When I think of what I saw at the cross, that will do it. When I look at my embroidered coat, that will do it. When I look into the scroll I carry in my coat, that will do it. And when my thoughts grow warm about where I am going, that will do it.

Prudence. And what is it that makes you so eager to get to Mount Zion?

Christian. Why, there I hope to see alive the one who hung dead on the cross; and there I hope to be rid of all those things that are a torment to me even now. There, they say, there is no death; and there I shall live with exactly the company I like best. Because, to tell you the truth, I love him, since it was by him I was relieved of my burden; and I am sick of my own inward sickness. I would dearly like to be where I shall die no more, and with the company that goes on crying, "Holy, holy, holy."

Then Charity said to Christian: Have you a family? Are you a married man?

Christian. I have a wife and four small children.

Charity. And why did you not bring them along with you?

Christian. Then Christian wept, and said: Oh, how gladly I would have done it! But every one of them was dead set against my going on pilgrimage.

Charity. But you should have talked to them, and tried to show them the danger of staying behind.

Christian. So I did — and I told them too what God had shown me about the destruction of our city. "But I seemed to them like a man making a joke," and they did not believe me.

Charity. And did you pray that God would make your advice do them good?

Christian. Yes, and with a great deal of feeling; because you must understand that my wife and my poor children were very dear to me.

Charity. But did you tell them about your own misery, and your fear of destruction? Because I suppose the destruction was plain enough to you.

Christian. Yes, over and over and over. They could see my fears in my face too, and in my tears, and in the way I shook under the weight of the judgment hanging over our heads. But none of it was enough to persuade them to come with me.

Charity. But what could they say for themselves, as to why they would not come?

Christian. Why — my wife was afraid of losing this world, and my children were given up to the silly pleasures of being young. So between one thing and another, they left me to go wandering off like this on my own.

Charity. But did you not undercut everything you said to persuade them, by the emptiness of your own life?

Christian. I certainly cannot recommend my life; I am well aware of a great many failings in it. And I know too that a man's own conduct can quickly knock down what he is labouring by argument and persuasion to fix in other people's minds for their good. Still, I can say this much: I was very careful not to give them any excuse, by anything unfitting in my behaviour, to be put off going on pilgrimage. In fact it was that very thing they used to hold against me — that I was too strict, and that for their sakes I denied myself things they could see no harm in at all. No, I think I may say that if what they saw in me held them back, it was how careful I was about sinning against God, or doing any wrong to my neighbour.

Charity. Indeed, Cain hated his brother "because his own works were evil and his brother's were righteous"; and if your wife and children have been offended with you for this, they show by that they are set against what is good, and "you have delivered your own soul from their blood."

Now I saw in my dream that they sat there talking like this until supper was ready. So when it was prepared, they sat down to eat. Now the table was laid "with rich food, and with well-refined wine"; and all their talk at the table was about the Lord of the hill — what he had done, and why he had done what he did, and why he had built this house.

And from what they said, I gathered that he had been a great warrior, and had fought and killed "the one who had the power of death," but not without great danger to himself, which made me love him the more.

Because, as they said, and as I believe it too (said Christian), he did it at the cost of a great deal of blood. But what put the glory of grace into everything he did was that he did it out of pure love for his country. And besides, there were some of the household who said they had been and spoken with him since he died on the cross; and they testified they had it from his own lips that he is such a lover of poor pilgrims as you would not find from one end of the earth to the other.

They gave an example, too, of what they were saying: that he had stripped himself of his own glory so that he could do this for the poor; and that they had heard him say and insist "that he would not live on the mountain of Zion alone." They said, further, that he had made many pilgrims into princes, though they were born beggars by nature and had come off the rubbish heap.

So they talked together until late at night; and after they had committed themselves to their Lord for protection, they went to their rest. They put the Pilgrim in a large upstairs room whose window opened towards the sunrise; and the name of that room was Peace, where he slept until daybreak. Then he woke, and sang:

	Where am I now? Is this the love and care
	of Jesus for the men that pilgrims are?
	To be provided for like this — forgiven —
	and lodged already next door to heaven!

So in the morning they all got up; and after some more conversation they told him he was not to leave until they had shown him the treasures of the place.

First they took him into the study, where they showed him records of the greatest antiquity. In these, as I remember my dream, they showed him first the pedigree of the Lord of the hill: that he was the Son of the Ancient of Days, and came by that eternal descent. Here too were recorded more fully the things he had done, and the names of many hundreds he had taken into his service, and how he had settled them in dwellings that could not be pulled down either by length of years or by the wearing out of nature.

Then they read him some of the worthy deeds that his servants had done: how they had "conquered kingdoms, worked righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, grew brave in battle, and put foreign armies to flight."

Then they read again in another part of the records of the house, where it was shown how willing their Lord was to receive into his favour anybody at all — anybody — even those who in times past had offered great insults to him and to what he was doing. Here too were a number of other accounts of famous things, all of which Christian was given sight of, both ancient and modern, along with prophecies and predictions of things that are certain to come about, to the terror and astonishment of enemies and to the comfort and consolation of pilgrims.

The next day they took him into the armoury, where they showed him every kind of equipment their Lord had provided for pilgrims: sword, shield, helmet, breastplate, the weapon of all-prayer, and shoes that would never wear out. And there was enough of it here to equip as many men for their Lord's service as there are stars in the sky for number.

They also showed him some of the instruments with which some of his servants had done extraordinary things. They showed him Moses' staff; the hammer and nail with which Jael killed Sisera; the pitchers, trumpets and lamps too, with which Gideon put the armies of Midian to flight. Then they showed him the ox-goad with which Shamgar killed six hundred men. They showed him as well the jawbone with which Samson did such mighty deeds. They showed him, further, the sling and the stone with which David killed Goliath of Gath; and also the sword with which their Lord will kill the Man of Sin, on the day he rises up to take his prey. And they showed him a great many other excellent things besides, which delighted Christian very much.

When this was done, they went to their rest again.
