The Valley of Humiliation and Apollyon

Then I saw in my dream that the next morning he got up to go on; but they asked him to stay another day as well. And then, they said, if the day is clear we will show you the Delectable Mountains — which, they said, would add still further to his comfort, because they were nearer the harbour he was making for than the place where he was now. So he agreed, and stayed.

When the morning came they took him to the top of the house and told him to look south. So he did — and there, a great way off, he saw a most beautiful mountainous country, made lovely with woods and vineyards and fruit of every kind, and flowers too, with springs and fountains, all delightful to look at. Then he asked the name of the country. They said it was Immanuel's Land; and it is common ground, they said, just as this hill is, to all pilgrims. And when you get there, they said, from there you will be able to see as far as the gate of the Celestial City, as the shepherds who live there will show you.

Now he thought about setting off, and they were willing that he should. But first, they said, let us go into the armoury again. So they did; and when they got there, they fitted him out from head to foot in tested armour, in case he should run into any attacks on the road. So being equipped like this, he walked out with his friends to the gate, and there he asked the porter whether he had seen any pilgrims go past.

The porter answered: Yes.

Christian. Please — did you know him? said he.

Porter. I asked his name, and he told me it was Faithful.

Christian. Oh, said Christian, I know him. He is from my own town, a close neighbour of mine; he comes from the place where I was born. How far ahead do you think he might be?

Porter. By this time he will have got below the hill.

Christian. Well, said Christian, good Porter, the Lord be with you, and add a great increase to all your blessings, for the kindness you have shown me.

Then he set off; but Discretion, Piety, Charity and Prudence would come with him down to the foot of the hill. So they went on together, going back over the things they had talked about before, until they came to the descent. Then Christian said: It was hard coming up, and as far as I can see it is dangerous going down.

Yes, said Prudence, so it is; because it is a hard business for a man to go down into the Valley of Humiliation, as you are doing now, and not slip somewhere along the way. That, they said, is why we have come out to see you down the hill.

So he began to go down, very carefully — and even so he slipped once or twice. Then I saw in my dream that when Christian had reached the bottom of the hill, these good companions gave him a loaf of bread, a bottle of wine and a bunch of raisins; and then he went on his way.

But now, in this Valley of Humiliation, poor Christian was in real trouble; because he had gone only a little way when he spotted a foul fiend coming across the field to meet him, whose name is Apollyon. Then Christian began to be afraid, and to turn over in his mind whether to go back or stand his ground. But then he considered that he had no armour for his back, and so he thought that turning his back might only give the fiend the greater advantage, and let him drive his darts in easily. So he decided to risk it and stand his ground. Because, he thought, even if I had nothing in view but saving my own life, standing would still be the best way.

So he went on, and Apollyon met him. Now the monster was hideous to look at. He was covered in scales like a fish — and they are his pride. He had wings like a dragon, feet like a bear, and out of his belly came fire and smoke, and his mouth was like the mouth of a lion. When he had come up to Christian, he looked him over with contempt and began to question him.

Apollyon. Where have you come from, and where are you bound?

Christian. I have come from the City of Destruction, which is the home of everything evil, and I am going to the City of Zion.

Apollyon. By this I gather you are one of my subjects, because all that country is mine, and I am its prince and god. How is it, then, that you have run away from your king? If I did not hope you might do me more service yet, I would strike you to the ground now, with a single blow.

Christian. I was born in your territory, it is true; but your service was hard, and your wages were not enough for a man to live on — "for the wages of sin is death." So when I came of age I did what other thoughtful people do, and looked about to see whether I could better myself.

Apollyon. There is no prince who will lose his subjects as lightly as that, and I do not intend to lose you yet. But since you complain of your service and your wages, be content to come back; and I promise you here whatever our country can provide.

Christian. But I have hired myself out to another — to the King of princes; and how can I go back with you in any honesty?

Apollyon. In this you have done what the proverb says — swapped a bad master for a worse. But it is quite ordinary for people who have declared themselves his servants to give him the slip after a while and come back to me. You do the same, and all will be well.

Christian. I have given him my word and sworn my allegiance to him. How, then, can I go back on it and not be hanged as a traitor?

Apollyon. You did just the same to me — and yet I am willing to let it all go, if you will only turn round now and come back.

Christian. What I promised you, I promised when I was under age. And besides, I reckon the Prince under whose flag I now stand is able to release me from it — yes, and to pardon what I did in going along with you as well. And besides that, you destroying Apollyon: to tell you the truth, I like his service, his wages, his servants, his government, his company and his country better than yours. So stop trying to persuade me. I am his servant, and I mean to follow him.

Apollyon. Think again, once your blood has cooled, about what you are likely to meet on the road you are taking. You know that for the most part his servants come to a bad end, because they are offenders against me and against my ways. How many of them have been put to shameful deaths! And besides, you reckon his service better than mine, when he has never yet come out from the place where he is to deliver anybody who served him out of our hands — whereas I, as all the world knows perfectly well, have delivered any number of those who have faithfully served me, either by force or by trickery, out of his hands and his people's, even after they were captured. And I will deliver you too.

Christian. If he holds off from delivering them for the present, it is on purpose to test their love, and see whether they will hold to him to the end. And as for the bad end you say they come to, in their own reckoning that is the most glorious thing of all. Because as for being delivered here and now, they do not much expect it: they are waiting for their glory, and then they will have it, when their Prince comes in his own glory and the glory of the angels.

Apollyon. You have already been unfaithful in your service to him. How do you expect to get wages out of him?

Christian. In what way, Apollyon, have I been unfaithful to him?

Apollyon. You lost your nerve at the very start, when you were nearly choked in the Slough of Despond. You tried wrong roads to be rid of your burden, when you should have waited until your Prince took it off. You sinfully fell asleep and lost your most precious possession. You were very nearly talked into turning back at the sight of the lions. And when you talk about your journey and about what you have seen and heard, there is a hunger for glory in you, in everything you say and do.

Christian. All this is true, and a good deal more that you have left out. But the Prince I serve and honour is merciful and ready to forgive. And besides — these weaknesses took hold of me in your country. That is where I drank them in. And I have groaned under them, and been sorry for them, and have been pardoned by my Prince.

Apollyon. Then Apollyon broke out into a terrible rage, saying: I am an enemy to this Prince. I hate his person, his laws and his people. I have come out on purpose to stop you.

Christian. Apollyon, be careful what you do. I am on the king's highway, the way of holiness; so look to yourself.

Apollyon. Then Apollyon straddled right across the whole width of the road and said: I have no fear at all in this matter. Prepare to die; because I swear by my den in hell that you shall go no further. Here is where I spill your soul.

And with that he threw a flaming dart at his chest. But Christian had a shield in his hand, and caught it with that, and so escaped the danger.

Then Christian drew his sword, because he saw it was time to move. And Apollyon came at him just as fast, throwing darts as thick as hail; and by them, in spite of everything Christian could do to dodge, Apollyon wounded him in the head, the hand and the foot. This made Christian give a little ground; so Apollyon pressed his attack with full force, and Christian took heart again and fought back as hard as he could.

This bitter fight lasted more than half a day, until Christian was nearly spent — because you have to understand that Christian, with his wounds, was bound to grow weaker and weaker.

Then Apollyon, seeing his chance, closed right in on Christian, and wrestling with him, threw him down hard; and with that, Christian's sword flew out of his hand. Then Apollyon said: I have you now. And with that he almost crushed him to death, so that Christian began to give up hope of living.

But as God would have it, while Apollyon was drawing back for his last blow, meant to finish this good man off altogether, Christian nimbly stretched out his hand for his sword and got hold of it, saying, "Do not gloat over me, my enemy; when I fall, I shall get up again." And with that he gave him a deadly thrust, which drove him back like a creature that has taken its death wound. Christian, seeing that, went at him again, saying, "No — in all these things we are more than conquerors, through him who loved us." And with that Apollyon spread out his dragon's wings and sped away, so that Christian saw him no more for a while.

Nobody can imagine, unless he had seen and heard it as I did, what yelling and hideous roaring Apollyon made all through this fight. He spoke like a dragon. And on the other side, what sighs and groans burst out of Christian's heart. I never once saw him give so much as a single cheerful look the whole time, until he realized that he had wounded Apollyon with his two-edged sword; and then, indeed, he did smile and look upward. But it was the most terrible sight I ever saw.

So when the battle was over, Christian said, "Here I will give thanks to the one who delivered me out of the mouth of the lion — to the one who helped me against Apollyon." And so he did, saying:

	Great Beelzebub, the captain of this fiend,
	planned my destruction, and to that same end
	sent him out armed; and he, with such a rage
	as only hell can give, joined me in battle.
	But blessed Michael helped me, and I,
	with a stroke of the sword, soon made him fly.
	So let me give him praise that has no end,
	and bless his holy name for evermore.

Then there came to him a hand, holding some of the leaves of the tree of life. Christian took them and put them on the wounds he had taken in the battle, and was healed immediately. He also sat down in that place to eat some bread and drink from the bottle that had been given him a little earlier. And so, refreshed, he set himself to his journey with his sword drawn in his hand; because he said, I do not know but that some other enemy may be close by. But he had no further trouble from Apollyon all the way through this valley.

Now at the end of this valley there was another, the Valley of the Shadow of Death; and Christian had no choice but to go through it, because the road to the Celestial City lay right through the middle of it. Now this valley is a very lonely place. The prophet Jeremiah describes it like this: "A wilderness, a land of deserts and of pits, a land of drought and of the shadow of death, a land that nobody" — nobody but a Christian — "passed through, and where nobody lived."

And here Christian was in worse trouble than he had been in his fight with Apollyon, as you will see from what followed.
