The Valley of the Shadow of Death

Then I saw in my dream that when Christian had got to the edge of the Shadow of Death, two men met him — sons of the men who brought back a bad report of the good land — hurrying to go back the way they had come. Christian spoke to them like this.

Christian. Where are you going?

The men. They said: Back! Back! And we would advise you to do the same, if you set any value on either your life or your peace.

Christian. Why? What is the matter? said Christian.

The men. The matter! they said. We were going that way, the way you are going, and we went as far as we dared; and in fact we were nearly past the point of coming back at all. If we had gone a little further, we would not be here to bring you the news.

Christian. But what did you run into? said Christian.

The men. Why, we were nearly into the Valley of the Shadow of Death; only, luckily, we looked ahead of us and saw the danger before we got to it.

Christian. But what did you see? said Christian.

The men. See! Why, the valley itself, which is as black as pitch. We also saw the hobgoblins there, and satyrs, and dragons of the pit. And we heard in that valley a constant howling and yelling, like people in misery beyond words, sitting there bound in irons and affliction. And over that valley hang the discouraging clouds of confusion. Death is always spreading his wings over it too. In a word, the whole of it is terrible, and it has no order in it at all.

Christian. Then Christian said: From everything you have told me, I still see nothing to show that this is not my road to the harbour I want.

The men. Let it be your road; we will not choose it for ours.

So they parted, and Christian went on his way — but still with his sword drawn in his hand, for fear of being attacked.

Then I saw in my dream that for the whole length of this valley, there was on the right-hand side a very deep ditch. That ditch is the one into which the blind have led the blind in every age, and both of them have died miserably in it. And on the left-hand side there was a very dangerous bog, into which, if even a good man falls, he can find no bottom for his foot to stand on. King David once fell into that bog, and would no doubt have been smothered in it, if the one who is able had not pulled him out.

The path here was also extremely narrow, and so good Christian was all the harder pressed. Because when he tried in the dark to keep clear of the ditch on the one side, he was on the point of tipping over into the mud on the other; and when he tried to get away from the mud, without the greatest care he was ready to fall into the ditch. So he went on; and I heard him sighing bitterly here, because besides the dangers I have described, the path was so dark that time and again, when he lifted his foot to step forward, he had no idea where or on what he would be setting it down.

About the middle of this valley I made out the mouth of hell, and it stood right beside the road as well. Now, thought Christian, what am I going to do? And every now and then the flame and the smoke would come pouring out, with sparks and hideous noises — things that had no fear of Christian's sword the way Apollyon had — so that he was forced to put his sword away and take up another weapon, called All-prayer. So he cried out, in my hearing: "Lord, I beg you, deliver my soul!"

He went on like this for a long while, and still the flames kept reaching towards him. He heard mournful voices too, and rushing to and fro, so that sometimes he thought he was going to be torn to pieces, or trodden down like mud in the street. This terrifying sight was in front of him, and these dreadful noises in his ears, for several miles together.

And coming to a place where he thought he heard a company of fiends coming forward to meet him, he stopped and began to think out what he had best do. Sometimes he half thought of going back; then again he thought he might be halfway through the valley by now. He remembered too how many dangers he had already beaten, and that the danger of going back might be a good deal greater than going on. So he decided to keep going. And yet the fiends seemed to come nearer and nearer; but when they had got almost on top of him, he cried out in a tremendous voice, "I will walk in the strength of the Lord God!" — and at that they fell back, and came no further.

There is one thing I would not want to let slip past. I noticed that poor Christian was now so bewildered that he did not know his own voice; and this is how I could tell. Just as he came opposite the mouth of the burning pit, one of the wicked ones got in behind him and stepped up softly to him, and whispered a great many terrible blasphemies at him — which he genuinely believed had come out of his own mind. This put Christian to harder straits than anything he had met with before: to think that he was now blaspheming the one he had loved so much until then. And yet if he could have stopped it he would not have done it for anything; only he did not have the presence of mind either to stop his ears or to work out where these blasphemies were coming from.

When Christian had travelled in this wretched state for a considerable time, he thought he heard the voice of a man ahead of him on the road, saying, "Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for you are with me."

Then he was glad, and for these reasons.

First, because he gathered from it that there were others in this valley who feared God, besides himself.

Second, because he understood that God was with them, even in that dark and dismal place. And why not with me, he thought — even though, because of what this place puts in the way, I cannot make it out.

Third, because he hoped that if he could catch up with them he would have company before long.

So he went on, and called out to the man ahead of him. But the man did not know what to answer, because he thought he was alone too. And before long, day broke. Then Christian said: He has turned "the shadow of death into the morning."

Now that morning had come, he looked back — not out of any wish to go back, but to see by daylight what dangers he had come through in the dark. So he saw more clearly the ditch on the one hand and the bog on the other, and how narrow the road was that ran between the two of them. And now he saw the hobgoblins, and the satyrs, and the dragons of the pit as well — but all a long way off, because after daybreak they did not come near. Still, they were shown to him, as it is written: "He uncovers deep things out of darkness, and brings the shadow of death out into the light."

Now Christian was deeply moved at having been delivered from all the dangers of his lonely road. He had feared them more before, and yet he saw them more clearly now, because the daylight made them plain to him.

And about this time the sun was rising, and this was another mercy to Christian. Because you have to notice that although the first part of the Valley of the Shadow of Death was dangerous, this second part, which he still had to go, was if anything far more dangerous. From the place where he now stood right to the end of the valley, the road was set so thick with snares, traps, springs and nets on the one hand, and so full of pits, pitfalls, deep holes and sudden drops on the other, that if it had been dark now, as it was when he came through the first part, then had he a thousand souls, by any reasonable reckoning they would all have been thrown away. But, as I said, the sun was just now rising. So he said: "His lamp shines on my head, and by his light I walk through the darkness."

So he came to the end of the valley in this light. Now I saw in my dream that at the end of this valley there lay blood, bones, ashes and the mangled bodies of men — pilgrims, in fact, who had come this way before. And while I was wondering what the reason for it might be, I spotted a little ahead of me a cave, where two giants, Pope and Pagan, had lived in the old days; and it was by their power and tyranny that the men whose bones and blood and ashes lay there had been cruelly put to death.

But Christian went past this place without much danger, which surprised me somewhat. Since then, though, I have learned that Pagan has been dead many a long day; and as for the other, although he is still alive, he has grown so decrepit and so stiff in the joints — partly from age, and partly from the many sharp maulings he took in his younger days — that he can now do little more than sit at the mouth of his cave, grinning at pilgrims as they go past and biting his nails because he cannot get at them.
