Faithful

So I saw that Christian went on his way. Yet at the sight of the Old Man sitting in the mouth of the cave he did not know what to think — especially because the giant spoke to him, though he could not come after him, saying, "You will never learn until more of you are burned." But Christian held his tongue and put a good face on it, and so went past and took no harm. Then Christian sang:

	What a world of wonders — I can say no less —
	that I should have been kept safe through the distress
	I met with here. Blessed for ever be
	the hand that has delivered me from it.
	Dangers in darkness, devils, hell and sin
	closed round me while I was that valley in;
	snares, pits and traps and nets lay all about
	my path, that worthless, silly I might be
	caught, and entangled, and thrown down for good.
	But since I live — let Jesus wear the crown.

Now as Christian went on his way, he came to a slight rise that had been thrown up on purpose so that pilgrims could see ahead of them. So Christian went up it; and looking forward, he saw Faithful ahead of him on the road. Then Christian called out: Hey! Hello there! Wait, and I will be your companion.

At that, Faithful looked behind him; and Christian called out again: Wait, wait, until I catch up with you.

But Faithful answered: No — I am running for my life, and the avenger of blood is behind me.

At this Christian was rather stung, and putting on all his strength he quickly came up with Faithful, and in fact overtook him; so the last was first. Then Christian smiled a rather self-satisfied smile at having got the better of his brother — and then, not watching his feet properly, he suddenly tripped and fell, and could not get up again until Faithful came along to help him.

Then I saw in my dream that they went on together very affectionately, and had a good long talk about everything that had happened to them on their pilgrimage; and Christian began.

Christian. My honoured and much-loved brother Faithful, I am glad I have caught up with you, and that God has matched our tempers so well that we can walk as companions along such a pleasant stretch of road.

Faithful. I had hoped, dear friend, to have had your company all the way from our town; but you got a start on me, and so I have been forced to come this much of the road alone.

Christian. How long did you stay in the City of Destruction before you set out after me on your pilgrimage?

Faithful. Until I could not stay any longer. There was a great deal of talk, right after you had gone out, that our city would shortly be burned to the ground with fire from heaven.

Christian. What — did your neighbours talk like that?

Faithful. Yes, for a while it was in everybody's mouth.

Christian. What! And did nobody but you come out to escape the danger?

Faithful. Although there was a great deal of talk about it, as I say, I do not think they really believed it. Because in the heat of the discussion I heard some of them speak sneeringly about you, and about your desperate journey — which is what they called this pilgrimage of yours. But I did believe it, and I believe still, that the end of our city will come with fire and brimstone from above; and so I made my escape.

Christian. Did you hear any talk about neighbour Pliable?

Faithful. Yes, Christian. I heard he followed you until he came to the Slough of Despond, where, so some said, he fell in — though he would not have it known that he had. But I am quite sure he was thoroughly spattered with that particular kind of mud.

Christian. And what did the neighbours say to him?

Faithful. Ever since he went back he has been an object of ridicule, and among every sort of person. Some mock him and look down on him, and hardly anybody will give him work. He is now seven times worse off than if he had never left the city at all.

Christian. But why should they be so set against him, when they despise the road he abandoned too?

Faithful. Oh — they say, hang him, he is a turncoat; he was not true to what he claimed to believe. I think God has stirred up even his enemies to hiss at him and make him a byword, because he abandoned the road.

Christian. Did you have any conversation with him before you came out?

Faithful. I met him once in the street, but he slunk off to the other side, like a man ashamed of what he had done; so I did not speak to him.

Christian. Well, when I first set out I had hopes of that man. But now I am afraid he will die in the destruction of the city. Because what has happened to him is exactly what the true proverb says: "The dog has gone back to its own vomit, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mud."

Faithful. Those are my fears about him too. But who can stop what is going to be?

Christian. Well, neighbour Faithful, said Christian, let us leave him and talk about things that concern us more directly. Tell me now what you have met with on the road as you came; because I know you must have met with something, or else it would be a wonder worth writing down.

Faithful. I got clear of the Slough that I gather you fell into, and got up to the gate without that danger. Only I met with one whose name was Wanton, who came near to doing me real harm.

Christian. It was well for you that you got out of her net. Joseph was hard put to it by her, and he escaped her as you did — but it nearly cost him his life. What did she do to you?

Faithful. You cannot imagine — well, you know something of it — what a flattering tongue she had. She worked at me hard to turn aside with her, promising me every kind of satisfaction.

Christian. No — she did not promise you the satisfaction of a good conscience.

Faithful. You know what I mean. Every satisfaction of the body.

Christian. Thank God you escaped her. "The man the Lord detests shall fall into her ditch."

Faithful. Well — I am not sure whether I escaped her altogether or not.

Christian. Why, I trust you did not give in to what she wanted?

Faithful. No — not so far as defiling myself. Because I remembered an old piece of writing I had seen, which said, "Her steps take hold on hell." So I shut my eyes, because I did not want to be bewitched by her looks. Then she screamed abuse at me, and I went on my way.

Christian. Did you meet with no other attack as you came?

Faithful. When I came to the foot of the hill called Difficulty, I met a very old man who asked me what I was and where I was bound. I told him I was a pilgrim going to the Celestial City. Then the old man said: You look like an honest fellow. Would you be content to live with me for the wages I will give you? Then I asked his name and where he lived. He said his name was Adam the First, and that he lived in the town of Deceit.

Then I asked him what his work was, and what the wages would be. He told me his work was any number of delights, and that his wages were that I should be his heir at the end. I asked him further what kind of house he kept and what other servants he had. So he told me his house was kept up with all the delicacies in the world, and that his servants were of his own fathering. Then I asked whether he had any children. He said he had only three daughters — the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes and the Pride of Life — and that I could marry all three of them if I liked. Then I asked how long he would want me to live with him; and he told me, as long as he lived himself.

Christian. Well — and what did the old man and you settle on in the end?

Faithful. Why, at first I found myself rather inclined to go with him, because I thought he talked very fair. But looking at his forehead while I was talking with him, I saw written there: "Put off the old man with his deeds."

Christian. And what then?

Faithful. Then it came into my mind, burning hot, that whatever he said and however he flattered, once he had got me home to his house he would sell me for a slave. So I told him to stop talking, because I would not go near the door of his house. Then he abused me, and told me he would send somebody after me who would make my road bitter to my soul.

So I turned to go away from him. But just as I turned to leave, I felt him take hold of my flesh and give me such a deadly wrench backwards that I thought he had pulled part of me away with him. It made me cry out, "What a wretched man I am!" So I went on my way up the hill.

Now when I had got about halfway up, I looked behind me and saw somebody coming after me, swift as the wind; and he caught up with me just about where the bench stands.

Christian. Just there, said Christian, is where I sat down to rest; and being overcome with sleep, that is where I lost this scroll out of my coat.

Faithful. But hear me out, good brother. As soon as the man caught up with me, it was a word and a blow — down he knocked me and left me for dead. And when I had come round a little, I asked him why he had treated me so. He said, because of my secret leaning towards Adam the First; and with that he struck me another deadly blow on the chest and knocked me over backwards, so that I lay at his feet as dead as before.

So when I came round again I begged him for mercy; but he said, I do not know how to show mercy — and with that knocked me down again. He would certainly have finished me off, except that One came by and told him to stop.

Christian. Who was it that told him to stop?

Faithful. I did not know him at first; but as he went past I saw the holes in his hands and in his side, and then I concluded he was our Lord. So I went on up the hill.

Christian. The man who caught up with you was Moses. He spares nobody, and he does not know how to show mercy to those who break his law.

Faithful. I know it very well. It was not the first time he has met with me. He was the one who came to me when I was living comfortably at home, and told me he would burn my house down over my head if I stayed there.

Christian. But did you not see the house that stands there at the top of the hill, on the side where Moses met you?

Faithful. Yes, and the lions too, before I got to it. But as for the lions, I think they were asleep — it was about midday. And since I had so much of the day still ahead of me, I went past the porter and came on down the hill.

Christian. He did tell me that he saw you go by. But I wish you had called in at the house, because they would have shown you so many remarkable things that you would hardly have forgotten them to your dying day. But tell me, please — did you meet nobody in the Valley of Humiliation?

Faithful. Yes. I met one Discontent, who would gladly have talked me into going back with him. His argument was that there was no honour to be had in that valley at all. He told me, further, that going down there was a way of disobeying all my friends — Pride, Arrogance, Self-conceit, Worldly-glory and the rest, who, he said he knew, would be very much offended if I made such a fool of myself as to wade through this valley.

Christian. Well — and how did you answer him?

Faithful. I told him that although everybody he named might claim to be related to me, and rightly, since they really were my relations by blood, still, since I became a pilgrim they have disowned me, just as I have rejected them; and so they were no more to me now than if they had never been of my family at all.

I told him too that as far as this valley went, he had thoroughly misrepresented the thing; "for humility comes before honour, and a haughty spirit before a fall." So I said, I would rather go through this valley to the honour that the wisest people reckon as honour, than choose the thing he thought most worth our affection.

Christian. Did you meet with nothing else in that valley?

Faithful. Yes — I met with Shame. But of all the men I met on my pilgrimage, he is the one I think is wrongly named. The others would take no for an answer after a little argument and a bit besides; but this brazen-faced Shame would never be finished.

Christian. Why — what did he say to you?

Faithful. What! Why, he attacked religion itself. He said it was a pitiful, low, sneaking business for a man to give his mind to religion. He said a tender conscience was an unmanly thing, and that for a man to watch his words and his behaviour, and tie himself up from the swaggering freedom that the fine spirits of the age go in for, would make him the laughing stock of the times. He objected too that hardly any of the powerful, the rich or the clever had ever been of my opinion — nor any of them at all, until they had been talked into being fools, and into a deliberate foolishness that risks losing everything for nobody knows what. He also objected to the low and humble station of most of the pilgrims of their day, and to their ignorance and their lack of any education in the sciences.

Yes, and he pressed me at that rate about a great many more things than I am telling you here: that it was a shame to sit whining and mourning under a sermon, and a shame to come home sighing and groaning; that it was a shame to ask my neighbour's forgiveness for small faults, or to make things good where I had taken something from anyone. He said too that religion made a man stand off from the great, on account of a few vices, which he called by finer names; and made him acknowledge and respect the low, because they belonged to the same religious brotherhood. And is that not a shame? he said.

Christian. And what did you say to him?

Faithful. Say! At first I could not tell what to say. He put me to it so hard that the blood came up into my face — this Shame fetched it up, and very nearly beat me off altogether. But at last I began to consider that "what is highly valued among men is detestable in the sight of God." And I thought again: this Shame tells me what men are, but it tells me nothing about what God is, or what the Word of God is. And I thought, further, that on the day of judgment we shall not be sentenced to death or to life according to the swaggering spirits of this world, but according to the wisdom and the law of the Highest.

So, I thought, what God says is best really is best, even if every man in the world is against it. Seeing, then, that God prefers his own religion; seeing that God prefers a tender conscience; seeing that those who make fools of themselves for the kingdom of heaven are the wisest of all, and that a poor man who loves Christ is richer than the greatest man in the world who hates him — Shame, be off with you; you are an enemy to my salvation. Am I to take you in, against my sovereign Lord? How would I look him in the face when he comes? If I am ashamed of his ways and his servants now, how can I expect his blessing?

But this Shame really was a bold villain. I could hardly shake him out of my company; he would come haunting me, whispering in my ear about one or another of the weaknesses that go along with religion. But at last I told him it was no use trying any further with me, because the very things he despised were the ones in which I saw the most glory. And so at last I got past this pestering creature. And when I had shaken him off, I began to sing:

	The trials that those men meet with on the way
	who are obedient to the heavenly call
	are many, and are fitted to the flesh,
	and come, and come, and come again afresh,
	so that now, or at some other time, we may
	be taken by them, beaten, thrown away.
	So let the pilgrims, let the pilgrims then
	be on their guard, and quit themselves like men.

Christian. I am glad, my brother, that you stood up to this villain so bravely; because of all of them, as you say, I think he is the one with the wrong name. He is so bold that he will follow us in the street and try to shame us in front of everybody — that is, to make us ashamed of what is good. And if he were not so brazen himself, he would never attempt what he does. But let us keep on resisting him; because for all his swagger, he advances nobody but the fool. "The wise shall inherit glory," Solomon said, "but shame shall be the promotion of fools."

Faithful. I think we shall have to cry out for help against Shame to the one who wants us to be valiant for the truth on the earth.

Christian. You are right. But did you meet nobody else in that valley?

Faithful. No, nobody — because I had sunshine the whole of the rest of the way through it, and through the Valley of the Shadow of Death as well.

Christian. It was well for you. I am sure it went very differently with me. Almost as soon as I entered that valley, I had a long and terrible fight with that foul fiend Apollyon. In fact I genuinely thought he would have killed me, especially when he got me down and crushed me under him as though he meant to crush me to pieces; because as he threw me, my sword flew out of my hand. He even told me he had me for certain. But I cried out to God, and he heard me and delivered me out of all my troubles. Then I went into the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and had no light for almost half the way through it. I thought over and over that I was going to be killed there. But at last day broke and the sun rose, and I went through what was left of it with far more ease and quiet.
