Doubting Castle and Giant Despair

Then I saw that they went on their way to a pleasant river, which King David called "the river of God" and John "the river of the water of life." Now their road ran right along the bank of the river, and here Christian and his companion walked with great delight. They drank the water of the river too, which was sweet, and put new life into their tired spirits. Besides that, on both banks of this river there were green trees bearing every kind of fruit, and the leaves of the trees were good for medicine. They were delighted with the fruit of these trees as well, and they ate the leaves to keep off the sickness and the other complaints that come to people who overheat their blood with travelling. On each side of the river there was also a meadow, beautifully set with lilies, and it was green all the year round.

In this meadow they lay down and slept, because here they could lie down in safety. When they woke, they gathered more fruit from the trees and drank more of the water of the river, and then lay down to sleep again. They did this for several days and nights. Then they sang:

	Look how these crystal waters slip and slide
	to comfort pilgrims by the highway side;
	the meadows green, besides their fragrant smell,
	set out a feast for them. And who can tell
	what pleasant fruit, what leaves these trees will yield,
	will sell up all he has to buy this field.

So when they were minded to go on — because they were not at their journey's end yet — they ate and drank and set off.

Now I saw in my dream that they had not travelled far before the river and the road parted company for a while; at which they were more than a little sorry, and yet they did not dare go off the road. Now the road away from the river was rough, and their feet were sore from all their travelling; "so the souls of the pilgrims were much discouraged because of the way." So as they went on, they kept wishing for a better road.

Now a little ahead of them, on the left-hand side of the road, there was a meadow with a stile going over into it, and that meadow is called By-path Meadow. Then Christian said to his companion: If this meadow runs alongside our road, let us go over into it. So he went to the stile to look — and there, on the other side of the fence, was a path running along beside the road.

Just what I wanted, said Christian. Here is the easier walking. Come along, good Hopeful, and let us go over.

Hopeful. But what if this path should lead us off the road?

Christian. That is not likely, said the other. Look — does it not run right alongside it?

So Hopeful, persuaded by his companion, went after him over the stile. Once they were over and onto the path, they found it very easy on their feet; and looking ahead of them, they spotted a man walking as they were, whose name was Vain-confidence. So they called after him and asked where that path led. He said, to the Celestial Gate.

Look, said Christian — did I not tell you? By this you can see we are right.

So they followed on, and he went ahead of them. But then night came on and it grew very dark, so that the two behind lost sight of the man in front.

So the man in front — Vain-confidence by name — not being able to see the way ahead of him, fell into a deep pit, which had been dug there on purpose by the Prince of those grounds to catch conceited fools with; and he was smashed to pieces by the fall.

Now Christian and his companion heard him fall. So they called out to ask what had happened, but there was nobody to answer; they only heard a groaning.

Then Hopeful said: Where are we now?

At that his companion fell silent, suspecting that he had led him off the road. And now it began to rain, and thunder and lighten most terribly, and the water rose fast.

Then Hopeful groaned to himself, saying: Oh, if only I had kept to my road!

Christian. Who could have thought that this path would lead us off the way?

Hopeful. I was afraid of it from the very first, and that is why I gave you that gentle warning. I would have spoken plainer, except that you are older than I am.

Christian. Good brother, do not take offence. I am sorry I have brought you off the road, and that I have put you into such immediate danger. Please, my brother, forgive me. I did not do it with any bad intention.

Hopeful. Take comfort, my brother, for I do forgive you; and I believe too that this will turn out for our good.

Christian. I am glad I have a merciful brother with me. But we must not stand about like this. Let us try to get back again.

Hopeful. But, good brother, let me go first.

Christian. No, if you please, let me go first — so that if there is any danger I may be the first into it, since it is by my doing that we are both off the road.

Hopeful. No, said Hopeful, you shall not go first; because your mind is troubled, and it may lead you off the road again.

Then, to encourage them, they heard a voice saying: "Set your heart towards the highway, the very road you came by; turn back again." But by this time the waters had risen a great deal, which made going back very dangerous. (And it occurred to me then that it is easier to go off the road when you are on it than to get back on when you are off it.) Still, they risked going back — but it was so dark, and the flood was so high, that going back they were within an inch of drowning nine or ten times.

Nor could they, for all the skill they had, get back to the stile that night. So at last, coming upon a little shelter, they sat down there until daybreak; but being worn out, they fell asleep.

Now there was, not far from where they lay, a castle called Doubting Castle, whose owner was Giant Despair; and it was in his grounds that they were now sleeping. So getting up early in the morning and walking up and down his fields, he caught Christian and Hopeful asleep on his land. Then in a grim, surly voice he told them to wake up, and asked them where they were from and what they were doing on his grounds. They told him they were pilgrims and that they had lost their way.

Then the Giant said: You have trespassed on me tonight, tramping over my grounds and lying down on them, and so you must come along with me.

So they were forced to go, because he was stronger than they were. They also had very little to say for themselves, because they knew they were in the wrong. So the Giant drove them ahead of him and put them in his castle, into a very dark dungeon, filthy and stinking to the spirits of these two men. And here they lay from Wednesday morning to Saturday night without a bite of bread or a drop of water, or any light, or anybody to ask how they were. So they were in a bad way here, and a long way from friends and acquaintances. And in this place Christian had a double sorrow, because it was through his own ill-considered advice that they had been brought into this trouble.

Now Giant Despair had a wife, and her name was Diffidence — which is to say Distrust. So when he had gone to bed, he told his wife what he had done: that he had taken a couple of prisoners and thrown them into his dungeon for trespassing on his grounds. Then he asked her what he had best do with them next. So she asked him what they were, where they had come from and where they were bound; and he told her. Then she advised him that when he got up in the morning he should beat them without any mercy at all.

So when he got up he fetched himself a heavy crabapple club, and went down into the dungeon to them; and there he first set about swearing at them as if they were dogs, although they had never given him a word of offence. Then he set on them and beat them terribly, and so thoroughly that they could not help themselves or even turn over on the floor. This done, he went off and left them there to grieve over their misery and mourn under their distress. So they spent that whole day in nothing but sighs and bitter lamentations.

The next night, talking with her husband about them again and learning that they were still alive, she advised him to urge them to make an end of themselves. So when morning came he went to them in the same surly way as before; and seeing that they were very sore from the beating he had given them the day before, he told them that since they were never likely to get out of that place, their best course would be to finish themselves off at once — with a knife, a rope or poison. Because why, said he, should you choose life, when it comes with so much bitterness in it?

But they begged him to let them go. At that he gave them an ugly look, and rushing at them would no doubt have finished them off himself — except that he fell into one of his fits, because in sunny weather he sometimes did, and lost the use of his hand for a while. So he went off and left them, as before, to think about what to do.

Then the prisoners talked it over between themselves, whether it was best to take his advice or not; and this is how the conversation began.

Christian. Brother, said Christian, what are we going to do? The life we are living now is miserable. For my part I do not know which is better, to live like this or to die out of hand. "My soul chooses strangling rather than life," and the grave would be easier for me than this dungeon. Shall we be governed by what the Giant says?

Hopeful. Our present condition is dreadful, certainly, and death would be far more welcome to me than staying here for ever. But even so, let us consider: the Lord of the country we are going to has said, You shall do no murder — not to another man's person; so how much more are we forbidden to take the Giant's advice and kill ourselves. Besides, a man who kills another can only commit murder on his body; but for a man to kill himself is to kill body and soul at one stroke.

And what is more, my brother — you talk about ease in the grave; but have you forgotten the hell that murderers certainly go to? Because "no murderer has eternal life."

And let us consider again that all the law is not in Giant Despair's hands. Others, as far as I can make out, have been taken by him just as we have, and have still escaped out of his hands. Who knows but that the God who made the world may cause Giant Despair to die? Or that at some point he may forget to lock us in? Or that he may shortly have another of his fits in front of us and lose the use of his limbs? And if that ever happens again, then for my part I am determined to summon up a man's courage and do everything I can to get out from under his hand. I was a fool not to have tried it before. But however that may be, my brother, let us be patient and put up with it a while. The time may come that will give us a happy release. Only let us not be our own murderers.

With these words Hopeful steadied his brother's mind for the moment; so they stayed together in the dark that day, in their sad and dismal condition.

Well, towards evening the Giant went down into the dungeon again to see whether his prisoners had taken his advice. But when he got there he found them alive — and truly, alive was all they were, because now, what with the lack of bread and water and the wounds they had taken when he beat them, they could do little more than breathe. But alive, as I say, he found them; at which he flew into a terrible rage and told them that since they had disobeyed his advice, it would go worse with them than if they had never been born.

At this they shook badly, and I think Christian fainted. But coming round a little, they took up their conversation again about the Giant's advice, and whether after all they had better take it. Now Christian again seemed to be for doing it, but Hopeful made his second reply, as follows.

Hopeful. My brother, said he — do you not remember how brave you have been before now? Apollyon could not crush you, nor could everything you heard and saw and felt in the Valley of the Shadow of Death. What hardship and terror and bewilderment you have already come through! And are you now nothing but fear?

You can see that I am in this dungeon with you, and I am a far weaker man by nature than you are. This Giant has wounded me as well as you, and has cut off the bread and water from my mouth too, and I am mourning in the dark alongside you. But let us practise a little more patience. Remember how you played the man at Vanity Fair, and were afraid neither of the chain, nor the cage, nor even of a bloody death. So let us — at the very least to avoid the shame that it does not become a Christian to be caught in — bear up patiently as well as we can.

Now night having come again, and the Giant and his wife being in bed, she asked him about the prisoners, and whether they had taken his advice. To which he answered: They are stubborn rogues; they would rather put up with every hardship than make an end of themselves.

Then she said: Take them into the castle yard tomorrow and show them the bones and skulls of the ones you have already finished off; and make them believe that before the week is out you will tear them to pieces as you did their fellows before them.

So when morning came, the Giant went to them again and took them into the castle yard, and showed them what his wife had told him to. These, said he, were pilgrims like you, once, and they trespassed on my grounds as you have done; and when I thought fit, I tore them to pieces, and within ten days I will do the same to you. Go on, get back down to your den. And with that he beat them the whole way there.

So they lay all through Saturday in a pitiful state, as before. Now when night came, and when Mrs. Diffidence and her husband the Giant had got to bed, they began to talk about their prisoners again; and the old Giant wondered aloud that he could bring them to an end neither by his blows nor by his advice. At which his wife answered: I am afraid, said she, that they are living in hope that somebody will come to rescue them, or that they have picklocks about them, and hope to escape by them.

And do you say so, my dear? said the Giant. Then I shall search them in the morning.

Well — on Saturday, about midnight, the prisoners began to pray, and kept on praying until almost daybreak.

Now a little before it was light, good Christian, like a man half astonished, burst out in this passionate speech: What a fool I am, said he, to lie in a stinking dungeon like this when I could just as well be walking free! I have a key in my coat called Promise, that will — I am certain of it — open any lock in Doubting Castle.

Then Hopeful said: That is good news, good brother. Pull it out and try it.

Then Christian pulled it out of his coat and began trying it on the dungeon door; and as he turned the key the bolt gave, and the door swung open easily, and Christian and Hopeful both came out. Then he went to the outer door that leads into the castle yard, and with his key opened that door too. After that he went to the iron gate, because that had to be opened as well; and that lock went damnably hard, but the key did open it. Then they shoved the gate open to make their escape quickly — but as it opened, that gate made such a creaking that it woke Giant Despair, who got up in a hurry to chase his prisoners and felt his limbs give way under him, because his fits had taken him again, so that he could not go after them at all.

Then they went on and came to the King's highway, and so were safe, because they were out of his jurisdiction.

Now when they had got back over the stile, they began to work out between themselves what they might do at that stile to stop those who came after them from falling into Giant Despair's hands. So they agreed to put up a pillar there, and to engrave on the side of it this sentence: "Over this stile is the way to Doubting Castle, which is kept by Giant Despair, who despises the King of the Celestial Country and seeks to destroy his holy pilgrims."

So a great many who came after read what was written there, and escaped the danger. When this was done, they sang as follows:

	Off the road we went, and there we found
	what it is to walk on forbidden ground.
	And let those who come after us take care,
	in case their carelessness should land them where
	we were — as trespassers, and prisoners there,
	whose castle's Doubting and whose name's Despair.
