The Delectable Mountains

Then they went on until they came to the Delectable Mountains, which belong to the Lord of that hill we spoke of before. So they went up into the mountains to look at the gardens and orchards, the vineyards and the springs of water; and there they drank and washed themselves, and ate freely from the vineyards.

Now on the tops of these mountains there were shepherds feeding their flocks, and they were standing by the roadside. So the Pilgrims went over to them; and leaning on their staffs, as tired pilgrims usually do when they stop to talk with anybody along the road, they asked: Whose Delectable Mountains are these? And whose are the sheep feeding on them?

Shepherd. These mountains are Immanuel's Land, and they are within sight of his city; and the sheep are his too, and he laid down his life for them.

Christian. Is this the road to the Celestial City?

Shepherd. You are exactly on your road.

Christian. How far is it from here?

Shepherd. Too far for anybody except those who will really get there.

Christian. Is the road safe or dangerous?

Shepherd. Safe for those it is meant to be safe for; but offenders shall fall on it.

Christian. Is there anything here to relieve pilgrims who are tired and faint on the road?

Shepherd. The Lord of these mountains has charged us not to be "forgetful to entertain strangers." So everything good about the place is at your service.

I saw too in my dream that when the Shepherds realized they were travellers, they put questions to them as well, which they answered as they had elsewhere: Where have you come from? And how did you get onto the road? And by what means have you kept to it so long? — because only a few of those who set out to come here ever show their faces on these mountains. But when the Shepherds heard their answers and were pleased with them, they looked at them very kindly and said: Welcome to the Delectable Mountains.

The Shepherds, I say — whose names were Knowledge, Experience, Watchful and Sincere — took them by the hand and led them to their tents, and had them share whatever was ready at the time. They said, moreover: We would like you to stay here a while, to get to know us, and to enjoy yourselves further with all the good of these Delectable Mountains. So the Pilgrims said they were content to stay; and they went to their rest that night, because it was very late.

Then I saw in my dream that in the morning the Shepherds called Christian and Hopeful to come and walk with them on the mountains. So they went out with them and walked a while, with a pleasant view on every side. Then the Shepherds said to one another: Shall we show these Pilgrims some wonders?

So when they had decided to do it, they took them first to the top of a hill called Error, which was very steep on the far side, and told them to look down to the bottom. So Christian and Hopeful looked down, and saw at the bottom a number of men smashed to pieces by a fall they had taken from the top.

Then Christian said: What does this mean?

The Shepherds answered: Have you not heard of those who were led into error by listening to Hymenaeus and Philetus, on the matter of the faith of the resurrection of the body?

They answered: Yes.

Then the Shepherds said: Those you see lying smashed to pieces at the bottom of this mountain are the men themselves; and they have been left unburied to this day, as you see, as an example to others, to take care how they climb too high or come too near the edge of this mountain.

Then I saw that they took them to the top of another mountain, whose name is Caution, and told them to look into the distance. And when they did, they made out what they took to be several men walking up and down among the tombs that stood there; and they could tell the men were blind, because they kept stumbling over the tombs and could not find their way out from among them.

Then Christian said: What does this mean?

The Shepherds answered: Did you not see, a little below these mountains, a stile leading into a meadow on the left-hand side of the road?

They answered: Yes.

Then the Shepherds said: From that stile there runs a path that leads straight to Doubting Castle, which is kept by Giant Despair. And these men — pointing at the figures among the tombs — once came on pilgrimage as you are doing now, right up to that same stile. And because the proper road was rough at that spot, they chose to leave it and go into that meadow; and there they were taken by Giant Despair and thrown into Doubting Castle. And after they had been kept in the dungeon a while, he at last put out their eyes and led them out among those tombs, where he has left them to wander to this very day — so that the saying of the wise man might be fulfilled: "He who wanders out of the way of understanding shall remain in the congregation of the dead."

Then Christian and Hopeful looked at one another, with the tears bursting out of them, but said nothing at all to the Shepherds.

Then I saw in my dream that the Shepherds took them to another place, in a hollow, where there was a door in the side of a hill; and they opened the door and told them to look in. So they looked in, and saw that inside it was very dark and full of smoke. They also thought they could hear a rumbling noise there, like fire, and the cry of somebody being tormented; and they could smell the reek of brimstone.

Then Christian said: What does this mean?

The Shepherds told them: This is a side road to hell, a way that hypocrites go in by — people who sell their birthright, like Esau; who sell their master, like Judas; who blaspheme the Gospel, like Alexander; and who lie and dissemble, like Ananias and his wife Sapphira.

Then Hopeful said to the Shepherds: I gather that every one of these had the appearance of being on pilgrimage, just as we have now. Is that not so?

Shepherd. Yes — and kept it up a long time, too.

Hopeful. How far might they have got on their pilgrimage in their day, given that they were still thrown away so miserably?

Shepherd. Some further, and some not as far, as these mountains.

Then the Pilgrims said to one another: We shall need to cry out to the Strong One for strength.

Shepherd. Yes — and you will need to use it, when you have it, too.

By this time the Pilgrims wanted to go on, and the Shepherds wanted them to; so they walked on together towards the end of the mountains. Then the Shepherds said to one another: Let us show the Pilgrims the gates of the Celestial City from here, if they have the knack of looking through our telescope.

The Pilgrims gladly accepted the offer; so they took them to the top of a high hill called Clear, and gave them the glass to look through.

Then they tried to look; but the memory of that last thing the Shepherds had shown them made their hands shake, and because of that they could not hold the glass steady. Even so, they thought they saw something like the gate, and something of the glory of the place as well. Then they went away, and sang this song:

	So by the Shepherds secrets are revealed
	which from all other men are kept concealed.
	Come to the Shepherds, then, if you would see
	things deep, things hidden, things of mystery.

When they were about to leave, one of the Shepherds gave them a written note about the road. Another told them to beware of the Flatterer. The third told them to take care that they did not fall asleep on the Enchanted Ground. And the fourth wished them godspeed.

So I woke up from my dream.

And I slept, and dreamed again, and saw the same two Pilgrims going down the mountains along the highway towards the city. Now a little below these mountains, on the left, lies the country of Conceit; and out of that country there comes into the road the Pilgrims were walking on a little crooked lane. So here they met a very brisk young man who had come out of that country, whose name was Ignorance. So Christian asked him what parts he came from, and where he was going.

Ignorance. Sir, I was born in the country lying over there, a little to the left, and I am going to the Celestial City.

Christian. But how do you expect to get in at the gate? You may find some difficulty there.

Ignorance. Just as other good people do, said he.

Christian. But what do you have to show at that gate that would get it opened to you?

Ignorance. I know my Lord's will, and I have lived a good life. I pay every man what I owe him. I pray, I fast, I pay tithes, I give to the poor, and I have left my own country for the place I am going to.

Christian. But you did not come in at the little gate at the head of this road. You came in by that crooked lane; and so I am afraid that, whatever you may think of yourself, when the day of reckoning comes it will be laid to your charge that you are a thief and a robber, instead of your being let into the city.

Ignorance. Gentlemen, you are complete strangers to me and I do not know you. Be content to follow the religion of your country, and I will follow the religion of mine. I hope everything will turn out well. And as for this gate you talk about, everybody knows it is a long way off from our country. I cannot think that anybody in our parts so much as knows the road to it — nor do they need to care whether they do or not, since we have, as you see, a fine pleasant green lane that comes down from our country and joins the road by the shortest way.

When Christian saw that the man was "wise in his own conceit," he said to Hopeful in a whisper: "There is more hope of a fool than of him." And he added: "When a fool walks along the road, his wisdom fails him, and he tells everybody he meets that he is a fool." What — shall we talk with him further, or get ahead of him for now and leave him to think over what he has heard already, and then stop for him again later, and see whether we can do him any good by degrees?

Then Hopeful said:

	Let Ignorance a little while now muse
	on what's been said, and let him not refuse
	good counsel when it comes, lest he remain
	still ignorant of what's the greatest gain.
	God says that those who have no understanding,
	although he made them, he will not save.

Hopeful added: It is not good, I think, to tell him everything at once. Let us pass him by, if you like, and talk to him later, as much as he can take.

So they both went on, and Ignorance came along behind.

Now when they had got a little way past him, they came into a very dark lane, where they met a man whom seven devils had bound with seven strong ropes and were carrying back to the door they had seen in the side of the hill. Now good Christian began to tremble, and so did Hopeful his companion. Yet as the devils led the man away, Christian looked to see whether he knew him; and he thought it might be one Turn-away, who lived in the town of Apostasy. But he could not see his face properly, because he was hanging his head like a thief who has been caught. But once they were past, Hopeful looked after him and spotted a paper on his back with this written on it: "A loose-living believer, and a damnable apostate."

Then Christian said to his companion: Now I remember what I was told about something that happened to a good man near here. The man's name was Little-faith — a good man, and he lived in the town of Sincere. This was the thing.

At the entrance to this passage there comes down from Broad-way Gate a lane called Dead Man's Lane, so called because of the murders that are commonly done there. And this Little-faith, going on pilgrimage as we are now, happened to sit down there and fell asleep. Now at that very time there happened to come down the lane from Broad-way Gate three sturdy rogues, whose names were Faint-heart, Mistrust and Guilt — three brothers; and spotting Little-faith where he was, they came galloping up at speed.

Now the good man had just woken from his sleep and was getting up to go on with his journey. So they all came up to him and told him to stand, with threatening language. At this, Little-faith went as white as a cloud, and had the power neither to fight nor to run.

Then Faint-heart said: Hand over your purse. But when he was slow to do it, because he was unwilling to lose his money, Mistrust ran up to him and thrust his hand into his pocket and pulled out a bag of silver. Then Little-faith cried out: Thieves! Thieves! At which Guilt, with a great club he had in his hand, struck Little-faith on the head, and with that blow felled him flat to the ground, where he lay bleeding like a man who would bleed to death.

All this while the thieves stood by. But at last, hearing that somebody was on the road and afraid it might be one Great-grace, who lives in the city of Good-confidence, they took to their heels and left this good man to fend for himself.

Now after a while Little-faith came round, and getting up, managed to scramble on his way. That was the story.

Hopeful. But did they take everything he had?

Christian. No. They never went through the place where his jewels were, so he kept those. But I was told the good man was much distressed by his loss, because the thieves got most of his spending money. What they did not get, as I said, were the jewels; and he had a little odd money left as well, but hardly enough to get him to the end of his journey. In fact, if I was not misinformed, he was forced to beg as he went, to keep himself alive, since he was not allowed to sell his jewels. But beg and do what he could, he went — as we say — with many a hungry belly for most of the rest of the way.

Hopeful. But is it not a wonder they did not get his certificate off him, the one he was to be admitted by at the Celestial Gate?

Christian. It is a wonder. But they did not get it — though he did not keep it from them by any cleverness of his own; because being terrified by their coming on him, he had neither the power nor the presence of mind to hide anything. So it was more by good Providence than by any effort of his that they missed that good thing.

Hopeful. But it must have been a comfort to him that they did not get that jewel from him.

Christian. It might have been a great comfort to him, if he had made the use of it he should have. But those who told me the story said he made very little use of it all the rest of the way, and that because of the shock of having his money taken. In fact he forgot it for a great part of the rest of his journey; and besides, whenever it did come into his mind and he began to take comfort from it, fresh thoughts of his loss would come over him again, and those thoughts would swallow up everything else.

Hopeful. Poor man. That must have been a great grief to him.

Christian. Grief! Yes, a grief indeed. Would it not have been so to any of us, if we had been treated as he was — robbed and wounded too, and in a strange place, as he was? It is a wonder he did not die of grief, poor heart. I was told that he scattered nearly the whole rest of the way with nothing but mournful and bitter complaints, telling everybody who caught up with him, or whom he caught up with, where he had been robbed and how; who it was that did it, and what he had lost; how he was wounded, and how he barely escaped with his life.

Hopeful. But it is a wonder his need did not drive him to sell or pawn some of his jewels, so that he could have had something to relieve himself with on his journey.

Christian. You talk like a man who still has the eggshell on his head to this very day. What should he pawn them for, or who should he sell them to? In that whole country where he was robbed his jewels were valued at nothing; nor did he want the kind of relief that could have been got there. Besides, if his jewels had been missing at the gate of the Celestial City, he would have been shut out of an inheritance there — and he knew that perfectly well; and that would have been worse to him than the appearance and the villainy of ten thousand thieves.

Hopeful. Why are you so sharp with me, my brother? Esau sold his birthright, and for a bowl of stew at that, and that birthright was his greatest jewel. And if he did, why might Little-faith not have done the same?

Christian. Esau did sell his birthright, certainly, and so do many others, and by doing it shut themselves out of the chief blessing — as that wretch did too. But you must draw a distinction between Esau and Little-faith, and between their situations.

Esau's birthright was a symbol; Little-faith's jewels were not. Esau's belly was his god; Little-faith's belly was not. Esau's lack was in his bodily appetite; Little-faith's was not. Besides, Esau could see no further than satisfying his appetites: "Look, I am at the point of death," said he, "and what good will this birthright do me?" But Little-faith, although it was his lot to have only a little faith, was kept by that little faith from such excesses, and was made to see his jewels and value them too highly to sell them as Esau sold his birthright.

You do not read anywhere that Esau had faith — not so much as a little. So it is no wonder that where the flesh alone rules, as it will in a man who has no faith to resist it, he sells his birthright and his soul and everything else, and that to the devil of hell; because it is with such men as it is with the ass in heat, that cannot be turned aside. When their minds are set on their appetites, they will have them whatever they cost.

But Little-faith was of another temper. His mind was on divine things; his living was on things that were spiritual, and from above. So what purpose would there be for a man of that temper to sell his jewels — even if there had been anybody who would have bought them — in order to fill his mind with empty things? Will a man pay a penny to fill his belly with hay? Or could you persuade a turtledove to live on carrion like a crow? Though faithless men can pawn or mortgage or sell what they have for the sake of their appetites, and themselves outright into the bargain, still, those who have faith — saving faith, though only a little of it — cannot do so. That, my brother, is where you are mistaken.

Hopeful. I admit it. But your severe remark had almost made me angry.

Christian. Why, I only compared you to some of the brisker sort of birds, that will go running to and fro on untrodden paths with the shell still on their heads. But let that pass, and think about the matter we were discussing, and all will be well between you and me.

Hopeful. But, Christian — these three fellows, I am convinced in my heart, are nothing but a pack of cowards. Would they have run as they did, do you think, at the noise of one man coming along the road? Why did Little-faith not summon up more courage? It seems to me he could have stood one round with them, and given in when there was no help for it.

Christian. That they are cowards, many have said; but few have found it so when they were tried. As for great courage, Little-faith had none. And I can see, my brother, that if you had been the man concerned, you are only for one round and then giving in. And truly, since this is the height of your spirit now, while they are at a distance from us, if they were to appear to you as they did to him they might give you second thoughts.

But consider again: they are only hired thieves. They serve under the king of the bottomless pit, who will come to their aid himself if he has to, and his voice is like the roaring of a lion. I have been in the same fight myself as Little-faith was, and I found it a terrible thing. These three villains set on me; and when I began, like a Christian, to resist, they gave one call and in came their master. I would have given my life for a penny, as the saying goes — except that, as God would have it, I was clothed in tested armour. And yes, even so equipped, I found it hard work to acquit myself like a man. No man can tell what waits for us in that combat but the man who has been in the battle himself.

Hopeful. Well — but they ran, you see, when they only supposed that Great-grace was on the road.

Christian. True. They have often run, both they and their master, when Great-grace has merely appeared; and no wonder, because he is the King's Champion. But I imagine you will allow some difference between Little-faith and the King's Champion. Not all the King's subjects are his champions, nor can they, when they are tested, do the feats of war that he can. Is it reasonable to think that a little child could handle Goliath as David did? Or that there should be the strength of an ox in a wren? Some are strong, some are weak; some have great faith and some have little. This man was one of the weak ones, and so he got the worst of it.

Hopeful. I wish it had been Great-grace, for their sakes.

Christian. If it had been, he might have had his hands full. Because I must tell you that although Great-grace is excellent with his weapons, and can do well enough with them so long as he keeps them at sword's point, still, if they get inside his guard — even Faint-heart, or Mistrust, or the other one — it will go hard but they will tip his heels up. And when a man is down, you know, what can he do?

Anybody who looks closely at Great-grace's face will see scars and cuts there that easily prove what I am saying. Yes, and I once heard that he said, and that when he was in the fight, "We despaired even of life." How these sturdy rogues and their fellows made David groan and mourn and roar! And Heman and Hezekiah too, though they were champions in their day, were forced to bestir themselves when these attacked them — and even so, they had their coats soundly beaten by them. Peter once wanted to go and try what he could do; and though some say of him that he is the prince of the apostles, they handled him so that in the end they made him afraid of a mere serving girl.

Besides, their king is at their whistle. He is never out of earshot; and if at any time they get the worst of it, he comes in to help them if he possibly can. And of him it is said: "The sword of the one who attacks him cannot hold, nor the spear, the dart, nor the coat of mail. He counts iron as straw, and bronze as rotten wood. The arrow cannot make him run; slingstones are turned to stubble against him. Darts are counted as stubble; he laughs at the shaking of a spear."

What can a man do in a case like this? It is true that if a man could have Job's horse at every turn, and had the skill and the courage to ride him, he might do remarkable things: "for his neck is clothed with thunder, and he will not be afraid of the grasshopper; the glory of his snorting is terrible; he paws in the valley and rejoices in his strength; he goes out to meet the armed men. He mocks at fear and is not frightened, and he does not turn back from the sword. The quiver rattles against him, and the glittering spear and the shield. He swallows the ground with fierceness and rage, and he will not believe it is the sound of the trumpet. Among the trumpets he says, Ha, ha! And he smells the battle far off, the thunder of the captains and the shouting."

But for foot-soldiers like you and me, let us never wish to meet an enemy, nor boast as though we could do better when we hear that others have been worn down, nor be pleased with the thought of our own manhood. Because men like that generally come off worst when they are tried. Look at Peter, whom I mentioned before. He would swagger — yes, he would; he would do better, so his empty mind prompted him to say, and stand up for his Master more than anybody else. But who was ever so beaten and so run down by these villains as he was?

So when we hear that such robberies are done on the King's highway, there are two things it is right for us to do.

First, to go out armed, and to be sure to take a shield with us. Because it was for want of a shield that the man who struck so hard at Leviathan could not make him yield; and indeed, if that is missing, he is not afraid of us at all. That is why the one with the knowledge has said, "Above all, taking the shield of faith, with which you shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked."

Second, it is good as well that we ask the King for an escort — yes, that he will go with us himself. This is what made David rejoice when he was in the Valley of the Shadow of Death; and Moses would rather have died where he stood than go one step without his God. My brother, if he will only come along with us, what need have we to be afraid of ten thousand who set themselves against us? But without him, the proud helpers "fall among the slain."

I for my part have been in the fight before now; and though, by the goodness of the one who is best, I am alive, as you see, still I cannot boast about my manhood. I shall be glad if I meet with no more shocks like that one — though I am afraid we are not out of all danger yet. However, since the lion and the bear have not devoured me so far, I hope God will deliver us from the next uncircumcised Philistine too.

Then Christian sang:

	Poor Little-faith! Have you been among the thieves?
	Were you robbed? Remember this, whoever believes
	and gets more faith, shall then a victor be
	over ten thousand — else scarce over three.

So they went on, and Ignorance followed. Then they went on until they came to a place where they saw a road come into their road, and it seemed to run just as straight as the one they were meant to take; and here they did not know which of the two to take, because both seemed to lie straight ahead. So they stood still to consider.

And as they were thinking about the road, a figure came to them, black of body but covered in a very light robe, and asked them why they were standing there. They answered that they were going to the Celestial City, but did not know which of these roads to take.

Follow me, said the figure — that is where I am going too.

So they followed him along the road that had just joined theirs, which by degrees turned, and turned them so far away from the city they wanted to reach that in a short time their faces were pointing away from it. And still they followed him. But before long, before they realized it, he had led them both inside the compass of a net, in which they were so tangled that they did not know what to do; and with that the white robe fell off the black figure's back. Then they saw where they were. So there they lay, crying for some time, because they could not get themselves out.

Christian. Then Christian said to his companion: Now I see that I have gone wrong. Did the Shepherds not tell us to beware of the flatterers? It is as the wise man says, and we have found it out today: "A man who flatters his neighbour spreads a net for his feet."

Hopeful. They also gave us a written note of directions about the road, to help us find it more surely; but we have forgotten to read that as well, and have not kept ourselves out of the paths of the destroyer. David was wiser than we are here, because he says, "Concerning the works of men, by the word of your lips I have kept myself from the paths of the destroyer."

So they lay there lamenting themselves in the net.

At last they spotted a Shining One coming towards them, with a whip of fine cord in his hand. When he had come to the place where they were, he asked them where they had come from and what they were doing there. They told him they were poor pilgrims going to Zion, but had been led off their road by a black figure dressed in white, who told us, they said, to follow him, because he was going there too.

Then the one with the whip said: It is Flatterer, a false apostle, who has transformed himself into an angel of light.

So he tore the net open and let the men out. Then he said to them: Follow me, and I will set you on your road again. So he led them back to the road they had left in order to follow the Flatterer.

Then he asked them: Where did you sleep last night? They said: With the Shepherds, on the Delectable Mountains. He asked them then whether they had not had a note of directions for the road from those Shepherds. They answered: Yes.

But did you, said he, when you came to a standstill, pull out your note and read it? They answered: No. He asked them why. They said they had forgotten.

He asked, further, whether the Shepherds had not told them to beware of the Flatterer. They answered: Yes — but we did not imagine, they said, that this fine-spoken man was he.

Then I saw in my dream that he ordered them to lie down; and when they did, he punished them severely, to teach them the good road they ought to walk in. And as he punished them he said, "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be zealous, therefore, and repent."

When this was done, he told them to go on their way and pay good attention to the Shepherds' other directions. So they thanked him for all his kindness, and went quietly along the right road, singing:

	Come over here, you that walk along the way,
	and see how pilgrims fare who go astray!
	They are caught in an entangling net,
	because good counsel they too lightly did forget.
	True, they were rescued — but you see as well,
	they're whipped besides. Let that your warning be.

Now after a while they saw, a long way off, somebody coming quietly and alone along the highway to meet them. Then Christian said to his companion: There is a man over there with his back towards Zion, and he is coming to meet us.

Hopeful. I see him. Let us look out for ourselves now, in case he turns out to be a flatterer too.

So he came nearer and nearer, and at last came up to them. His name was Atheist, and he asked them where they were going.

Christian. We are going to Mount Zion.

Then Atheist burst into a great fit of laughter.

Christian. What is the meaning of your laughing?

Atheist. I am laughing to see what ignorant people you are, to take on such a wearisome journey — and all you are likely to get for your pains is the walking.

Christian. Why, man — do you think we shall not be received?

Atheist. Received! There is no such place as you are dreaming of anywhere in this world.

Christian. But there is in the world to come.

Atheist. When I was at home in my own country I heard what you are saying now; and from hearing it I went out to see, and I have been looking for this city these twenty years — and I find no more of it than I did the first day I set out.

Christian. We have both heard, and we believe, that there is such a place to be found.

Atheist. If I had not believed it when I was at home, I would not have come this far to look. But finding nothing — and I should have found it, if there had been such a place, because I have gone further to look for it than you have — I am going back again, and I mean to refresh myself with the things I threw away then, for the hope of something that I now see does not exist.

Christian. Then Christian said to Hopeful his companion: Is what this man says true?

Hopeful. Take care — he is one of the flatterers. Remember what it has already cost us once for listening to that kind of fellow. What, no Mount Zion? Did we not see the gate of the city from the Delectable Mountains? And besides, are we not to walk by faith now? Let us go on, said Hopeful, in case the man with the whip catches up with us again.

You should have been the one teaching me that lesson, and I will whisper it in your ear instead: "Stop, my son, listening to instruction that will cause you to stray from the words of knowledge." I say, my brother, stop listening to him, and let us "believe to the saving of the soul."

Christian. My brother, I did not put the question to you because I doubted the truth of what we believe myself, but to test you and draw out from you some fruit of the honesty of your heart. As for this man, I know he is blinded by the god of this world. Let us go on, you and I, knowing that we have belief in the truth, "and no lie is of the truth."

Hopeful. Now I rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.

So they turned away from the man; and he, laughing at them, went on his way.
