The Enchanted Ground

Then I saw in my dream that they went on until they came into a certain country whose air naturally makes a person drowsy, if he comes into it as a stranger. And here Hopeful began to get very dull and heavy with sleep; so he said to Christian: I am beginning to get so drowsy now that I can hardly keep my eyes open. Let us lie down here and take a nap.

Christian. Not on any account, said the other — in case we fall asleep and never wake up again.

Hopeful. Why, my brother? Sleep is sweet to a working man. We might be refreshed if we took a nap.

Christian. Do you not remember that one of the Shepherds told us to beware of the Enchanted Ground? What he meant by that was that we should beware of sleeping. "So let us not sleep, as others do, but let us watch and be sober."

Hopeful. I admit I was in the wrong. And if I had been here alone, I would have run the risk of death by sleeping. I see the truth of what the wise man says: "Two are better than one." Your company has been a mercy to me all this way, and you shall have a good reward for your trouble.

Christian. Now then, said Christian, to keep off drowsiness in this place, let us get into some good conversation.

Hopeful. With all my heart, said the other.

Christian. Where shall we begin?

Hopeful. Where God began with us. But you begin, if you please.

Christian. First I will sing you this song:

	When saints grow sleepy, let them come this way
	and hear how these two pilgrims talk and pray.
	Yes, let them learn from them, by any means,
	to hold their drowsy, slumbering eyelids open.
	The fellowship of saints, if managed well,
	will keep them wide awake, in spite of hell.

Christian. Then Christian began, and said: I will ask you a question. How did you first come to think of doing what you are doing now?

Hopeful. Do you mean, how did I first come to look after the good of my soul?

Christian. Yes, that is my meaning.

Hopeful. I carried on a long while enjoying the things that were seen and sold at our fair — things which I believe now, if I had stayed with them, would have drowned me in ruin and destruction.

Christian. What things were they?

Hopeful. All the treasures and riches of the world. I also took a great deal of pleasure in wild living, revelling, drinking, swearing, lying, impurity, breaking the Sabbath, and anything else that tends to destroy the soul. But I found at last, by hearing and thinking about divine things — which in fact I heard from you, and from beloved Faithful, who was put to death for his faith and his good living at Vanity Fair — that "the end of these things is death," and that it is because of them that "the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience."

Christian. And did you fall under the power of that conviction straight away?

Hopeful. No. I was not willing at first to know the evil of sin, or the damnation that follows from committing it. When my mind first began to be shaken by the Word, I tried to shut my eyes against its light.

Christian. But what was the reason you behaved like that towards the first workings of God's blessed Spirit on you?

Hopeful. The reasons were these. First, I did not know this was the work of God in me. It never occurred to me that God begins the conversion of a sinner by waking him up about his sin. Second, sin was still very sweet to my flesh, and I was unwilling to leave it. Third, I could not see how to part with my old companions; their company and the things they did were too attractive to me. Fourth, the hours when these convictions were on me were such troublesome, heart-terrifying hours that I could not bear them — could not even bear the memory of them on my heart.

Christian. Then it seems you sometimes got rid of your trouble?

Hopeful. Yes, truly. But it would come back into my mind again, and then I would be as bad as before — worse, in fact.

Christian. And what was it that brought your sins back to mind?

Hopeful. A great many things. Such as:

If I so much as met a good man in the street; or

if I heard anybody reading in the Bible; or

if my head started to ache; or

if I was told that some of my neighbours were sick; or

if I heard the bell tolling for somebody who had died; or

if I thought about dying myself; or

if I heard that somebody else had died suddenly;

but above all, when I thought about myself, and that I must very soon come to judgment.

Christian. And could you at any time get the guilt of sin off you easily, when it came on you by any of these ways?

Hopeful. No, not I — because then they would take a faster hold on my conscience. And then, if I so much as thought about going back to sin, though my mind was set against it, it would be a double torment to me.

Christian. And what did you do then?

Hopeful. I thought I would have to try to mend my life; because otherwise, I thought, I am certain to be damned.

Christian. And did you try to mend it?

Hopeful. Yes. I ran not only from my sins but from sinful company as well, and took to religious duties — praying, reading, weeping over sin, telling my neighbours the truth, and so on. I did these things and a great many more, too many to go into here.

Christian. And did you think yourself in a good way then?

Hopeful. Yes, for a while. But at last my trouble came tumbling down on me again, and that right on top of all my reforming.

Christian. How did that come about, since you were reformed by then?

Hopeful. There were several things that brought it on me, especially sayings like these: "All our righteousness is like filthy rags." "By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified." "When you have done all those things, say, We are unprofitable" — and many more of the same sort.

From these I began to reason with myself like this: If all my righteousness is filthy rags; if by keeping the law nobody can be justified; and if, when we have done everything, we are still unprofitable, then it is nothing but folly to think of getting to heaven by the law.

I thought further along these lines: if a man runs up a hundred pounds of debt at the shopkeeper's, and after that pays for everything he takes, still, if the old debt stands there in the book uncrossed, the shopkeeper can sue him for it and have him thrown into prison until he pays it.

Christian. Well, and how did you apply that to yourself?

Hopeful. Why, I thought this to myself. By my sins I have run a long way into God's book, and my reforming now will not pay off that score. So under all my present improvements I still had to think: how am I to be freed from the damnation I have brought myself into danger of by everything I did before?

Christian. A very good application. But please go on.

Hopeful. Another thing that has troubled me, even since my recent improvements, is this: if I look closely at the best of what I do now, I still see sin — new sin — mixing itself in with the best of what I do. So that now I am forced to conclude that in spite of all my old foolish opinions of myself and of my religious duties, I have committed enough sin in a single duty to send me to hell, even if my earlier life had been faultless.

Christian. And what did you do then?

Hopeful. Do! I could not tell what to do, until I confided in Faithful — because he and I knew each other well. And he told me that unless I could get hold of the righteousness of a man who had never sinned, then neither my own righteousness nor all the righteousness in the world could save me.

Christian. And did you think he was telling the truth?

Hopeful. If he had told me that while I was pleased and satisfied with my own reforming, I would have called him a fool for his trouble. But now, since I can see my own weakness and the sin that sticks to my best performance, I have been forced round to his opinion.

Christian. But when he first suggested it to you, did you think there was such a man to be found — one of whom it could justly be said that he had never committed a sin?

Hopeful. I have to admit the words sounded strange at first; but after a little more talk and time in his company, I was fully convinced of it.

Christian. And did you ask him who this man was, and how you were to be justified by him?

Hopeful. Yes. And he told me it was the Lord Jesus, who lives at the right hand of the Most High. And this, he said, is how you must be justified by him: by trusting in what he did in his own person in the days of his flesh, and in what he suffered when he hung on the tree.

I asked him further how that man's righteousness could have the power to justify somebody else before God. And he told me that he was the mighty God, and did what he did, and died his death as well, not for himself but for me — and that his doings, and the worth of them, would be credited to me if I believed in him.

Christian. And what did you do then?

Hopeful. I raised my objections against believing, because I thought he was not willing to save me.

Christian. And what did Faithful say to that?

Hopeful. He told me to go to him and see. Then I said that would be presumption; but he said no, because I had been invited to come. Then he gave me a book of Jesus' own composing, to encourage me to come more freely; and he said of that book that every jot and tittle in it stood firmer than heaven and earth.

Then I asked him what I was to do when I came; and he told me I must beg on my knees, with all my heart and soul, for the Father to reveal him to me. Then I asked him further how I was to make my petition to him. And he said: Go, and you will find him on a mercy seat, where he sits all the year round to give pardon and forgiveness to those who come.

I told him I did not know what to say when I came. And he told me to say something to this effect: God be merciful to me, a sinner, and make me know and believe in Jesus Christ. Because I can see that if his righteousness had not existed, or if I have no faith in that righteousness, I am utterly cast away. Lord, I have heard that you are a merciful God, and that you have appointed that your Son Jesus Christ should be the Saviour of the world; and further, that you are willing to give him to such a poor sinner as I am — and I am a sinner indeed. Lord, take this opportunity, then, and magnify your grace in the salvation of my soul, through your Son Jesus Christ. Amen.

Christian. And did you do as you were told?

Hopeful. Yes — over and over and over.

Christian. And did the Father reveal his Son to you?

Hopeful. Not the first time, nor the second, nor the third, nor the fourth, nor the fifth — no, nor the sixth time either.

Christian. What did you do then?

Hopeful. What! Why, I could not tell what to do.

Christian. Did you not think of leaving off praying?

Hopeful. Yes — two hundred times over.

Christian. And what was the reason you did not?

Hopeful. I believed that what I had been told was true — that without the righteousness of this Christ, all the world could not save me. And so I thought to myself: if I leave off, I die; and I can only die at the throne of grace. And along with that, this came into my mind: "Though it delays, wait for it, because it will surely come; it will not delay." So I kept on praying until the Father showed me his Son.

Christian. And how was he revealed to you?

Hopeful. I did not see him with my bodily eyes, but with the eyes of my understanding; and this is how it happened. One day I was very sad — sadder, I think, than at any other time in my life — and this sadness came from a fresh sight of the size and the vileness of my sins. And as I was expecting nothing but hell and the everlasting damnation of my soul, suddenly, as I thought, I saw the Lord Jesus look down from heaven at me and say, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved."

But I answered: Lord, I am a great sinner — a very great sinner. And he answered, "My grace is sufficient for you."

Then I said: But, Lord, what is believing? And then I saw from that saying, "He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst," that believing and coming were one and the same thing; and that whoever came — that is, whoever ran out in his heart and his affections after salvation by Christ — really did believe in Christ.

Then the tears came into my eyes, and I asked further: But, Lord, may such a great sinner as I am really be accepted by you and saved by you? And I heard him say, "And the one who comes to me I will in no way cast out."

Then I said: But how, Lord, must I think of you as I come to you, so that my faith may be placed on you rightly? Then he said, "Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners." "He is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes." "He died for our sins and rose again for our justification." "He loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood." "He is the mediator between God and us." "He lives for ever to intercede for us."

From all of which I gathered that I must look for righteousness in his person, and for the settling of my sins by his blood; and that what he did in obedience to his Father's law, and in submitting to its penalty, was not for himself but for whoever will accept it for his own salvation and be grateful for it. And now my heart was full of joy, my eyes full of tears, and my whole affection running over with love for the name and the people and the ways of Jesus Christ.

Christian. This was a revelation of Christ to your soul indeed. But tell me particularly what effect it had on your spirit.

Hopeful. It made me see that all the world, for all the righteousness in it, is in a state of condemnation. It made me see that God the Father, though he is just, can justly justify the sinner who comes to him. It made me deeply ashamed of the vileness of my former life, and overwhelmed me with the sense of my own ignorance; because no thought had ever come into my heart before that showed me the beauty of Jesus Christ like that. It made me love a holy life, and long to do something for the honour and glory of the name of the Lord Jesus. Yes — I thought that if I had a thousand gallons of blood in my body now, I could spill every drop of it for the sake of the Lord Jesus.

Then I saw in my dream that Hopeful looked back and saw Ignorance, whom they had left behind, coming after them. Look, he said to Christian, how far back that youngster is loitering.

Christian. Yes, yes, I see him. He has no use for our company.

Hopeful. But I should have thought it would have done him no harm to have kept pace with us so far.

Christian. That is true; but I warrant you he thinks otherwise.

Hopeful. I think he does. But even so, let us wait for him.

So they did. Then Christian said to him: Come on, man — why are you hanging back so far?

Ignorance. I take my pleasure in walking alone — a great deal more than in company, unless I happen to like it better.

Then Christian said quietly to Hopeful: Did I not tell you he had no use for our company? But even so, said he, come up, and let us talk the time away in this lonely place.

Then, turning his speech to Ignorance, he said: Come — how are you? How do things stand between God and your soul now?

Ignorance. Well, I hope. Because I am always full of good impulses that come into my mind and comfort me as I walk.

Christian. What good impulses? Tell us, please.

Ignorance. Why, I think about God and heaven.

Christian. So do the devils and the damned souls.

Ignorance. But I think about them and I want them.

Christian. So do many people who are never likely to get there. "The soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing."

Ignorance. But I think about them, and I leave everything for them.

Christian. That I doubt. Because leaving everything is a hard business — harder than most people realize. But why, or on what grounds, are you persuaded that you have left everything for God and heaven?

Ignorance. My heart tells me so.

Christian. The wise man says, "He that trusts his own heart is a fool."

Ignorance. That is said about an evil heart, but mine is a good one.

Christian. But how do you prove that?

Ignorance. It comforts me with hopes of heaven.

Christian. That may be through its own deceitfulness; because a man's heart can supply him with comfort in hopes of a thing he has no ground at all to hope for.

Ignorance. But my heart and my life agree together, and so my hope is well grounded.

Christian. Who told you your heart and your life agree together?

Ignorance. My heart tells me so.

Christian. Ask my friend whether I am a thief! Your heart tells you so! Unless the Word of God bears witness in this matter, no other testimony is worth anything.

Ignorance. But is it not a good heart that has good thoughts? And is that not a good life that goes according to God's commandments?

Christian. Yes, that is a good heart that has good thoughts, and that is a good life that goes according to God's commandments. But it is one thing to have these, and quite another only to think you have them.

Ignorance. Tell me, then — what do you count as good thoughts, and a life according to God's commandments?

Christian. There are good thoughts of various kinds: some about ourselves, some about God, some about Christ, and some about other things.

Ignorance. What are good thoughts about ourselves?

Christian. Those that agree with the Word of God.

Ignorance. And when do our thoughts about ourselves agree with the Word of God?

Christian. When we pass the same judgment on ourselves that the Word passes. To explain myself: the Word of God says of people in their natural condition, "There is none righteous; there is none that does good." It also says that "every imagination of the heart of man is only evil, and that continually." And again, "The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth." Now when we think this about ourselves, and feel it, then our thoughts are good ones, because they agree with the Word of God.

Ignorance. I will never believe that my heart is as bad as that.

Christian. Then you have never had one good thought about yourself in your life. But let me go on. As the Word passes judgment on our hearts, so it passes judgment on our ways; and when our thoughts about our hearts and our ways agree with the judgment the Word gives on both, then both are good, because they agree with it.

Ignorance. Explain what you mean.

Christian. Why, the Word of God says that man's ways are crooked ways — not good, but twisted. It says they are naturally off the good road, and that they have never known it. Now when a man thinks this about his own ways — and I mean when he thinks it with real feeling, and with humbling of heart — then he has good thoughts about his own ways, because his thoughts now agree with the judgment of the Word of God.

Ignorance. And what are good thoughts about God?

Christian. Just as I said about ourselves: when our thoughts about God agree with what the Word says about him. And that means when we think about his being and his attributes as the Word has taught us, which I cannot go into at length now. But to speak of him with reference to ourselves: we have right thoughts of God when we think that he knows us better than we know ourselves, and can see sin in us when and where we can see none in ourselves; when we think that he knows our innermost thoughts, and that our heart, with all its depths, is always open to his eyes; and also when we think that all our righteousness stinks in his nostrils, and that he cannot therefore bear to see us stand in front of him with any confidence, even in the very best of what we do.

Ignorance. Do you think I am such a fool as to think God can see no further than I can? Or that I would come to God on the strength of the best of what I do?

Christian. Why, how do you think about this, then?

Ignorance. Why, to be brief — I think I must believe in Christ for justification.

Christian. What! You think you must believe in Christ when you cannot see that you need him! You see neither the corruption you were born with nor the sins you have actually committed; you have such an opinion of yourself and of what you do as plainly shows you to be a man who never saw any necessity for Christ's personal righteousness to justify him before God. How, then, can you say, I believe in Christ?

Ignorance. I believe well enough for all that.

Christian. And how do you believe?

Ignorance. I believe that Christ died for sinners, and that I shall be justified before God from the curse through his gracious acceptance of my obedience to his law. Or to put it another way: Christ makes my religious duties acceptable to his Father by virtue of his merits, and so I shall be justified.

Christian. Let me answer this confession of your faith.

First, you believe with an imaginary faith; because this faith is nowhere described in the Word.

Second, you believe with a false faith; because it takes justification away from the personal righteousness of Christ and applies it to your own.

Third, this faith does not make Christ the justifier of your person, but only of your actions — and of your person for the sake of your actions, which is false.

Fourth, therefore this faith is deceitful, and will leave you under wrath on the day of God Almighty. Because true justifying faith puts the soul, feeling its lost condition under the law, to flying for refuge to Christ's righteousness — and that righteousness of his is not some act of grace by which he makes your obedience acceptable to God for justification, but his own personal obedience to the law, doing and suffering for us what the law required of us. That righteousness, I say, is what true faith accepts; and the soul, sheltered under the skirt of it and presented by it as spotless before God, is accepted and acquitted from condemnation.

Ignorance. What! Would you have us trust to what Christ has done in his own person, outside us altogether? This notion would loosen the reins on our appetites and let us live exactly as we please. Because what does it matter how we live, if we can be justified by Christ's personal righteousness from everything, as soon as we believe it?

Christian. Ignorance is your name, and as your name is, so are you — and this very answer of yours proves what I say. You are ignorant of what justifying righteousness is, and just as ignorant of how to secure your soul from the heavy wrath of God through faith in it. Yes, and you are ignorant too of the true effects of saving faith in this righteousness of Christ, which are to bend and win the heart over to God in Christ, to love his name, his Word, his ways and his people — and not what you ignorantly imagine.

Hopeful. Ask him whether he ever had Christ revealed to him from heaven.

Ignorance. What! You are a man for revelations, are you? I believe that everything you and all the rest of you say on that subject is nothing but the product of disordered brains.

Hopeful. Why, man! Christ is so hidden in God from the natural understanding of the flesh that no man can know him savingly unless God the Father reveals him.

Ignorance. That is your faith, but not mine; and yet mine is as good as yours, I have no doubt, even though I do not have as many fancies in my head as you do.

Christian. Allow me to put in a word. You ought not to speak so lightly about this matter. Because I will boldly state, exactly as my good companion has done, that no man can know Jesus Christ except by the revelation of the Father. Yes, and the faith too, by which the soul lays hold of Christ, must — if it is the right kind — be worked in us by the exceeding greatness of his mighty power; and the working of that faith, I can see, poor Ignorance, is a thing you know nothing about. Wake up, then; see your own wretchedness, and run to the Lord Jesus. And by his righteousness, which is the righteousness of God, since he himself is God, you will be delivered from condemnation.

Ignorance. You go so fast that I cannot keep up with you. You go on ahead; I must stay behind a while.

Then they said:

	Well, Ignorance, will you go on being a fool,
	and slight good counsel, ten times given you?
	And if you still refuse it, you will know
	before too long the evil of doing so.
	Remember, man, in time; stoop, do not fear.
	Good counsel taken well will save; so hear.
	But if you slight it still, then you will be
	the loser, Ignorance — I promise you.

Then Christian turned to his companion.

Christian. Well, come along, my good Hopeful. I can see that you and I are going to walk by ourselves again.

So I saw in my dream that they went on at a good pace ahead, and Ignorance came shambling after. Then Christian said to his companion: I feel very sorry for this poor man. It will certainly go badly with him in the end.

Hopeful. There are plenty in our town in the same condition — whole families, yes, whole streets of them, and pilgrims among them too. And if there are so many in our parts, how many do you think there must be in the place where he was born?

Christian. Indeed, the Word says, "He has blinded their eyes, so that they should not see." But now that we are on our own — what do you make of such men? Do you think they never have convictions of sin, and consequently fears that their situation is dangerous?

Hopeful. No — you answer that question yourself; you are the older man.

Christian. Then I say that sometimes, as I think, they may. But being naturally ignorant, they do not understand that convictions like that are for their good; and so they desperately try to stifle them, and go on presumptuously flattering themselves in the way their own hearts want to go.

Hopeful. I do believe, as you say, that fear does men a great deal of good, and helps to set them right at the beginning of their pilgrimage.

Christian. Without any doubt it does, if it is the right kind. Because the Word says so: "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom."

Hopeful. How would you describe right fear?

Christian. True or right fear can be recognized by three things.

First, by where it comes from: it is caused by saving convictions about sin.

Second, it drives the soul to take a fast hold of Christ for salvation.

Third, it produces and keeps up in the soul a great reverence for God, his Word and his ways — keeping it tender, and making it afraid to turn away from them, to the right hand or the left, to anything that might dishonour God, break its peace, grieve the Spirit or give the enemy something to sneer about.

Hopeful. Well said. I believe you have spoken the truth. Are we nearly past the Enchanted Ground now?

Christian. Why, are you tired of this conversation?

Hopeful. No, truly — I only wanted to know where we are.

Christian. We have not above two miles more to go on it. But let us come back to our subject. Now the ignorant do not know that convictions of the kind that put them in fear are for their good, and so they try to stifle them.

Hopeful. How do they try to stifle them?

Christian. First, they think those fears are worked in them by the devil, though in fact they are worked by God; and thinking so, they resist them as things that tend directly to their own ruin.

Second, they also think these fears tend to spoil their faith — when, poor men, alas for them, they have no faith at all. And so they harden their hearts against them.

Third, they take it for granted that they ought not to be afraid, and so, in spite of the fears, they grow presumptuously confident.

Fourth, they see that these fears tend to take away their pitiful old self-made holiness, and so they resist them with all their might.

Hopeful. I know something of this myself, because before I knew myself it was just so with me.

Christian. Well, let us leave our neighbour Ignorance to himself for now, and take up another useful question.

Hopeful. With all my heart — but you must still start it.

Christian. Well then: did you not know, about ten years ago, a man called Temporary in your parts, who was very forward in religion at the time?

Hopeful. Know him! Yes. He lived in Graceless, a town about two miles from Honesty, and he lived next door to a man called Turnback.

Christian. That is right; he lived under the same roof with him. Well, that man was much awakened once. I believe that then he had some sight of his sins and of the wages that were owing for them.

Hopeful. I am of your mind, because my house was not more than three miles from his, and he would often come to me, and with a great many tears. Truly I pitied the man, and was not altogether without hope for him. But one can see that not everybody who cries, Lord, Lord, is in earnest.

Christian. He told me once that he had decided to go on pilgrimage, as we are doing now. But all of a sudden he got to know a man called Save-self, and after that he became a stranger to me.

Hopeful. Now that we are talking about him, let us look a little into the reason for the sudden backsliding of him and others like him.

Christian. It may be very useful. But you begin.

Hopeful. Well then — in my judgment there are four reasons for it.

First, although the consciences of such men are woken up, their minds are not changed. So when the power of guilt wears off, the thing that provoked them to be religious stops, and they naturally turn back to their own course again. It is the same as we see with a dog that is sick from something it has eaten: as long as the sickness lasts it vomits and brings everything up — not that it does this out of any free choice, if we may speak of a dog having a choice, but because its stomach is upset. But now, when its sickness is over and its stomach eased, its appetite not being at all turned away from its vomit, it comes round and licks the whole lot up again. And so what is written is true: "The dog is turned to his own vomit again." So, I say, being hot for heaven only by virtue of the sense and fear of the torments of hell, then as their sense of hell and their fear of damnation chills and cools, so their desire for heaven and salvation cools too. And so it comes about that when their guilt and fear is gone, their desire for heaven and happiness dies, and they go back to their old course.

Second, another reason is that they have slavish fears that get the better of them. I am speaking now of the fears they have of other people, because "the fear of man brings a snare." So although they seem to be hot for heaven as long as the flames of hell are about their ears, still, when that terror has passed off a little, they fall to having second thoughts — namely, that it is a good thing to be prudent, and not to run the risk of losing everything for they know not what, or at the very least of bringing unavoidable and unnecessary trouble on themselves. And so they fall in with the world again.

Third, the shame that goes with religion lies in their way like a block. They are proud and haughty, and in their eyes religion is a low and contemptible thing. So when they have lost their sense of hell and of the wrath to come, they go back to their old course.

Fourth, guilt, and thinking about terrifying things, are painful to them. They do not like to see their misery before they get into it — though perhaps if they looked at it first, and if they could bring themselves to like the sight, it might make them run where the righteous run and are safe. But because, as I said before, they positively avoid all thought of guilt and terror, therefore once they are rid of their awakenings about the terrors and wrath of God, they gladly harden their hearts, and choose the sort of paths that will harden them more and more.

Christian. You are near the heart of it. Because the bottom of the whole thing is the want of a change in their mind and their will. And so they are just like a criminal standing in front of the judge: he quakes and trembles and seems to repent most heartily, but the bottom of it all is the fear of the rope, not any hatred of the offence. And that is obvious, because let this man have his freedom and he will still be a thief, and a rogue still — whereas if his mind had been changed he would be another man.

Hopeful. Now I have shown you the reasons for their going back; you show me the way it happens.

Christian. So I will, gladly.

First, they draw their thoughts off, as far as they can, from any remembrance of God, of death and of the judgment to come.

Second, then they cast off their private duties by degrees — private prayer, curbing their appetites, keeping watch, sorrow for sin, and the like.

Third, then they avoid the company of lively and warm Christians.

Fourth, after that, they grow cold towards public duty — hearing, reading, godly conversation and so on.

Fifth, then they begin to pick holes, as we say, in the coats of some of the godly; and they do it devilishly, so that they may have some plausible excuse for throwing religion behind their backs on account of some weakness they have spotted in them.

Sixth, then they begin to attach themselves to, and keep company with, worldly, loose and dissolute men.

Seventh, then they give way to worldly and dissolute talk in private; and they are delighted if they can see such things in anybody who is reckoned honest, so that they may do it all the more boldly on their example.

Eighth, after this they begin to play with small sins openly.

Ninth, and then, being hardened, they show themselves for what they are. And so, launched out again into the gulf of misery, unless a miracle of grace prevents it, they perish everlastingly in their own self-deceptions.
