The Author's Way of Sending Forth His Second Part

	Go now, my little book, to every place
	where my first Pilgrim has but shown his face.
	Call at their door. If any say, Who's there?
	then answer them: Christiana is here.
	If they invite you in, then in you go
	with all your boys; and then, as you well know,
	tell them who these are, and where they came from —
	perhaps they'll know them by their looks, or name.
	But if they don't, then ask them yet again
	whether they didn't once take in and entertain
	one Christian, a Pilgrim. If they say
	they did, and were delighted with his way,
	then let them know that these are his relations:
	yes, this is his own wife, and these his children.
	Tell them they have left their house and home
	and turned Pilgrims, seeking a world to come;
	that they have met with hardships on the road,
	that trouble finds them out by night and day;
	that they have trodden on snakes, fought with devils,
	and have come out on top of a good many evils.
	Yes, tell them of the others too, who have
	out of sheer love of pilgrimage been brave
	defenders of that road, and how they still
	refuse this world, to do their Father's will.
	Go, tell them also of the choice good things
	that pilgrimage to the Pilgrim brings.
	Let them be told as well how dear they are
	to their own King, and how they're in his care;
	what fine houses he is providing for them,
	though they meet rough winds and swelling tides;
	and what a splendid calm they'll have at last
	who hold to their Lord, and to his ways, hold fast.
	Perhaps with heart and hand they will embrace
	you, as they did my firstborn, and will grace
	you and your fellows with such welcome and such fare
	as shows they are lovers of Pilgrims everywhere.

Objection 1

	But what if they will not believe of me
	that I am truly yours? Because there are some
	who counterfeit the Pilgrim and his name,
	and by disguise try to seem the very same,
	and by that means have worked their way into
	the hands and houses of I don't know who.

Answer

	It's true. Some have lately, to counterfeit
	my Pilgrim, put my title on their own;
	and others have stitched half my name and title
	onto their book, to help the thing sell better.
	But by their features they declare themselves
	not mine at all, whoever else's they are.
	If you meet any such, your only way
	in front of them all is to say out your say
	in your own native language, which no man
	uses now, and nobody can easily fake.
	If, after all that, they still have doubts of you,
	and think that you, like gypsies, wander round
	up to no good, to dirty the whole country,
	or that you're out to cheat good honest people
	with things you've no warrant for — then send for me,
	and I will testify that you are pilgrims.
	Yes, I will testify that only you
	are my Pilgrims; and that alone will do.

Objection 2

	But what if I should ask about him at the door
	of those who wish him damned in life and limb?
	What shall I do, when at a house like that
	I ask for Pilgrims, and they only rage the more?

Answer

	Don't frighten yourself, my book. Such bogeymen
	are nothing but the ground of groundless fears.
	My Pilgrim's book has travelled sea and land,
	and yet I never once could understand
	that it was slighted, or turned out of doors
	by any kingdom, whether rich or poor.
	In France and Flanders, where men kill each other,
	my Pilgrim is esteemed a friend, a brother.
	In Holland too, they say, as I am told,
	my Pilgrim is with some worth more than gold.
	Highlanders and wild Irish can agree
	that my Pilgrim should be on familiar terms with them.
	In New England he is so far advanced,
	receives there such a loving countenance,
	as to be trimmed, new-clothed and decked with gems
	so that he can show off his features and his limbs.
	And more than that: so handsomely he walks
	that thousands sing about him daily, and talk.
	And if you come nearer home, it will appear
	my Pilgrim knows no ground for shame or fear.
	City and country both will take him in
	with, Welcome, Pilgrim; yes, and they can't refrain
	from smiling, if my Pilgrim's only by,
	or shows his head in any company.
	Fine gentlemen will hug my Pilgrim and love him,
	value him greatly — yes, and rate him above
	things of much greater bulk; and with delight
	say, My lark's leg is better than a kite.
	Young ladies, and young gentlewomen too,
	show no small kindness to my Pilgrim.
	Their cabinets, their bosoms and their hearts
	my Pilgrim has, because to them he imparts
	his pretty riddles in such wholesome strains
	as yield them double profit for the pains
	of reading. Yes, I think I may be bold
	to say some prize him far above their gold.
	The very children walking in the street,
	if they should chance my holy Pilgrim meet,
	will greet him well, will wish him well, and say
	he is the finest young fellow of the day.
	Those who have never seen him still admire
	what they have heard of him, and much desire
	to have his company, and hear him tell
	those pilgrim stories that he knows so well.
	Yes, some who did not love him at the first,
	but called him fool and simpleton, say they must,
	now that they've seen and heard him, praise him now,
	and send him on to those they love.
	So then, my Second Part, you needn't be
	afraid to show your head. None can hurt you
	who wish well to the one that went before,
	because you follow after with a second store
	of things as good, as rich, as profitable
	for young, for old, for shaky and for stable.

Objection 3

	But there are some who say, He laughs too loud;
	and some who say, His head is in a cloud.
	Some say his words and stories are so dark
	they cannot tell, by them, how to find his mark.

Answer

	One may, I think, say this: both his laughs and cries
	can well be guessed at by his watery eyes.
	Some things are of a nature that will make
	a man's fancy chuckle while his heart's aching.
	When Jacob saw his Rachel with the sheep,
	he did at the same moment kiss and weep.
	And where some say a cloud is in his head —
	that only shows how wisdom is covered over
	with its own mantles, and set there to stir the mind
	to a search after what it would gladly find.
	Things that seem hidden away in obscure words
	only allure the godly mind the more
	to study what such sayings should contain
	that speak to us in such a clouded strain.
	I also know a dark comparison
	will press itself upon the fancy harder,
	and stick faster in the heart and head,
	than things not borrowed from a simile.
	So then, my book, let no discouragement
	hinder your travels. Look — you are being sent
	to friends, not enemies; to friends who will make room
	for you, your Pilgrims, and embrace your words.
	Besides, whatever my first Pilgrim left concealed,
	you, my brave second Pilgrim, have revealed.
	What Christian left locked up, and went his way,
	sweet Christiana opens with her key.

Objection 4

	But some don't like the method of your first;
	they count it romance, and throw it away as dust.
	If I should meet with such, what should I say?
	Must I slight them as they slight me, or not?

Answer

	My Christiana, if you meet with such,
	by all means, in the most loving way, greet them.
	Do not return them abuse for abuse;
	but if they frown, then please — smile back at them.
	Perhaps it's just their nature, or some bad report
	that's made them scorn you so, or answer sharply.
	Some love no cheese, some love no fish, and some
	love neither their friends nor their own house and home.
	Some shy at pork, think nothing of a chicken,
	and love a fowl no better than a cuckoo or an owl.
	Leave such, my Christiana, to their choice,
	and look for those who will rejoice to find you.
	By no means force yourself; but humbly go
	and present yourself to them in your Pilgrim's dress.
	Go, then, my little book, and show to all
	who take you in and bid you welcome
	what you shall keep shut up and hid from the rest;
	and wish that what you show them may be blessed
	to them for good, and make them choose to be
	Pilgrims far better than either you or me.
	Go then, I say, and tell all men who you are.
	Say: I am Christiana, and my part
	is now, with my four sons, to tell you what
	it is for people to take a Pilgrim's lot.
	Go also, tell them who and what they are
	that now go on pilgrimage with you.
	Say: Here's my neighbour Mercy; she is one
	who has walked a Pilgrim with me a long time.
	Come, see her in her single life, and learn
	between the idle and the Pilgrim to discern.
	Yes, let young women learn from her to prize
	the world that is to come, in any case.
	When young girls with light steps follow God,
	and leave old doting sinners to his rod,
	it's like those days in which the young ones cried
	Hosanna! — while the old ones stood and jeered.
	Next, tell them of old Honest, whom you found
	with his white hair, treading the Pilgrim's ground.
	Yes, tell them how plain-hearted this man was,
	how, following his good Lord, he bore his cross.
	Perhaps with some grey head this may prevail
	to fall in love with Christ and mourn his sin.
	Tell them also how Master Fearing went
	on pilgrimage, and how the time he spent
	in loneliness, with all his fears and cries —
	and how at last he won the joyful prize.
	He was a good man, though much down in spirit;
	he is a good man, and does life inherit.
	Tell them of Master Feeble-mind as well,
	who would not go in front, but still behind.
	Show them how near he came to being killed,
	and how one Great-heart got his life back for him.
	This man was true of heart, though weak in grace;
	you could read true godliness in his face.
	Then tell them of Master Ready-to-halt,
	a man on crutches, but with little fault.
	Tell them how Master Feeble-mind and he
	loved one another, and in opinion much agreed.
	And let all know that though weakness was their lot,
	still, sometimes one could sing and one could dance.
	Do not forget Master Valiant-for-truth,
	that man of courage, though a very youth.
	Tell everybody that his spirit was so stout
	no man could ever once make him turn about;
	and how Great-heart and he could not hold back,
	but pulled down Doubting Castle, and killed Despair.
	Do not pass over Master Despondency,
	nor Much-afraid, his daughter, though they lie
	under such heavy cloaks as make them look
	(to some) as if their God had quite forsaken them.
	They went softly, but they went sure; and at the end
	they found the Lord of Pilgrims was their friend.
	When you have told the world of all these things,
	then turn about, my book, and touch these strings,
	which, if but touched, will make such music
	as makes a cripple dance and a giant quake.
	These riddles lying folded in your breast,
	set out and open freely; and for the rest
	of your more mysterious lines, let them remain
	for those whose nimble wits shall win them.
	Now may this little book a blessing be
	to those who love this little book and me;
	and may the man who buys it have no cause to say
	his money was lost, or thrown away.
	Yes, may this Second Pilgrim yield such fruit
	as suits each good Pilgrim's fancy;
	and may it persuade some who go astray
	to turn their feet and hearts to the right way.
	This is the hearty prayer of

The Author,

John Bunyan
