Christiana's Summons

	"I have used similitudes."

Courteous Companions,

Some time ago it was a pleasure to me, and a profit to you, to tell you the dream I had about Christian the Pilgrim, and about his dangerous journey towards the Celestial Country. I told you then as well what I saw concerning his wife and children, and how unwilling they were to go with him on pilgrimage — so unwilling that he was forced to set out without them, because he dared not risk the destruction he was afraid would come of staying with them in the City of Destruction. So, as I showed you then, he left them and went.

Now it has happened, through the sheer press of business, that I have been much hindered and held back from my usual travels into the parts he came from, and so could not, until now, get an opportunity to make any further inquiry after those he left behind, so that I could give you an account of them. But having had some business that way lately, I went down there again. And having taken lodgings in a wood about a mile from the place, I dreamed again as I slept.

And in my dream, an elderly gentleman came past where I lay; and because he was going part of the way I was travelling, it seemed to me that I got up and went along with him. So as we walked, as travellers usually do, we seemed to fall into conversation; and our talk happened to turn on Christian and his travels. This is how I began with the old man.

Sir, said I, what town is that down there, lying on the left-hand side of our road?

Then Mr. Sagacity said — for that was his name — It is the City of Destruction: a populous place, but full of a very ill-natured and idle sort of people.

I thought that was the city, said I. I went through that town myself once, and so I know this report you give of it is true.

Sagacity. Too true. I wish I could speak the truth and say something better about the people who live there.

Well, sir, said I, then I see you are a well-meaning man, and one who takes pleasure in hearing and telling what is good. Tell me — did you never hear what happened some time ago to a man in this town whose name was Christian, who went on pilgrimage up towards the higher country?

Sagacity. Hear of him! Yes — and I heard too of the harassment, the troubles, the wars, the captivities, the cries and groans and frights and fears that he met with on his journey. Besides which, I have to tell you, the whole country rings with him. There are hardly any houses that have heard of him and what he did that have not gone looking for the record of his pilgrimage and got hold of it. Yes, I think I may say that that hazardous journey of his has won a great many well-wishers to his way. Because although while he was here he was a fool in everybody's mouth, now that he is gone he is highly praised by all of them. It is said he lives splendidly where he is; and many who are determined never to run his risks still find their mouths watering at his gains.

They may well think, said I — if they think anything true at all — that he lives well where he is; because he now lives at and in the Fountain of Life, and has what he has without labour or sorrow, since there is no grief mixed in with it there. But tell me — what do the people say about him?

Sagacity. Say! The people say strange things about him. Some say that he now walks in white; that he has a chain of gold about his neck; that he has a crown of gold set with pearls on his head. Others say that the Shining Ones who showed themselves to him now and then on his journey have become his companions, and that he is on as easy terms with them where he is as one neighbour is with another here.

Besides that, it is confidently stated about him that the King of the place where he is has already given him a very rich and pleasant house at court; and that every day he eats and drinks and walks and talks with him, and receives the smiles and favour of the one who is Judge of all there.

What is more, some expect that his Prince, the Lord of that country, will shortly be coming into these parts, and will want to know the reason, if they can give any, why his neighbours thought so little of him and held him up to so much ridicule when they found he meant to be a pilgrim. Because they say that he stands so high now in his Prince's affections, and that his Sovereign is so much concerned about the insults thrown at Christian when he became a pilgrim, that he will regard them all as done to himself. And no wonder — because it was for love of his Prince that Christian took the risks he did.

I must say, said I, I am glad of it. I am glad for the poor man's sake, that he now has rest from his labour, and that he now reaps the harvest of his tears with joy, and that he has got beyond the gunshot of his enemies and out of the reach of those who hate him. I am glad too that a rumour of these things is going round in this country. Who can tell but it may have some good effect on some of those left behind?

But please, sir, while it is fresh in my mind — do you hear anything of his wife and children? Poor hearts. I have been wondering what has become of them.

Sagacity. Who — Christiana and her sons? They are likely to do as well as Christian himself did. Because although they all played the fool at first, and could not be persuaded by Christian's tears or his pleading, still, second thoughts have worked wonderfully in them; so they have packed up and gone after him too.

Better and better, said I. But what — wife and children and all?

Sagacity. It is true. I can give you an account of the matter, because I was on the spot at the time and knew the whole affair thoroughly.

Then, said I, a man may report it for a fact?

Sagacity. You need not be afraid to state it — I mean that they have all gone on pilgrimage, both the good woman and her four boys. And since we are, as I gather, going a considerable way together, I will give you an account of the whole thing.

This Christiana — for that was her name from the day she and her children took up a pilgrim's life — after her husband had gone over the river, and she could hear nothing more of him, began to have her thoughts working in her mind. First, because she had lost her husband, and because the loving bond of that relationship was utterly broken between them. Because you know, he said to me, nature can do no less than fill the living with many a heavy thought at the memory of losing those they loved. This, then, over her husband, cost her many a tear.

But that was not all. Christiana also began to consider whether her own unbecoming behaviour towards her husband was not one reason she never saw him again, and why he was taken from her the way he was. And on top of this there came into her mind, in swarms, all her unkind and unnatural and ungodly conduct towards her dear friend — which clogged her conscience and loaded her down with guilt.

She was, moreover, badly broken by calling to mind her husband's restless groans, his salt tears, and his lamenting over himself; and how she had hardened her heart against all his pleading and his loving attempts to persuade her and her sons to go with him. Yes — there was not a thing Christian either said to her or did in front of her the whole time his burden hung on his back that did not come back on her like a flash of lightning and tear her heart open. Above all, that bitter cry of his, "What shall I do to be saved?" rang in her ears most miserably.

Then she said to her children: Sons, we are all ruined. I have sinned your father away, and he is gone. He wanted us with him, but I would not go myself. And I have kept you back from life as well.

At that the boys all burst into tears and cried out to go after their father.

Oh, said Christiana, if it had only been our lot to go with him! Then things would have gone well with us, beyond anything they are likely to do now. Because although I used foolishly to imagine, about your father's troubles, that they came out of some foolish notion he had got, or that he was overrun with melancholy, still, now I cannot get it out of my mind that they came from something else altogether: that the Light of light was given him, and that by its help, as I can see now, he has escaped the traps of death.

Then they all wept again, and cried out: Oh, cursed be the day!

The next night Christiana had a dream. She saw, as it were, a broad sheet of parchment opened out in front of her, on which the sum of all her ways was written down; and the record, as she thought, looked very black against her. Then she cried out aloud in her sleep, "Lord, have mercy on me, a sinner!" And the little children heard her.

After that, she thought she saw two very evil-looking creatures standing by her bedside, saying: What are we going to do with this woman? Because she cries out for mercy waking and sleeping. If she is allowed to go on as she has begun, we shall lose her as we lost her husband. So one way or another we must find a way to take her mind off what is to come hereafter; otherwise nothing in the world can stop her becoming a pilgrim.

Now she woke up in a great sweat, and shaking; but after a while she fell asleep again. And then she thought she saw Christian her husband in a place of bliss, among a great many immortals, with a harp in his hand, standing and playing on it before One who sat on a throne with a rainbow round his head. And she saw him bow his head, with his face down to the paved floor under the Prince's feet, saying: I thank my Lord and King with all my heart for bringing me into this place. Then a company of those standing round about shouted, and played on their harps; but no living person could tell what they said, except Christian and his companions.

The next morning, when she was up and had prayed to God and talked with her children a while, somebody knocked hard at the door. So she called out, saying: If you come in God's name, come in.

So he said, Amen, and opened the door, and greeted her with "Peace be to this house." And when he had done that, he said: Christiana, do you know why I have come?

Then she went red and began to tremble, and her heart began to grow warm with wanting to know where he had come from and what his errand to her was. So he said to her: My name is Secret; I live among those who are on high. It is spoken of, where I live, as if you had a wish to come there. And there is a report too that you are aware of the wrong you did your husband in hardening your heart against his way, and in keeping these children of yours in ignorance.

Christiana, the Merciful One has sent me to tell you that he is a God ready to forgive, and that he takes delight in multiplying his pardons for offences. He also wants you to know that he invites you to come into his presence, to his table, and that he will feed you with the richest of his house, and with the inheritance of Jacob your father.

There is Christian your husband — that was — with legions more of his companions, for ever looking at that face which gives life to all who look at it; and every one of them will be glad when they hear the sound of your feet crossing your Father's threshold.

Christiana was deeply humbled at this, and bowed her head to the ground; and the Visitor went on and said: Christiana, here is a letter for you as well, which I have brought from your husband's King.

So she took it and opened it — and it smelled like the finest perfume, and it was written in letters of gold. The contents of the letter were that the King would have her do as Christian her husband had done, because that was the way to come to his city and to live in his presence with joy for ever.

At this the good woman was quite overcome. So she cried out to her visitor: Sir, will you take me and my children with you, so that we too may go and worship this King?

Then the visitor said: Christiana, the bitter comes before the sweet. You must enter this Celestial City by way of troubles, as the man who went before you did. So my advice is that you do what Christian your husband did. Go to that little gate over there, across the plain, because that stands at the head of the road you must go up; and I wish you all speed.

I advise you as well to put this letter inside your coat, and to read it over to yourself and to your children until you have it by heart; because it is one of the songs you must sing while you are in this house of your pilgrimage. And you must hand it in at the gate at the far end.

Now I saw in my dream that this old gentleman, as he told me this story, seemed to be greatly moved by it himself. He went on, and said:

So Christiana called her sons together and began to speak to them like this. My sons, I have lately been, as you may have noticed, under a great deal of distress of soul about the death of your father — not because I have any doubt at all about his happiness, since I am satisfied now that he is well. I have also been much troubled by thoughts about my own condition and yours, which I really do believe is by nature a wretched one. My behaviour to your father in his distress lies heavy on my conscience too, because I hardened my own heart and yours against him, and refused to go with him on pilgrimage.

The thought of these things would kill me outright now, if it were not for a dream I had last night, and for the encouragement this stranger has given me this morning. Come, my children — let us pack up and be off to the gate that leads to the Celestial Country, so that we may see your father, and be with him and his companions in peace, according to the laws of that land.

Then her children burst into tears for joy, that their mother's heart was so turned. So their visitor said goodbye to them, and they began to get ready to set out on their journey.

But while they were on the point of going, two of the women who were Christiana's neighbours came up to the house and knocked at her door. To whom she said, as before: If you come in God's name, come in.

At this the women were taken aback, because they were not used to hearing that kind of language, or noticing it fall from Christiana's lips. Still, they came in — and there they found the good woman getting ready to leave her house.

So they began, and said: Neighbour, tell us, please — what do you mean by this?
