Mrs. Timorous and Mercy

Christiana answered the elder of them, whose name was Mrs. Timorous: I am getting ready for a journey. (This Timorous was the daughter of the man who met Christian on the Hill Difficulty and wanted him to turn back for fear of the lions.)

Timorous. What journey, may I ask?

Christiana. To go after my good husband. And with that she burst into tears.

Timorous. I hope not, good neighbour. For your poor children's sake, do not throw yourself away in such an unwomanly fashion.

Christiana. No — my children are going with me. Not one of them is willing to stay behind.

Timorous. I wonder with all my heart what, or who, has put you into this frame of mind.

Christiana. Oh, neighbour — if you knew only as much as I do, I have no doubt you would come with me.

Timorous. Tell me, please: what new knowledge have you got hold of that turns your mind so against your friends, and tempts you to go off nobody knows where?

Christiana. Then Christiana answered: I have been sorely afflicted since my husband left me, and especially since he went over the river. But what troubles me most is my churlish behaviour towards him when he was in his distress. And besides that, I am now as he was then: nothing will do for me but going on pilgrimage.

I dreamed last night that I saw him. Oh, that my soul were with him! He lives in the presence of the King of that country; he sits and eats with him at his table; he has become a companion of immortals, and has been given a house to live in that makes the best palaces on earth look to me, by comparison, like a rubbish heap. The Prince of the place has sent for me too, with the promise of a welcome if I will come to him. His messenger was here just now, and has brought me a letter inviting me.

And with that she pulled out her letter and read it, and said to them: Now what have you to say to this?

Timorous. Oh, the madness that has taken hold of you and your husband, to run yourselves into such difficulties! You have heard, I am sure, what your husband met with almost at the very first step he took on the road — as our neighbour Obstinate can still testify, because he went along with him; yes, and Pliable too, until they, like sensible men, were afraid to go any further. We heard as well how he met with the lions, and Apollyon, and the Shadow of Death, and a great many other things. Nor should you forget the danger he met with at Vanity Fair; because if he, a man, was so hard put to it, what can you do, being only a poor woman?

Consider too that these four sweet children are yours, your own flesh and bone. So even if you should be rash enough to throw yourself away, still, for the sake of your own children, stay at home.

But Christiana said to her: Do not tempt me, neighbour. I have a price put into my hand now to buy something with, and I should be the greatest fool alive if I had no heart to seize the chance. And as for all these troubles you tell me I am likely to meet on the road — so far from being any discouragement to me, they show me I am in the right. The bitter must come before the sweet, and that is what will make the sweet the sweeter. So, since you did not come to my house in God's name, as I said, please go away and stop disturbing me.

Then Timorous turned abusive as well, and said to her companion: Come along, neighbour Mercy, let us leave her to her own devices, since she despises our advice and our company.

But Mercy hung back, and could not fall in with her neighbour so readily; and that for two reasons. First, her heart went out to Christiana. So she said to herself: If my neighbour must go, I will go a little way with her and help her on. Second, her heart was moved about her own soul, because what Christiana had said had taken some hold on her mind. So she said to herself again: I will have some more talk with this Christiana; and if I find truth and life in what she says, then I and my whole heart will go along with her.

So Mercy began to answer her neighbour Timorous like this.

Mercy. Neighbour, I did come along with you to see Christiana this morning; and since she is, as you see, taking her last farewell of her country, I think I will walk a little way with her this sunny morning and help her on her road. (But she did not tell her the second reason; she kept that to herself.)

Timorous. Well, I see you have a mind to go off and play the fool too. But take warning while there is time, and be sensible. While we are out of danger, we are out of it; but once we are in, we are in.

So Mrs. Timorous went back to her house, and Christiana set off on her journey. But when Timorous had got home, she sent for some of her neighbours — Mrs. Bat's-eyes, Mrs. Inconsiderate, Mrs. Light-mind and Mrs. Know-nothing. And when they had come to her house, she set about telling them the story of Christiana and her intended journey. This is how she began her tale.

Timorous. Neighbours, having had little to do this morning, I went to pay Christiana a visit; and when I came to the door I knocked, as you know is our custom. And she answered: If you come in God's name, come in. So in I went, thinking everything was as usual. But when I got in, I found her getting ready to leave the town — she and her children too. So I asked her what she meant by it. And she told me, in short, that she had now made up her mind to go on pilgrimage, as her husband did. She told me too about a dream she had had, and how the King of the country where her husband is had sent her a letter inviting her to come there.

Then Mrs. Know-nothing said: What — do you think she will really go?

Timorous. Yes, go she will, whatever comes of it. And this is how I know it. The thing that was my great argument for persuading her to stay at home — namely the troubles she is likely to meet on the road — is one of her great arguments for going. Because she told me in so many words, "The bitter goes before the sweet." Yes, and just because it does, it makes the sweet the sweeter.

Mrs. Bat's-eyes. Oh, the blind, foolish woman! said she. Will she not take warning from her husband's sufferings? For my part I am sure that if he were back here again, he would settle for a whole skin and never run so many risks for nothing.

Mrs. Inconsiderate answered as well, saying: Away with such fanciful fools out of the town! A good riddance, I say, as far as she is concerned. If she stayed where she lives and kept this frame of mind, who could live quietly next to her? Because she will either be gloomy or unneighbourly, or she will talk about the sort of things no sensible person can put up with. So for my part I shall never be sorry she has gone. Let her go, and let somebody better come into her place. It has never been a good world since these whimsical fools started living in it.

Then Mrs. Light-mind added this: Come, put that kind of talk away. I was at Madam Wanton's yesterday, where we were as merry as could be. Because who do you think was there but myself, and Mrs. Love-the-flesh, and three or four more, with Mr. Lechery, Mrs. Filth and some others. So we had music there, and dancing, and whatever else was called for to fill out the pleasure. And I must say my lady herself is an admirably well-bred gentlewoman, and Mr. Lechery is as fine a fellow as you could wish.

By this time Christiana had got out on her road, and Mercy was walking with her. So as they went, her children being with them too, Christiana began to talk.

And, Mercy, said Christiana, I take it as an unexpected kindness that you should set foot outside your door with me, to keep me company a little way on my road.

Mercy. Then young Mercy said, for she was still young: If I thought there would be any purpose in going with you, I would never go near that town again.

Christiana. Well, Mercy, said Christiana, throw in your lot with me. I know perfectly well what the end of our pilgrimage will be. My husband is where he would not give up being for all the gold in the Spanish mines. And you will not be turned away either, even though you come only on my invitation. The King who has sent for me and my children is one who delights in mercy. Besides — if you like, I will take you into my service, and you shall come along with me as my servant; and yet we will have everything in common between us. Only come along with me.

Mercy. But how am I to be sure that I shall be received too? If I had that hope from somebody who could tell me, I would make no difficulty at all, but would go, helped by the one who can help — however wearisome the road might be.

Christiana. Well, kind Mercy, I will tell you what to do. Come with me as far as the little gate, and there I will make further inquiries for you; and if you do not meet with any encouragement there, then I shall be content for you to go back to your own place. And I will pay you for the kindness you are showing me and my children in coming with us on our road as you are doing.

Mercy. Then I will go there, and take whatever follows; and may the Lord grant that my lot falls there just as the King of Heaven shall have his heart set on me.

Christiana was glad at heart then, not only because she had a companion, but also because she had prevailed on this poor girl to fall in love with her own salvation. So they went on together — and Mercy began to cry.

Then Christiana said: Why is my sister crying?

Mercy. Ah, said she, who could help grieving, if they really considered what a state and condition my poor relations are still in, back in that sinful town of ours? And what makes my grief heavier is that they have nobody to teach them, and nobody to tell them what is coming.

Christiana. Compassion becomes a pilgrim. And you are doing for your friends what my good Christian did for me when he left me. He mourned because I would not listen to him or take any notice of him. But his Lord and ours gathered up his tears afterwards and put them into his bottle; and now both you and I, and these sweet children of mine, are reaping the fruit and the benefit of them.

I hope, Mercy, that these tears of yours will not be lost either; because the truth has said that "those who sow in tears shall reap in joy," singing. And "he who goes out weeping, carrying precious seed, shall doubtless come back rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him."

Then Mercy said:

	Let the Most Blessed be my guide,
	if it should be his will,
	up to his gate, into his fold,
	up to his holy hill.
	And let him never let me swerve
	or turn myself aside
	from his free grace and holy ways,
	whatever may betide.
	And let him gather in my own,
	the ones I've left behind;
	Lord, make them pray to be your own
	with all their heart and mind.
