The Slough and the Gate

Now my old friend went on, and said: But when Christiana came up to the Slough of Despond, she stopped short; because, she said, this is the place where my dear husband was nearly smothered in the mud. She noticed too that in spite of the King's order to make this place good for pilgrims, it was rather worse than it had been before.

So I asked whether that was true. Yes, said the old gentleman, only too true. Because there are a great many who claim to be the King's workmen, and who say they are for mending the King's highway, who bring dirt and dung instead of stones, and so spoil it instead of mending it.

So here Christiana and her boys came to a halt. But Mercy said: Come, let us risk it — only let us be careful. Then they watched the stepping stones closely and managed to get across, staggering as they went. Even so, Christiana was nearly in, and that more than once or twice. And no sooner had they got over than they thought they heard words saying to them, "Blessed is she who believed; for there shall be a fulfilment of the things that were told her from the Lord."

Then they went on again; and Mercy said to Christiana: If I had as good a ground as you have for hoping for a kind reception at the little gate, I think no Slough of Despond would put me off.

Well, said the other, you know your own sore and I know mine; and, good friend, we shall all have trouble enough before we come to the end of our journey.

Because can it be imagined that people who mean to reach such splendid glories as we do, and who are so envied that happiness as we are, will not meet with every fear and fright, every trouble and affliction that those who hate us can possibly attack us with?

And now Mr. Sagacity left me to dream out my dream by myself.

So it seemed to me that I saw Christiana and Mercy and the boys all go up to the gate; and when they had got there they had a short discussion about how they ought to manage their calling at the gate, and what should be said to the one who opened it. So it was settled that since Christiana was the eldest, she should be the one to knock for admission, and that she should speak to whoever opened, on behalf of the rest.

So Christiana began to knock; and, as her poor husband had done, she knocked, and knocked again. But instead of anyone answering, they all thought they heard something like a dog come barking at them — a dog, and a big one at that. And this frightened the women and the children, and for a while they did not dare knock any more, in case the mastiff should fly at them.

So now they were greatly tossed about in their minds, and did not know what to do. They dared not knock, for fear of the dog; and they dared not go back, in case the Keeper of the gate should catch sight of them going and be offended with them. At last they thought of knocking again, and knocked harder than they had the first time.

Then the Keeper of the gate said: Who is there? At which the dog stopped barking, and he opened to them.

Then Christiana bowed low and said: Do not let our Lord be offended with his servants, because we have knocked at his princely gate.

Then the Keeper said: Where have you come from, and what is it you want?

Christiana answered: We have come from the place Christian came from, and on the same errand as he did — namely, to be graciously admitted, if it should please you, in at this gate onto the road that leads to the Celestial City. And I answer further, my Lord, that I am Christiana, who was once the wife of Christian, and who is now got above.

At this the Keeper of the gate marvelled, saying: What! Has she become a pilgrim now, who only a little while ago detested that life?

Then she bowed her head and said: Yes — and so have these sweet children of mine.

Then he took her by the hand and let her in, and said as well, "Suffer the little children to come to me." And with that he shut the gate. This done, he called up to a trumpeter above the gate to welcome Christiana with shouting and the sound of the trumpet, for joy. So the trumpeter obeyed, and sounded, and filled the air with his melodious notes.

Now all this time poor Mercy stood outside, trembling and crying for fear that she had been refused. But once Christiana had got admission for herself and her boys, she began to plead for Mercy.

Christiana. And she said: My Lord, I have a companion of mine still standing outside, who has come here on the same account as I have. She is very cast down in her mind, because she comes, as she thinks, without being sent for — whereas I was sent for to come, by my husband's King.

Now Mercy began to get very impatient, because every minute felt as long to her as an hour. So she cut Christiana's pleading short by knocking at the gate herself. And she knocked so loud that she made Christiana jump.

Then the Keeper of the gate said: Who is there? And Christiana said: It is my friend.

So he opened the gate and looked out — and there was Mercy fallen down outside in a faint, because she had fainted away, afraid that no gate would ever be opened to her.

Then he took her by the hand and said: Young woman, I tell you to get up.

Oh sir, said she, I am faint; there is hardly any life left in me.

But he answered: Somebody once said, "When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord; and my prayer came in to you, into your holy temple." Do not be afraid, but stand on your feet, and tell me why you have come.

Mercy. I have come to something I was never invited to, as my friend Christiana was. Hers was an invitation from the King, and mine was only from her. So I am afraid I am presuming.

Keeper. Did she ask you to come with her to this place?

Mercy. Yes; and, as my Lord sees, I have come. And if there is any grace or forgiveness of sins to spare, I beg that I, your poor servant, may have a share in it.

Then he took her by the hand again and led her gently in, and said: I pray for all those who believe in me, by whatever means they come to me.

Then he said to those standing by: Fetch something and give it to Mercy to smell, to stop her fainting. So they fetched her a bundle of myrrh, and after a while she came round.

And now Christiana and her boys and Mercy had been received by the Lord at the head of the road, and spoken to kindly by him. Then they said to him further: We are sorry for our sins, and we beg our Lord's pardon, and to be told what we must do next.

I grant pardon, he said, by word and by deed: by word, in the promise of forgiveness; by deed, in the way I obtained it. Take the first from my lips with a kiss, and the other as it shall be revealed to you.

Now I saw in my dream that he spoke a great many good words to them, which gladdened them greatly. He also took them up to the top of the gate and showed them by what deed they had been saved, and told them at the same time that they would have that sight again, for their comfort, as they went along the road.

So he left them a while in a summer parlour below, where they got into conversation among themselves; and Christiana began: Oh Lord, how glad I am that we have got in here!

Mercy. Well you may be. But of all of us I have most reason to jump for joy.

Christiana. There was one moment, standing at the gate, when I thought — because I had knocked and nobody answered — that all our effort had been wasted; and especially when that ugly cur set up such a heavy barking at us.

Mercy. But my worse fear came after I had seen you taken into his favour and myself left outside. Now, I thought, what is written has come true: "Two women shall be grinding together; the one shall be taken and the other left." I had all I could do to keep from crying out, I am finished!

And I was afraid to knock any more. But when I looked up at what was written over the gate, I took courage. And I thought too that I must either knock again or die. So I knocked — but I cannot tell you how, because my spirit was struggling then between life and death.

Christiana. You cannot tell how you knocked? I am sure your knocking was so desperate that the very sound of it made me jump. I thought I had never heard such knocking in my life. I thought you meant to come in by main force, or take the kingdom by storm.

Mercy. But to be in my situation — who that was in it could have done otherwise? You saw that the door was shut on me, and that there was a most savage dog about the place. Who, I say, that was as fainthearted as I was, would not have knocked with all their might? But tell me, please — what did my Lord say about my rudeness? Was he not angry with me?

Christiana. When he heard your thundering, he gave the most wonderfully innocent smile. I believe what you did pleased him well enough, because he gave no sign of anything else. But I do wonder in my heart why he keeps such a dog. If I had known about that beforehand, I am afraid I would not have had the courage to venture here like this. But now that we are in, we are in, and I am glad of it with all my heart.

Mercy. If you like, I will ask him next time he comes down why he keeps such a filthy cur in his yard. I hope he will not take it badly.

Yes, do, said the children — and persuade him to hang it; because we are afraid it will bite us when we go on from here.

So at last he came down to them again; and Mercy fell face down on the ground before him and worshipped, and said: Let my Lord accept the sacrifice of praise that I offer him now with the fruit of my lips.

So he said to her, "Peace be to you; stand up." But she stayed on her face and said, "You are righteous, Lord, when I plead with you; and yet let me talk with you about your judgments." Why do you keep such a savage dog in your yard, at the sight of which women and children like us are ready to run away from your gate in fear?

He answered and said: That dog has another owner, and he is kept shut up on another man's ground; only my pilgrims hear him barking. He belongs to the castle you can see over there in the distance, though he can come right up to the walls of this place. He has frightened many an honest pilgrim out of a worse way into a better one, by the loudness of his roaring.

The man who owns him certainly does not keep him out of any goodwill to me or mine, but with the intention of keeping pilgrims from coming to me, and of making them afraid to knock at this gate for entry. Sometimes he has broken out too, and has savaged some that I loved. But I bear all of this patiently at present. I also give my pilgrims timely help, so that they are not handed over to his power, to have done to them what his doggish nature would prompt.

But come — you whom I have bought: I dare say that if you had known about him beforehand, you would not have been afraid of a dog anyway.

Beggars who go from door to door will run the risk of the bawling and barking and even the biting of a dog, rather than lose the chance of a penny. And shall a dog — a dog in another man's yard, a dog whose barking I turn to my pilgrims' profit — keep anybody from coming to me? I deliver them from the lions, and their darling from the power of the dog.

Mercy. Then Mercy said: I confess my ignorance. I spoke about what I did not understand. I acknowledge that you do all things well.

Christiana. Then Christiana began to talk about their journey, and to ask about the road. So he fed them, and washed their feet, and set them on the way of his own steps, exactly as he had dealt with her husband before.

So I saw in my dream that they walked on their way, and had very pleasant weather for it. Then Christiana began to sing:

	Blessed be the day when I began
	to be a pilgrim too;
	and blessed be that man as well
	who moved me to it.
	It's true it was a long while first
	before I sought to live for ever;
	but now I run as fast as I can —
	better late than never.
	Our tears to joy, our fears to faith
	are turned, as we can see;
	so that our start, as someone says,
	shows what our end will be.

Now there was, on the other side of the wall that fenced in the road Christiana and her companions had to go up, a garden; and that garden belonged to the man who owned the barking dog mentioned earlier. And some of the fruit trees growing in that garden pushed their branches out over the wall; and being ripe, whoever found them would gather them and often eat them, to their own harm.

So Christiana's boys, as boys will, being taken with the trees and the fruit hanging on them, pulled the branches down and began to eat. Their mother told them off for doing it, but the boys carried on anyway.

Well, said she, my sons, you are doing wrong, because that fruit is not ours. But she did not know that the trees belonged to the enemy; I assure you that if she had, she would have been ready to die of fright.

But that passed off, and they went on their way. Now by the time they had got about two bowshots from the place that let them onto the road, they saw two very evil-looking creatures coming down quickly to meet them. At that, Christiana and Mercy her friend covered themselves with their veils and kept walking; the children went on ahead. And so at last they all met.

Then the two who had come down to meet them came right up to the women, as though they meant to embrace them. But Christiana said: Stand back, or go quietly past us, as you ought.

Yet these two, like men who were deaf, took no notice of what Christiana said, but began to lay hands on them. At that Christiana grew furious and kicked at them. Mercy too did everything she could to fight them off. Christiana said to them again: Stand back and be off with you. We have no money to lose, being pilgrims, as you can see — and pilgrims who live on the charity of our friends at that.

Ill-favoured one. Then one of the two men said: We are not attacking you for money. We have come out to tell you that if you will only grant one small request we shall ask, we will make women of you for ever.

Christiana. Now Christiana, guessing what they meant, answered: We will not listen to what you ask, or consider it, or give way to it. We are in a hurry and cannot stop. Our business is a business of life and death.

So she and her companion made another attempt to get past them; but the men blocked their way.

Ill-favoured one. And they said: We mean no harm to your lives. It is another thing we want.

Christiana. Ah, said Christiana — you want us body and soul, because I know that is what you have come for. But we will die on the spot rather than let ourselves be brought into traps that would put our well-being hereafter at risk.

And with that they both shrieked out and cried, Murder! Murder! — and so put themselves under the protection of the laws that exist for the protection of women. But the men still came at them, meaning to have their way. So the women cried out again.

Now since they were, as I said, not far from the gate they had come in at, their voices carried from where they were as far as the gate. So some of the household came out; and knowing it was Christiana's voice, they hurried to her rescue. But by the time they had got in sight of them, the women were in a violent struggle, with the children standing crying alongside.

Then the man who had come to their rescue called out to the ruffians, saying: What is this you are doing? Would you make my Lord's people break his law? He also tried to seize them, but they escaped over the wall into the garden of the man who owned the great dog; and so the dog became their protector.

Then this Reliever came up to the women and asked them how they were. So they answered: Thanks be to your Prince, well enough. Only we have had a bad fright. And we thank you as well for coming in to help us, because otherwise we would have been overpowered.

Reliever. So after a few more words this Reliever said: I wondered very much, when you were received at the gate up there, that knowing as you did that you were only weak women, you did not petition the Lord there for an escort. Then you might have avoided these troubles and dangers, because he would have granted you one.

Christiana. Ah, said Christiana, we were so taken up with the blessing right in front of us that dangers still to come went clean out of our minds. Besides — who would have thought that so near to the King's palace there would be such wicked creatures lying in wait? It really would have been well for us if we had asked our Lord for an escort. But since our Lord knew it would be for our good, I wonder that he did not send one along with us anyway.

Reliever. It is not always necessary to grant what is not asked for, in case by granting it the thing comes to be thought little of. But when the lack of something is actually felt, then in the eyes of the person who feels it, it comes to be valued at its proper worth, and consequently it will be used properly afterwards. If my Lord had granted you an escort, you would not have lamented your oversight in failing to ask for one, as now you have good reason to do. So all things work for good, and tend to make you more careful.

Christiana. Shall we go back to my Lord and confess our foolishness and ask for one?

Reliever. I will present him with your confession of your foolishness. You need not go back; because everywhere you come you will find nothing lacking. In every one of my Lord's lodgings, which he has prepared for the reception of his pilgrims, there is enough to equip them against attacks of any kind. But as I said, "He will be asked by them to do it for them." And a thing that is not worth asking for is a poor thing indeed.

When he had said this he went back to his place, and the Pilgrims went on their way.

Mercy. Then Mercy said: What a sudden setback this is! I reckoned we were past all danger now, and that we should never see any more sorrow.

Christiana. Your innocence, my sister, said Christiana to Mercy, may excuse you a good deal. But as for me, my fault is all the greater, because I saw this danger before I ever came out of doors, and still made no provision against it where provision could have been had. So I am much to blame.

Mercy. Then Mercy said: How did you know about it before you left home? Explain this riddle to me.

Christiana. Why, I will tell you. Before I set foot outside the door, one night as I lay in my bed I had a dream about this very thing. Because I thought I saw two men, as like these two as anything in the world, standing at the foot of my bed and plotting how they might stop my salvation. I will tell you their very words. They said — this was when I was in my troubles — What shall we do with this woman? Because she cries out, waking and sleeping, for forgiveness. If she is allowed to go on as she has begun, we shall lose her as we lost her husband. That, you see, might have made me take care, and provide for it while provision could be had.

Mercy. Well, said Mercy, just as this neglect has given us the occasion to see our own shortcomings, so our Lord has taken the occasion by it to show the riches of his grace. Because he has, as we can see, followed us with kindness we never asked for, and has delivered us out of the hands of men who were stronger than we are, purely out of his own good pleasure.
