Great-heart, and the Cross

The Interpreter then called for one of his manservants, a man called Great-heart, and told him to take sword and helmet and shield. And take these daughters of mine, he said, and escort them to the house called Beautiful, where they will rest next.

So Great-heart took up his weapons and went ahead of them; and the Interpreter said, God speed. Those who belonged to the household sent them off as well with many a good wish. So they went on their way, and sang:

	This place has been our second stage;
	here we have heard and seen
	those good things which, from age to age,
	have hidden from others been.
	The dunghill-raker, spider, hen,
	the chicken too, to me
	have taught a lesson; let me then
	conformed to it be.
	The butcher, garden and the field,
	the robin and his bait,
	and the rotten tree as well all yield
	me argument of weight
	to move me now to watch and pray,
	to strive to be sincere,
	to take my cross up day by day
	and serve the Lord with fear.

Now I saw in my dream that they went on, with Great-heart walking in front of them; and so they came to the place where Christian's burden fell off his back and tumbled into a tomb. Here they paused, and here too they blessed God.

Now, said Christiana, it comes into my mind what was said to us at the gate — that we should have pardon by word and by deed: by word, that is, by the promise; and by deed, that is, in the way it was obtained. What the promise is, I know something about. But what it is to have pardon by deed, or in the way it was obtained — Mr. Great-heart, I imagine you know; so if you would, let us hear you speak about it.

Great-heart. Pardon by the deed done is pardon obtained by somebody, for somebody else who needs it — not obtained by the person pardoned, but, as another puts it, in the way in which I have obtained it. So then, to speak to the question more fully: the pardon that you and Mercy and these boys have received was obtained by another — namely by the one who let you in at the gate. And he obtained it in a double way: he has performed a righteousness to cover you, and spilt blood to wash you in.

Christiana. But if he parts with his righteousness to us, what will he have left for himself?

Great-heart. He has more righteousness than you need, or than he needs himself.

Christiana. Please show me how that can be.

Great-heart. With all my heart. But first I must say this by way of preface: the one we are about to speak of has no equal anywhere. He has two natures in one Person, plainly to be distinguished but impossible to divide. A righteousness belongs to each of these natures, and each righteousness is essential to that nature; so that you could as easily wipe out the nature itself as separate its justice or righteousness from it. Of these righteousnesses, then, we are not made partakers — they are not put on us so that we might be made just and live by them.

Besides these, there is a righteousness this Person has as the two natures are joined in one. And this is neither the righteousness of the Godhead as distinct from the manhood, nor the righteousness of the manhood as distinct from the Godhead, but a righteousness that consists in the union of both natures. It may properly be called the righteousness essential to his being fitted by God for the office of mediator, which he was to be entrusted with.

If he parts with the first righteousness, he parts with his Godhead. If he parts with the second, he parts with the purity of his manhood. If he parts with this third, he parts with the perfection that fits him for the office of mediation.

So he has another righteousness besides, which consists in performance, or obedience, to a revealed will. And that is the one he puts on sinners, and by which their sins are covered. Which is why he says, "As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous."

Christiana. But are the other righteousnesses of no use at all to us?

Great-heart. Yes, they are. Because although they are essential to his natures and his office, and so cannot be handed over to anybody else, it is by virtue of them that the righteousness which justifies is effective for that purpose. The righteousness of his Godhead gives power to his obedience. The righteousness of his manhood gives his obedience the capacity to justify. And the righteousness that consists in the union of the two natures in his office gives that righteousness the authority to do the work it is appointed for.

So then, here is a righteousness that Christ as God has no need of, because he is God without it. Here is a righteousness that Christ as man has no need of to make him so, because he is perfect man without it. And again, here is a righteousness that Christ as God-and-man has no need of, because he is perfectly that without it.

Here, then, is a righteousness that Christ — as God, as man, as God-and-man — has no need of with reference to himself, and which he can therefore spare: a justifying righteousness that he does not need for himself, and therefore gives away. Which is why it is called "the gift of righteousness."

And this righteousness, since Christ Jesus the Lord has put himself under the law, must be given away. Because the law does not only bind the man who is under it "to do justly," but to practise charity. So he must, and by the law he ought, if he has two coats, to give one to the man who has none. Now our Lord does indeed have two coats — one for himself and one to spare; and so he freely gives one to those who have none.

And that, Christiana and Mercy and the rest of you here, is how your pardon comes by deed, or by another man's work. Your Lord Christ is the one who has done the work, and has given away what he worked for to the next poor beggar he meets.

But again: for pardon by deed, something has to be paid to God as a price, as well as something being prepared to cover us with. Sin has handed us over to the just curse of a righteous law; and from that curse we must be justified by way of redemption, a price being paid for the harm we have done. And this is by the blood of your Lord, who came and stood in your place and instead of you, and died your death for your offences. So he has ransomed you from your offences by blood, and covered your polluted and misshapen souls with righteousness. And for the sake of that, God passes you by, and will not harm you when he comes to judge the world.

Christiana. This is splendid. Now I see there was something to be learned from our being pardoned by word and by deed. Good Mercy, let us work at keeping this in mind; and my children, remember it too. But, sir — was this not the thing that made my good Christian's burden fall off his shoulders, and made him give three leaps for joy?

Great-heart. Yes. It was believing this that cut the cords which could not be cut by any other means; and it was to give him a proof of the power of it that he was allowed to carry his burden all the way to the Cross.

Christiana. I thought so. Because although my heart was light and joyful before, it is ten times lighter and more joyful now. And I am convinced, from what I have felt — and I have felt only a little of it as yet — that if the most heavily burdened man in the world were standing here and could see and believe as I do now, it would make his heart merrier and lighter still.

Great-heart. There is not only comfort in this, and the easing of a burden, when we see and think about these things; there is also a deep affection born in us by it. Because who could once think that pardon comes not only by promise but in this way, and not be moved by the way and the means of his own redemption — and so by the Man who has worked it out for him?

Christiana. True. It seems to me it makes my heart bleed to think that he should bleed for me. Oh, you loving One! Oh, you blessed One! You deserve to have me; you have bought me; you deserve to have all of me; you have paid ten thousand times more for me than I am worth!

No wonder this made the tears stand in my husband's eyes, and made him trudge along so nimbly. I am sure he wished me with him — and, wretch that I was, I let him go all alone.

Oh, Mercy, if only your father and mother were here! Yes, and Mrs. Timorous too. In fact I wish with all my heart that Madam Wanton were here as well. Surely, surely their hearts would be moved. Neither the fear of the one nor the strong appetites of the other could persuade them to go home again and refuse to become good pilgrims.

Great-heart. You are speaking now in the warmth of your feelings. Will it always be like this with you, do you think? Besides, this is not given to everybody who saw your Jesus bleed. There were people standing by who saw the blood run from his heart to the ground, and who were so far from this that instead of grieving they laughed at him, and instead of becoming his disciples hardened their hearts against him. So everything you have, my daughters, you have by a particular impression made in you by God as you contemplate what I have been telling you. Remember what you were told: that the hen gives her chicks no food by her everyday call. So what you have, you have by a special grace.

Now I saw further in my dream that they went on until they came to the place where Simple and Sloth and Presumption were lying asleep when Christian went past on pilgrimage — and there they were, hanged in irons a little way off on the other side.

Mercy. Then Mercy said to their guide and escort: Who are those three men? And what have they been hanged there for?

Great-heart. These three men were men of very bad character. They had no wish to be pilgrims themselves, and they hindered anybody else they could. They were all for laziness and folly themselves, and anybody they could talk round they made the same; and along with it they taught them to take for granted that they would come out all right in the end. They were asleep when Christian went by; and now, when you go by, they are hanged.

Mercy. But could they really persuade anybody to their way of thinking?

Great-heart. Yes. They turned several people off the road. There was Slow-pace, whom they persuaded to do as they did. They also succeeded with one Short-wind, and one No-heart, and one Linger-after-lust, and one Sleepyhead, and with a young woman called Dull, so that they turned off the road and became like them.

Besides that, they put about a bad report of your Lord, persuading others that he was a slave-driver. They also put about a bad report of the good land, saying it was not half as good as some people claimed. They began running his servants down too, and counting even the best of them meddlers, nuisances and busybodies. And further, they could call the bread of God husks, and the comforts of his children fancies, and the travelling and labour of pilgrims a waste of time.

Christiana. No, said Christiana — if they were like that, they shall never be mourned by me. They have only what they deserve. And I think it is a good thing that they hang so near the highway, so that others may see them and take warning. But would it not have been well if their crimes had been engraved on some plate of iron or brass and left here, on the very spot where they did their mischief, as a warning to other bad men?

Great-heart. So they are — as you may see for yourself, if you will step over to the wall.

Mercy. No, no — let them hang, and let their names rot, and let their crimes live for ever against them. I think it a great favour that they were hanged before we came here. Who knows what they might otherwise have done to poor women like us?

Then she turned it into a song, saying:

	Now then, you three — hang there, and be a sign
	to all who shall against the truth combine.
	And let the man who comes behind fear this end
	if to the pilgrims he is not a friend.
	And you, my soul, of all such men beware
	who to holiness the opposers are.
