The Hill Difficulty and the Lions

So they went on until they came to the foot of the Hill Difficulty, where again their good friend Mr. Great-heart took the chance to tell them what happened there when Christian himself came past. So he took them first to the spring.

Look, said he, this is the spring Christian drank from before he went up this hill. It was clear and good then; but now it is dirty, from the feet of people who do not want pilgrims quenching their thirst here.

At which Mercy said: Why so spiteful, I wonder?

But, said their guide, it will do well enough if you take it up and put it into a vessel that is clean and sound; because then the dirt will sink to the bottom and the water will come out of its own accord clearer. So Christiana and her companions had to do exactly that. They scooped it up and put it into an earthenware pot, and let it stand until the dirt had settled to the bottom, and then they drank it.

Next he showed them the two side roads at the foot of the hill, where Formalist and Hypocrisy lost themselves. And, said he, these are dangerous paths. Two men were thrown away here when Christian came by. And although, as you see, these ways have since been blocked off with chains and posts and a ditch, there are still people who would rather risk them than take the trouble to go up this hill.

Christiana. "The way of transgressors is hard." It is a wonder they can get into those ways at all without breaking their necks.

Great-heart. They will risk it. Yes — and if at any time one of the King's servants happens to see them and calls out to them and tells them they are on the wrong road, and warns them of the danger, they will answer him back abusively and say, "As for the word you have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not listen to you; we will certainly do whatever comes out of our own mouths." And more than that: if you look a little further, you will see these ways have been made warning enough not only by the posts and the ditch and the chain but by being hedged up as well — and still they choose to go there.

Christiana. They are lazy. They do not like taking trouble; an uphill road is unpleasant to them. So what is written is fulfilled in them: "The way of the slothful man is like a hedge of thorns." Yes — they would rather walk into a trap than go up this hill and along the rest of this road to the city.

Then they set off and began to go up the hill, and up the hill they went. But before they got to the top Christiana began to pant, and said: I dare say this is a hill that makes you breathe. No wonder that people who love their comfort more than their souls choose themselves a smoother road.

Then Mercy said: I must sit down. And the smallest of the children began to cry.

Come, come, said Great-heart, do not sit down here — because a little further up is the Prince's shelter. Then he took the little boy by the hand and led him up to it.

When they had got to the shelter they were very glad to sit down, because they were all in a great sweat. Then Mercy said: How sweet rest is to people who have been working! And how good the Prince of pilgrims is, to provide resting places like this for them! I have heard a great deal about this shelter, but I never saw it before. But here let us take care not to fall asleep; because I have heard that that cost poor Christian dear.

Then Mr. Great-heart said to the little ones: Come, my fine boys, how are you? What do you think of going on pilgrimage now?

Sir, said the smallest, I was nearly beaten out of heart. But thank you for lending me a hand when I needed it. And I remember now what my mother has told me: that the way to heaven is like going up a ladder, and the way to hell is like going down a hill. But I would rather go up the ladder to life than down the hill to death.

Then Mercy said: But the proverb is that going downhill is easy.

But James said — for that was his name — The day is coming when, in my opinion, going downhill will be the hardest thing of all.

That is a good boy, said his master; you have given her the right answer. Then Mercy smiled, but the little boy went red.

Christiana. Come, said Christiana, will you eat something, just to sweeten your mouths while you sit here and rest your legs? Because I have a piece of pomegranate here that Mr. Interpreter put into my hand just as I was coming out of his door. He gave me a piece of honeycomb too, and a little bottle of cordial.

I thought he gave you something, said Mercy, because he called you aside.

Yes, so he did, said the other. But, said Christiana, it shall be as I said it would be when we first came from home: you shall have a share in every good thing I have, because you so willingly became my companion.

Then she shared it out and they ate — Mercy and the boys together. And Christiana said to Mr. Great-heart: Sir, will you have some as we are doing?

But he answered: You are going on pilgrimage, and I shall be going back shortly. Much good may what you have do you. At home I eat the same thing every day.

Now when they had eaten and drunk and chatted a little longer, their guide said to them: The day is wearing away; if you think it best, let us get ready to go.

So they got up to go, and the little boys went in front. But Christiana forgot to take her bottle of cordial with her, so she sent her little boy back to fetch it.

Then Mercy said: I think this is a losing place. Christian lost his scroll here, and here Christiana has left her bottle behind. Sir, what is the reason for it?

So their guide answered and said: The reason is sleep, or forgetfulness. Some sleep when they should be keeping awake, and some forget when they should be remembering. And this is exactly why, at the resting places, pilgrims often come off losers in one thing or another. Pilgrims ought to keep watch, and to remember what they have already received, precisely when they are enjoying themselves most; and for want of doing that, their rejoicing often ends in tears and their sunshine in a cloud. Witness Christian's own story in this place.

When they had come to the spot where Mistrust and Timorous met Christian to persuade him to turn back for fear of the lions, they saw what looked like a scaffold; and in front of it, towards the road, a broad plate with a verse written on it, and underneath the reason for that scaffold being put up in that place. The verse was this:

	Let the man who sees this scaffold take good heed
	unto his heart and tongue;
	for if he does not, here he'll come to speed
	as some did long ago.

And the words underneath the verse were: "This scaffold was built for the punishment of those who, through Timorousness or Mistrust, are afraid to go further on pilgrimage. On this scaffold both Mistrust and Timorous were burned through the tongue with a hot iron, for trying to hinder Christian on his journey."

Then Mercy said: This is very like what the Beloved says: "What shall be given to you, or what shall be done to you, you false tongue? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper."

So they went on until they came within sight of the lions. Now Mr. Great-heart was a strong man, so he was not afraid of a lion. But when they came up to the place where the lions were, the boys who had been walking in front were glad to shrink back behind, because they were afraid of the lions. So they stepped back and went behind.

At this their guide smiled and said: How now, my boys — do you like to go in front when no danger is coming, and like to come behind as soon as the lions appear?

Now as they went up, Mr. Great-heart drew his sword, meaning to force a way through for the Pilgrims in spite of the lions. Then somebody appeared who had apparently taken it on himself to reinforce the lions; and he said to the Pilgrims' guide: What is the reason for your coming here? Now the name of that man was Grim, or Bloody-man, because of the pilgrims he had killed; and he was of the race of the giants.

Great-heart. Then the Pilgrims' guide said: These women and children are going on pilgrimage. This is the road they have to take, and take it they shall, in spite of you and your lions.

Grim. This is not their road, and they shall not go on it. I have come out to stop them, and I will back the lions to that end.

Now, to tell the truth, on account of the fierceness of the lions and the grim bearing of the man who backed them, this road had lately gone very little used, and was almost all overgrown with grass.

Christiana. Then Christiana said: Though the highways have gone unused until now, and though travellers have been made in the past to walk by side paths, it must not be so now that I have risen. Now "I am risen a mother in Israel."

Grim. Then he swore by the lions that it should be so, and told them to turn aside, because they should have no passage there.

Great-heart. But their guide went straight at Grim, and laid into him so hard with his sword that he forced him back.

Grim. Then the man who was trying to back the lions said: Will you kill me on my own ground?

Great-heart. It is the King's highway we are on, and it is on his road that you have placed your lions. But these women and these children, weak as they are, shall hold on their way in spite of your lions.

And with that he gave him another downright blow and brought him to his knees. With that blow he also broke his helmet, and with the next he cut off an arm. Then the giant roared so hideously that his voice frightened the women — and yet they were glad to see him sprawling on the ground.

Now the lions were chained, so of themselves they could do nothing. So when old Grim, who had meant to back them, was dead, Mr. Great-heart said to the Pilgrims: Come on now and follow me, and no harm shall come to you from the lions.

So on they went — but the women trembled as they passed them, and the boys looked as if they would die of it. Still, they all got past without any further harm.

Now they were within sight of the Porter's Lodge, and they soon came up to it; but they made all the more haste after this to get there, because it is dangerous travelling in that place at night.

So when they had come to the gate, the guide knocked, and the Porter called out: Who is there? But as soon as the guide had said, It is I, he knew his voice and came down — because the guide had often been there before, escorting pilgrims.

When he had come down he opened the gate; and seeing the guide standing right in front of it, but not seeing the women, because they were behind him, he said: How now, Mr. Great-heart, what is your business here so late at night?

I have brought some pilgrims here, said he, who by my Lord's command are to lodge here. I would have been here some time ago if I had not been opposed by the giant who used to back the lions; but after a long and wearing fight with him I have cut him off, and have brought the Pilgrims here safely.

Porter. Will you not come in and stay till morning?

Great-heart. No, I shall go back to my Lord tonight.

Christiana. Oh, sir, I do not know how to be willing for you to leave us in the middle of our pilgrimage. You have been so faithful and so loving to us; you have fought so bravely for us; you have been so warm-hearted in advising us. I shall never forget your kindness to us.

Mercy. Then Mercy said: Oh, if only we could have your company to the end of our journey! How can poor women like us hold out on a road as full of trouble as this one, without a friend and a defender?

James. Then James, the youngest of the boys, said: Please, sir, let yourself be persuaded to come with us and help us — because we are so weak, and the road is so dangerous.

Great-heart. I am at my Lord's command. If he assigns me to be your guide the whole way, I will gladly attend on you. But here you slipped up at the start: when he told me to come this far with you, you should have begged him for me to go the whole way with you, and he would have granted your request. As things are, though, I must leave. And so — good Christiana, Mercy, and my fine children — goodbye.

Then the Porter, Mr. Watchful, asked Christiana what country she came from and who her family were; and she said: I have come from the City of Destruction. I am a widow, and my husband is dead. His name was Christian, the Pilgrim.

What! said the Porter — was he your husband?

Yes, said she; and these are his children. And this, she said, pointing to Mercy, is one of my townswomen.

Then the Porter rang his bell, as he is accustomed to do at such times, and one of the young women came to the door, whose name was Humble-mind. And the Porter said to her: Go and tell them inside that Christiana, the wife of Christian, and her children, have come here on pilgrimage.

So she went in and told them. But oh, what a noise of gladness there was inside, when the young woman had barely got the words out of her mouth! So they came hurrying to the Porter — because Christiana was still standing at the door. Then some of the most serious among them said to her: Come in, Christiana; come in, wife of that good man; come in, blessed woman; come in, and all who are with you.

So she went in, and her children and her companions followed her. Now when they had gone in, they were taken into a very large room and told to sit down; so they sat down, and the heads of the house were called to see the guests and welcome them. Then they came in, and understanding who they were, greeted them each with a kiss and said: Welcome, you vessels of the grace of God; welcome to us, your friends.
