The House Beautiful Again

Now because it was getting late, and because the Pilgrims were tired from their journey and faint as well from the sight of the fight and the terrible lions, they asked to get ready for bed as soon as they could.

No, said the household — refresh yourselves first with a bite of food. Because they had prepared a lamb for them, with the sauce that traditionally goes with it; the Porter had heard beforehand that they were coming and had told those inside.

So when they had eaten and finished their prayers with a psalm, they asked to go to their rest. But, said Christiana, if we may be so bold as to choose, let us have the room that was my husband's when he was here.

So they took them up there, and they all slept in one room. When they were settled, Christiana and Mercy fell into conversation about suitable things.

Christiana. I little thought once, when my husband went on pilgrimage, that I should ever follow him.

Mercy. And you thought as little of lying in his bed, and resting in his room, as you are doing now.

Christiana. And far less did I ever think of seeing his face with any comfort, or of worshipping the Lord the King alongside him. And yet now I believe I shall.

Mercy. Listen! Do you not hear a noise?

Christiana. Yes. I believe it is a sound of music, for joy that we are here.

Mercy. Wonderful! Music in the house, music in the heart, and music in heaven too, for joy that we are here.

So they talked a while, and then went to sleep. And in the morning, when they woke, Christiana said to Mercy:

Christiana. What was it that made you laugh in your sleep last night? I suppose you were dreaming.

Mercy. So I was, and a sweet dream it was. But are you sure I laughed?

Christiana. Yes, you laughed heartily. But please, Mercy, tell me your dream.

Mercy. I dreamed that I was sitting all alone in a lonely place, lamenting the hardness of my heart. Now I had not been sitting there long when it seemed a great many people gathered round to look at me and hear what I was saying. So they listened, and I went on lamenting the hardness of my heart. At this some of them laughed at me, and some called me a fool, and some began to push me about.

At that I thought I looked up and saw somebody coming towards me with wings. So he came straight to me and said, Mercy, what is the matter with you? And when he had heard my complaint, he said, "Peace be to you." He also wiped my eyes with his handkerchief and dressed me in silver and gold. He put a chain round my neck and earrings in my ears and a beautiful crown on my head. Then he took me by the hand and said, Mercy, come after me.

So he went up and I followed, until we came to a golden gate. Then he knocked; and when those inside had opened, the man went in and I followed him up to a throne, on which one sat; and he said to me, Welcome, daughter. The place looked bright and glittering, like the stars — or rather like the sun. And I thought I saw your husband there.

So I woke up from my dream. But did I really laugh?

Christiana. Laugh! Yes, and well you might, to see yourself so well off. Because you must allow me to tell you that I believe it was a good dream, and that just as you have begun to find the first part of it true, so you will find the second part true at last. "God speaks once, yes twice, and yet man does not perceive it: in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls on men, in their slumbering on the bed." We do not need to lie awake in bed to talk with God. He can visit us while we sleep, and make us hear his voice then. Our heart often wakes while we sleep, and God can speak to it, by words or by proverbs or by signs and comparisons, quite as well as if we were awake.

Mercy. Well, I am glad of my dream; because I hope before long to see it come true, and to be made to laugh again.

Christiana. I think it is high time we got up and found out what we are to do.

Mercy. Please, if they invite us to stay a while, let us gladly accept the offer. I am all the more willing to stay a while here so as to get better acquainted with these young women. It seems to me that Prudence and Piety and Charity have very fine, serious faces.

Christiana. We shall see what they do.

So when they were up and dressed, they came down; and they asked each other how they had slept, and whether it had been comfortable.

Mercy. Very good, said Mercy. It was one of the best nights' lodging I ever had in my life.

Then Prudence and Piety said: If you can be persuaded to stay here a while, you shall have whatever the house can provide.

Charity. Yes — and with a very good will, said Charity.

So they agreed, and stayed there about a month or more, and did each other a great deal of good. And because Prudence wanted to see how Christiana had brought her children up, she asked her permission to test them. So Christiana freely consented. Then she began with the youngest, whose name was James.

Prudence. And she said: Come, James — can you tell me who made you?

James. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit.

Prudence. Good boy. And can you tell me who saves you?

James. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit.

Prudence. Still a good boy. But how does God the Father save you?

James. By his grace.

Prudence. How does God the Son save you?

James. By his righteousness, his death, his blood and his life.

Prudence. And how does God the Holy Spirit save you?

James. By enlightening me, by making me new, and by keeping me.

Then Prudence said to Christiana: You are to be praised for bringing your children up like this. I suppose I need not ask the others these questions, since the youngest of them can answer them so well. So now I will turn to the next youngest.

Prudence. Then she said: Come, Joseph — for that was his name — will you let me question you?

Joseph. With all my heart.

Prudence. What is man?

Joseph. A creature with reason, made so by God, as my brother said.

Prudence. What is implied by the word "saved"?

Joseph. That man, by sin, has brought himself into a state of captivity and misery.

Prudence. What is implied by his being saved by the Trinity?

Joseph. That sin is so great and mighty a tyrant that nobody but God can pull us out of its grip; and that God is so good and loving to man as actually to pull him out of that miserable state.

Prudence. What is God's purpose in saving poor men?

Joseph. The glory of his name, and of his grace and justice; and the everlasting happiness of his creature.

Prudence. Who are the ones who must be saved?

Joseph. Those who accept his salvation.

Prudence. Good boy, Joseph. Your mother has taught you well, and you have listened to what she has said to you.

Then Prudence said to Samuel, who was the second eldest:

Prudence. Come, Samuel — are you willing for me to question you as well?

Samuel. Yes, indeed, if you please.

Prudence. What is heaven?

Samuel. A place and a state most blessed, because God lives there.

Prudence. What is hell?

Samuel. A place and a state most wretched, because it is the dwelling place of sin, and the devil, and death.

Prudence. Why would you want to go to heaven?

Samuel. So that I may see God and serve him without ever getting tired; so that I may see Christ and love him everlastingly; and so that I may have that fullness of the Holy Spirit in me that I cannot possibly enjoy here.

Prudence. A very good boy too, and one who has learned well.

Then she turned to the eldest, whose name was Matthew, and said to him: Come, Matthew, shall I question you as well?

Matthew. With a very good will.

Prudence. Then I ask you: was there ever anything that existed before God?

Matthew. No — because God is eternal; nor is there anything besides himself that existed before the beginning of the first day. "For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and everything in them."

Prudence. What do you think of the Bible?

Matthew. It is the holy Word of God.

Prudence. Is there nothing written in it but what you understand?

Matthew. Yes — a great deal.

Prudence. What do you do when you come to places in it that you do not understand?

Matthew. I consider that God is wiser than I am. And I pray that he will be pleased to let me know everything in it that he knows will be for my good.

Prudence. What do you believe about the resurrection of the dead?

Matthew. I believe they shall rise, the same as were buried — the same in their nature, though not in their decay. And I believe this on two grounds: first, because God has promised it; and second, because he is able to do it.

Then Prudence said to the boys: You must go on listening to your mother, because she can teach you more. You must also pay careful attention to any good talk you hear from others, because it is for your sakes that they say good things. Observe as well, and carefully, what the heavens and the earth teach you; but above all be much occupied in meditating on that Book which was the cause of your father's becoming a pilgrim. I for my part, my children, will teach you what I can while you are here, and shall be glad if you will ask me questions that tend to godly building up.

Now by the time these Pilgrims had been at this place a week, Mercy had a visitor who claimed to have some goodwill towards her; and his name was Mr. Brisk — a man of some breeding, who made a show of religion, but a man who stuck very close to the world. So he came once or twice, or more, to Mercy, and offered her his love.

Now Mercy had a lovely face, and was all the more attractive for it. And her disposition was always to be busy at something; because when she had nothing to do for herself she would be making stockings and clothes for other people, and would give them away to those who needed them. And Mr. Brisk, not knowing where or how she disposed of what she made, seemed greatly taken with her, because he found she was never idle. I will warrant her a good housewife, he said to himself.

Mercy then mentioned the business to the young women of the house, and asked them about him, because they knew him better than she did. So they told her that he was a very busy young man who made a show of religion, but who was, they were afraid, a stranger to the power of what was good.

In that case, said Mercy, I will not look at him again. Because I mean never to have anything hung round my soul to drag on it.

Prudence then replied that there was no need to give him any great discouragement; her carrying on as she had begun, working for the poor, would soon cool his ardour.

So the next time he came, he found her at her old work, making things for the poor. Then he said: What — always at it?

Yes, said she — either for myself or for other people.

And how much can you earn in a day? said he.

I do these things, said she, "so that I may be rich in good works, laying up in store a good foundation for the time to come, so that I may lay hold on eternal life."

Why, tell me — what do you do with them? said he.

Clothe the naked, said she.

At that his face fell. So he gave up coming to see her; and when he was asked the reason why, he said that Mercy was a pretty girl, but troubled with awkward notions.

When he had left her, Prudence said: Did I not tell you Mr. Brisk would soon give you up? Yes — and he will spread a bad report of you as well. Because for all his pretence of religion and his apparent love for Mercy, still, Mercy and he are of such different tempers that I do not believe they will ever come together.

Mercy. I might have had husbands before now, though I never mentioned it to anybody. But they were the sort who did not like my character, though none of them ever found fault with my person. So they and I could not agree.

Prudence. Mercy in our day is little valued, except as a word. As for the practice of it, which is what your character sets out, there are very few who can put up with it.

Mercy. Well, said Mercy, if nobody will have me, I will die unmarried; or else my character shall be a husband to me. Because I cannot change my nature; and to have somebody who runs across me in this, I am resolved never to allow as long as I live. I had a sister called Bountiful who married one of these boors; and he and she could never agree. But because my sister was determined to go on as she had begun — that is, to show kindness to the poor — her husband first denounced her publicly at the market cross, and then turned her out of doors.

Prudence. And yet he was a professing believer, I dare say.

Mercy. Yes, the sort of believer he was. And the world is full of that sort now; but I will have none of them.

Now Matthew, Christiana's eldest son, fell ill; and his illness was severe, because he was in great pain in the stomach, so that at times he was doubled up as though he were being pulled double. There lived not far from there one Mr. Skill, an old and well-regarded physician. So Christiana asked for him, and they sent for him, and he came.

When he had come into the room and observed the boy a little, he concluded that he was suffering from severe cramps. Then he said to his mother: What has Matthew been eating lately?

Eating? said Christiana. Nothing but what is wholesome.

The physician answered: This boy has been meddling with something that is lying undigested in his stomach, and that will not shift without help. And I tell you, he must be purged or he will die.

Samuel. Then Samuel said: Mother, mother — what was it my brother gathered up and ate as soon as we had come from the gate at the head of this road? You remember there was an orchard on the left hand, on the other side of the wall, and some of the trees hung over the wall, and my brother pulled the branches down and ate.

Christiana. True, my child, said Christiana. He did take some and eat it. Naughty boy that he was, I told him off, and still he would eat it.

Mr. Skill. I knew he had eaten something that was not wholesome food; and that food — that fruit — is the most harmful of the lot. It is the fruit of Beelzebub's orchard. I am astonished nobody warned you about it. A great many have died of it.

Christiana. Then Christiana began to cry, and said: Oh, the naughty boy! And oh, the careless mother! What am I to do for my son?

Mr. Skill. Come, do not be too downcast. The boy may be well again; but he must be purged, and made to be sick.

Christiana. Please, sir, use the very utmost of your skill on him, whatever it costs.

Mr. Skill. No — I hope I shall be reasonable.

So he made him a purge; but it was too weak. It was said to be made of the blood of a goat, the ashes of a heifer, and some juice of hyssop. When Mr. Skill saw that this purge was too weak, he made him one that would do the job: it was made *ex carne et sanguine Christi* — out of the flesh and blood of Christ. (You know physicians give their patients strange medicines.) And it was made up into pills with a promise or two, and a proportionate quantity of salt. Now he was to take them three at a time, on an empty stomach, in half a quarter of a pint of the tears of repentance.

When this medicine had been prepared and brought to the boy, he was unwilling to take it, though he was torn with the cramps as if he were being pulled to pieces.

Come, come, said the physician, you must take it.

It turns my stomach, said the boy.

I must have you take it, said his mother.

I shall be sick and bring it up again, said the boy.

Please, sir, said Christiana to Mr. Skill, how does it taste?

It has no bad taste, said the doctor. And with that she touched one of the pills with the tip of her tongue.

Oh, Matthew, said she, this medicine is sweeter than honey. If you love your mother, if you love your brothers, if you love Mercy, if you love your own life — take it.

So with much difficulty, after a short prayer for God's blessing on it, he took it, and it worked kindly with him. It made him purge; it made him sleep and rest quietly; it put him into a good warmth and a breaking sweat, and it rid him entirely of his cramps. So in a short time he got up and walked about with a stick, and would go from room to room and talk with Prudence and Piety and Charity about his illness and how he was cured.

So when the boy was well, Christiana asked Mr. Skill: Sir, what will satisfy you for your trouble and your care of my child?

And he said: You must pay the Master of the College of Physicians, according to the rules laid down for such cases.

Christiana. But, sir, said she, what else is this pill good for?

Mr. Skill. It is a universal pill. It is good against all the diseases that Pilgrims are liable to; and when it is properly prepared it will keep good for ever.

Christiana. Please, sir, make me up twelve boxes of them; because if I can get these, I will never take any other medicine.

Mr. Skill. These pills are good for preventing diseases as well as for curing them once you are ill. Yes, and I dare say it and stand by it: that if a man will only use this medicine as he should, it will make him live for ever. But, good Christiana, you must give these pills no other way than I have prescribed; because if you do, they will do no good.

So he gave Christiana medicine for herself and her boys and for Mercy, and told Matthew to take care how he ate any more green plums; and he kissed them and went on his way.

You were told earlier that Prudence had told the boys that whenever they liked they should ask her questions that might do them good, and that she would say something to them.

Matthew. Then Matthew, who had been ill, asked her why medicine is mostly bitter to our tongues.

Prudence. To show how unwelcome the Word of God, and its effects, are to a worldly heart.

Matthew. Why does medicine, if it does us good, purge us and make us sick?

Prudence. To show that the Word, when it works effectively, cleans out the heart and mind. Because look — what the one does to the body, the other does to the soul.

Matthew. What should we learn from seeing the flame of our fire go upwards, and from seeing the beams and sweet influences of the sun strike downwards?

Prudence. From the going up of the fire we are taught to rise to heaven by hot and eager desires. And from the sun sending its heat and beams and sweet influences downwards, we are taught that the Saviour of the world, though he is high, reaches down with his grace and love to us below.

Matthew. Where do the clouds get their water?

Prudence. Out of the sea.

Matthew. What may we learn from that?

Prudence. That ministers should fetch their teaching from God.

Matthew. Why do they empty themselves out on the earth?

Prudence. To show that ministers should give out to the world what they know of God.

Matthew. Why is the rainbow caused by the sun?

Prudence. To show that the covenant of God's grace is confirmed to us in Christ.

Matthew. Why do the springs come to us from the sea, through the earth?

Prudence. To show that the grace of God comes to us through the body of Christ.

Matthew. Why do some of the springs rise on the tops of high hills?

Prudence. To show that the spirit of grace will spring up in some who are great and powerful, as well as in many who are poor and lowly.

Matthew. Why does the fire take hold on the candlewick?

Prudence. To show that unless grace catches light on the heart, there will be no true light of life in us.

Matthew. Why are the wick and the tallow and everything used up to keep the candle burning?

Prudence. To show that body and soul and everything should be at the service of, and should spend themselves to keep in good condition, that grace of God which is in us.

Matthew. Why does the pelican pierce her own breast with her beak?

Prudence. To feed her young with her own blood, and by that to show that Christ the blessed one so loves his young, his people, as to save them from death with his blood.

Matthew. What may one learn from hearing the cock crow?

Prudence. Learn to remember Peter's sin and Peter's repentance. The cock's crowing also shows that day is coming on; so let the crowing of the cock put you in mind of that last and terrible day of judgment.

Now about this time their month was up; so they let those of the house know that it was time for them to be up and going. Then Joseph said to his mother: It would be a good idea if you did not forget to send to Mr. Interpreter's house, to ask him to grant that Mr. Great-heart may be sent to us, so that he can be our escort for the rest of the way.

Good boy, said she — I had almost forgotten.

So she drew up a petition and asked Mr. Watchful, the Porter, to send it by some suitable man to her good friend Mr. Interpreter. And when it had come and he had seen the contents of the petition, he said to the messenger: Go and tell them I will send him.

When the household where Christiana was saw that they meant to go on, they called the whole house together to give thanks to their King for sending them such profitable guests. And when that was done they said to Christiana: And shall we not show you something, as it is our custom to do with pilgrims, that you may think about when you are on the road?

So they took Christiana and her children and Mercy into the inner room and showed them one of the apples that Eve ate, and that she also gave to her husband, and for the eating of which they were both turned out of Paradise; and asked her what she thought it was.

Then Christiana said: It is food, or poison — I do not know which.

So they explained the matter to her, and she held up her hands in amazement.

Then they took her to a place and showed her Jacob's ladder. Now at that moment there were some angels going up it. So Christiana looked and looked to see the angels going up, and so did the rest of the company. Then they were about to go on to another place to show them something else, but James said to his mother: Please ask them to stay here a little longer, because this is a wonderful sight.

So they turned back, and stood feeding their eyes on such a lovely view.

After this they took them to a place where a golden anchor hung up; and they told Christiana to take it down, because, they said, you shall have it with you — you absolutely must have it, so that you may lay hold on what is within the veil and stand steady, in case you meet with stormy weather. So they were glad of it.

Then they took them to the mountain where Abraham our father offered up his son Isaac, and showed them the altar, the wood, the fire and the knife; because they are still to be seen there to this very day. When they had seen it, they lifted up their hands and blessed themselves and said: Oh, what a man Abraham was, for love of his Master and denial of himself!

After they had shown them all these things, Prudence took them into the dining room, where there stood a fine pair of virginals; and she played on them, and turned everything she had shown them into this excellent song:

	Eve's apple we have showed to you —
	of that one, be aware;
	you have seen Jacob's ladder too,
	and the angels going there.
	An anchor you've received as well;
	but let not these suffice
	until, with Abraham, you have given
	your best as sacrifice.

Now about this time somebody knocked at the door; so the Porter opened, and there was Mr. Great-heart. And when he had come in, what joy there was! Because it all came fresh into their minds again, how only a little while ago he had killed old Grim Bloody-man the giant and delivered them from the lions.

Then Mr. Great-heart said to Christiana and to Mercy: My Lord has sent each of you a bottle of wine, and some parched corn as well, together with a couple of pomegranates. He has also sent the boys some figs and raisins, to refresh you on your road.

Then they set themselves to their journey, and Prudence and Piety went along with them. When they came to the gate, Christiana asked the Porter whether anybody had gone by lately. He said no — only one, some time ago, who also told me that there had lately been a great robbery on the King's highway further on. But, he said, the thieves have been caught, and will shortly be tried for their lives.

Then Christiana and Mercy were afraid; but Matthew said: Mother, fear nothing, as long as Mr. Great-heart is going with us and is our escort.

Then Christiana said to the Porter: Sir, I am very much obliged to you for all the kindnesses you have shown me since I came here, and for being so loving and kind to my children. I do not know how to repay your kindness; so please, as a token of my respect for you, accept this small offering.

So she put a gold coin into his hand; and he made her a low bow and said: Let your clothing be always white, and let your head lack no oil. Let Mercy live and not die, and let her works not be few.

And to the boys he said: Run from the appetites of youth, and follow after godliness in the company of those who are serious and wise; so you will put gladness into your mother's heart, and win the praise of everybody who is sober-minded.

So they thanked the Porter and left.

Now I saw in my dream that they went on until they had come to the brow of the hill; where Piety, suddenly remembering, cried out: Oh dear — I have forgotten what I meant to give Christiana and her companions. I will go back and fetch it.

So she ran and fetched it. And while she was gone, Christiana thought she heard, in a grove a little way off on the right hand, the most exquisite melodious note, with words something like these:

	Through all my life your favour is
	so freely shown to me,
	that in your house for evermore
	my dwelling-place shall be.

And still listening, she thought she heard another answer it, saying:

	And why? The Lord our God is good,
	his mercy is for ever sure;
	his truth at all times firmly stood,
	and shall from age to age endure.

So Christiana asked Prudence what it was that made those exquisite notes.

They are, said she, our country birds. They only sing these notes now and then, except in the spring, when the flowers come out and the sun shines warm; and then you may hear them all day long. I often go out to listen to them, said she; and we often keep them tame in the house too. They are very fine company for us when we are low, and they make the woods and groves and lonely places into places you want to be.

By this time Piety had come back; so she said to Christiana: Look here — I have brought you an outline of all the things you have seen at our house, which you can look at when you find yourself forgetting, and so call those things back to mind for your building up and your comfort.
