The Valley of Humiliation

Now they began to go down the hill into the Valley of Humiliation. It was a steep hill and the path was slippery; but they were very careful, so they got down well enough.

When they were down in the Valley, Piety said to Christiana: This is the place where Christian your husband met with the foul fiend Apollyon, and where they had that dreadful fight. You cannot but have heard about it. But take courage — as long as you have Mr. Great-heart here to be your guide and escort, we hope you will fare the better for it.

So when these two had committed the Pilgrims to their guide's care, he went on ahead and they followed after.

Great-heart. Then Mr. Great-heart said: We need not be so afraid of this Valley, because there is nothing here to hurt us unless we bring it on ourselves. It is true that Christian met Apollyon here, and had a hard fight with him; but that fight was the fruit of the slips he made coming down the hill. Because those who slip up there must expect fights down here. And that is how this Valley has got such a bad name. Because the ordinary people, when they hear that some frightening thing has happened to somebody in a certain place, take the view that the place is haunted by some foul fiend or evil spirit — when in fact it is on account of their own doing that such things happen to them there.

This Valley of Humiliation is in itself as fruitful a place as any the crow flies over. And I am convinced that if we could hit on it, we might find something hereabouts that would give us an account of why Christian was so hard beset in this place.

Then James said to his mother: Look, over there is a pillar, and it seems to have something written on it. Let us go and see what it is.

So they went, and found written there: "Let Christian's slips, before he came here, and the battles he met with in this place, be a warning to those who come after."

There, said their guide — did I not tell you there was something round here that would give a hint as to why Christian was so hard beset in this place?

Then turning to Christiana, he said: This is no disgrace to Christian, any more than to a great many others whose luck and lot were the same as his; because it is easier going up this hill than down it, and that can be said of very few hills anywhere in the world. But we will leave the good man; he is at rest, and he had a splendid victory over his enemy. May the one who lives above grant that we fare no worse than he did, when we come to be tested.

But let us come back to this Valley of Humiliation. It is the best and most useful piece of ground in all these parts. It is rich soil, and, as you see, consists mostly of meadow; and if a man came here in the summer, as we are doing now, and knew nothing about it beforehand, and took pleasure in what he could see, he would find plenty here to delight him. Look how green this Valley is, and how beautiful with lilies. I have known many working men, too, who have made good estates in this Valley of Humiliation — "because God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble" — because it really is very fruitful soil, and brings forth by handfuls.

Some have even wished that the nearest way to their Father's house ran through here, so that they would be troubled no more with hills or mountains to climb. But the way is the way, and there is an end of it.

Now as they were going along and talking, they spotted a boy minding his father's sheep. The boy was in very poor clothes, but had a fresh and handsome face; and as he sat there by himself, he sang.

Listen, said Mr. Great-heart, to what the shepherd's boy is saying. So they listened, and he said:

	He that is down needs fear no fall;
	he that is low, no pride;
	he that is humble ever shall
	have God to be his guide.
	I am content with what I have,
	little be it or much;
	and, Lord, contentment still I crave,
	because you save all such.
	Fullness to such is a burden
	as go on pilgrimage;
	here little, and hereafter bliss,
	is best from age to age.

Then the guide said: Do you hear him? I will venture to say that this boy lives a merrier life, and carries more of that herb called heart's-ease in his chest, than the man dressed in silk and velvet. But let us go on with what we were saying.

In this Valley our Lord used to have his country house. He loved to be here. He loved to walk in these meadows too, because he found the air pleasant. Besides which, here a man is free from the noise and the rushing about of this life. Every other place is full of noise and confusion; only the Valley of Humiliation is empty and quiet. Here a man will not be hindered and held back in his thinking, as he is apt to be elsewhere. This is a Valley that nobody walks in but those who love a pilgrim's life. And although Christian had the bad luck to meet Apollyon here and to have a brisk encounter with him, still, I have to tell you that in earlier times men have met angels here, have found pearls here, and have found the words of life in this place.

Did I say our Lord had his country house here in the old days, and that he loved to walk here? I will add this: that in this place, and to the people who live and go about these grounds, he has left a yearly income, to be faithfully paid them at set seasons, for their keep along the way and for their further encouragement to go on with their pilgrimage.

Samuel. Now as they went on, Samuel said to Mr. Great-heart: Sir, I gather it was in this Valley that my father and Apollyon had their battle. But whereabouts was the fight? Because I can see this Valley is a large one.

Great-heart. Your father had that battle with Apollyon at a place ahead of us, in a narrow passage just beyond Forgetful Green. And that place really is the most dangerous spot in all these parts. Because if at any time pilgrims run into a hard knock, it is when they forget what favours they have received and how little they deserve them. This is the place where others have been hard pressed as well. But more about the place when we come to it; because I am fairly sure that to this day there is either some sign of the battle left, or some monument to testify that such a battle was fought there.

Mercy. Then Mercy said: I think I am as well in this Valley as I have been anywhere else in the whole of our journey. It seems to me the place suits my spirit. I love being in places like this, where there is no rattling of coaches or rumbling of wheels. It seems to me that here one may, without much disturbance, think about what one is, and where one came from, and what one has done, and what the King has called one to. Here one may think, and break at heart, and melt in one's spirit, until one's eyes become like "the fishpools of Heshbon." Those who go rightly through this Valley of Weeping make it a well, and the rain that God sends down from heaven on those who are here fills the pools too. This is the Valley out of which the King will give his people their vineyards; and those who go through it shall sing, as Christian did, for all that he met with Apollyon.

Great-heart. It is true, said their guide. I have gone through this Valley many a time, and I was never better than when I was here. I have also been an escort to a number of pilgrims, and they have said the same. "To this man will I look," says the King, "even to him who is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word."

Now they came to the place where the battle we spoke of was fought. Then the guide said to Christiana, her children and Mercy: This is the place. On this ground Christian stood, and up there came Apollyon against him. And look — did I not tell you? Here is some of your husband's blood on these stones to this day. See too how here and there you can still make out on the ground some of the splinters of Apollyon's broken darts. See how they beat the ground with their feet as they fought, each holding his position against the other; and how with their glancing blows they split the very stones to pieces.

Christian really did play the man here, and showed himself as tough as Hercules himself would have been if he had been standing there. When Apollyon was beaten, he made his retreat into the next Valley, which is called the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and which we shall come to shortly.

Look — over there stands a monument as well, with this battle engraved on it, and Christian's victory, to his fame through all the ages.

So, because it stood right by the roadside in front of them, they stepped over to it and read the writing, which word for word was this:

	Close by here a battle was fought,
	most strange, and yet most true;
	Christian and Apollyon sought
	each other to subdue.
	The man so bravely played the man,
	he made the fiend to fly;
	of which a monument I stand,
	the same to testify.

When they had gone past this place, they came to the borders of the Shadow of Death. And this Valley was longer than the other, and a place most strangely haunted with evil things, as a great many can testify. But these women and children got through it the better, because they had daylight, and because Mr. Great-heart was their escort.

When they had entered this Valley, they thought they heard a groaning, like the groaning of dead men — a very great groaning. They thought too that they could hear words of lamentation spoken, as of people in the last extremes of torment. These things made the boys quake, and the women looked pale and drawn; but their guide told them to take comfort.

So they went on a little further, and they thought they felt the ground begin to shake under them, as if there were some hollow place there. They heard a kind of hissing too, like snakes — but nothing had appeared as yet.

Then the boys said: Are we not at the end of this dismal place yet?

But again the guide told them to take courage, and to watch their feet — in case, he said, you get caught in some trap.

Now James began to feel sick; but I think the cause of it was fear. So his mother gave him some of that glass of cordial that had been given her at the Interpreter's house, and three of the pills that Mr. Skill had prepared, and the boy began to revive.

So they went on, until they came to about the middle of the Valley; and then Christiana said: I think I see something over there on the road ahead of us — a thing of such a shape as I have never seen.

Then Joseph said: Mother, what is it?

An ugly thing, child; an ugly thing, said she.

But, mother, what is it like? said he.

It is like I cannot tell you what, said she. And by now it was only a little way off; and then she said: It is close.

Well, well, said Mr. Great-heart. Let those who are most afraid keep close to me.

So the fiend came on, and their escort went to meet it; but just as it reached him, it vanished from all their sight. Then they remembered what had been said some time ago: "Resist the devil, and he will flee from you."

So they went on, feeling a little refreshed. But they had not gone far before Mercy, looking behind her, saw something she thought most like a lion; and it came after them at a great padding pace, and it had a hollow roaring voice; and at every roar it gave, it made the whole Valley echo, and made their hearts ache — all except the heart of their guide.

So it came up; and Mr. Great-heart went behind and put all the Pilgrims in front of him. The lion came on fast too, and Mr. Great-heart set himself to give it battle. But when it saw that resistance was going to be made, it also drew back, and came no further.

Then they went on again, with their escort walking ahead of them, until they came to a place where a pit had been dug the whole width of the road; and before they could get ready to cross it, a great mist and darkness came down on them, so that they could not see.

Then the Pilgrims said: Oh dear — now what are we to do?

But their guide answered: Do not be afraid. Stand still, and see what end will be put to this as well.

So they waited there, because their path was blocked. And they thought too that they could hear the noise and rushing of their enemies more clearly, and that the fire and the smoke of the pit were much easier to make out.

Then Christiana said to Mercy: Now I see what my poor husband went through. I have heard a great deal about this place, but I was never here until now. Poor man — he went through here all alone in the night; he had night almost the whole way. And these fiends were busy about him too, as if they meant to tear him to pieces. Many have spoken of it, but nobody can tell what the Valley of the Shadow of Death means until they are in it themselves. "The heart knows its own bitterness, and a stranger does not share its joy." To be here is a fearful thing.

Great-heart. This is like doing business in great waters, or going down into the deep; this is like being in the heart of the sea, and going down to the roots of the mountains. Now it feels as though the earth with its bars were closed round us for ever. But let those who walk in darkness and have no light trust in the name of the Lord and lean on their God.

For my part, as I have told you already, I have often gone through this Valley, and have been far harder pressed than I am now — and yet you can see I am alive. I would not boast, because I am not my own saviour; but I trust we shall have a good deliverance. Come, let us pray for light to the one who can lighten our darkness, and who can rebuke not only these but all the Satans in hell.

So they cried out and prayed; and God sent light and deliverance, so that now there was nothing blocking their way — not even where they had just been stopped by a pit.

Still, they were not through the Valley yet; so they went on. And now there were great stinks and loathsome smells, greatly to their disgust.

Then Mercy said to Christiana: There is not such pleasant being here as at the gate, or at the Interpreter's, or at the house where we slept last night.

Oh, but, said one of the boys, it is not so bad to go through here as it would be to live here always. And for all I know, one reason we have to go this way to the house prepared for us is so that our home may be all the sweeter to us.

Well said, Samuel, said the guide — you have spoken now like a man.

Why, if ever I get out of here again, said the boy, I think I shall value light and a good road better than ever I did in all my life.

Then the guide said: We shall be out before long.

So on they went; and Joseph said: Can we not see the end of this Valley yet?

Then the guide said: Watch your feet, because you will be among the traps in a moment.

So they watched their feet and went on; but they were much troubled by the traps. Now when they had got in among them, they spotted a man thrown into the ditch on the left-hand side, with his flesh all ripped and torn.

Then the guide said: That is one Heedless, who was going this way. He has lain there a great while. There was one Take-heed with him when he was caught and killed, but he escaped their hands. You cannot imagine how many are killed hereabouts — and yet men are foolhardy enough to set out lightly on pilgrimage, and to come without a guide. Poor Christian! It was a wonder he escaped here. But he was loved by his God; and he had a good heart of his own, too, or he could never have done it.

Now they were coming towards the end of the road; and just where Christian had seen the cave when he went past, out came a giant named Maul. This Maul used to ruin young pilgrims with clever false arguments; and he called Great-heart by name and said to him: How many times have you been forbidden to do these things?

Then Mr. Great-heart said: What things?

What things! said the giant. You know what things. But I will put an end to your trade.

But tell me, said Mr. Great-heart — before we set to, let us understand what we have to fight about.

Now the women and children stood trembling, and did not know what to do.

Said the giant: You rob the country, and you rob it with the worst kind of theft.

Those are only generalities, said Mr. Great-heart. Come to particulars, man.

Then the giant said: You practise the trade of a kidnapper. You gather up women and children and carry them off into a strange country, to the weakening of my master's kingdom.

But now Great-heart replied: I am a servant of the God of heaven. My business is to persuade sinners to repent. I am commanded to do my best to turn men, women and children "from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God." And if that is really the ground of your quarrel, then let us set to as soon as you like.

Then the giant came on, and Mr. Great-heart went to meet him; and as he went he drew his sword, but the giant had a club. So without any more ado they set to; and at the first blow the giant knocked Mr. Great-heart down onto one knee. At that the women and children cried out. So Mr. Great-heart recovered himself and laid about him in a thoroughly vigorous way, and gave the giant a wound in the arm.

He fought like this for the space of an hour, at such a pitch of heat that the breath came out of the giant's nostrils the way steam comes out of a boiling cauldron.

Then they sat down to rest; but Mr. Great-heart took himself to prayer, while the women and children did nothing but sigh and cry the whole time the battle lasted.

When they had rested and got their breath back, they both set to it again; and Mr. Great-heart with a full blow brought the giant down to the ground.

No, hold on — let me get up, said the giant. So Mr. Great-heart fairly let him get to his feet.

So at it they went again, and the giant came within very little of smashing Mr. Great-heart's skull altogether with his club.

Mr. Great-heart, seeing that, ran at him in the full heat of his spirit and pierced him under the fifth rib; and with that the giant began to weaken and could hold his club up no longer. Then Mr. Great-heart followed up his blow and struck the giant's head from his shoulders.

Then the women and children rejoiced, and Mr. Great-heart praised God too for the deliverance he had worked. When this was done, they put up a pillar among them and fastened the giant's head on it, and wrote underneath in letters that passers-by could read:

	He that wore this head was one
	who did the pilgrims misuse;
	he stopped their way, he spared none,
	but did them all abuse —
	until I, Great-heart, rose to be
	the pilgrims' guide, and stood
	to oppose him, who was he
	that was their enemy.
