The Valley of the Shadow, and Old Honest

Now I saw that they went to the rise a little further on, which had been thrown up as a lookout for pilgrims — the place from which Christian first caught sight of his brother Faithful. So here they sat down and rested, and here too they ate and drank and made merry, because they had been delivered from such a dangerous enemy.

As they sat there eating, Christiana asked the guide whether he had taken any hurt in the battle.

Then Mr. Great-heart said: No, apart from a little on my flesh. And even that is so far from doing me any harm that it is proof at present of my love for my Master and for you, and by grace it will be a means of increasing my reward at the end.

Christiana. But were you not afraid, good sir, when you saw him come out with his club?

Great-heart. It is my duty, said he, to distrust my own ability, so that I may rely on the one who is stronger than all.

Christiana. But what did you think when he knocked you down to the ground at the first blow?

Great-heart. Why, I thought, said he, that my Master himself was served the same way — and yet it was he who conquered in the end.

Matthew. Whatever the rest of you think, I think God has been wonderfully good to us, both in bringing us out of this Valley and in delivering us out of this enemy's hands. For my part, I see no reason why we should distrust our God any more, since he has now, and in such a place as this, given us such proof of his love.

Then they got up and went on. Now a little ahead of them stood an oak tree; and under it, when they came to it, they found an old pilgrim fast asleep. They knew he was a pilgrim by his clothes, and his staff, and his belt.

So the guide, Mr. Great-heart, woke him; and the old gentleman, as he opened his eyes, cried out: What is the matter? Who are you? And what is your business here?

Great-heart. Come, man, do not be so hot. There is nobody here but friends.

Still, the old man got up and stood on his guard, and would know from them who they were. Then the guide said: My name is Great-heart. I am the guide of these Pilgrims, who are going to the Celestial Country.

Honest. Then Mr. Honest said: I beg your pardon. I was afraid you were of that company who some time ago robbed Little-faith of his money. But now that I look about me better, I can see you are honester people than that.

Great-heart. Why — what would you have done, or what could you have done, to help yourself, if we really had been of that company?

Honest. Done! Why, I would have fought as long as there was breath in me. And if I had, I am sure you could never have had the better of me; because a Christian can never be overcome unless he gives in of his own accord.

Great-heart. Well said, father Honest, said the guide. Because by this I know you are a bird of the right feather, since you have spoken the truth.

Honest. And by this I know as well that you understand what true pilgrimage is; because everybody else thinks we are the easiest of all people to overcome.

Great-heart. Well, now that we have met so happily, let me ask your name, and the name of the place you came from.

Honest. My name I cannot tell you. But I came from the town of Stupidity; it lies about four degrees beyond the City of Destruction.

Great-heart. Oh — are you from that country? I think I can half guess who you are. Your name is Old Honesty, is it not?

So the old gentleman blushed and said: Not Honesty in the abstract; Honest is my name. And I hope my nature may agree with what I am called.

Honest. But, sir, said the old gentleman, how could you guess that I was that sort of man, given that I came from such a place?

Great-heart. I had heard of you before, from my Master; because he knows everything that is done on the earth. But I have often wondered that anybody should come out of your town, because it is worse than the City of Destruction itself.

Honest. Yes — we lie further from the sun, and so we are colder and duller. But if a man were standing in a mountain of ice, still, if the Sun of Righteousness rises on him, his frozen heart will feel a thaw. And that is how it has been with me.

Great-heart. I believe it, father Honest, I believe it; because I know the thing is true.

Then the old gentleman greeted all the Pilgrims with a holy kiss of love, and asked them their names, and how they had got on since they set out on their pilgrimage.

Christiana. Then Christiana said: My name I suppose you have heard. Good Christian was my husband, and these four are his children.

But you cannot imagine how the old gentleman was struck when she told him who she was. He skipped, he smiled, he blessed them with a thousand good wishes, saying:

Honest. I have heard a great deal about your husband, and about his travels and the wars he went through in his day. Let it be said for your comfort: your husband's name rings all over these parts of the world. His faith, his courage, his endurance and his sincerity through it all have made his name famous.

Then he turned to the boys and asked them their names, which they told him. And then he said to them: Matthew, be like Matthew the tax-collector — not in his vice but in his virtue. Samuel, said he, be like Samuel the prophet, a man of faith and prayer. Joseph, said he, be like Joseph in Potiphar's house: chaste, and a man who runs from temptation. And James, be like James the Just, and like James the brother of our Lord.

Then they told him about Mercy, and how she had left her town and her family to come along with Christiana and her sons. At which the honest old man said: Mercy is your name; by mercy you shall be held up, and carried through all the difficulties that will come at you on your road, until you come to the place where you shall look the Fountain of Mercy in the face with comfort.

All this while the guide, Mr. Great-heart, was very much pleased, and smiled at his companion.

Now as they walked along together, the guide asked the old gentleman whether he had known a certain Mr. Fearing, who came on pilgrimage from his part of the country.

Honest. Yes, very well, said he. He was a man who had the root of the matter in him — but he was one of the most troublesome pilgrims I ever met with in all my days.

Great-heart. I can see you knew him, because you have given a very accurate description of him.

Honest. Knew him! I was a great companion of his. I was with him nearly all the time. When he first began to think about what was coming on us hereafter, I was with him.

Great-heart. I was his guide from my Master's house to the gates of the Celestial City.

Honest. Then you knew he was a troublesome one.

Great-heart. I did; but I could put up with it well enough, because men of my calling are often entrusted with escorting people like him.

Honest. Well then, let us hear a little about him, and how he conducted himself under your escort.

Great-heart. Why — he was always afraid he would fall short of the place he so much wanted to get to. Everything frightened him that he heard anybody mention that had the least appearance of opposition in it. I hear that he lay roaring at the Slough of Despond for about a month together; and he did not dare venture across, even though he saw several go over ahead of him, and many of them offered him a hand. But he would not go back either. He said he would die if he never reached the Celestial City — and yet he was cast down by every difficulty and tripped over every straw that anybody threw in his path.

Well, after he had lain at the Slough of Despond a great while, as I say, one sunny morning — I do not know how — he ventured it, and so got over. But once he was over he could hardly believe it. He had, I think, a Slough of Despond in his own mind, a slough he carried about with him everywhere; or he could never have been as he was.

So he came up to the gate — you know the one I mean, that stands at the head of this road — and there again he stood a good while before he would risk knocking. When the gate was opened he would draw back and give way to others, and say he was not worthy. Because for all that he had got to the gate ahead of some of them, still, a good many of them went in before him. There the poor man would stand, shaking and shrinking. I dare say it would have made anybody's heart ache to see him. And still he would not go back.

At last he took the hammer that hung by the gate in his hand and gave one or two small taps. Then One opened to him — but he shrank back as before. The one who opened stepped out after him and said: Trembling man, what do you want? At that he fell down to the ground. The one who spoke to him was astonished to see him so faint. So he said to him: Peace be to you. Get up, because I have set the door open for you. Come in, because you are blessed. With that he got up and went in trembling; and once he was in, he was ashamed to show his face.

Well, after he had been entertained there a while, as you know is the custom, he was told to go on his way, and told the road he should take. So on he came, until he came to our house. But he behaved at my Master the Interpreter's door exactly as he had done at the gate. He lay about outside in the cold a good while before he would risk calling — and yet he would not go back, and the nights were long and cold then.

Indeed, he had a note of his necessity in his coat, addressed to my Master, asking him to receive him and grant him the comfort of his house, and to allow him a strong and valiant escort as well, because he was such a chicken-hearted man himself. And even so, he was afraid to call at the door. So he lay about the place until, poor man, he was nearly starved. Yes — such was his low state that although he saw several others get in by knocking, he was still afraid to risk it.

At last, I think, I looked out of the window and noticed a man going up and down outside the door; so I went out to him and asked who he was. But, poor man, the tears stood in his eyes, so I understood what he wanted. So I went in and told them in the house, and we put the matter to our Lord. So he sent me out again to beg him to come in; but I can tell you I had hard work to manage it.

At last he came in. And I will say this for my Lord: he treated him wonderfully lovingly. There were only a few good pieces on the table, but some of them were laid on his plate. Then he presented his note, and my Lord looked at it and said his request should be granted. So when he had been there a good while, he seemed to get a little heart, and to be a little more comfortable. Because my Master, you must understand, is a man of very tender feeling, and especially towards those who are afraid; so he treated him in whatever way would most encourage him.

Well — when he had seen the things of the place and was ready to take his journey to the city, my Lord, as he had done for Christian before, gave him a bottle of cordial and some good things to eat. So we set off, and I walked ahead of him; but the man was a man of very few words. He only sighed aloud.

When we came to the place where the three fellows were hanged, he said he was afraid that would be his end too. He only seemed glad when he saw the Cross and the Tomb. There, I admit, he wanted to stay a little and look; and for a while afterwards he seemed a little cheerful.

When we came to the Hill Difficulty he made no fuss about that, and he was not much afraid of the lions either; because you have to understand that his trouble was not about that kind of thing. His fear was about whether he would be accepted at the end.

I got him into the House Beautiful, I think, before he was willing to go. And once he was in I introduced him to the young women of the place; but he was ashamed to make much of himself in company. He wanted very much to be alone — and yet he always loved good conversation, and would often get behind the screen to listen to it. He also loved seeing ancient things, and turning them over in his mind. He told me afterwards that he loved being in those two houses he had last come from — the gate, and the Interpreter's — but that he had not dared to be so bold as to ask.

And when we left the House Beautiful and he went down the hill into the Valley of Humiliation, he went down as well as ever I saw a man do in my life; because he did not care how low he was, so long as he might be happy at the end. Yes — I think there was a kind of sympathy between that valley and him, because I never saw him better in his whole pilgrimage than when he was in that valley.

Here he would lie down and hug the ground and kiss the very flowers that grew in the valley. He would be up now every morning at daybreak, walking and tracing to and fro about the place.

But when he came to the entrance of the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I thought I was going to lose my man. Not because he had any inclination to go back — he always hated that — but because he was ready to die of fright. Oh, the hobgoblins will have me! The hobgoblins will have me! he cried; and I could not get him off it. He made such a noise, such an outcry here, that if they had only heard him it would have been enough to encourage them to come and fall on us.

But this I noticed particularly: that this valley was as quiet the whole time he was going through it as I have ever known it, before or since. I suppose these enemies here had a special check laid on them from our Lord, and an order not to interfere until Mr. Fearing was past.
