Vanity Town

It would take too long to tell you everything, so we will only mention a passage or two more. When he came to Vanity Fair, I thought he would have fought every man at the fair. I was afraid the two of us would be knocked on the head there, he was so hot against their follies. On the Enchanted Ground, too, he was very wide awake. But when he came to the river, where there was no bridge, then he was in a bad way again. Now, now, he said, he would be drowned for ever, and would never see with any comfort that Face he had come so many miles to look on.

And here I noticed something very remarkable: the water of that river was lower at that moment than I have ever seen it in my life. So he went over at last, hardly getting his feet wet. When he was going up to the gate, I began to take my leave of him and to wish him a good reception up there. And he said: I shall have it, I shall. Then we parted, and I never saw him again.

Honest. Then it seems he was well at last.

Great-heart. Yes, yes. I never had any doubt about him. He was a man of a choice spirit; only he was always kept very low, and that made his life so much of a burden to himself and so troublesome to others. He was, above most men, sensitive about sin. He was so afraid of doing others an injury that he would often deny himself things that were perfectly lawful, because he did not want to give offence.

Honest. But what should be the reason that such a good man should be so much in the dark all his days?

Great-heart. There are two sorts of reason for it. One is that the wise God will have it so: some must pipe and some must weep. Now Mr. Fearing was one who played the bass line. He and his fellows sound the sackbut, whose notes are more mournful than the notes of other instruments — though some say that the bass is the foundation of music. And for my part, I care nothing at all for a profession of faith that does not begin in heaviness of mind. The first string a musician usually touches is the bass, when he means to put everything in tune. God also plays this string first, when he is tuning the soul for himself. Only here was Mr. Fearing's imperfection: he could play no other music but this, until towards the very end.

I make bold to talk in this figurative way, to sharpen the wits of young readers; and because in the book of Revelation the saved are compared to a company of musicians who play on their trumpets and harps and sing their songs before the throne.

Honest. He was a very zealous man, as anyone can see from the account you have given of him. Difficulties, lions, Vanity Fair — he was not afraid of any of them. It was only sin and death and hell that were a terror to him, because he had some doubts about his own share in that celestial country.

Great-heart. You are right. Those were the things that troubled him; and they arose, as you have rightly observed, from a weakness in his mind on that particular point, not from any weakness of spirit as to the practical part of a pilgrim's life. I honestly believe that, as the proverb goes, he could have bitten a firebrand in two if it had stood in his way; but the things that weighed him down are things no man has ever yet shaken off easily.

Christiana. Then Christiana said: This account of Mr. Fearing has done me good. I thought nobody had been like me; but I can see there was some likeness between this good man and me. Only we differed in two things. His troubles were so great that they broke out; mine I kept inside. And his lay so heavy on him that they stopped him from knocking at the houses provided for pilgrims to stay in — whereas my trouble was always the sort that made me knock the louder.

Mercy. If I may speak my heart too, I have to say that something of him has been in me as well; because I have always been more afraid of the lake, and of losing my place in Paradise, than I have been of losing anything else. Oh, I thought, if only I may have the happiness of a home there — that is enough, even if I part with the whole world to win it.

Matthew. Then Matthew said: Fear was one thing that made me think I was a long way from having in me what goes along with salvation. But if it was like that with such a good man as he was, why should it not turn out well for me too?

James. No fears, no grace, said James. Although there is not always grace where there is a fear of hell, still, there is certainly no grace where there is no fear of God.

Great-heart. Well said, James; you have hit the mark. Because the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom; and certainly those who lack the beginning have neither middle nor end. But we will end our talk about Mr. Fearing here, after we have sent this farewell after him:

	Well, Master Fearing, you did fear
	your God, and were afraid
	of doing anything, while here,
	by which you'd be betrayed.
	And did you fear the lake and pit?
	Would others did so too!
	Because as for those who want your wit,
	they their own selves undo.

Now I saw that they still went on talking; because after Mr. Great-heart had finished with Mr. Fearing, Mr. Honest began to tell them about another man, whose name was Mr. Self-will.

He claimed to be a pilgrim, said Mr. Honest, but I am convinced he never came in at the gate that stands at the head of the road.

Great-heart. Did you ever have any conversation with him about it?

Honest. Yes, more than once or twice. But he would always be like himself — self-willed. He cared nothing for people, or for argument, or for example either. Whatever his own mind prompted him to do, that he would do, and nothing could get him to do anything else.

Great-heart. Tell me — what principles did he hold? I suppose you can say.

Honest. He held that a man might follow the vices of the pilgrims as well as their virtues, and that if he did both he would certainly be saved.

Great-heart. What! If he had said it is possible for the heart to be guilty of the vices as well as to share in the virtues of pilgrims, he could not have been much blamed; because in fact we are not absolutely exempted from any vice, except on condition that we watch and struggle. But that, I gather, is not the point. If I understand you rightly, you mean that he was of the opinion that it was allowable to be like that.

Honest. Yes, yes, that is what I mean; and that is what he believed and practised.

Great-heart. But what grounds did he have for saying it?

Honest. Why, he said he had the Scripture for his warrant.

Great-heart. Please, Mr. Honest, give us a few particulars.

Honest. So I will. He said that having to do with other men's wives had been practised by David, God's beloved, and that therefore he could do it. He said that having more than one woman was a thing Solomon practised, and therefore he could do it. He said that Sarah and the godly midwives of Egypt lied, and so did Rahab who was saved, and therefore he could do it. He said the disciples went at their Master's bidding and took away the owner's donkey, and therefore he could do the same. He said that Jacob got his father's inheritance by trickery and pretence, and therefore he could do the same.

Great-heart. Utterly base! And you are sure he held this opinion?

Honest. I have heard him argue for it, bring Scripture for it, bring reasons for it, and so on.

Great-heart. An opinion that ought not to be allowed the smallest room anywhere in the world.

Honest. You must understand me correctly. He did not say that any man might do this — but that those who had the virtues of the men who did such things might do the same.

Great-heart. But what could be falser than that conclusion? Because this amounts to saying that because good men in the past have sinned out of weakness, therefore he has permission to do it deliberately. Or as though, because a child was blown over by a gust of wind, or stumbled on a stone and fell and dirtied itself in the mud, therefore he might deliberately lie down and wallow in it like a pig. Who could have thought anybody could be so far blinded by the power of his appetites? But what is written must be true: they "stumble at the Word, being disobedient — to which also they were appointed."

His supposition that people who give themselves up to godly men's vices may have those men's virtues is a delusion just as strong as the other. It is exactly as if a dog were to say, I have, or may have, the qualities of the child, because I lick up its filth. Eating up the sins of God's people is no sign of a man possessed of their virtues. Nor can I believe that anybody holding this opinion has, at that moment, either faith or love in him. But I know you have made strong objections to him. Tell me — what can he say for himself?

Honest. Why, he says that to do this as a matter of stated opinion seems a great deal more honest than to do it while holding the opposite opinion.

Great-heart. A very wicked answer. Because although letting the reins loose on our appetites while our opinions are against such things is bad, still, to sin and then argue for permission to do it is worse. The first trips up onlookers by accident; the second argues them into the trap.

Honest. There are many of this man's mind who have not got this man's mouth; and that is what makes going on pilgrimage as little regarded as it is.

Great-heart. You have spoken the truth, and it is to be lamented. But the man who fears the King of Paradise will come out of it all.

Christiana. There are strange opinions in the world. I knew one man who said it was time enough to repent when they came to die.

Great-heart. Such people are not very wise. That man would have been very unwilling, if he had been given a week to run twenty miles in for his life, to put that journey off to the last hour of the week.

Honest. You are right. And yet most of those who count themselves pilgrims really do just that. I am, as you see, an old man, and I have been a traveller on this road many a day, and I have taken notice of a great many things.

I have seen some who set out as though they would drive the whole world in front of them, and who yet within a few days died as those people died in the wilderness, and so never got a sight of the promised land.

I have seen some who promised nothing at all when they first set out to be pilgrims — men you would have thought could not last a day — who have yet turned out very good pilgrims.

I have seen some who ran hurrying forward and who then, after a little while, ran just as fast back again.

I have seen some who spoke very well of a pilgrim's life at first, and who after a while spoke just as much against it. I have heard some, when they first set out for Paradise, say positively that there is such a place — who, when they had almost got there, came back again and said there is none.

I have heard some boast about what they would do in case they were opposed, who at a mere false alarm have run for it, abandoning faith, the pilgrim's road and everything else.

Now, as they were going along like this, somebody came running to meet them and said: Gentlemen — and you of the weaker sort — if you value your lives, look out for yourselves, because the robbers are up ahead of you.

Great-heart. Then Mr. Great-heart said: They are the three who attacked Little-faith before now. Well, said he, we are ready for them.

So they went on their way. And they looked at every turn to see whether they would meet the villains; but whether they had heard about Mr. Great-heart, or whether they had other game in view, they never came up to the Pilgrims.
