Mr. Feeble-mind and Mr. Ready-to-halt

Well, said Gaius, now that you are here, and since I know Mr. Great-heart is good with his weapons, if you like we will walk out into the fields when we have refreshed ourselves, and see whether we can do any good. About a mile from here there is one Slay-good, a giant who does a great deal of harm on the King's highway in these parts; and I know roughly where his haunt is. He is master of a number of thieves. It would be a good thing if we could clear these parts of him.

So they agreed and went — Mr. Great-heart with his sword and helmet and shield, and the rest with spears and staffs. When they came to the place where he was, they found him with one Feeble-mind in his hands, whom his servants had brought to him, having caught him on the road. Now the giant was going through his pockets, meaning after that to pick his bones, because he was of the flesh-eating kind.

Well, as soon as he saw Mr. Great-heart and his friends at the mouth of his cave with their weapons, he demanded to know what they wanted.

Great-heart. We want you. Because we have come to avenge the quarrel of the many pilgrims you have killed after dragging them off the King's highway. So come out of your cave.

So he armed himself and came out; and to battle they went, and fought for more than an hour, and then stood still to get their breath.

Slay-good. Then the giant said: Why are you here on my ground?

Great-heart. To avenge the blood of pilgrims, as I told you before.

So they set to it again, and the giant made Mr. Great-heart give ground; but he came up again, and with a great heart he let fly so stoutly at the giant's head and sides that he made him drop his weapon out of his hand. So he struck him and killed him, and cut off his head and brought it away to the inn. He also took Feeble-mind the pilgrim and brought him back with him to his lodgings.

When they had got home, they showed the head to the household, and then set it up, as they had done with others before, as a warning to anybody who might try to do the same afterwards.

Then they asked Mr. Feeble-mind how he had fallen into his hands.

Feeble-mind. Then the poor man said: I am a sickly man, as you see. And because death used to knock at my door about once a day, I thought I should never be well at home; so I took up a pilgrim's life, and have travelled here from the town of Uncertain, where I and my father were born.

I am a man with no strength at all, either of body or of mind. But I would, if I could, spend my life on the pilgrim's road, even though I can only crawl along it. When I came to the gate at the head of the road, the Lord of that place received me freely. He raised no objection to my sickly looks or to my feeble mind, but gave me the things that were necessary for my journey and told me to hope to the end.

When I came to the house of the Interpreter I met with a great deal of kindness there; and because the Hill Difficulty was judged too hard for me, I was carried up it by one of his servants. Indeed, I have found a great deal of relief from pilgrims — though none of them were willing to go as slowly as I am forced to go. Still, as they came on, they told me to take heart, and said that it was their Lord's will that comfort should be given to the feeble-minded; and then they went on at their own pace.

When I had come up to Assault Lane, this giant met me and told me to prepare for a fight. But alas — feeble creature that I am, I had more need of a cordial. So he came up and took me.

I fancied he would not kill me. And when he had got me into his den, since I had not gone with him willingly, I believed I should come out alive again; because I have heard that no pilgrim who is taken captive by violent hands is, by the laws of Providence, to die at the enemy's hand, so long as he keeps his heart whole towards his Master. Robbed I expected to be, and robbed I certainly have been; but I have escaped with my life, as you see. And for that I thank my King as the author of it, and you as the means.

I expect other hard knocks as well. But this I have settled on: to run when I can, to walk when I cannot run, and to crawl when I cannot walk. As for the main point, I thank the one who loves me, I am fixed. My road is in front of me; my mind is beyond the river that has no bridge — even though I am, as you see, only of a feeble mind.

Honest. Then old Mr. Honest said: Were you not once acquainted with a certain Mr. Fearing, a pilgrim?

Feeble-mind. Acquainted with him! Yes. He came from the town of Stupidity, which lies four degrees to the north of the City of Destruction, and as far from where I was born. And yet we knew each other well — because in fact he was my uncle, my father's brother. He and I have been much of the same temper. He was a little shorter than I am, but we were much of the same complexion.

Honest. I can see you knew him; and I am inclined to believe you were related, too, because you have his pale look, a cast of the eye like his, and your way of speaking is much the same.

Feeble-mind. Most people who have known us both have said so. And besides, whatever I have read in him I have mostly found in myself too.

Gaius. Come, sir, said good Gaius, take heart. You are welcome to me and to my house; call freely for whatever you have a mind to, and whatever you want my servants to do for you they will do gladly.

Then Mr. Feeble-mind said: This is unexpected kindness — like the sun shining out of a very dark cloud. Did Giant Slay-good intend me this favour when he stopped me and decided to let me go no further? Did he intend that after he had gone through my pockets I should go to Gaius, my host? And yet that is how it has turned out.

Now just as Mr. Feeble-mind and Gaius were talking like this, somebody came running and called at the door, and told them that about a mile and a half off, one Mr. Not-right, a pilgrim, had been struck dead on the spot by a thunderbolt.

Feeble-mind. Oh dear, said Mr. Feeble-mind — is he killed? He caught up with me a few days before I got as far as here, and wanted to be my companion. He was with me too when Slay-good the giant took me; but he was quick on his feet and got away. And it seems he escaped in order to die, and I was taken in order to live.

	What seems to seek to kill a man outright
	often delivers from the saddest plight.
	That very providence whose face is death
	often to the lowly bequeaths life.
	I was taken, he escaped and fled;
	crossed hands give death to him and life to me.

Now about this time Matthew and Mercy were married. Gaius also gave his daughter Phoebe to James, Matthew's brother, as his wife. After which they still stayed more than ten days at Gaius's house, spending their time and the seasons as pilgrims usually do.

When they were to leave, Gaius made them a feast, and they ate and drank and were merry. Now the hour came when they had to go; so Mr. Great-heart called for the bill. But Gaius told him that at his house it was not the custom for pilgrims to pay for their entertainment. He kept them by the year, but looked for his payment from the good Samaritan, who had promised him that on his return he would faithfully repay him whatever expense he had been put to on their account.

Then Mr. Great-heart said to him:

Great-heart. "Beloved, you do faithfully whatever you do for the brothers and for strangers, who have borne witness to your love before the church; and if you go on to help them forward on their journey in a godly way, you will do well."

Then Gaius took his leave of them all, and of his children, and particularly of Mr. Feeble-mind. He also gave him something to drink on the road.

Now Mr. Feeble-mind, as they were going out of the door, looked as though he meant to hang back. Which when Mr. Great-heart noticed, he said: Come, Mr. Feeble-mind, please come along with us. I will be your escort, and you shall fare as the rest do.

Feeble-mind. Alas — I want a companion who suits me. You are all strong and hearty, but I, as you see, am weak. So I would rather come along behind, in case, on account of my many weaknesses, I should be a burden both to myself and to you.

I am, as I said, a man of a weak and feeble mind, and I shall be offended and weakened by things that others can take in their stride. I shall not like any laughing; I shall not like any bright clothes; I shall not like any pointless questions. In fact I am such a weak man that I shall be offended by things other people are perfectly free to do. I do not yet know the whole truth; I am a very ignorant Christian man. Sometimes, if I hear other people rejoicing in the Lord, it troubles me, because I cannot do the same. It is with me as it is with a weak man among the strong, or a sick man among the healthy, or a lamp that is despised — "he that is ready to slip with his feet is like a lamp despised in the thoughts of the man who is at ease." So I do not know what to do.

Great-heart. But, brother, said Mr. Great-heart, I have a commission to "comfort the feeble-minded" and to "support the weak." You must certainly come along with us. We will wait for you; we will lend you our help; we will deny ourselves some things, both in opinion and in practice, for your sake; we will not get into doubtful arguments in front of you; we will be made all things to you, rather than have you left behind.

Now all this while they were standing at Gaius's door. And as they were in the middle of this conversation, Mr. Ready-to-halt came past with his crutches in his hand — and he was going on pilgrimage too.

Feeble-mind. Then Mr. Feeble-mind said to him: Man, how did you come here? I was just complaining that I had no companion to suit me — and you are exactly what I wished for. Welcome, welcome, good Mr. Ready-to-halt. I hope you and I may be some help to each other.

Ready-to-halt. I shall be glad of your company, said the other; and good Mr. Feeble-mind, rather than we should part, now that we have met so happily, I will lend you one of my crutches.

Feeble-mind. No, said he — and though I thank you for your good will, I am not inclined to limp before I am lame. All the same, I think that when the occasion arises it might help me against a dog.

Ready-to-halt. If either I or my crutches can do you any service, we are both at your command, good Mr. Feeble-mind.

So they went on: Mr. Great-heart and Mr. Honest in front, Christiana and her children next, and Mr. Feeble-mind and Mr. Ready-to-halt bringing up the rear with his crutches.

Then Mr. Honest said:

Honest. Please, sir, now that we are on the road, tell us some profitable things about people who have gone on pilgrimage before us.

Great-heart. Gladly. I suppose you have heard how Christian in the old days met Apollyon in the Valley of Humiliation, and also what hard work he had getting through the Valley of the Shadow of Death. And I think you cannot but have heard how Faithful was put to it by Madam Wanton, and by Adam the First, and by one Discontent, and by Shame — four as deceitful villains as a man can meet with on the road.

Honest. Yes, I have heard all this. But indeed, good Faithful was hardest pressed by Shame; he was a tireless one.

Great-heart. Yes — because, as the Pilgrim rightly said, of all men he had the wrong name.

Honest. But tell me, sir — where was it that Christian and Faithful met Talkative? He was another remarkable one.

Great-heart. He was a confident fool; and yet a great many follow his ways.

Honest. He came near to taking Faithful in.

Great-heart. Yes; but Christian quickly put him in the way of finding him out.

So they went on until they came to the place where Evangelist met Christian and Faithful and prophesied to them about what would happen to them at Vanity Fair.

Great-heart. Then their guide said: It was about here that Christian and Faithful met Evangelist, who prophesied to them what troubles they would meet at Vanity Fair.

Honest. Did they? I dare say that was a hard chapter he read them then.

Great-heart. It was. But he gave them encouragement along with it. But why do we talk of them? They were a pair of lion-like men; they had set their faces like flint. Do you not remember how undaunted they were when they stood in front of the judge?

Honest. Well, Faithful suffered bravely.

Great-heart. So he did — and brave things came of it, because Hopeful and some others, as the story tells us, were converted by his death.

Honest. Well, but do go on; you are well acquainted with these things.

Great-heart. Of everything Christian met with after he had passed through Vanity Fair, one By-ends was the greatest rogue.

Honest. By-ends! Who was he?

Great-heart. A thoroughgoing rogue — an outright hypocrite. A man who would be religious whichever way the world went, but so cunning that he made sure he would neither lose nor suffer by it. He had his own brand of religion for every fresh occasion, and his wife was as good at it as he was. He would turn and change from one opinion to another — yes, and argue for doing it, too. But so far as I could learn, he came to a bad end with his by-ends; nor did I ever hear that any of his children were thought anything of by anybody who truly feared God.

Now by this time they had come within sight of the town of Vanity, where Vanity Fair is held. So when they saw they were so close to the town, they discussed with one another how they should get through it; and some said one thing and some another. At last Mr. Great-heart said: I have, as you know, often escorted pilgrims through this town. Now I am acquainted with one Mr. Mnason, a Cypriot by nation, an old disciple, at whose house we may lodge. If you think it a good idea, said he, we will turn in there.

Agreed, said old Honest. Agreed, said Christiana. Agreed, said Mr. Feeble-mind. And so they all said.

Now you must understand it was evening by the time they got to the edge of the town. But Mr. Great-heart knew the way to the old man's house. So they came there, and he called at the door; and the old man inside knew his voice the moment he heard it. So he opened up, and they all came in.

Then Mnason their host said: How far have you come today?

So they said: From the house of our friend Gaius.

I promise you, said he, you have come a good stretch. You may well be tired. Sit down.

So they sat down.

Great-heart. Then their guide said: Come, what cheer, gentlemen? I dare say you are welcome to my friend.

Mnason. I do bid you welcome, said Mr. Mnason. And whatever you need, only say so, and we will do what we can to get it for you.

Honest. Our great need a while ago was shelter and good company; and now I hope we have both.

Mnason. As for shelter, you can see what it is. As for good company, that will show itself in the testing.

Great-heart. Well, said Mr. Great-heart, will you take the Pilgrims up to their rooms?

Mnason. I will, said Mr. Mnason.

So he took them to their various places, and also showed them a very fine dining room where they could sit and eat supper together until it was time to go to bed.

Now when they were settled in their places, and had cheered up a little after their journey, Mr. Honest asked his landlord whether there were any good people in the town.

Mnason. We have a few — and indeed they are only a few, compared with the others.

Honest. But how are we to see some of them? Because the sight of good men, to people who are going on pilgrimage, is like the appearing of the moon and the stars to men sailing at sea.

Then Mr. Mnason stamped his foot, and his daughter Grace came up. So he said to her: Grace, go and tell my friends Mr. Contrite, Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Love-saint, Mr. Dare-not-lie and Mr. Penitent that I have a friend or two at my house who would like to see them this evening.

So Grace went to call them, and they came; and after greetings had been made, they sat down together at the table.

Then Mr. Mnason their landlord said: Neighbours, I have, as you see, a company of strangers come to my house. They are Pilgrims; they have come from far away, and they are going to Mount Zion. But who, said he, do you think this is? — pointing with his finger at Christiana. This is Christiana, the wife of Christian, that famous Pilgrim who, along with his brother Faithful, was so shamefully treated in our town.

At that they stood amazed, saying: We little thought we should see Christiana, when Grace came to call us. So this is a very comforting surprise.

Then they asked after her well-being, and whether these young men were her husband's sons. And when she had told them they were, they said: May the King whom you love and serve make you like your father, and bring you where he is, in peace.

Honest. Then Mr. Honest, when they were all sitting down, asked Mr. Contrite and the rest what state their town was in at present.

Contrite. You may be sure we are in a rush at fair time. It is hard to keep our hearts and spirits in any good order when we are in such a cluttered state. A man who lives in a place like this, and has to deal with the people we deal with, needs a reminder to warn him to take care every moment of the day.

Honest. But how are your neighbours as regards leaving people in peace?

Contrite. They are a great deal more moderate now than they used to be. You know how Christian and Faithful were treated in our town. But lately, I say, they have been far more moderate. I think the blood of Faithful lies heavy on them to this day; because since they burned him, they have been ashamed to burn anybody else. In those days we were afraid to walk in the streets, but now we can show our heads. Then the name of a believer was hateful; now, especially in some parts of our town — because you know our town is a large one — religion is counted respectable.

Then Mr. Contrite said to them: Tell us, how does it go with you on your pilgrimage? How is the country disposed towards you?

Honest. It happens to us as it happens to travellers: sometimes our road is clean, sometimes foul; sometimes uphill, sometimes down. We are seldom sure of anything. The wind is not always at our backs, nor is everybody we meet on the road a friend. We have met with some notable knocks already, and what still lies ahead we do not know. But for the most part we find it true, what has been said from of old: that a good man must expect trouble.

Contrite. You speak of knocks. What knocks have you met with?

Honest. Ask Mr. Great-heart, our guide; he can give the best account of that.

Great-heart. We have been set upon three or four times already. First, Christiana and her children were set upon by two ruffians, who they were afraid would take their lives. We have been set upon by Giant Bloody-man, Giant Maul and Giant Slay-good — though in fact with the last we did the setting-upon rather than he.

And this is how it happened. After we had been some time at the house of "Gaius, my host, and host of the whole church," we had a mind one day to take our weapons with us and go and see whether we could light on any of the enemies of pilgrims; because we had heard there was a notable one thereabouts. Now Gaius knew his haunt better than I did, because he lived nearby. So we looked and looked, until at last we made out the mouth of his cave. Then we were glad, and plucked up our spirits.

So we came up to his den; and when we got there, he had dragged this poor man, Mr. Feeble-mind, into his net by main force, and was about to make an end of him. But when he saw us — supposing, as we thought, that he had another catch — he left the poor man in his hole and came out. So we fell to it hard, and he laid about him vigorously; but in the end he was brought down to the ground, and his head cut off and set up by the roadside, as a warning to any who should practise such wickedness afterwards. And that I am telling you the truth, here is the man himself to confirm it, who was like a lamb taken out of the lion's mouth.

Feeble-mind. Then Mr. Feeble-mind said: I found this true, both to my cost and to my comfort. To my cost, when he was threatening to pick my bones every moment; and to my comfort, when I saw Mr. Great-heart and his friends coming up so close with their weapons to rescue me.

Holy-man. Then Mr. Holy-man said: There are two things that people who go on pilgrimage need to have: courage, and an unstained life. If they have no courage, they can never hold on their way; and if their lives are loose, they will make the very name of a Pilgrim stink.

Love-saint. Then Mr. Love-saint said: I hope this warning is not needed among you. But truly, there are many on the road who show themselves strangers to pilgrimage, rather than strangers and pilgrims on the earth.

Dare-not-lie. Then Mr. Dare-not-lie said: It is true. They have neither the pilgrim's need nor the pilgrim's courage. They do not walk straight, but all crooked; one shoe turns inward and the other outward, and their stockings hang out behind; a rag here and a tear there, to the discredit of their Lord.

Penitent. These things, said Mr. Penitent, are what they ought to be troubled about. Nor are the pilgrims likely to have the favour they want put on them and on their pilgrimage until the road is cleared of such spots and blemishes.

So they sat talking and passing the time until supper was set on the table; and they went to it and refreshed their weary bodies, and then went to bed.

Now they stayed at this fair a great while, at the house of this Mr. Mnason; who in due course gave his daughter Grace to Samuel, Christiana's son, as his wife, and his daughter Martha to Joseph.

The time they stayed here was, as I say, a long one, because things were not now as they had been in former days. So the Pilgrims got to know many of the good people of the town, and did them whatever service they could. Mercy, as her custom was, worked hard for the poor; so their bellies and their backs blessed her, and she was an ornament there to what she professed. And to say the truth for Grace and Phoebe and Martha, they were all of a very good nature and did a great deal of good where they were. They were all of them very fruitful too; so that Christian's name, as was said before, was likely to live on in the world.

While they were staying here, a monster came out of the woods and killed a great many of the people of the town. It would carry away their children too, and teach them to suckle its cubs. Now no man in the town dared so much as face this monster; they all fled when they heard the noise of it coming.

The monster was like no beast on earth. Its body was like a dragon's, and it had seven heads and ten horns. It made great havoc among the children, and yet it was governed by a woman. This monster set out terms to men; and those men who loved their lives more than their souls accepted those terms. So they came under it.

Now this Mr. Great-heart, together with those who had come to visit the pilgrims at Mr. Mnason's house, entered into an agreement to go and engage this beast, in the hope that they might deliver the people of this town out of the paws and mouth of such a devouring serpent.

So Mr. Great-heart, Mr. Contrite, Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Dare-not-lie and Mr. Penitent went out with their weapons to meet it. Now the monster at first was very rampant, and looked on these enemies with great contempt; but they belaboured it so, being sturdy men at arms, that they made it retreat; and so they came home again to Mr. Mnason's house.

The monster, you must understand, had its own particular seasons for coming out and making its attempts on the children of the townspeople. And these valiant men watched for it in those seasons and kept up a constant assault on it, so much so that in time it became not only wounded but lame; and it has not made the havoc among the townsmen's children that it used to. And some genuinely believe that this beast will die of its wounds.

So this made Mr. Great-heart and his companions famous in this town, so that many of the people who lacked any real discernment nevertheless had a reverent regard and respect for them. And it was on this account that these pilgrims came to no great harm here. It is true there were some of the baser sort who could see no further than a mole and understand no more than an animal; these had no reverence for these men, and took no notice of their courage or their exploits.

Well — the time came when the Pilgrims had to go on their way; so they got ready for their journey. They sent for their friends; they talked with them; they set aside some time to commit each other to their Prince's protection. There were others too who brought them such things as they had that were suitable for the weak and for the strong, for the women and for the men, and so loaded them up with what was needed.

Then they set off on their road; and their friends going with them as far as was convenient, they committed each other again to their King's protection, and parted.

So those who were of the Pilgrims' company went on, with Mr. Great-heart walking ahead of them. Now the women and children being weak, they were forced to go at whatever pace they could bear; and by this means Mr. Ready-to-halt and Mr. Feeble-mind had more company in their own condition.

When they had left the townspeople, and their friends had said goodbye, they soon came to the place where Faithful was put to death. So there they stopped, and thanked the one who had enabled him to bear his cross so well — and all the more because they now found they had a benefit from such a manly suffering as his was.

So after this they went on a good way further, talking about Christian and Faithful, and about how Hopeful joined himself to Christian after Faithful was dead.

Now they had come up to the Hill Lucre, where the silver mine was that took Demas off his pilgrimage, and into which, as some think, By-ends fell and perished; so they thought about that. But when they came to the old monument standing opposite the Hill Lucre — the pillar of salt that stands within sight of Sodom and its stinking lake — they wondered, as Christian had before them, that men of such knowledge and ripeness of wit as those men were should be so blinded as to turn aside here. Only they considered again that human nature is not much affected by the harm others have come to — especially if the thing they are looking at has some power of attraction over a foolish eye.
