By-path Meadow Revisited

Now I saw that they went on until they came to the river that lies on this side of the Delectable Mountains — the river where the fine trees grow on both banks, and whose leaves, if taken inwardly, are good against overeating; where the meadows are green all the year round, and where they could lie down safely.

Along this riverside, in the meadow, there were shelters and folds for sheep, and a house built for the feeding and bringing up of those lambs, the babies of the women who go on pilgrimage. And there was one here who was entrusted with them: one who could feel compassion, and who could gather these lambs in his arm and carry them in his bosom, and who could gently lead those who were with young.

Now to this man's care Christiana urged her four daughters to commit their little ones, so that beside these waters they might be housed and sheltered and helped and fed, and so that none of them should be missing in time to come. If any of them stray or get lost, this man will bring them back again. He will also bind up whatever was broken, and will strengthen those who are sick. Here they will never lack food and drink and clothing; here they will be kept safe from thieves and robbers — because this man will die before a single one of those committed to his care shall be lost.

Besides which, they will certainly have good upbringing and correction here, and will be taught to walk in the right paths; and that, as you know, is a favour of no small value. And here too, as you see, are lovely waters, pleasant meadows, delicate flowers, and a variety of trees bearing wholesome fruit — not fruit like the kind Matthew ate, that hung over the wall out of Beelzebub's garden, but fruit that produces health where there is none, and keeps it up and increases it where there is.

So they were content to commit their little ones to him. And another thing that encouraged them to do it was that all of this was to be at the King's expense, so that it was like a hospital for young children and orphans.

Now they went on; and when they had come to By-path Meadow, to the stile Christian climbed over with his companion Hopeful when they were caught by Giant Despair and put into Doubting Castle, they sat down and discussed what would be best to do. That is: now that they were so strong, and had a man like Mr. Great-heart for their escort, whether they had not better make an attempt on the Giant, demolish his castle, and set free any pilgrims who might be in it, before they went any further.

So one said one thing and another said the opposite. One questioned whether it was lawful to go onto unconsecrated ground; another said they might, provided their purpose was good. But Mr. Great-heart said: Although that last assertion cannot be universally true, still, I have a command to resist sin, to overcome evil, and to fight the good fight of faith. And tell me — who should I fight that good fight with, if not with Giant Despair? So I mean to attempt the taking of his life and the demolition of Doubting Castle.

Then he said: Who will come with me?

Then old Honest said: I will.

And so will we, said Christiana's four sons, Matthew, Samuel, James and Joseph; because they were young men and strong.

So they left the women on the road, and with them Mr. Feeble-mind and Mr. Ready-to-halt with his crutches, to be their guard until they came back; because in that place, close as Giant Despair lived, so long as they kept to the road a little child could have led them.

So Mr. Great-heart, old Honest and the four young men went up to Doubting Castle to look for Giant Despair. When they came to the castle gate, they knocked for admission with an extraordinary racket. At which the old Giant came to the gate, with Diffidence his wife following.

Then he said: Who is it, and what is he, that is bold enough to come and disturb Giant Despair like this?

Mr. Great-heart replied: It is I, Great-heart, one of the escorts who bring the King of the Celestial Country's pilgrims to their place. And I demand that you open your gates and let me in. Get ready to fight as well, because I have come to take off your head and demolish Doubting Castle.

Now Giant Despair, being a giant, thought no man could beat him; and again he thought, since I have conquered angels before now, shall Great-heart make me afraid? So he armed himself and came out. He had a steel cap on his head and a breastplate of fire strapped to him, and he came out in iron shoes with a great club in his hand.

Then these six men closed on him and set on him from front and behind. And when Diffidence the giantess came up to help him, old Mr. Honest cut her down at a single blow. Then they fought for their lives, and Giant Despair was brought down to the ground — but he was very unwilling to die. He struggled hard, and had, as they say, as many lives as a cat. But Great-heart was the death of him, because he did not leave off until he had cut his head from his shoulders.

Then they set about demolishing Doubting Castle, which as you can imagine was easily enough done, now that Giant Despair was dead. They were seven days destroying it; and inside it they found, of pilgrims, one Mr. Despondency, almost starved to death, and one Much-afraid, his daughter. These two they brought out alive. But it would have astonished you to see the dead bodies lying here and there in the castle yard, and how full of dead men's bones the dungeon was.

When Mr. Great-heart and his companions had carried out this exploit, they took Mr. Despondency and his daughter Much-afraid under their protection; because they were honest people, for all that they had been prisoners in Doubting Castle to that tyrant Giant Despair.

So, as I say, they took the Giant's head with them — his body they had buried under a heap of stones — and came down to the road and to their companions, and showed them what they had done.

Now when Feeble-mind and Ready-to-halt saw that it really was the head of Giant Despair, they were tremendously cheerful and merry. Now Christiana, when there was need of it, could play the viol, and her daughter Mercy the lute. So, since they were all in such a merry mood, she played them a piece, and Ready-to-halt would dance. So he took Despondency's daughter, Much-afraid, by the hand, and off they went dancing in the road. It is true that he could not dance without one crutch in his hand; but I promise you he footed it well. And the girl deserved credit too, because she answered the music handsomely.

As for Mr. Despondency, the music did not do much for him; he was for eating rather than dancing, since he was very nearly starved. So Christiana gave him some out of her bottle of cordial for immediate relief, and then got him something to eat; and in a little while the old gentleman came round, and began to revive nicely.
