The Fall of Doubting Castle

Now I saw in my dream that when all this was finished, Mr. Great-heart took the head of Giant Despair and set it on a pole beside the highway, directly opposite the pillar Christian had put up to warn pilgrims who came after him not to go onto his grounds.

	Though Doubting Castle has been demolished,
	and Giant Despair has lost his head,
	sin can rebuild the Castle, make it stand,
	and make Despair the Giant live again.

Then underneath, on a marble stone, he wrote these verses:

	This is the head of him whose name alone
	in former times did pilgrims terrify.
	His Castle's down; and Diffidence, his wife,
	brave Master Great-heart has bereft of life.
	Despondency, and his daughter Much-afraid —
	for them as well Great-heart the man has played.
	Whoever doubts it, if he'll cast his eye
	up here, may all his scruples satisfy.
	This head also, when doubting cripples dance,
	shows that from all their fears they have deliverance.

When these men had shown themselves so bravely against Doubting Castle, and had killed Giant Despair, they went forward; and went on until they came to the Delectable Mountains, where Christian and Hopeful refreshed themselves with all the good things of the place. They also got to know the shepherds there, who welcomed them to the Delectable Mountains as they had welcomed Christian before.

Now the Shepherds, seeing such a large party following Mr. Great-heart — for they knew him well — said to him: Good sir, you have a fine company here. Tell us, where did you find them all?

Then Mr. Great-heart replied:

	First, here is Christiana and her train,
	her sons and her sons' wives, who like the Wain
	keep by the pole, and steer by compass, so
	from sin to grace — or they'd not be here.
	Next, here's old Honest come on pilgrimage;
	Ready-to-halt as well, who, I'll engage,
	is true of heart; and so is Feeble-mind,
	who was not willing to be left behind.
	Despondency, good man, is coming after,
	and so is Much-afraid as well, his daughter.
	May we have lodging here — or must we still
	go further on? Let us know what to trust.

Then the Shepherds said: This is a comforting company. You are welcome to us, because we have comfort for the feeble as much as for the strong. Our Prince keeps an eye on what is done to the least of these; so infirmity must be no bar to our hospitality.

So they took them to the palace door, and then said to them: Come in, Mr. Feeble-mind; come in, Mr. Ready-to-halt; come in, Mr. Despondency, and Mrs. Much-afraid, his daughter. These, Mr. Great-heart, said the Shepherds to the guide, we call in by name, because they are the most liable to hang back. But as for you and the rest who are strong, we leave you to your usual freedom.

Then Mr. Great-heart said: Today I can see that grace shines in your faces, and that you really are my Lord's Shepherds; because you have not shoved these sick ones aside with side or shoulder, but have rather strewn their way into the palace with flowers, as you should.

So the feeble and the weak went in, and Mr. Great-heart and the rest followed after. When they were seated too, the Shepherds said to those of the weaker sort: What would you like? Because, they said, everything here must be managed for the support of the weak as well as for the warning of the unruly.

So they made them a feast of things easy to digest, and pleasant to the taste, and nourishing; and when they had had it, they went to their rest, each one to his own proper place.

When morning came — because the mountains were high and the day was clear, and because it was the Shepherds' custom to show Pilgrims some rarities before they left — after they were ready and had refreshed themselves, the Shepherds took them out into the fields and showed them first what they had shown Christian before. Then they took them to some new places.

The first was Mount Marvel, where they looked and saw a man in the distance tumbling the hills about with words. Then they asked the Shepherds what that should mean. So they told them that the man was a son of one Great-grace, whom you read about in the First Part of the Records of the Pilgrim's Progress; and that he is set there to teach pilgrims how to believe down, or tumble out of their way, whatever difficulties they meet with, by faith.

Then Mr. Great-heart said: I know him. He is a man above many.

Then they took them to another place, called Mount Innocent; and there they saw a man dressed all in white, and two men, Prejudice and Ill-will, constantly throwing dirt at him. Now, whatever dirt they threw at him would fall off again in a little while, and his clothes would look as clean as if no dirt had ever been thrown at them.

Then the Pilgrims said: What does this mean?

The Shepherds answered: This man's name is Godly-man, and this clothing is to show the innocence of his life. Now those who throw dirt at him are people who hate his doing good. But as you can see the dirt will not stick on his clothes, so it will be with anybody who truly lives innocently in the world. Whoever they are who would like to make such men dirty, they are all labouring in vain; because God, once a little time has gone by, will cause their innocence to break out like the light, and their righteousness like the noonday.

Then they took them to Mount Charity, where they showed them a man with a bundle of cloth lying in front of him, out of which he was cutting coats and clothes for the poor standing round him — and yet his bundle, or roll, of cloth was never any the smaller.

Then they said: What is this meant to be?

This is, said the Shepherds, to show you that the man who has a heart to give away what he works for to the poor shall never lack anything. He who waters shall himself be watered. And the cake the widow gave the Prophet did not leave her any the less in her barrel.

They also took them to a place where they saw one Fool and one Want-wit washing an Ethiopian, with the intention of making him white; but the more they washed him, the blacker he was.

Then they asked the Shepherds what that should mean. So they told them, saying: So it will be with the vile person. All the means used to get such a man a good name will in the end only make him more detestable. So it was with the Pharisees, and so it will be with all hypocrites.

Then Mercy, Matthew's wife, said to Christiana her mother: Mother, if it could be arranged, I would like to see the hole in the hill — the one commonly called the byway to hell.

So her mother mentioned it to the Shepherds. Then they went to the door. It was in the side of a hill, and they opened it and told Mercy to listen for a while. So she listened, and heard one saying: Cursed be my father, for holding my feet back from the way of peace and life. And another said: Oh, if only I had been torn to pieces before I had saved my life and lost my soul! And another said: If I could live again, how I would deny myself, rather than come to this place!

Then it was as though the very earth groaned and shook under the young woman's feet for fear. So she went white, and came away trembling, saying: Blessed be the man and the woman who are delivered from this place.

Now when the Shepherds had shown them all these things, they took them back to the palace and entertained them with what the house could provide. But Mercy, being young and pregnant, longed for something she saw there, and was ashamed to ask for it. Her mother-in-law then asked her what was wrong with her, because she looked unwell.

Then Mercy said: There is a looking-glass hanging up in the dining room that I cannot get out of my mind. If I do not have it, I think I shall lose the child.

Then her mother said: I will mention what you want to the Shepherds, and they will not refuse you.

But she said: I am ashamed for these men to know that I had such a longing.

No, my daughter, said she — it is no shame but a virtue to long for a thing like that.

So Mercy said: Then, mother, if you would, ask the Shepherds whether they are willing to sell it.

Now the glass was one in a thousand. Looked at one way, it would show a person his own features exactly; and turn it another way, and it would show the very face and likeness of the Prince of Pilgrims himself. Yes — I have talked with people who can tell, and they have said that they have seen the very crown of thorns on his head by looking in that glass, and have seen in it too the holes in his hands and his feet and his side. Indeed, there is such an excellence in that glass that it will show him to a person however they have a mind to see him: living or dead, on earth or in heaven, in his humiliation or in his exaltation, coming to suffer or coming to reign.

So Christiana went to the Shepherds privately — now the names of the Shepherds are Knowledge, Experience, Watchful and Sincere — and said to them: One of my daughters is pregnant, and I think she is longing for something she has seen in this house; and she thinks she will lose the child if you refuse her.

Experience. Call her, call her. She shall certainly have whatever we can help her to.

So they called her and said to her: Mercy, what is this thing you would like to have?

Then she blushed, and said: The great glass hanging up in the dining room.

So Sincere ran and fetched it, and it was given her with a glad heart. Then she bowed her head and gave thanks, and said: By this I know that I have found favour in your eyes.

They also gave the other young women whatever they wanted, and gave their husbands great praise for having joined with Mr. Great-heart in killing Giant Despair and demolishing Doubting Castle.

The Shepherds put a bracelet round Christiana's neck, and did the same for her four daughters; and they put earrings in their ears and jewels on their foreheads.

When they had a mind to go, they let them go in peace — but they did not give them the particular warnings that had been given to Christian and his companion before. The reason was that these had Great-heart for their guide, who was a man well acquainted with the way, and so could give them their warnings at a better moment: that is, just when the danger was coming near.

The warnings Christian and his companion had been given by the Shepherds they had also lost by the time they needed to put them into practice. So here was the advantage this company had over the other.

From here they went on singing, and said:

	See how fittingly the stages are set out
	for the relief of those who pilgrims are!
	And how they take us in without a check,
	who make the other life our mark and home!
	Whatever novelties they have they give us,
	so that we Pilgrims may live joyful lives;
	they lay such things upon us, too, as show
	that we are Pilgrims, wherever we may go.

When they had left the Shepherds, they soon came to the place where Christian met one Turn-away, who lived in the town of Apostasy. So Mr. Great-heart their guide reminded them of him, saying: This is the place where Christian met one Turn-away, who carried the record of his rebellion on his back. And this I have to say about the man: he would listen to no advice; once he had fallen, no persuasion could stop him.

When he came to the place where the Cross and the Tomb are, he met somebody who told him to look at them; but he ground his teeth and stamped, and said he was determined to go back to his own town. Before he came to the gate, he met Evangelist, who offered to lay hands on him and turn him back into the road. But this Turn-away resisted him; and after treating him with great contempt, he got away over the wall and so escaped his hand.

Then they went on. And just at the place where Little-faith was robbed before, there stood a man with his sword drawn and his face all bloody.

Then Mr. Great-heart said: Who are you?

The man answered, saying: My name is Valiant-for-truth. I am a pilgrim, and I am going to the Celestial City. Now, as I was on my way, three men set on me and put these three things to me. First, whether I would become one of them. Second, or go back where I came from. Third, or die on the spot.

To the first I answered that I had been an honest man a long while, and so it could not be expected that I should now throw in my lot with thieves. Then they demanded what I had to say to the second; so I told them that if I had not found the place I came from thoroughly uncomfortable I would never have left it at all, but that finding it entirely unsuitable and quite unprofitable for me, I had left it for this road. Then they asked me what I said to the third; and I told them that my life cost me far too dear for me to give it away lightly. Besides, said I, you have no business putting things to my choice like this; so if you interfere, it is at your own peril.

Then these three — Wild-head, Inconsiderate and Pragmatic — drew on me, and I drew on them.

So we set to, one against three, for more than three hours. They have left some of the marks of their valour on me, as you see, and have carried off some of mine as well. They have only just gone. I suppose they may, as the saying goes, have heard your horses coming, and so took to their heels.

Great-heart. But those were great odds — three against one.

Valiant-for-truth. It is true; but few or many are nothing to a man who has the truth on his side. "Though an army should camp against me," said one, "my heart shall not fear; though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident." Besides, he says, I have read in certain records that one man has fought an army. And how many did Samson kill with the jawbone of a donkey?

Great-heart. Then the guide said: Why did you not shout out, so that somebody might have come to your help?

Valiant-for-truth. So I did — to my King, who I knew could hear, and could give invisible help; and that was enough for me.

Great-heart. Then Great-heart said to Mr. Valiant-for-truth: You have conducted yourself worthily. Let me see your sword.

So he showed it him. And when he had taken it in his hand and looked at it a while, he said: Ha! This is a genuine Jerusalem blade.

Valiant-for-truth. It is. Let a man have one of these blades, with a hand to wield it and the skill to use it, and he may take on an angel with it. He need not fear it will fail him, if he only knows how to lay on. Its edges will never go blunt. It will cut flesh and bones, and soul and spirit, and everything.

Great-heart. But you fought a long while. I wonder you were not tired out.

Valiant-for-truth. I fought until my sword stuck to my hand; and when the two were joined together, as though a sword had grown out of my arm, and when the blood ran through my fingers — then I fought with the most courage of all.

Great-heart. You have done well. You have "resisted to the point of blood, striving against sin." You shall stay with us, and come in and go out with us; because we are your companions.

Then they took him and washed his wounds, and gave him what they had to refresh him; and so they went on together. Now, as they went along — because Mr. Great-heart was delighted with him, since he greatly loved anybody he found to be a fighting man, and because there were feeble and weak ones in his company — he questioned him about a good many things. First, what country he came from.

Valiant-for-truth. I am from Dark-land; because I was born there, and my father and mother are there still.

Great-heart. Dark-land, said the guide — does that not lie on the same coast as the City of Destruction?

Valiant-for-truth. Yes, it does. Now what made me come on pilgrimage was this. One Mr. Tell-true came into our parts, and he told everybody what Christian had done, who went from the City of Destruction: namely, how he had left his wife and children and taken up a pilgrim's life. It was also confidently reported how he had killed a serpent that came out to stop him on his journey, and how he got through to where he meant to go. It was also told what a welcome he had at all his Lord's lodgings, and especially when he came to the gates of the Celestial City — because there, said the man, he was received with the sound of a trumpet, by a company of Shining Ones. He told too how all the bells in the city rang for joy at his reception, and what golden clothes he was dressed in, along with a great many other things I will not go into now.

In a word, that man told the story of Christian and his travels in such a way that my heart fell into a burning hurry to be off after him. Neither father nor mother could hold me. So I got away from them, and I have come this far on my road.

Great-heart. You came in at the gate, did you not?

Valiant-for-truth. Yes, yes — because the same man told us as well that it would all come to nothing if we did not begin this road by entering at the gate.

Great-heart. Do you see, said the guide to Christiana — your husband's pilgrimage, and what he has gained by it, is spread abroad far and near.

Valiant-for-truth. Why — is this Christian's wife?

Great-heart. Yes, it is. And these are her four sons.

Valiant-for-truth. What — and going on pilgrimage too?

Great-heart. Yes, truly; they are following after him.

Valiant-for-truth. It gladdens my heart. Good man! How joyful he will be when he sees the very people who would not go with him coming in after him at the gates of the City!

Great-heart. Without a doubt it will be a comfort to him; because next to the joy of seeing himself there, it will be a joy to meet his wife and children there.

Valiant-for-truth. But now that you are on that subject, let me hear your opinion about it. Some people raise the question whether we shall know one another when we are there.

Great-heart. Do they think they will know themselves then, or that they will rejoice to see themselves in that bliss? And if they think they will know and do these things, why not know others, and rejoice in their welfare too?

And again: since our relations are our second selves, though that condition will be dissolved there, still, why may we not reasonably conclude that we shall be gladder to see them there than to see that they are missing?

Valiant-for-truth. Well, I can see where you stand on this. Have you any more things to ask me about my setting out on pilgrimage?

Great-heart. Yes. Were your father and mother willing for you to become a pilgrim?

Valiant-for-truth. Oh no. They used every means imaginable to persuade me to stay at home.

Great-heart. What could they say against it?

Valiant-for-truth. They said it was an idle life; and that if I were not naturally inclined to sloth and laziness, I would never approve of a pilgrim's way of living.

Great-heart. And what else did they say?

Valiant-for-truth. Why, they told me it was a dangerous road — indeed that the most dangerous road in the world, they said, is the one the pilgrims go.

Great-heart. Did they show how this road is so dangerous?

Valiant-for-truth. Yes, and in a great many particulars.

Great-heart. Name some of them.

Valiant-for-truth. They told me about the Slough of Despond, where Christian was very nearly smothered. They told me there were archers standing ready in Beelzebub's Castle to shoot anybody who knocked at the little gate to get in. They told me too about the wood and the dark mountains, about the Hill Difficulty, about the lions, and about the three giants, Bloody-man, Maul and Slay-good. They said as well that there was a foul fiend haunting the Valley of Humiliation, and that Christian was nearly killed by him. Besides which, they said, you must go over the Valley of the Shadow of Death, where the hobgoblins are, where the light is darkness, and where the road is full of snares and pits and traps. They told me about Giant Despair as well, and Doubting Castle, and the disaster the Pilgrims met with there. Further, they said I must go over the Enchanted Ground, which was dangerous. And that after all this I should find a river with no bridge over it, and that that river lay between me and the Celestial Country.

Great-heart. And was that all?

Valiant-for-truth. No. They also told me that this road was full of deceivers, and of people lying in wait there to turn good men off the path.

Great-heart. But how did they make that out?

Valiant-for-truth. They told me that Mr. Worldly-Wiseman lay in wait there to deceive people. They said too that Formalist and Hypocrisy were constantly on the road. They also said that By-ends, or Talkative, or Demas would very likely pick me up; that the Flatterer would catch me in his net; or that, like raw green Ignorance, I would presume to go on to the gate, from which he was always sent back to the hole in the side of the hill, and made to go the byway to hell.

Great-heart. I must say that was enough to discourage anybody. But did they stop there?

Valiant-for-truth. No — wait. They also told me about a great many who had tried that road in the old days, and had gone a long way down it to see whether they could find any of that glory there that so many had talked so much about from time to time; and how they came back again and called themselves fools for ever setting a foot out of doors on that path — to the satisfaction of the whole country. And they named several who had done so: Obstinate and Pliable, Mistrust and Timorous, Turn-away and old Atheist, and several more, some of whom, they said, had gone a long way to see whether they could find anything — and not one of them had got as much advantage out of going as would weigh a feather.

Great-heart. Did they say anything more to discourage you?

Valiant-for-truth. Yes. They told me about a Mr. Fearing who was a pilgrim, and how he found this road so lonely that he never had a comfortable hour on it. Also that Mr. Despondency had nearly been starved on it. Yes — and also, which I had almost forgotten, that Christian himself, about whom there has been such a noise, after all his ventures for a heavenly crown, was certainly drowned in the Black River and never went a foot further, however much it was hushed up.

Great-heart. And did none of this discourage you?

Valiant-for-truth. No. It all seemed like so much nothing to me.

Great-heart. How did that come about?

Valiant-for-truth. Why, I still believed what Mr. Tell-true had said, and that carried me past the lot of it.

Great-heart. Then this was your victory — your faith.

Valiant-for-truth. It was. I believed, by the grace of God, and so I came out, and got onto the road, and fought everything that set itself against me; and by believing I have come this far.

	Who would true valour see,
	let him come hither;
	one here will constant be,
	come wind, come weather.
	There's no discouragement
	shall make him once relent
	his first avowed intent
	to be a pilgrim.
	Whoever beset him round
	with dismal stories
	do but themselves confound;
	his strength the more is.
	No lion can him fright,
	he'll with a giant fight,
	but he will have a right
	to be a pilgrim.
	Hobgoblin nor foul fiend
	can daunt his spirit;
	he knows he at the end
	shall life inherit.
	Then fancies fly away,
	he'll fear not what men say;
	he'll labour night and day
	to be a pilgrim.
