The Enchanted Ground

By this time they had got to the Enchanted Ground, where the air naturally makes a person drowsy. That place was all overgrown with briars and thorns, except here and there where there was an Enchanted Arbour; and if a man sits down in one of those, or falls asleep in one, it is an open question, some say, whether he will ever get up or wake again in this world.

So over this forest they went, one and all; and Mr. Great-heart went in front, since he was the guide, and Mr. Valiant-for-truth came behind as a rearguard, for fear that some fiend or dragon or giant or thief might fall on their rear and do them harm. They went on here with every man's sword drawn in his hand, because they knew it was a dangerous place. They also encouraged one another as well as they could. Mr. Great-heart ordered Feeble-mind to come along right behind him, and Mr. Despondency was kept under Mr. Valiant's eye.

Now they had not gone far before a great mist and darkness came down on them all, so that for a long while they could hardly see one another. So they were forced for some time to feel for each other with words, because they were certainly not walking by sight.

But anybody can imagine that this was poor going for the best of them, and how much worse for the women and children, who were tender in both feet and heart. Yet so it was that, by the encouraging words of the man leading in front and the man bringing them up behind, they managed a fairly good job of struggling along.

The road here was very wearisome too, with all the mud and the sliminess. Nor was there on all this ground so much as one inn or eating house where the feebler ones could refresh themselves. So there was grunting here, and puffing, and sighing. One of them tumbles over a bush, another sticks fast in the mud, and some of the children lost their shoes in the mire. One cries out, I am down! and another, Hey — where are you? and a third, The bushes have got such a hold of me, I do not think I can get away from them.

Then they came to an arbour, warm and promising a great deal of refreshment to the Pilgrims; because it was finely worked overhead, decorated with greenery, and furnished with benches and seats. It also had a soft couch in it, where the weary could lie back. All things considered, you may imagine this was tempting, because the Pilgrims were already beginning to be worn down by the badness of the road. But there was not one of them who so much as suggested stopping there.

Indeed, so far as I could see, they paid such constant attention to their guide's advice, and he told them so faithfully about dangers, and about the nature of dangers, at the very moment they were in them, that usually when they were closest to them they were the most heartened, and the most ready to encourage one another to deny the flesh. This arbour was called The Slothful's Friend, put there on purpose to lure some of the pilgrims, if it could, into taking their rest there when they were tired.

Then I saw in my dream that they went on across this lonely ground until they came to a place where a man is likely to lose his way. Now, although in daylight their guide could tell well enough how to avoid the roads that led the wrong way, in the dark he was brought to a stop. But he had in his pocket a map of all the roads leading to and from the Celestial City. So he struck a light — because he never goes without his tinderbox either — and took a look at his book, or map, which told him to be careful at this place to take the right-hand road.

And if he had not been careful to look at his map here, in all probability they would all have been smothered in the mud; because just a little ahead of them, and at the end of the cleanest-looking road at that, there was a pit, nobody knows how deep, full of nothing but mud, made there on purpose to destroy the Pilgrims.

Then I thought to myself: who that goes on pilgrimage would not want one of these maps about him, so that he can look at it when he is brought to a stand, and see which way he has to take?

So they went on across the Enchanted Ground until they came to where there was another arbour, built beside the highway. And in that arbour two men were lying, whose names were Heedless and Too-bold. These two had got this far on pilgrimage; but here, being worn out with their journey, they had sat down to rest and fallen fast asleep.

When the Pilgrims saw them, they stood still and shook their heads, because they knew the sleepers were in a pitiful state. Then they discussed what to do — whether to go on and leave them sleeping, or to go over to them and try to wake them. So they decided to go to them and wake them if they could, but with this precaution: to take care that they did not sit down themselves, or accept the comfort the arbour was offering.

So they went in and spoke to the men and called them each by name, because the guide, it seems, knew them. But there was no voice and no answer. Then the guide shook them and did everything he could to rouse them.

Then one of them said: I will pay you when I get my money. At which the guide shook his head.

I will fight as long as I can hold my sword in my hand, said the other. At which one of the children laughed.

Then Christiana said: What does this mean?

The guide said: They are talking in their sleep. If you struck them, or beat them, or did anything else to them, they would answer you in the same way. Or, as one man said long ago, when the waves of the sea were beating on him and he slept like a man on a ship's mast: "When shall I awake? I will seek it yet again."

You know that when men talk in their sleep they say anything at all, and their words are governed neither by faith nor by reason. There is an incoherence in their words now, just as there was before between their going on pilgrimage and their sitting down here.

And this is the mischief of it: when heedless people go on pilgrimage, it is twenty to one that they get served like this. Because this Enchanted Ground is one of the last refuges the enemy of pilgrims has. That is why it is placed, as you see, almost at the end of the road, so that it stands against us with all the more advantage. Because the enemy thinks: when will these fools be so eager to sit down as when they are tired? And when are they so likely to be tired as when they are almost at the end of their journey?

That is why, I say, the Enchanted Ground is placed so close to the Land of Beulah, and so near the end of their race. So let pilgrims look out for themselves, in case it happens to them as it has happened to these, who as you can see have fallen asleep, and whom nobody can wake.

Then the Pilgrims wanted, trembling, to go forward; only they asked their guide to strike a light, so that they might go the rest of their road by the help of a lantern. So he struck a light, and they went by the help of it through the rest of this stretch, though the darkness was very great.

But the children began to be badly tired out, and they cried out to the one who loves pilgrims to make their road more comfortable. So by the time they had gone a little further, a wind got up that drove the fog away, and the air became clearer.

They were still a long way from being off the Enchanted Ground; only now they could see one another better, and see the road they were to walk on.
