Mr. Stand-fast and Madam Bubble

Now when they were almost at the end of this ground, they became aware that a little way ahead of them there was the solemn sound of somebody in great distress. So they went on and looked ahead; and there, as they thought, they saw a man on his knees, with his hands and his eyes lifted up, speaking, so it seemed to them, earnestly to One who was above. They came nearer, but could not make out what he said. So they went quietly until he had finished.

When he had finished, he got up and began to run towards the Celestial City. Then Mr. Great-heart called after him, saying: Hello there, friend! Let us have your company, if you are going, as I suppose you are, to the Celestial City.

So the man stopped, and they came up to him. But as soon as Mr. Honest saw him he said: I know this man.

Then Mr. Valiant-for-truth said: Tell us, who is he?

He is one, said he, who comes from near where I lived. His name is Stand-fast, and he is certainly a thoroughly good pilgrim.

So they came up to one another; and Stand-fast said at once to old Honest: Hello, father Honest — are you here?

Yes, said he, that I am, as surely as you are.

I am very glad, said Mr. Stand-fast, to have found you on this road.

And I am just as glad, said the other, to have caught sight of you on your knees.

Then Mr. Stand-fast blushed and said: But did you see me?

Yes, I did, said the other, and my heart was glad at the sight.

Why — what did you think? said Stand-fast.

Think! said old Honest. What should I think? I thought we had an honest man on the road, and that we should have his company before long.

If you thought no worse than that, said Stand-fast, how happy I am. But if I am not what I ought to be, I must bear it alone.

That is true, said the other; but your fear only confirms me further that things are right between the Prince of Pilgrims and your soul; because it is said, "Blessed is the man who fears always."

Valiant-for-truth. Well, but brother, tell us please — what was it that brought you to your knees just now? Was it that some special mercies had laid an obligation on you, or what?

Stand-fast. Why — we are, as you see, on the Enchanted Ground. And as I was coming along I was thinking to myself what a dangerous stretch of road this place is, and how many people who had come even this far on pilgrimage had been stopped here and destroyed. I was thinking too about the kind of death this place destroys men with. Those who die here do not die of any violent illness. The death such men die is not painful to them; because the man who goes off in a sleep begins that journey with desire and pleasure. Yes — men like that consent to the sickness that is killing them.

Honest. Then Mr. Honest interrupted him and said: Did you see the two men asleep in the arbour?

Stand-fast. Yes, yes — I saw Heedless and Too-bold there; and for all I know they will lie there until they rot. But let me go on with my tale.

As I was thinking these things over, as I say, there was one in very pleasant clothes, but old, who presented herself to me and offered me three things: her body, her purse and her bed. Now the truth is I was both tired and sleepy; and I am also as poor as an owlet, which perhaps the witch knew.

Well, I repulsed her once and twice, but she brushed my refusals aside and smiled. Then I began to get angry, but that did not matter to her in the least. Then she made her offers again, and said that if I would be guided by her she would make me great and happy; because, she said, I am the mistress of the world, and men are made happy by me.

Then I asked her name, and she told me it was Madam Bubble. This put me further off from her than ever; but she still came after me with her enticements. Then I took myself to my knees, as you saw, and with my hands lifted up and with crying out, I prayed to the one who has said he would help. So, just as you came up, the gentlewoman went off. Then I went on giving thanks for this great deliverance of mine; because I truly believe she meant no good, but was rather looking to bring me to a stop on my journey.

Honest. Without a doubt her designs were bad. But wait — now that you speak of her, I think I have either seen her or read some account of her.

Stand-fast. Perhaps you have done both.

Honest. Madam Bubble! Is she not a tall, handsome woman, with something of a dark complexion?

Stand-fast. Right — you have hit it. She is exactly that.

Honest. Does she not speak very smoothly, and give you a smile at the end of a sentence?

Stand-fast. You have hit it again, because those are her very mannerisms.

Honest. Does she not wear a great purse at her side, and is not her hand often inside it, fingering her money, as though that were her heart's delight?

Stand-fast. That is just it. If she had been standing here all this while, you could not have set her out in front of me more fully, or described her features better.

Honest. Then the man who drew her picture was a good artist, and the man who wrote about her told the truth.

Great-heart. This woman is a witch, and it is by the power of her sorceries that this ground is enchanted. Whoever lays his head down in her lap might as well lay it down on the block with the axe hanging over it; and whoever lets his eyes rest on her beauty is counted an enemy of God. This is the woman who keeps all the enemies of pilgrims in their splendour. Yes — this is the woman who has bought many a man off from a pilgrim's life.

She is a great gossip. She and her daughters are always at one pilgrim's heels or another, first praising and then recommending the excellences of this life. She is a bold and shameless creature; she will talk to any man. She always laughs poor pilgrims to scorn, but praises the rich to the skies. If there is somebody clever at making money in a place, she will speak well of him from house to house. She loves banqueting and feasting enormously; she is always at one loaded table or another. She has given it out in some places that she is a goddess, and so some people worship her. She has her own times and public places for cheating; and she will say, and swear to it, that nobody can show a good to compare with hers. She promises to live with your children's children, if only they will love her and make much of her. She will throw gold out of her purse like dust, in certain places and to certain people. She loves to be sought after, and spoken well of, and to lie in men's arms. She is never tired of advertising her wares, and she loves best the men who think best of her. She will promise some men crowns and kingdoms if only they will take her advice — and yet she has brought many a man to the gallows, and ten thousand times more to hell.

Stand-fast. Oh, said Stand-fast, what a mercy it is that I resisted! Because where might she have dragged me to?

Great-heart. Where! No, nobody but God knows where. But in general, certainly, she would have dragged you into "many foolish and hurtful desires, which drown men in destruction and ruin."

It was she who set Absalom against his father, and Jeroboam against his master. It was she who persuaded Judas to sell his Lord, and who prevailed on Demas to abandon the godly pilgrim's life. Nobody can tell the mischief she does. She makes trouble between rulers and subjects, between parents and children, between neighbour and neighbour, between a man and his wife, between a man and himself, between the flesh and the heart.

So, good Master Stand-fast, be what your name says you are; and "when you have done everything, stand."

At this speech there was among the Pilgrims a mixture of joy and trembling; but at last they broke out and sang:

	What danger is the pilgrim in!
	How many are his foes!
	How many ways there are to sin
	no living mortal knows.
	Some shy away from the ditch, and yet
	lie tumbling in the mire;
	some, though they shun the frying pan,
	go leaping in the fire.
