The Land of Beulah

After this I watched until they had come into the Land of Beulah, where the sun shines night and day. Here, because they were tired, they took themselves off to rest for a while; and because this country is common ground for pilgrims, and because the orchards and vineyards here belonged to the King of the Celestial country, they were licensed to help themselves freely to anything of his.

But a very little while refreshed them here — because the bells rang so, and the trumpets sounded so melodiously and so constantly, that they could not sleep; and yet they got as much refreshment as if they had slept the soundest sleep in the world.

Here too the whole talk of those walking in the streets was, More pilgrims have come to town. And another would answer, saying, And so many went over the water and were let in at the golden gates today. And they would call out again, There is a whole legion of Shining Ones just come to town — by which we know there are more pilgrims on the road; because they come here to wait for them, and to comfort them after all their sorrow.

Then the Pilgrims got up and walked about; and how their ears were filled now with heavenly sounds, and their eyes delighted with heavenly sights! In this land they heard nothing, saw nothing, felt nothing, smelled nothing and tasted nothing that was offensive either to their stomachs or to their minds. Only when they tasted the water of the river they had to cross, they thought that tasted a little bitter on the tongue — though it proved sweeter once it was down.

In this place a record was kept of the names of those who had been pilgrims in the old days, and a history of all the famous deeds they had done. There was a great deal of talk here too about how the river had run high for some, and how it had ebbed while others went over. It has been practically dry for some, while it has overflowed its banks for others.

In this place the children of the town would go into the King's gardens and gather posies for the Pilgrims, and bring them to them very affectionately. Here too grew camphire and spikenard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all the trees of frankincense and myrrh and aloes, and all the chief spices. The Pilgrims' rooms were perfumed with these while they stayed here, and with these their bodies were anointed, to prepare them to go over the river when the appointed time came.

Now while they were staying here and waiting for the good hour, there was word about the town that a messenger had come from the Celestial City with a matter of great importance for one Christiana, the wife of Christian the Pilgrim. So inquiry was made for her and the house was found where she was staying; and the messenger presented her with a letter, the contents of which were: "Greetings, good woman. I bring you news that the Master is calling for you, and expects you to stand in his presence, in clothes of immortality, within ten days."

When he had read this letter to her, he gave her along with it a sure token that he was a true messenger and had come to tell her to make haste and be gone. The token was an arrow with a point sharpened with love, let easily into her heart, which by degrees worked in her so effectively that at the appointed time she had to go.

When Christiana saw that her time had come, and that she was the first of this company to go over, she called for Mr. Great-heart her guide and told him how matters stood. So he told her he was heartily glad of the news, and would have been glad if the messenger had come for him. Then she asked him to advise her on how everything should be prepared for her journey. So he told her, saying: it must be so and so; and we who are left behind will go with you to the riverside.

Then she called for her children and gave them her blessing, and told them that she could still read with comfort the mark that had been set on their foreheads, and was glad to see them there with her, and to see that they had kept their clothes so white. Lastly she left the little she had to the poor, and told her sons and her daughters to be ready for when the messenger should come for them.

When she had said these words to her guide and to her children, she called for Mr. Valiant-for-truth and said to him: Sir, you have shown yourself true-hearted everywhere. "Be faithful to death," and my King will give you "a crown of life." I would also beg you to keep an eye on my children, and if at any time you see them faltering, to speak comfortingly to them. As for my daughters, my sons' wives, they have been faithful, and their end will be the fulfilment of the promise upon them.

But to Mr. Stand-fast she gave a ring.

Then she called for old Mr. Honest, and said of him: "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no deceit."

Then he said: I wish you a fine day when you set out for Mount Zion, and shall be glad to see you go over the river dry-shod.

But she answered: Come wet, come dry, I long to be gone. Because whatever the weather is on my journey, I shall have time enough when I get there to sit down and rest and dry myself.

Then that good man Mr. Ready-to-halt came in to see her. So she said to him: Your journey here has been hard going, but that will make your rest all the sweeter. But keep watch and be ready; because the messenger may come at an hour when you are not expecting him.

After him came Mr. Despondency and his daughter Much-afraid, to whom she said: You ought to remember with thankfulness, for ever, your deliverance from the hands of Giant Despair and out of Doubting Castle. The result of that mercy is that you have been brought here safely. Be watchful, and throw away your fear; "be sober, and hope to the end."

Then she said to Mr. Feeble-mind: You were delivered out of the mouth of Giant Slay-good so that you might live in the light of the living for ever, and see your King with comfort. Only I advise you to repent of how ready you are to be afraid and to doubt his goodness, before he sends for you — in case, when he comes, you are made to stand in front of him blushing for that fault.

Now the day drew on when Christiana had to go. So the road was full of people to see her set out on her journey. But behold, all the banks beyond the river were full of horses and chariots, which had come down from above to escort her to the city gate.

So she came out and entered the river, with a wave of farewell to those who had followed her to the riverside. The last words she was heard to say here were: I come, Lord, to be with you and bless you.

So her children and friends went back to their places, because those who were waiting for Christiana had carried her out of their sight. So she went, and called, and entered in at the gate with all the ceremonies of joy that her husband Christian had before her.

At her going her children wept. But Mr. Great-heart and Mr. Valiant played on the well-tuned cymbal and harp for joy. So they all went off to their own places.

In due course a messenger came to the town again, and his business was with Mr. Ready-to-halt. So he sought him out and said to him: I have come to you in the name of the one you have loved and followed, though on crutches. And my message is to tell you that he expects you at his table to have supper with him in his kingdom, the day after Easter. So get yourself ready for this journey.

Then he also gave him a token that he was a true messenger, saying: I have broken your golden bowl, and loosed your silver cord.

After this Mr. Ready-to-halt called for his fellow pilgrims and told them, saying: I have been sent for, and God will surely visit you too. So he asked Mr. Valiant to make his will; and because he had nothing to leave to those who would outlive him but his crutches and his good wishes, this is what he said: These crutches I leave to my son who shall walk in my footsteps, with a hundred warm wishes that he may turn out better than I have.

Then he thanked Mr. Great-heart for his guidance and his kindness, and so set himself to his journey. When he came to the brink of the river he said: Now I shall have no more need of these crutches, since over there are chariots and horses for me to ride on. The last words he was heard to say were: Welcome, life! So he went on his way.

After this, Mr. Feeble-mind had word brought him that the messenger was sounding his horn at his bedroom door. Then he came in and told him, saying: I have come to tell you that your Master has need of you, and that in a very little while you must see his face in its brightness. And take this as a token of the truth of my message: "Those who look out of the windows shall be darkened."

Then Mr. Feeble-mind called for his friends and told them what errand had been brought to him, and what token he had been given of the truth of the message. Then he said: Since I have nothing to leave to anybody, what would be the point of making a will? As for my feeble mind, I shall leave that behind me, because I have no need of it in the place I am going to. Nor is it worth giving to the poorest pilgrim there is. So when I am gone, I ask that you, Mr. Valiant, would bury it in a dunghill.

This done, and the day having come when he was to leave, he entered the river like the rest. His last words were: Hold out, faith and patience. So he went over to the other side.

When a good many days had gone by, Mr. Despondency was sent for; because a messenger came and brought him this message: Trembling man, these are to summon you to be ready with your King by next Sunday, to shout for joy at your deliverance from all your doubtings.

And, said the messenger, take this as proof that my message is true. So he gave him the grasshopper to be a burden to him.

Now Mr. Despondency's daughter, whose name was Much-afraid, said when she heard what had happened that she would go with her father.

Then Mr. Despondency said to his friends: You know what my daughter and I have been, and how troublesomely we have behaved in every company we were in. Our will, mine and my daughter's, is that our despondencies and our slavish fears should never be taken in by anybody after the day we leave, for ever. Because I know that after my death they will offer themselves to other people. To be plain with you, they are ghosts that we took in when we first began to be pilgrims, and could never afterwards shake off; and they will go walking about looking for lodging among the pilgrims. But for our sakes, shut the doors on them.

When the time came for them to leave, they went to the brink of the river. Mr. Despondency's last words were: Farewell, night; welcome, day. His daughter went through the river singing, but nobody could make out what she said.

Then it happened, a while afterwards, that there was a messenger in the town asking for Mr. Honest. So he came to the house where he was and put these lines into his hand: You are commanded to be ready a week from today, to present yourself before your Lord at his Father's house. And as a token that my message is true, "All your daughters of music shall be brought low."

Then Mr. Honest called for his friends and said to them: I am dying, but I shall make no will. As for my honesty, it goes with me; let whoever comes after be told so.

When the day came when he was to go, he set himself to go over the river. Now at that time the river was overflowing its banks in places; but Mr. Honest in his lifetime had spoken to one Good-conscience to meet him there, which he did, and lent him his hand and so helped him across. Mr. Honest's last words were: Grace reigns. And so he left the world.

After this it was noised about that Mr. Valiant-for-truth had been served with a summons by the same messenger as the others, and had been given this as a token that the summons was true: "That his pitcher was broken at the fountain."

When he understood it, he called for his friends and told them about it. Then he said: I am going to my Father's house. And though I have got here with great difficulty, still I do not now regret any of the trouble I have been to in order to arrive where I am. My sword I give to him who shall come after me in my pilgrimage, and my courage and skill to whoever can get it. My marks and my scars I carry with me, to be a witness for me that I have fought his battles who will now be my Rewarder.

When the day came that he had to go, many went with him to the riverside; and as he went into it he said, "Death, where is your sting?" And as he went down deeper he said, "Grave, where is your victory?"

So he passed over, and all the trumpets sounded for him on the other side.

Then a summons came out for Mr. Stand-fast — this Mr. Stand-fast was the one the rest of the Pilgrims found on his knees on the Enchanted Ground — because the messenger brought it to him open in his hands. The contents were that he must prepare for a change of life, because his Master was not willing that he should be so far away from him any longer.

At this Mr. Stand-fast fell to thinking. No, said the messenger, you need not doubt the truth of my message, because here is a token of it: "Your wheel is broken at the cistern."

Then he called Mr. Great-heart, who was their guide, and said to him: Sir, although it was not my luck to be much in your good company during the days of my pilgrimage, still, since the time I have known you, you have done me good.

When I came from home, I left behind me a wife and five small children. Let me beg you, on your return — because I know you will go back to your Master's house, in the hope that you may yet be an escort to more of the holy pilgrims — that you send to my family and let them know everything that has happened, or will happen, to me. Tell them, further, about my happy arrival at this place, and about the blessed condition I am in now.

Tell them too about Christian, and about Christiana his wife, and how she and her children came after her husband. Tell them as well what a happy end she made, and where she has gone. I have little or nothing to send my family, unless it be prayers and tears for them; and it will be enough if you tell them of that, in case those may yet do some good.

When Mr. Stand-fast had put things in order like this, and the time had come for him to hurry away, he too went down to the river. Now there was a great calm on the river at that time; so Mr. Stand-fast, when he was about halfway across, stood a while and talked to the companions who had come with him that far. And he said:

This river has been a terror to many; yes, and the thought of it has often frightened me. Now, it seems to me, I stand easy. My foot is fixed on the ground the feet of the priests who carried the ark of the covenant stood on, while Israel went over this Jordan. The water, it is true, is bitter to the tongue and cold to the stomach; and yet the thought of what I am going to, and of the escort waiting for me on the other side, lies like a glowing coal at my heart.

I see myself now at the end of my journey; my toiling days are over. I am going now to see that Head which was crowned with thorns, and that Face which was spat upon for me.

Until now I have lived by hearsay and by faith; but now I go where I shall live by sight, and shall be with the one in whose company I take my delight.

I have loved to hear my Lord spoken of; and wherever I have seen the print of his shoe in the earth, there I have wanted to set my own foot too.

His name has been to me like a box of perfume — sweeter, in fact, than any perfume. His voice has been most sweet to me, and I have wanted the sight of his face more than the people who most want the light of the sun. I used to gather his Word for my food, and as an antidote against my faintings. "He has held me, and has kept me from my sins; yes, he has strengthened my steps in his way."

Now, while he was talking like this, his face changed, his strong man bowed under him; and after he had said, Take me, for I am coming to you, he was seen by them no more.

But it was a glorious thing to see how the open country was filled with horses and chariots, with trumpeters and pipers, with singers and players on stringed instruments, to welcome the Pilgrims as they went up and followed one another in at the beautiful gate of the city.

As for Christian's children — the four boys Christiana brought with her, with their wives and their children — I did not stay where I was until they had gone over. And since I came away, I have heard somebody say that they were still alive, and would be for some time yet, for the increase of the church in the place where they were.

Should it be my lot to go that way again, I may give those who want it an account of what I have been silent about here.

In the meantime, I bid my reader goodbye.
