[Figure 13]

Whence, then, does the augmentation pointed out by Laplace arise? I would ask your best attention while I endeavor to make this knotty point clear to you. If air be compressed it becomes smaller in volume; if the pressure be diminished, the volume expands. The force which resists compression, and which produces expansion, is the elastic force of the air. Thus an external pressure squeezes the air-particles together; their own elastic force holds them asunder, and the particles are in equilibrium when these two forces are in equilibrium. Hence it is that the external pressure is a measure of the elastic force. Let the middle row of dots, Fig. 13, represent a series of air-particles in a state of quiescence between the points a and x. Then, because of the elastic force exerted between the particles, if any one of them be moved from its position of rest, the motion will be transmitted through the entire series. Supposing the particle a to be driven by the prong of a tuning-fork, or some other vibrating body, toward x, so as to be caused finally to occupy the position a′ in the lowest row of particles: at the instant the excursion of a commences, its motion begins to be transmitted to b. In the next following moments b transmits the motion to c, c to d, d to e, and so on. So that by the time a has reached the position a′, the motion will have been propagated to some point o′ of the line of particles more or less distant from a′. The entire series of particles between a′ and o′ is then in a state of condensation. The distance a′ o′, over which the motion has travelled during the excursion of a to a′, will depend upon the elastic force exerted between the particles. Fix your attention on any two of the particles, say a and b. The elastic force between them may be figured as a spiral spring, and it is plain that the more flaccid this spring the more sluggish would be the communication of the motion from a to b; while the stiffer the spring the more prompt would be the communication of the motion. What is true of a and b is true for every other pair of particles between a and o. Now the spring between every pair of these particles is suddenly stiffened by the heat developed along the line of condensation, and hence the velocity of propagation is augmented by this heat. Reverting to our old experiment with the row of boys, it is as if, by the very act of pushing his neighbor, the muscular rigidity of each boy’s arm was increased, thus enabling him to deliver his push more promptly than he would have done without this increase of rigidity. The condensed portion of a sonorous wave is propagated in the manner here described, and it is plain that the velocity of propagation is augmented by the heat developed in the condensation.

Let us now turn our thoughts for a moment to the propagation of the rarefaction. Supposing, as before, the middle row a x to represent the particles of air in equilibrium under the pressure of the atmosphere, and suppose the particle a to be suddenly drawn to the right, so as to occupy the position a″ in the highest line of dots: a″ is immediately followed by b″, b″ by c″, c″ by d″, d″ by e″; and thus the rarefaction is propagated backward toward x″, reaching a point o″ in the line of particles by the time a has completed its motion to the right. Now, why does b″ follow a″ when a″ is drawn away from it? Manifestly because the elastic force exerted between b″ and a″ is less than that between b″ and c″. In fact, b″ will be driven after a″ by a force equal to the difference of the two elasticities between a″ and b″ and between b″ and c″. The same remark applies to the motion of c″ after b″, to that of d″ after c″, in fact, to the motion of each succeeding particle when it follows its predecessor. The greater the difference of elasticity on the two sides of any particle the more promptly will it follow its predecessor. And here observe what the cold of rarefaction accomplishes. In addition to the diminution of the elastic force between a″ and b″ by the withdrawal of a″ to a greater distance, there is a further diminution due to the lowering of the temperature. The cold developed augments the difference of elastic force on which the propagation of the rarefaction depends. Thus we see that because the heat developed in the condensation augments the rapidity of the condensation, and because the cold developed in the rarefaction augments the rapidity of the rarefaction, the sonorous wave, which consists of a condensation and a rarefaction, must have its velocity augmented by the heat and the cold which it develops during its own progress.

It is worth while fixing your attention here upon the fact that the distance a′ o′, to which the motion has been propagated while a is moving to the position a′, may be vastly greater than that passed over in the same time by the particle itself. The excursion of a′ may not be more than a small fraction of an inch, while the distance to which the motion is transferred during the time required by a′ to perform this small excursion may be many feet, or even many yards. If this point should not appear altogether plain to you now, it will appear so by and by.

Ratio of Specific Heats of Air deduced from Velocity of Sound

Having grasped this, even partially, I will ask you to accompany me to a remote corner of the domain of physics, with the view, however, of showing that remoteness does not imply discontinuity. Let a certain quantity of air at a temperature of 0°, contained in a perfectly inexpansible vessel, have its temperature raised 1°. Let the same quantity of air, placed in a vessel which permits the air to expand when it is heated—the pressure on the air being kept constant during its expansion—also have its temperature raised 1°. The quantities of heat employed in the two cases are different. The one quantity expresses what is called the specific heat of air at constant volume; the other the specific heat of air at constant pressure. It is an instance of the manner in which apparently unrelated natural phenomena are bound together, that from the calculated and observed velocities of sound in air we can deduce the ratio of these two specific heats. Squaring Newton’s theoretic velocity and the observed velocity, and dividing the greater square by the less, we obtain the ratio referred to. Calling the specific heat at constant volume Cv, and that at constant pressure Cp; calling, moreover, Newton’s calculated velocity V, and the observed velocity V′, Laplace proved that—

Footnote: See “Heat as a Mode of Motion,” chap. iii.

    Cp / Cv  =  V′² / V²

Inserting the values of V and V′ in this equation, and making the calculation, we find—

    Cp / Cv  =  1.42

Thus, without knowing either the specific heat at constant volume or at constant pressure, Laplace found the ratio of the greater of them to the less to be 1·42. It is evident from the foregoing formulæ that the calculated velocity of sound, multiplied by the square root of this ratio, gives the observed velocity.

But there is one assumption connected with the determination of this ratio, which must be here brought clearly forth. It is assumed that the heat developed by compression remains in the condensed portion of the wave, and applies itself there to augment the elasticity; that no portion of it is lost by radiation. If air were a powerful radiator, this assumption could not stand. The heat developed in the condensation could not then remain in the condensation. It would radiate all round, lodging itself for the most part in the chilled and rarefied portion of the wave, which would be gifted with a proportionate power of absorption. Hence the direct tendency of radiation would be to equalize the temperatures of the different parts of the wave, and thus to abolish the increase of velocity which called forth Laplace’s correction.

Footnote: In fact, the prompt abstraction of the motion of heat from the condensation, and its prompt communication to the rarefaction by the contiguous luminiferous ether, would prevent the former from ever rising so high, or the latter from ever falling so low, in temperature as it would do if the power of radiation was absent.

Mechanical Equivalent of Heat deduced from Velocity of Sound

The question, then, of the correctness of this ratio involves the other and apparently incongruous question, whether atmospheric air possesses any sensible radiative power. If the ratio be correct, the practical absence of radiative power on the part of air is demonstrated. How then are we to ascertain whether the ratio is correct or not? By a process of reasoning which illustrates still further how natural agencies are intertwined. It was this ratio, looked at by a man of genius, named Mayer, which helped him to a clearer and a grander conception of the relation and interaction of the forces of inorganic and organic nature than any philosopher up to his time had attained. Mayer was the first to see that the excess 0·42 of the specific heat at constant pressure over that at constant volume was the quantity of heat consumed in the work performed by the expanding gas. Assuming the air to be confined laterally and to expand in a vertical direction, in which direction it would simply have to lift the weight of the atmosphere, he attempted to calculate the precise amount of heat consumed in the raising of this or any other weight. He thus sought to determine the “mechanical equivalent” of heat. In the combination of his data his mind was clear, but for the numerical correctness of these data he was obliged to rely upon the experimenters of his age. Their results, though approximately correct, were not so correct as the transcendent experimental ability of Regnault, aided by the last refinements of constructive skill, afterward made them. Without changing in the slightest degree the method of his thought or the structure of his calculation, the simple introduction of the exact numerical data into the formula of Mayer brings out the true mechanical equivalent of heat.

But how are we able to speak thus confidently of the accuracy of this equivalent? We are enabled to do so by the labors of an Englishman, who worked at this subject contemporaneously with Mayer; and who, while animated by the creative genius of his celebrated German brother, enjoyed also the opportunity of bringing the inspirations of that genius to the test of experiment. By the immortal experiments of Mr. Joule, the mutual convertibility of mechanical work and heat was first conclusively established. And “Joule’s equivalent,” as it is rightly called, considering the amount of resolute labor and skill expended in its determination, is almost identical with that derived from the formula of Mayer.

Absence of Radiative Power of Air deduced from Velocity of Sound

Consider now the ground we have trodden, the curious labyrinth of reasoning and experiment through which we have passed. We started with the observed and calculated velocities of sound in atmospheric air. We found Laplace, by a special assumption, deducing from these velocities the ratio of the specific heat of air at constant pressure to its specific heat at constant volume. We found Mayer calculating from this ratio the mechanical equivalent of heat; finally, we found Joule determining the same equivalent by direct experiments on the friction of solids and liquids. And what is the result? Mr. Joule’s experiments prove the result of Mayer to be the true one; they therefore prove the ratio determined by Laplace to be the true ratio; and, because they do this, they prove at the same time the practical absence of radiative power in atmospheric air. It seems a long step from the stirring of water, or the rubbing together of iron plates in Joule’s experiments, to the radiation of the atoms of our atmosphere; both questions are, however, connected by the line of reasoning here followed out.

But the true physical philosopher never rests content with an inference when an experiment to verify or contravene it is possible. The foregoing argument is clinched by bringing the radiative power of atmospheric air to a direct test. When this is done, experiment and reasoning are found to agree; air being proved to be a body sensibly devoid of radiative and absorptive power.

Footnote: “Heat a Mode of Motion,” chap. x.

But here the experimenter on the transmission of sound through gases needs a word of warning. In Laplace’s day, and long subsequently, it was thought that gases of all kinds possessed only an infinitesimal power of radiation; but that this is not the case is now well established. It would be rash to assume that, in the case of such bodies as ammonia, aqueous vapor, sulphurous acid, and olefiant gas, their enormous radiative powers do not interfere with the application of the formula of Laplace. It behooves us to inquire whether the ratio of the two specific heats deduced from the velocity of sound in these bodies is the true ratio; and whether, if the true ratio could be found by other methods, its square root, multiplied into the calculated velocity, would give the observed velocity. From the moment heat first appears in the condensation and cold in the rarefaction of a sonorous wave in any of those gases, the radiative power comes into play to abolish the difference of temperature. The condensed part of the wave is on this account rendered more flaccid and the rarefied part less flaccid than it would otherwise be, and with a sufficiently high radiative power the velocity of sound, instead of coinciding with that derived from the formula of Laplace, must approximate to that derived from the more simple formula of Newton.

Velocity of Sound through Gases, Liquids, and Solids

To complete our knowledge of the transmission of sound through gases, a table is here added from the excellent researches of Dulong, who employed in his experiments a method which shall be subsequently explained:

Velocity of Sound in Gases at the Temperature of 0° C.

                           Velocity
    Air                    1,092     feet
    Oxygen                 1,040     feet
    Hydrogen               4,164     feet
    Carbonic acid          858       feet
    Carbonic oxide         1,107     feet
    Protoxide of nitrogen  859       feet
    Olefiant gas           1,030     feet

According to theory, the velocities of sound in oxygen and hydrogen are inversely proportional to the square roots of the densities of the two gases. We here find this theoretic deduction verified by experiment. Oxygen being sixteen times heavier than hydrogen, the velocity of sound in the latter gas ought, according to the above law, to be four times its velocity in the former; hence, the velocity in oxygen being 1,040, in hydrogen calculation would make it 4,160. Experiment, we see, makes it 4,164.

The velocity of sound in liquids may be determined theoretically, as Newton determined its velocity in air; for the density of a liquid is easily determined, and its elasticity can be measured by subjecting it to compression. In the case of water, the calculated and the observed velocities agree so closely as to prove that the changes of temperature produced by a sound-wave in water have no sensible influence upon the velocity. In a series of memorable experiments in the Lake of Geneva, MM. Colladon and Sturm determined the velocity of sound through water, and made it 4,708 feet a second. By a mode of experiment which you will subsequently be able to comprehend, the late M. Wertheim determined the velocity through various liquids, and in the following table I have collected his results:

Transmission of Sound through Liquids
